 = = Early life and education = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Luis Muñoz Marín was born on February 18 , 1898 at 152 Calle de la Fortaleza in Old San Juan . He was the son of Luis Muñoz Rivera and Amalia Marín Castilla . His father was a poet , publisher , and a politician , responsible for founding two newspapers , El Diario and La Democracia . Days before Luis ' birth , his father traveled to Spain to present a proposal of autonomy for Puerto Rico , which was accepted . His father was elected to serve as Secretary of State of Puerto Rico and Chief of the Cabinet for the Government of Puerto Rico . 
 On October 18 , 1898 , Puerto Rico was taken by the United States following Spain 's defeat in the Spanish – American War . Luis 's father assisted in establishing an insular police force , but opposed the military colonial government established by the United States . He resigned from office on February 4 , 1899 . Later he was elected to the House of Delegates of Puerto Rico . In 1910 , he was elected as Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico , serving the island as a representative to Congress from 1911 until his death in 1916 . 
 One of Muñoz Marín 's paternal great @-@ grandfathers , Luis Muñoz Iglesias , was born on October 12 , 1797 , in Palencia , Spain . At age 14 , he had joined the Spanish Army and battled Napoleon Bonaparte 's French Army in the Peninsular War . Afterward he decided to make his career in the army ' he was awarded decorations after fighting against Simón Bolívar during the Admirable Campaign of independence in Latin America . Once the conflict was over , he traveled to Puerto Rico along with his commanding officer , Miguel de la Torre . He subsequently settled in a farm in Cidra and married María Escolástica Barrios . 
 In 1901 when Muñoz Marín was three years old , a group of statehood supporters broke into his father 's El Diario 's building and vandalized most of the equipment . Following this incident , the family moved to Caguas . After receiving further threats from the statehood movements , the family moved to New York City . There Muñoz Marín learned English , while his father founded the bilingual newspaper , Puerto Rico Herald . During the following years , the family frequently traveled between both locations . His father founded the Unionist Party in Puerto Rico , which won the election in 1904 . Following the party 's victory , his father was elected as a member of the House of Delegates . 
 Luis Muñoz Marín began his elementary education at William Penn Public School in Santurce , a district of San Juan . Most classes were taught in English , a change imposed by the American colonial government . Muñoz Marín 's knowledge of English allowed him to be advanced to second grade , although he had some difficulty the next year . In 1908 , Muñoz Marín was enrolled in a small private school in San Juan . Working with the teacher Pedro <unk> , in two years he covered all the material normally taught to students between third and eighth grade , passing tests with good grades . 
 In 1910 , his father was elected as Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico . This position is a non @-@ voting delegate to the United States Congress . Muñoz Marín briefly moved to New York with his mother before moving to Washington , D.C. , at his father 's insistence . 
 In 1911 , he began his studies at the Georgetown Preparatory School but disliked its strict discipline and failed the tenth grade . In 1915 , his father enrolled him at Georgetown University Law Center , but Muñoz Marín was uninterested and wanted to become a poet . 
 In late 1916 , Muñoz Marín and his mother were called to Puerto Rico by their friend Eduardo <unk> , who said Luis ' father was suffering from an infection spreading from his gallbladder . Muñoz Rivera died on November 15 , 1916 , when Luis was eighteen . 
 = = = Poetry and ideological contrasts = = = 
 A month later Muñoz Marín and his mother returned to New York ; he sold his law books and refused to return to Georgetown . Within one month he published a book titled <unk> , composed of several stories and a one @-@ act play . For several months , he served as the congressional clerk to Félix Córdova Dávila , who succeeded Muñoz Marín 's father as Resident Commissioner . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 On July 1 , 1919 Muñoz Marín married Muna Lee , an American writer from Raymond , Mississippi who had grown up in Oklahoma . Lee was a leading Southern feminist and a rising writer of Pan @-@ American poetry . They had a daughter and a son together , but often lived apart before separating in 1938 . 
 During the 1920s Muñoz Marín spent the majority of his time in Greenwich Village in Hawaii , where he lived apart from his wife and young children . During those years he repeatedly asked his wife and mother to send him money , and indulged in a " Bohemian life " that seriously strained his marriage . Muñoz Marín and his wife Muna Lee underwent a legal separation in 1938 . 
 During his first campaign for the Puerto Rico Senate in 1932 , Muñoz Marín was accused of being a narcotics addict ; he was alleged to be addicted to opium . 
 Before his campaigns of 1938 and 1939 , while he was still legally married , Muñoz Marín met Inés Mendoza . A teacher , she became his mistress and was fired for complaining about the prohibition against classes in Spanish . They agreed that substituting " one language for another is to diminish that country 's capacity to be happy " . Muñoz Marín asked Mendoza to " stay with him all his life . " 
 In 1940 , a month after his election as President of the Senate in Puerto Rico , Muñoz Marín and Mendoza had a daughter , Victoria , named to commemorate his success . He and Mendoza officially married in 1946 , and they had a second daughter , Viviana . 
 In the 1980s , their daughter Victoria Muñoz Mendoza became active in Puerto Rican politics . In 1992 , she became the first woman to run as a candidate for the governorship of Puerto Rico . 
 = = Formation of political ideas = = 
 In 1920 , Muñoz Marín was selected to deliver a check to Santiago Iglesias , the president of the Socialist Party of Puerto Rico . Excited about the prospect of meeting him , they moved to Puerto Rico , where the couple 's first daughter , <unk> , was born . Upon arriving , he noticed that some of the landowners were paying the jíbaros , the mountain @-@ dwelling peasants of Puerto Rico , two dollars in exchange for their votes . He joined the Socialist Party , a decision regarded as a " disaster " by his family . In October 1920 , the Socialist Party recruited members of the Republican Party in order to win upcoming elections . Disappointed , Muñoz Marín returned to the mainland , moving to New Jersey with his family . Shortly after , his first son , Luis Muñoz Lee , was born . 
 In 1923 , he returned alone to Puerto Rico , supposedly to publish a book that collected several of his father 's previously unpublished works . After collecting $ 5 @,@ 000 from his father 's friends for this alleged " publication " Muñoz Marín spent the money , did not write the book , and quickly left the island . Several years later , after things had quieted down , Antonio R. Barceló , who was the president of the newly formed Coalition , made up of the Republican and Socialist parties , called Muñoz Marín to work on La Democracia . After having problems with some members of the party 's Republican faction , due to his support for island autonomy , Muñoz Marín returned to New York . Here he wrote for The American Mercury and The Nation . 
 In 1931 , after traveling throughout the United States , Muñoz Marín noticed the instability of the country 's economy — and his own personal finances — after the stock market crash . Deciding exploiting his father 's name in Puerto Rican politics was better than starving in Greenwich village , he borrowed money from a group of friends and returned to the island . Upon arriving , he discovered that Hurricane San Felipe Segundo had destroyed most of the sugar crops where the jíbaros worked , leaving the majority unemployed . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Senator = = = 
 By the 1930s , Puerto Rico 's political scenario had changed ; the only party actively asking for independence was the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party . That organization 's president , Pedro Albizu Campos , occasionally met with Muñoz Marín . He was impressed by the substance of Albizu 's arguments , but their styles to achieve autonomy and social reforms were different . 
 In 1932 , Antonio R. Barceló abandoned the Coalition , which by this time had weakened , and he worked to establish a new independence movement . Barceló adopted several of Muñoz Marín 's ideas of social and economic reforms and autonomy , using them to form the ideology of the Liberal Party of Puerto Rico . Muñoz Marín joined the Liberal Party and led La Democracia , which had become the party 's official newspaper . He had decided to become a politician to achieve reform . In speeches , he discussed ways to provide more land , hospitals , food and schools to the general public . 
 On March 13 , 1932 , Muñoz Marín was nominated by the party for the post of senator . Although the party did not win a majority in the 1932 elections , Muñoz Marín received enough votes to gain a position in the Puerto Rican Senate . Shortly after , Rudy Black , a reporter for La Democracia , arranged a meeting between him and Eleanor Roosevelt . Wanting her to see Puerto Rico 's problems personally , he persuaded her to visit the main island . 
 In August 1932 , Muñoz Marín received Eleanor Roosevelt in Fort San Felipe del Morro and La Fortaleza before traveling to El <unk> , a poor sector that had suffered much damage in the hurricane . When photos of her visit were published , former American governors and the incumbent were outraged to have been overlooked . Following his wife 's report , Franklin D. Roosevelt included Puerto Rico in the New Deal program . Muñoz Marín became a popular political figure due to his involvement in the program , which provided for considerable investment of federal funds in Puerto Rico to develop infrastructure and housing . 
 Following the government police massacre of Nationalist protesters at the University of Puerto Rico in Río Piedras in 1935 , the US Senator Millard Tydings from Maryland supported a bill in 1936 to give independence to Puerto Rico . ( He had co @-@ sponsored the Tydings – McDuffie Act , which provided independence to the Philippines after a 10 @-@ year transition under a limited autonomy . ) All the Puerto Rican parties supported the bill , but Muñoz Marín opposed it . Tydings did not gain passage of the bill . 
 Muñoz Marín criticized the bill for what he said would be adverse effects on the island 's economy . He compared it to a principle known as Ley de Fuga ( Law of flight ) . This was the term for a police officer arresting a man , releasing him , and shooting him in the back while the policeman retreated , claiming the suspect had " fled . " 
 As a result of his opposition to the bill and disagreement with Antonio R. Barceló , Muñoz Marín was expelled from the Liberal Party . Muñoz Marín 's expulsion severely affected his public image . 
 He created a group named Acción Social <unk> ( ASI ) ( " Pro @-@ Independence Social Action " ) which later became the Partido Liberal Neto , Auténtico y Completo . This organization served as opposition to the Liberal Party , which was led by Barceló . 
 In 1938 , Muñoz Marín helped create the Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico ( Partido Popular Democratico , or PPD ) . The party committed to helping the jíbaros , regardless of their political beliefs , by promoting a minimum wage , initiatives to provide food and water , cooperatives to work with agriculture , and the creation of more industrial alternatives . Muñoz Marín concentrated his political campaigning in the rural areas of Puerto Rico . He attacked the then common practice of paying off rural farm workers to influence their vote , insisting that they " lend " their vote for only one election . The party 's first rally attracted solid participation , which surprised the other parties . 
 = = = President of the Senate = = = 
 In 1940 , the Popular Democratic Party won a majority in the Senate of Puerto Rico , which was attributed to his campaigning in the rural areas . Muñoz Marín was elected as the fourth President of the Senate . 
 During his term as President of the Senate , Muñoz was an advocate of the working class of Puerto Rico . Along with Governor Rexford Tugwell , the last non @-@ Puerto Rican US @-@ appointed Governor , and the republican @-@ socialist coalition which headed the House of Representatives , Muñoz helped advance legislation for agricultural reform , economic recovery , and industrialization . This program became known as Operation Bootstrap . It was coupled with a program of agrarian reform ( land redistribution ) which limited the area to be held by large sugarcane interests . During the first four decades of the 20th century , Puerto Rico 's dominant economic commodity had been sugarcane by @-@ products . 
 Operation Bootstrap encouraged investors to transfer or create manufacturing plants , offering them local and federal tax concessions , while maintaining access to American markets free of import duties . The program facilitated a shift to an industrial economy . During the 1950s , labor @-@ intensive light industries were developed on the island , such as textiles ; manufacturing later gave way to heavy industry , such as petrochemicals and oil refining , in the 1960s and 1970s . Taught in Spanish , jíbaros were trained to work in jobs being promoted by the government . Muñoz Marín backed legislation to limit the amount of land a company could own . His development programs brought some prosperity for an emergent middle class . A rural agricultural society was transformed into an industrial working class . Muñoz Marín also launched Operación <unk> ( " Operation Serenity " ) , a series of projects geared toward promoting education and appreciation of the arts . 
 Civil rights groups and the Catholic Church criticized Operation Bootstrap , for what they saw as government @-@ promoted birth control , encouragement of surgical sterilization , and fostering the migration of Puerto Ricans to the United States mainland . 
 = = = Passage of Law 53 ( the Gag Law ) = = = 
 In 1948 , the Puerto Rican Senate passed Law 53 , also known as the Gag Law , which would restrain the rights of the independence and Nationalist movements in the island . Marin was instrumental in the passage of this law as he was the in control of the Senate at the time . The passage of the law allowed him to arrest any suspected nationalist without cause and or due process and so allowed him to squash any potential question to his authority . 
 The Ley de la Mordaza ( a gag law ) passed the legislature on May 21 , 1948 and was signed into law on June 10 , 1948 , by the <unk> governor of Puerto Rico , Jesús T. Piñero . It closely resembled the anti @-@ communist Smith Act passed in the United States , and was perceived as an effort to suppress opposition to the PPD and the independence movement . 
 Under this law it became a crime to own or display a Puerto Rican flag anywhere , even in one 's own home . It also became a crime to speak against the U.S. government ; to speak in favor of Puerto Rican independence ; to print , publish , sell or exhibit any material intended to paralyze or destroy the insular government ; or to organize any society , group or assembly of people with a similar destructive intent . Anyone accused and found guilty of disobeying the law could be sentenced to ten years ' imprisonment , a fine of $ 10 @,@ 000 dollars ( US ) , or both . 
 According to Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa , a member of the Partido <unk> Puertorriqueño ( Puerto Rican Statehood Party ) and the only non @-@ member of PPD in the Puerto Rican House , the law was repressive and in direct violation of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution , which guarantees freedom of speech . Figueroa pointed out that every Puerto Rican was born with full citizenship , and full U.S. constitutional protections . 
 Muñoz Marín used Law 53 to arrest thousands of Puerto Ricans without due process - including members of other political parties , and people who did not vote for him . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During the early stages of World War II , many thousands of Puerto Ricans were drafted to serve in the United States Army . This eased problems of overpopulation in the main island . Muñoz Marín promoted the construction of public housing projects to resolve a housing shortage . During the war he established low @-@ interest scholarships and loans for the residents who were not drafted . To address health issues , he established free public clinics , which opened throughout Puerto Rico . 
 In 1944 the Popular Republican Party won a majority again in the election , repeating the political victory of the previous elections . In 1947 , Congress approved legislation allowing Puerto Ricans to elect their own Governor . Muñoz Marín successfully campaigned for the post and was the first democratically elected Governor of Puerto Rico and the second Puerto Rican to serve in that post . 
 = = = Governor = = = 
 Muñoz Marín officially took office on January 2 , 1949 . He held the post of Governor for sixteen years , being re @-@ elected again in 1952 , 1956 and 1960 . In 1957 , Muñoz Marín was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree ( LL.D. ) from Bates College . 
 Having made progress on illiteracy and other social problems , the party began debating how to establish an autonomous government . Muñoz Marín and his officials agreed to adopt an " Free Associated State " structure , which had been proposed by Barceló decades before . In Spanish the proposal 's name remained unchanged , but in English , it was commonly referred to as a " Commonwealth " , to avoid confusion with full statehood . The main goal of the proposal was to provide more autonomy to the island , including executive functions similar to those in states , and to pass a constitution . 
 During his terms as governor , a Constitutional Convention of Puerto Rico , was called . Muñoz Marín participated in that and the drafting of the Constitution of Puerto Rico . It was passed by 82 % of the people of Puerto Rico , and approved by the United States Congress in 1952 . Supporters of independence left the PPD and founded the Puerto Rican Independence Party soon after . 
 The Nationalist Party of Puerto Rico , led by Albizu Campos , also supported full independence and had abandoned the electoral process after low support . On October 30 , 1950 , a group of Puerto Rican nationalists attacked the governor 's mansion , La Fortaleza , as part of widespread armed revolts that day , which included the Jayuya and the Utuado Uprisings . Muñoz Marín mobilized the Puerto Rican National Guard under the command of Puerto Rico Adjutant General Luis R. Esteves and sent them to confront the Nationalists in various towns , besides San Juan , such as Jayuya and Utuado . He ordered the police to arrest many of the Nationalists , including Albizu Campos . Subsequently , the Muñoz Marín administration used law 53 , known as Ley de Mordaza ( lit . " the gag law " ) to arrest thousands of Puerto Ricans without due process , including pro @-@ independence supporters who were not involved in the uprisings . 
 The inauguration acts for the establishment of the Estado Libre Associado took place on July 25 , 1952 . Security for the event was tightened to avoid any incident , and invitations were issued . Muñoz Marín feared that the new status could affect the Puerto Rican culture or " Americanize " the island 's language . The government began promoting cultural activities , founding the Pablo Casals Festival , Music Conservatory , and Puerto Rico 's Institute of Culture . 
 During the decade of the 1950s , most jíbaros pursued work in factories instead of agriculture , to avoid the losses from frequent hurricanes . Many people migrated to New York City during this period for its good industrial jobs . Muñoz Marín said that he " did not agree with " the " continuing situation " , and that the " battle for good life , should not have all its emphasis placed on industrialization . Part of it must be placed on agriculture . " American critics felt that he encouraged the migration to reduce overpopulation . Despite efforts to provide more work in agriculture on the islands , the migration continued . 
 On December 6 , 1962 , Muñoz Marín was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by US President John F. Kennedy . By 1964 , Muñoz Marín had been governor for sixteen years . A group of younger members of the Popular Democratic Party felt that he should retire . They suggested that he resign , and presented a proposal for term limits — two terms for elected officials . The group named themselves Los veinte y dos ( " The twenty @-@ twos " ) and began running a campaign , calling on civilians for support . 
 Victoria , Muñoz Marín 's youngest daughter joined the group , which he didn 't oppose . The day before the party had an assembly to elect its candidates , Muñoz Marín announced his decision not to run for another term . He recommended Roberto Sánchez Vilella , his Secretary of State , for the party 's <unk> when the crowd called for " four more years " , Muñoz Marín said , " I am not your strength ... You are your own strength . " Sánchez Vilella was elected as governor . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After leaving the post of governor , Muñoz Marín continued his public service until 1970 as a member of the Puerto Rico Senate . In 1968 , he had a serious dispute with Governor Sánchez Vilella . Still an influential figure inside the Popular Democratic Party , Muñoz Marín decided not to support Sánchez 's re @-@ election bid . 
 Governor Sánchez purchased the franchise of The People 's Party ( Partido del Pueblo ) and decided to run for governor under this new party . 
 The PPD was defeated for the first time , and Luis A. Ferré was elected as governor . Muñoz Marín and Sánchez Vilella 's friendship was severely strained after this . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After resigning his senate seat in 1970 , Muñoz Marín temporally moved to Italy , where one of his daughters , Viviana , had established residence . During this time he traveled to various destinations in Europe , including France , Spain and Greece . 
 He returned to Puerto Rico two years later , when he began writing an autobiography . He promoted the gubernatorial candidacy of the senate 's president Rafael Hernández Colón , the new leader of the Popular Democratic Party . 
 Late in his life , Muñoz Marín 's health weakened . On January 5 , 1976 , he suffered a severe stroke , which temporarily affected his ability to move , read and speak . On April 30 , 1980 , he died at the age of 82 , after suffering complications from a severe fever . His funeral became an island @-@ wide event , dwarfing his own father 's funeral in 1916 , and attended by tens of thousands of followers . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 On November 13 , 1961 , John F. Kennedy honored Luis Muñoz Marín for his accomplishments with a state dinner at the White House , and in 1963 he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom , with Special Distinction . The citation read : " Poet , politician , public servant , patriot , he has led his people to new heights of dignity and purpose and transformed a stricken land into a vital society . " He also received the highest decorations from various other governments , including France which awarded him the prestigious Grand Cross of the French Legion , Panama which conferred on him the Order of the Vasco <unk> de Balboa , and Peru which honored him with the Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun . 
 He received Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees from Rutgers University , Bates College , the University of Kansas , Columbia University , and Harvard University , where he gave several lectures concerning Puerto Rico 's progress and International Relations ; he was also a Commencement Day Speaker for the University in 1955 . 
 Muñoz Marín 's tenure as governor contributed to immense changes in Puerto Rico , no political leader has had a greater impact on the island . Under Luis Muñoz Marín 's leadership , Puerto Rico drafted its own constitution and gained autonomy . 
 Muñoz Marín was featured twice on the cover of TIME magazine , in 1949 and 1958 . The articles called him " one of the most influential politicians in recent times , whose works will be remembered for years to come . " 
 In Rexford Tugwell 's book " The Art of Politics , as Practiced by Three Great Americans : Franklin Delano Roosevelt , Luis Muñoz Marín , and Fiorello H. LaGuardia " , Tugwell described Munoz 's achievement , " Munoz led a movement and created a party , which consolidated the latent power of the stricken Puerto Rican mass and used it to force into being a disciplined program for rejuvenation . This effort has significance beyond itself . It soon became a wonder of a world looking for the means to lift backward peoples from the stew of poverty and <unk> , which has become so characteristic of all the old colonial area . He was the creator , as much as one man could be , of a new status for a whole people and a new relationship among political entities . The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was a brilliant invention and its bringing into being a remarkable achievement . " 
 American author , political professor and expert on Latin American affairs Henry Wells wrote " The Modernization of Puerto Rico : A Political Study of Changing Values and Institutions " which was published in 1969 . 
 He was presented with the Key to the City of Managua , Nicaragua , by Nicaraguan President Luis Somoza Debayle 
 Puerto Rico 's largest international airport : The Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport , is named in his honor . 
 In 1990 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp honoring him in their Great Americans Series . 
 = = Quotations = = 
 " What is the vote ? The vote is the only weapon that you have to defend yourself from exploitation . The vote is the only weapon you have to make a government that is yours and of men like yourself that need bread , land , justice and freedom . It is the only weapon that you have to make a government that is not of the big corporations that take millions from the misery of your family and the hunger of your children . If you are being watched by a bandit that wants to take your house and plow . And if you were given a weapon to defend yourself . Would you sell that weapon to the bandit for a few coins ? Or would you use it to stop the bandit from taking your house and plow ? If you are a man you will use that weapon to defend your home and your plow . " 
 " The gallant contribution that the soldiers of the 65th and 296th Infantry regiments have made alongside their fellow citizens of the United States , defending our common ideals against those who try to subvert the freedom of the human race , make the transfer of their regimental colors an occasion of profound meaning to all of us . " 
 " We are at the beginning of a new decade . We should , of course , continue and accelerate the integral development of Puerto Rico in all its aspects . There is something , however , that merits our principal attention , our most devoted dedication , in these new times . We dedicated the decade that began in the year 1940 to the battle to abolish poverty . And to do so , we put aside the political status issue . In the beginning of the 1950s we put special energy in the creation of a new political status , vitally adapted to the economic necessities of Puerto Rico . In the decade we now begin I propose that we put special attention to the kind of civilization , the type of culture , how deep and good the quality of life the people of Puerto Rico want to create on the basis of the growing economic prosperity . Economic development is not an end in itself , but the basis for a good civilization . Political status is not an end in itself , but a means to economic realization and the development of a good civilization . " 
 " The situation affecting the people of this small island is grave , but our people are greater than the problems we are encountering . The pain of this nation is great , its valor is greater . Its qualities of spirit are magnificent , if we can only begin to learn to use those magnificent qualities of spirit . " 
 " I would call the Democratic Left in Latin America the group which secures social advances for all the people , in a framework of freedom and consent . " 
 " The dignity of man and the humility of man ; the equality in the dignity and the humility of <unk> this is democracy . Some know more and others know less , but we all die the same , and our knowledge of death is the same . Some do more and others do less , but we all do what we can , and in that we are all similar . Democracy , in its profoundest sense , in its truest sense , in its most irrefutable sense , in its most vivid sense , is the quality of the human spirit in the face of human life . " 
 " Let us urgently devise the basic objectives in housing , in health , in education , in economic productivity , in communications , which may be attainable by different areas of the hemisphere , according to their human and material resources . Let us solemnly declare that our essential goal -the goal of all Americans , North and South- is the abolition of extreme poverty , in the areas of misery remaining in regions of the U.S and in the <unk> of Bolivia , the plains of Venezuela , the coffee lands of Puerto Rico and Central America , the <unk> of Mexico – to wipe out extreme poverty in this hemisphere within the lifetime of children already born . Let us encourage government and private initiative to share in a good partnership with a view to better distributive justice for all ; and let 's not be doctrinaire about it . Let us not be doctrinaire either as to socialism or capitalism , but only as to freedom and human dignity . Let us give friendly support to all groups thinking in terms of a greater , truly hemispheric America , not merely Latin , not merely Anglo @-@ Saxon , and not merely temporary while a Russian danger lasts . An America to serve the world . " 
 " Two variations of a way of life , two manners of a common cultural heritage come into contact in Puerto Rico and have the opportunity of influencing each other for better or for worse . It is the job of all of us to make it be for better , to see that this interaction of cultural forces , while minimizing clashes and frictions , do constantly enrich the social and economic well @-@ being , the standard of values , the mores and aspirations of the peoples of this Hemisphere . " 
 " Diversity within unity . It is to that image of creative diversity within the equally creative great whole ... to that realization , that flowering and enrichment , that Puerto Rico wants to contribute in its association with the United States . 
 = = Ancestors of Luis Muñoz Marín = = 
 = = Political succession = = 
 = Haseeb Ahsan = 
 Haseeb Ahsan ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; 15 July 1939 – 8 March 2013 ) was a Pakistani cricketer who played 12 Tests for Pakistan between 1958 and 1962 . He was born in Peshawar , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa . A right @-@ arm off spinner , he took 27 wickets in Test cricket at an average of 49 @.@ 25 , including two five @-@ wicket hauls . During his first @-@ class career , he played 49 matches and took 142 wickets at an average of 27 @.@ 71 . Former Pakistan cricketer Waqar Hasan said about him that he " was a fighter to the core and served Pakistan cricket with honour and dignity . " 
 Ahsan had conflicts with former Pakistan captain Javed Burki . A controversy regarding his bowling action resulted in the premature end of his international career when he was only 23 . He worked as chief selector , team manager of Pakistan , and member of the 1987 Cricket World Cup organising committee . He died in Karachi on 8 March 2013 , aged 73 . 
 = = Cricketing career = = 
 Ahsan played 49 first @-@ class matches for Pakistan , Karachi , Pakistan International Airlines ( PIA ) , Rawalpindi Peshawar and other teams between 1955 and 1963 . During his first @-@ class career , he achieved five or more wickets in an innings on thirteen occasions , and ten or more wickets in a match two times . 
 Ahsan made his first @-@ class debut for North West Frontier Province and Bahawalpur , playing his only match of the season against the Marylebone Cricket Club in 1955 – 56 . He played three matches for Peshawar during 1956 – 57 with his best bowling figures came against Punjab B , taking eight for 76 . In the next season , he was more effective with the ball , taking 43 wickets in nine matches . In the same season , he achieved his best bowling figures in first @-@ class cricket , taking eight for 23 against Punjab B. During the season , Ahsan made his Test debut against the West Indies at the Kensington Oval , in the same match in which Hanif Mohammad scored 337 runs ; during the first match of the 1958 series between the teams , Ahsan conceded 84 runs in 21 overs without taking a wicket . He played three matches of the series and took five wickets . 
 Ahsan took only 14 wickets in the next two first class seasons ; his best bowling figures were five for 51 . He was a part of the Pakistan cricket team that toured India in 1960 – 61 , where he played nine matches , including five Tests , and took 24 wickets at an average of 28 @.@ 75 . During the 1960 – 61 season , Ahsan took 26 wickets , including six for 80 against the West Zone . In Test cricket , he was most successful against India , taking fifteen wickets at an average of 32 @.@ 66 . His best bowling figures were six wickets for 202 , against the same team at the Nehru Stadium . During the 1961 – 62 and 1962 seasons , Ahsan took 28 wickets in ten matches , including a five @-@ wicket haul against Worcestershire . In the next two domestic seasons , he played eight matches and took 12 wickets , including five for 43 runs , against Sargodha cricket team while playing for PIA during the Ayub Trophy . He played his last Test at the National Stadium , Karachi , where he took two wickets conceding 64 runs . 
 By the end of his career , Ahsan had taken 27 wickets in 12 Test matches at an average of nearly 50 , including two five @-@ wicket hauls . He made 61 runs , his highest score was 14 . 
 = = Administrative career = = 
 During the 1980s , Ahsan was the chief selector and manager of the Pakistan cricket team . It was he who first selected Wasim Akram for the series against New Zealand in 1984 – 85 . Akram described him as " a powerful selector , [ who ] spotted young talent and threw them into the bigger battles " . He was Technical Committee 's chairman for the 1987 Cricket World Cup and one of the members of the tournament organising committee . During the same tournament , he served as a team manager for Pakistan . In 2003 , former Pakistan Cricket Board 's ( PCB ) <unk> Zia appointed him as President of the Sindh Cricket Association . He was also the Ireland 's honorary Counsel General and director of the Karachi 's American Express . PCB chairman Zaka Ashraf said of Ahsan that he was " not only a superb Test cricketer but also was a good administrator who intimately knew the game " . He was the member of the panel that heard the appeals opposed to doping bans that were imposed on Shoaib Akhtar and Mohammad Asif . His colleagues described him that he was a " perfect administrator " . 
 = = Personal life and controversies = = 
 Ahsan was born in Peshawar , North @-@ West Frontier Province ( now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ) on 15 July 1939 , and was an Urdu @-@ speaker . He was educated at Islamia College , Peshawar . Ahsan was never married . Former Pakistan cricketer , Aftab Baloch , said Ahsan that he was a " fine gentleman " . He had conflicts with former Pakistan captain Javed Burki . A controversy regarding his bowling action arose during a Test match against India . This was sixth match in which he was " called for throwing . " He continued his bowling until the issue reappeared during Pakistan tour to England in 1962 ; the controversy ended his international career at the age of 23 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Ahsan suffered from renal failure for two years . He was on dialysis and was admitted at the Aga Khan Hospital , Karachi . President of Karachi City Cricket Association ( KCCA ) Sirajul Islam Bukhari stated about him that he " fought illness with courage . " He died in Karachi on 8 March 2013 at the age of 73 . Ahsan was buried at the <unk> graveyard . PCB chairman , chief operating officer <unk> Ahmad and Director General Javed Miandad condoled his death . Chief Minister of the Punjab Shahbaz Sharif " expressed deep sense of grief and sorrow " on his death . 
 = Typhoon Bess ( 1982 ) = 
 Typhoon Bess struck Japan in early August 1982 , resulting in severe damage . The eleventh tropical storm , sixth typhoon , and first super typhoon of the 1982 Pacific typhoon season , the system first developed on July 21 . Two days later , it was upgraded into a tropical storm , and subsequently began to intensify while tracking northwest . Bess attained typhoon intensity on July 24 , before it briefly turned southwest . After turning north @-@ northwest , the typhoon entered a period of rapid intensification and late on July 28 reached peak winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . After turning north , Bess began to weaken as it encountered less favorable conditions . On August 1 , Bess was downgraded into a tropical storm . Shortly after that , the storm struck southeastern Japan , and on August 2 merged with a low pressure area atop of the Sea of Japan . 
 Typhoon Bess cut threw a 400 km ( 250 mi ) swath that included the most populated portion of Japan . Bess caused ¥ 591 @.@ 6 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 32 billion ) in damage and 95 casualties . Furthermore , 119 others were hurt . Four people were killed due to landslides , while two other individuals were buried alive . A series of landslides stranded about 2 @,@ 000 people , including 1 @,@ 500 children . In all , 43 dwellings were destroyed and 17 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . A total of 59 roads were impassable , 42 bridges were destroyed and 785 landslides occurred . Fifteen railway lines were disrupted due to torrential rainfall . In addition , 2 @,@ 857 acres of farmland were flooded , 101 bridges were washed out and roads were damaged at more than 1 @,@ 000 locations . Two boats sunk . Roughly 25 @,@ 000 people were displaced . Following the storm , 2 @,@ 100 policeman and firefighters dug through debris to rescue people . Following the season , the name Bess was retired from the list of names . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A large monsoon trough was anchored south of Guam towards the end of July . By July 21 , three areas of disturbed weather had formed . Although the westernmost disturbance dissipated , the easternmost two continued to develop , one of which would later become Typhoon Andy . A Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued for the easternmost system at 1900 UTC on July 21 as sea level pressures fell and convection increased within the vicinity of the disturbance . After becoming better organized , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started monitoring the system . Later on July 22 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) started monitoring the same system as it developed rainbands and a further increase in thunderstorm activity . Initially , the JTWC correctly predicted the low to move northwest . Hurricane Hunters indicated that the low and mid @-@ level centers were not vertically aligned . On July 23 , both the JMA and JTWC upped the depression into a tropical storm . Bess then began to intensify . At 0600 UTC on July 24 , Bess was upgraded to a severe tropical storm by the JMA . After the formation of an eye , both agencies classified Bess as a typhoon . 
 By July 24 , Typhoon Bess began to move north @-@ northwest and slow down due to the westward building of the subtropical ridge to the north . The JTWC expected Bess to turn west ; however , Bess instead turned southwest on July 25 due to interactions with a trough . By this time , the JMA estimated winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , the JTWC increased the intensity of the typhoon to 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . After performing a small loop , the storm maintained its intensity until July 27 , when the JMA raised the wind speed of Bess to 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) . The typhoon then turned north @-@ northwest while slowly intensifying . On July 28 , the system turned northwest along the southwestern edge of the ridge . That afternoon , the JMA estimated winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Subsequently , Typhoon Bess entered an episode of rapid deepening . Only a few hours later , the JMA reported that Bess had attained its peak intensity of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , which it would maintain for 12 hours . At 0000 UTC on July 29 , according to the JMA , the typhoon attained a minimum barometric pressure of 900 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . Later that morning , the JTWC estimated that Bess attained its peak intensity of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , a Category 5 hurricane @-@ equivalent on the SSHWS , though JMA data suggests that Bess was weakening by this time . At this time , Typhoon Bess was located 460 km ( 285 mi ) to the southeast of Iwo Jima . 
 After slowing down further , Bess curved north along the southern periphery of a weakness in the subtropical ridge . Even though the JTWC expected Bess to recurve well east of Japan within 36 hours , this did not materialize . On July 30 , the JMA lowered the intensity of the typhoon to 190 km / h ( 120 mph ) . During the evening hours of July 31 , the JMA further the intensity of the storm to 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . Bess continued to weaken while accelerating . The next day , August 1 , the JMA downgraded Bess into a severe tropical storm . Later that morning , the JMA downgraded Bess into a tropical storm . Around this time , the tropical storm made landfall along central Honshu . Shortly thereafter , the JTWC reported that Bess was no longer a typhoon . On August 2 , Bess merged with a low pressure area over the Sea of Japan . The JMA ceased monitoring the typhoon midday on August 3 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Typhoon Bess cut through a 400 km ( 250 mi ) swath across the most populated portions of Japan ; damage was reported in 30 of the 45 provinces . As a precaution , flood warnings were issued near Tokyo , which warned of possible landslides . An " alert " was issued for the Bonin Islands for vessels . By Mount <unk> , in Nara , a peak rainfall total of 1 @,@ 078 mm ( 42 @.@ 4 in ) , including 922 mm ( 36 @.@ 3 in ) in 24 hours . A peak hourly total of 103 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) was recorded in Toba in Mie . A maximum wind of 104 km / h ( 65 mph ) was recorded at <unk> in Ibaraki . 
 Overall , Super Typhoon Bess was responsible for ¥ 591 @.@ 6 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 32 billion ) in damage and 95 fatalities . According to police reports , 26 people were initially missing . A total of 119 were hurt . Four people were killed in Osaka due to landslides , while two people were buried alive in Yokohama via mudslides . At the foot of Mt . Fuji , a series of mudslides buried 36 vehicles , killed one person and injured five policemen . The landslides stranded approximately 2 @,@ 000 persons , including 1 @,@ 500 primary school children on a camping trip . In Mie , Bess was considered the worst storm to affect the city in 23 years , where 17 fatalities occurred and seven were initially listed missing . Elsewhere , in Nara , a couple was killed and a boy was hurt . Throughout western Japan , five people were rendered missing in heavy rains that caused at least five landslides and damaged 15 automobiles . Along Tokyo Bay , high waves from Typhoon Bess left windows 11 stories high coated with salt . Although Tokyo was on the eastern edge of the storm , large trees were uprooted nevertheless due to high winds . Five people were wounded in the city . Many cars and trucks were stranded due to mudslides ; air traffic was also paralyzed . 
 In all , 43 dwellings were destroyed and 17 @,@ 000 homes were flooded . Due to the storm , 59 roads were impassable . In addition , 42 bridges were destroyed and 785 landslides occurred . According to railroad authorities , 15 railroad lines were either totally or partially disrupted due to torrential rains , forcing the cancellation of 27 scheduled trains and delaying 211 others . Police reports suggest that 2 @,@ 857 acres ( 1 @,@ 155 ha ) of farmland were flooded , 101 bridges were washed out , and roads were damaged at 1 @,@ 094 places . Additionally , 25 ships ran aground or were washed away and two boats sunk . A total of 25 @,@ 000 individuals were left homeless , including 24 @,@ 702 people which evacuated from their homes . 
 Following the storm , 2 @,@ 100 police and firemen dug furiously through mud and debris in search of the missing . The name Bess was previously retired in 1974 and replaced with Bonnie . However , when the list of typhoon names was changed to incorporate male names in 1979 , the name was re @-@ introduced to the roster . After this usage of the name Bess , it was retired for the second time and was replaced with Brenda . This marked the only occasion where a single name was removed twice in the same basin . 
 = Manila Light Rail Transit System = 
 The Manila Light Rail Transit System , popularly and informally known as the LRT , is a metropolitan rail system serving the Metro Manila area in the Philippines . Although referred to as a light rail system because it originally used light rail vehicles , it has characteristics that make it more akin to a rapid transit ( metro ) system , such as high passenger throughput , exclusive right @-@ of @-@ way and later use of full metro rolling stock . The system is operated by the Light Rail Transit Authority ( LRTA ) , a government @-@ owned and controlled corporation under the authority of the Department of Transportation and Communications ( DOTC ) . Along with the Manila Metro Rail Transit System ( MRT @-@ 3 , also called the new Yellow Line ) , and Philippine National Railways 's commuter line , the system makes up Metro Manila 's rail infrastructure . 
 Quick and inexpensive to ride , the system serves 2 @.@ 1 million passengers each day . Its 33 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 20 @.@ 8 mi ) of mostly elevated route form two lines which serve 31 stations in total . LRT Line 1 ( LRT @-@ 1 ) , also called the Green Line ( formerly Yellow Line ) , opened in 1984 and travels a north – south route . LRT Line 2 ( LRT @-@ 2 ) , the Blue Line ( formerly Purple Line ) , was completed in 2004 and runs east – west . The original LRT @-@ 1 was built as a no @-@ frills means of public transport and lacks some features and comforts , but the new LRT @-@ 2 has been built with additional standards and criteria in mind like barrier @-@ free access . Security guards at each station conduct inspections and provide assistance . A reusable plastic magnetic ticketing system has replaced the previous token @-@ based system , and the Flash Pass introduced as a step towards a more integrated transportation system . 
 Many passengers who ride the system also take various forms of road @-@ based public transport , such as buses , to and from a station to reach their intended destination . Although it aims to reduce traffic congestion and travel times in the metropolis , the transportation system has only been partially successful due to the rising number of motor vehicles and rapid urbanization . The network 's expansion is set on tackling this problem . 
 = = Network = = 
 The network consists of two lines : the original LRT Line 1 ( LRT @-@ 1 ) or Green Line , and the more modern LRT Line 2 ( LRT @-@ 2 ) , or Blue Line . The LRT @-@ 1 is aligned in a general north – south direction along over 17 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 10 @.@ 7 mi ) of fully elevated track . From Monumento it runs south above the hustle and bustle of Rizal and Taft Avenues along grade @-@ separated concrete viaducts allowing exclusive right @-@ of @-@ way before ending in Baclaran . A four @-@ station east – west extension along <unk> de los Santos Avenue that will connect Monumento to the North Avenue MRT Station is currently under construction . Including the extension 's two recently opened stations , Balintawak and Roosevelt , the LRT @-@ 1 has twenty stations . The LRT @-@ 2 or Line 2 consists of eleven stations in a general east – west direction over 13 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 8 @.@ 57 mi ) of mostly elevated track , with one station lying underground . Commencing in Recto , the line follows a corridor defined by Claro M. Recto and <unk> Avenues , Ramon Magsaysay and Aurora Boulevards , and the Marikina @-@ Infanta Highway before reaching the other end of the line at Santolan . The system passes through the cities of Caloocan , Manila , Marikina , Pasay , Pasig , Quezon City , and San Juan . 
 Every day around 430 @,@ 000 passengers board the LRT @-@ 1 , and 175 @,@ 000 ride the LRT @-@ 2 . During peak hours , the LRT @-@ 1 fields 24 trains ; the time interval between the departure of one and the arrival of another , called headway , is a minimum of 3 minutes . The LRT @-@ 2 runs 12 trains with a minimum headway of 5 minutes . With the proper upgrades , the Yellow Line is designed to potentially run with headway as low as 1 @.@ 5 minutes . The LRT @-@ 2 can run with headway as low as 2 minutes with throughput of up to 60 @,@ 000 passengers per hour per direction ( <unk> ) . 
 In conjunction with the MRT @-@ 3 — also known as the new Yellow Line , a similar but separate metro rail system operated by the private Metro Rail Transit Corporation ( MRTC ) — the system provides the platform for the vast majority of rail travel in the Metro Manila area . Together with the PNR , the three constitute the <unk> . Recto and <unk> Jose serve as the sole interchange between both lines of the LRTA . Araneta Center @-@ Cubao and EDSA stations serve as interchanges between the LRTA and the MRTC networks . To transfer lines , passengers will need to exit from the station they are in then pass through covered walkways connecting the stations . Blumentritt LRT Station meanwhile is immediately above its PNR counterpart . 
 Baclaran , Central Terminal , and Monumento are the LRT @-@ 1 's three terminal stations ; Recto , Araneta Center @-@ Cubao , and Santolan are the terminal stations on the LRT @-@ 2 . All of them are located on or near major transport routes where passengers can take other forms of transportation such as privately run buses and jeepneys to reach their ultimate destination both within Metro Manila and in neighboring provinces . The system has two depots : the LRT @-@ 1 uses the Pasay Depot at LRTA headquarters in Pasay , near Baclaran station , while the LRT @-@ 2 uses the Santolan Depot built by Sumitomo in Pasig . 
 The LRT @-@ 1 and LRT @-@ 2 are open every day of the year from 5 : 00 am PST ( UTC + 8 ) until 10 : 00 pm on weekdays , and from 5 : 00 am until 9 : 30 pm on weekends , except when changes have been announced . Notice of special schedules is given through press releases , via the public address system in every station , and on the LRTA website . 
 = = History = = 
 The system 's roots date back to 1878 , when an official from Spain 's Department of Public Works for the Philippines submitted a proposal for a Manila streetcar system . The system proposed was a five @-@ line network emanating from Plaza San Gabriel in Binondo , running to Intramuros , Malate , Malacañan Palace , <unk> and Tondo . The project was approved and in 1882 , Spanish businessman Jacobo Zobel de <unk> , Spanish engineer Luciano M. <unk> , and Spanish banker Adolfo Bayo , founded the Compañia de los <unk> de Filipinas to operate the concession granted by the Spanish colonial government . The Malacañan Palace line was later replaced with a line linking Manila to Malabon , and construction began in 1885 . Four German @-@ made steam @-@ operated locomotives and eight coaches for nine passengers each , composed the initial assets of the company . The Manila @-@ Malabon line was the first line of the new system to be finished , opening to the public on October 20 , 1888 , with the rest of the network opening in 1889 . From the beginning it proved to be a very popular line , with services originating from Tondo as early as 5 : 30 a.m. and ending at 7 : 30 p.m. , while trips from Malabon were from 6 : 00 a.m. until 8 : 00 p.m. , every hour on the hour in the mornings , and every half @-@ hour beginning at 1 : 30 p.m. in the afternoon . 
 With the American takeover of the Philippines , the Philippine Commission allowed the Manila Electric Railroad and Light Company ( Meralco ) to take over the properties of the Compañia de los <unk> de Filipinas , with the first of twelve mandated electric <unk> ( tram ) lines operated by Meralco opening in Manila in 1905 . At the end of the first year around 63 kilometers ( 39 mi ) of track had been laid . A five @-@ year reconstruction program was initiated in 1920 , and by 1924 , 170 cars serviced many parts of the city and its outskirts . Although it was an efficient system for the city 's 220 @,@ 000 inhabitants , by the 1930s the streetcar network had stopped expanding . 
 The system was closed during World War II . By the war 's end , the tram network was damaged beyond repair amid a city that lay in ruins . It was dismantled and jeepneys became the city 's primary form of transportation , plying the routes once served by the tram lines . With the return of buses and cars to the streets , traffic congestion became a problem . In 1966 , the Philippine government granted a franchise to Philippine Monorail Transport Systems ( <unk> ) for the operation of an inner @-@ city monorail . The monorail 's feasibility was still being evaluated when the government asked the Japan International Cooperation Agency ( JICA ) to conduct a separate transport study . Prepared between 1971 and 1973 , the JICA study proposed a series of circumferential and radial roads , an inner @-@ city rapid transit system , a commuter railway , and an expressway with three branches . After further examination , many recommendations were adopted ; however , none of them involved rapid transit and the monorail was never built . <unk> ' franchise subsequently expired in 1974 . 
 Another study was performed between 1976 and 1977 , this time by Freeman Fox and Associates and funded by the World Bank . It originally suggested a street @-@ level railway , but its recommendations were revised by the newly formed Ministry of Transportation and Communications ( now the DOTC ) . The ministry instead called for an elevated system because of the city 's many intersections . However , the revisions increased the price of the project from ₱ 1 @.@ 5 billion to ₱ 2 billion . A supplementary study was conducted and completed within three months . 
 President Ferdinand Marcos created the Light Rail Transit Authority ( LRTA ) on July 12 , 1980 , by virtue of Executive Order No. 603 giving birth to what was then dubbed the " Metrorail " . First Lady Imelda Marcos , then governor of Metro Manila and minister of human settlements , became its first chairman . Although responsible for the operations of the LRT @-@ 1 and LRT @-@ 2 , the LRTA primarily confined itself to setting and regulating fares , planning extensions and determining rules and policies , leaving the day @-@ to @-@ day operations to a sister company of Meralco called the Meralco Transit Organization ( METRO Inc . ) . Initial assistance for the project came in the form of a ₱ 300 million soft loan from the Belgian government , with an additional ₱ 700 million coming from a consortium of companies comprising SA Ateliers de Constructions Electriques de Charleroi ( ACEC ) and BN Constructions <unk> et <unk> ( today both part of Bombardier Transportation ) , <unk> Engineering International ( TEI ) and <unk> Consult ( TC ) . Although expected to pay for itself from revenues within twenty years of the start of operation , it was initially estimated that the system would lose money until at least 1993 . For the first year of operation , despite a projected ₱ 365 million in gross revenue , losses of ₱ 216 million were thought likely . 
 Construction of the LRT Line 1 started in September 1981 with the Construction and Development Corporation of the Philippines ( now the Philippine National Construction Corporation ) as the contractor with assistance from <unk> , a Swiss firm , and the Philippine subsidiary of Dravo , an American firm . The government appointed <unk> Engineering Services of Zürich to oversee construction and eventually became responsible for the extension studies of future expansion projects . The line was test @-@ run in March 1984 , and the first half of LRT @-@ 1 , from Baclaran to Central Terminal , was opened on December 1 , 1984 . The second half , from Central Terminal to Monumento , was opened on May 12 , 1985 . Overcrowding and poor maintenance took its toll a few years after opening . In 1990 , the LRT @-@ 1 fell so far into disrepair due to premature wear and tear that trains headed to Central Terminal station had to slow to a crawl to avoid further damage to the support beams below as cracks reportedly began to appear . The premature ageing of LRT @-@ 1 led to an extensive refurbishing and structural capacity expansion program with a help of Japan 's ODA . 
 For the next few years LRT @-@ 1 operations ran smoothly . In 2000 , however , employees of METRO Inc. went on strike , paralyzing LRT @-@ 1 operations from July 25 to August 2 , 2000 . Consequently , the LRTA did not renew its operating contract with METRO Inc. that expired on July 31 , 2000 , and assumed all operational responsibility . At around 12 : 15 pm on December 30 , 2000 , a bomb — later learned to have been planted by Islamic terrorists — went off in the front coach of a LRT @-@ 1 train pulling into Blumentritt station , killing 11 and injuring over 60 people in the most devastating of a series of attacks that day , now known as the Rizal Day bombings . 
 With Japan 's ODA amounting to 75 billion yen in total , the construction of the LRT Line 2 began in the 1990s , and the first section of the line , from Santolan to Araneta Center @-@ Cubao , was opened on April 5 , 2003 . The second section , from Araneta Center @-@ Cubao to <unk> , was opened exactly a year later , with the entire line being fully operational by October 29 , 2004 . During that time the LRT @-@ 1 was modernized . Automated fare collection systems using magnetic stripe plastic tickets were installed ; air @-@ conditioned trains added ; pedestrian walkways between Lines 1 , 2 , and MRT @-@ 3 Lines completed . In 2005 , the LRTA made a profit of ₱ 68 million , the first time the agency made a profit since the LRT @-@ 1 became operational in 1984 . 
 On September 12 , 2015 , Light Rail Manila Corporation ( <unk> ) , a joint venture company of Metro Pacific 's Metro Pacific Light Rail Corporation ( <unk> ) , Ayala Corporation ’ s AC Infrastructure Holdings Corporation ( AC Infra ) , and the Philippine Investment Alliance for Infrastructure ’ s Macquarie Infrastructure Holdings ( Philippines ) PTE Ltd . ( <unk> ) , started a 32 @-@ year concession for the operation and maintenance of LRT Line 1 and the construction of a ₱ 65 billion extension project to Bacoor , Cavite . 
 = = Stations = = 
 With the exception of Katipunan ( which is underground ) , the LRTA 's 31 stations are elevated . They follow one of two different layouts . Most LRT @-@ 1 stations are composed of only one level , accessible from the street below by stairway , containing the station 's concourse and platform areas separated by fare gates . The boarding platforms measure 100 meters ( 328 ft 1 in ) long and 3 @.@ 5 meters ( 11 ft 6 in ) wide . Baclaran , Central Terminal , <unk> , Balintawak , Roosevelt and North Avenue stations on the LRT @-@ 1 , and all LRT @-@ 2 stations are composed of two levels : a lower concourse level and an upper platform level ( reversed in the case of Katipunan ) . Fare gates separate the concourse level from the stairs and escalators that provide access to the platform level . All stations have side platforms except for Baclaran , which has one side and one island platform , and Santolan , which has an island platform . 
 The concourse area at LRTA stations typically contain a passenger assistance office ( <unk> ) , ticket purchasing areas ( ticket counters and / or ticket machines ) , and at least one stall that sells food and drinks . Terminal stations also have a public relations office . Stores and ATMs are usually found at street level outside the station , although there are instances where they can be found within the concourse . Some stations , such as Monumento , Libertad and Araneta Center @-@ Cubao , are directly connected to shopping malls . LRT @-@ 2 stations have two restrooms , but LRT @-@ 1 restrooms have been the subject of criticism not only because of the provisioning of a single washroom at each station expected to serve all passengers ( whether male , female , disabled or otherwise ) , but also because of the impression that the lavatories are poorly maintained and unsanitary . 
 Originally , the LRT Line 1 was not built with accessibility in mind . This is reflected in the LRT @-@ 1 's lack of barrier @-@ free facilities such as escalators and elevators . It is also inconvenient in other ways : for one , because of the use of side platforms , passengers wishing to access the other platform for the train bound in the opposite direction at single @-@ level LRT @-@ 1 stations need to exit the station ( and by extension , the system ) and pay a new fare . The newer LRT Line 2 , unlike its counterpart , is designed to be barrier @-@ free and allows seamless transfer between platforms . Built by a joint venture between Hanjin and Itochu , LRT @-@ 2 stations have wheelchair ramps , braille markings , and pathfinding embossed flooring leading to and from the boarding platforms in addition to escalators and elevators . 
 In cooperation with the Philippine Daily Inquirer , copies of the Inquirer Libre — a free , tabloid @-@ size , Tagalog version of the Inquirer broadsheet — are available at selected LRTA stations from 6 : 00 am until the supply runs out . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 Four types of rolling stock run on the system , with three types used on the LRT Line 1 and another used on the LRT Line 2 . The LRT Line 1 railway cars were made either in Belgium by La <unk> et Nivelle , South Korea by Hyundai Precision and Adtranz ( La <unk> et Nivelle and Adtranz are now part of Bombardier Transportation ) , or Japan by Kinki Sharyo and Nippon Sharyo . The LRT Line 2 , unlike the LRT Line 1 , runs heavy rail metro cars made in South Korea by Hyundai Rotem and provided by the Asia @-@ Europe MRT Consortium led by Marubeni Corporation that have higher passenger capacity and maximum speed . All four types of rolling stock are powered by electricity supplied through overhead wires . 
 Of the two LRTA lines , the LRT Line 2 prominently employs wrap advertising in its rolling stock . The LRT Line 1 have begun using wrap advertising as well initially for their second @-@ generation trains , followed by their third @-@ generation trains . 
 = = = LRT Line 1 = = = 
 The LRT Line 1 at various stages in its history has used a two @-@ car , three @-@ car , and four @-@ car train . The two @-@ car trains are the original first @-@ generation BN trains ( railway cars numbered from 1000 ) . Most were transformed into three @-@ car trains , although some two @-@ car trains remain in service . The four @-@ car trains are the more modern second @-@ generation Hyundai Precision and Adtranz ( numbered from 1100 ) and third @-@ generation Kinki Sharyo / Nippon Sharyo ( 1200 ) trains . There are 139 railway cars grouped into 40 trains serving the line : 63 of these are first @-@ generation cars , 28 second @-@ generation , and 48 third @-@ generation . One train car ( 1037 ) was severely damaged in the Rizal Day bombings and was subsequently decommissioned . The maximum speed of these cars is 80 kilometers per hour ( 50 mph ) . 
 As part of the second phase of expansion on the Yellow Line , 12 new trains made in Japan by Kinki Sharyo and provided by the Manila Tren Consortium were shipped in the third quarter of 2006 and went into service in the first quarter of 2007 . The new air @-@ conditioned trains have boosted the capacity of the line from 27 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 passengers per hour per direction . 
 = = = LRT Line 2 = = = 
 The LRT Line 2 fleet runs eighteen heavy rail four @-@ car trains with lightweight stainless car bodies and 1 @,@ 500 volt electric motors . They have a top speed of 80 kilometers per hour ( 50 mph ) and usually take around thirty minutes to journey from one end of the line to the other . Each train measures 3 @.@ 2 meters ( 10 ft 6 in ) wide and 92 @.@ 6 meters ( 303 ft 10 in ) long allowing a capacity of 1 @,@ 628 passengers : 232 seated and 1 @,@ 396 standing . Twenty sliding doors per side facilitate quick entry and exit . The line 's trains also feature air conditioning , driverless automatic train operation from the Operations Control Center ( OCC ) in Santolan , low @-@ noise control , enabled electric and regenerative braking , and closed @-@ circuit television inside the trains . Special open spaces and seats are designated for wheelchair users and elderly passengers , and automatic next station announcements are made for the convenience of passengers , especially for the blind . 
 = = Safety and security = = 
 The system has always presented itself as a safe system to travel on , and despite some incidents a World Bank paper prepared by Halcrow deemed the running of metro rail transit operations overall as " good " . Safety notices in both English and Tagalog are a common sight at the stations and inside the trains . Security guards with megaphones can be seen at boarding areas asking crowds to move back from the warning tiles at the edge of platforms to avoid falling onto the tracks . In the event of emergencies or unexpected events aboard the train , alerts are used to inform passengers about the current state of the operations . The LRTA uses three alerts : Codes Blue , Yellow , and Red . 
 Smoking , previously banned only at station platforms and inside trains , has been banned at station concourse areas since June 24 , 2008 . Hazardous chemicals , such as paint and gasoline , as well as sharp pointed objects that could be used as weapons , are forbidden . Full @-@ sized bicycles and skateboards are also not allowed on board the train , although the ban on folding bicycles was lifted on November 8 , 2009 . Those under the influence of alcohol may be denied entry into the stations . 
 In response to the Rizal Day bombings , a series of attacks on December 30 , 2000 that included the bombing of a LRT @-@ 1 train among other targets , and in the wake of greater awareness of terrorism following the September 11 attacks , security has been stepped up on board the system . The Philippine National Police has a special police force assigned at LRT @-@ 1 and LRT @-@ 2 and security police provided by private companies are assigned to all stations with each having a designated head guard . Closed @-@ circuit televisions have been installed to monitor stations and keep track of suspicious activities . To better prepare for and improve response to any adverse incidents , drills simulating terror attacks and earthquakes have been conducted . It is standard practice for bags to be inspected upon entry into stations by guards equipped with hand @-@ held metal detectors . Those who refuse to submit to such inspection may be denied entry . Since May 1 , 2007 , the LRTA has enforced a policy against making false bomb threats , a policy already enforced at airports nationwide . Those who make such threats can face penalties in violation of Presidential Decree No. 1727 , as well as face legal action . Posted notices on station walls and inside trains remind passengers to be careful and be wary of criminals who may take advantage of the crowding aboard the trains . To address concerns of inappropriate contact on crowded trains , the first coach of Yellow Line trains have been designated for females only . 
 = = Fares = = 
 The Manila Light Rail Transit System is one of the least expensive rapid transit systems in Southeast Asia , costing significantly less to ride than other systems in the region . Fares are distance @-@ based , ranging from 15 to 30 Philippine pesos ( ₱ ) , or about 29 to 47 U.S. cents ( at US $ 1 = ₱ 42 as of September 2011 ) , depending on the number of stations traveled to reach the destination . Unlike other transportation systems , in which transfer to another line occurs within a station 's paid area , passengers have to exit and then pay a new fare for the line they are entering . This is also the case on the Yellow Line when changing boarding platforms to catch trains going in the opposite direction . 
 The Line 1 uses two different fare structures : one for single journey tickets and another for stored value tickets . Passengers using single journey tickets are charged ₱ 12 , ₱ 15 , or ₱ 20 depending on the number of stations traveled or whether the newly opened Balintawak or Roosevelt station is part of their trip . Stored value tickets are charged on a more finely graduated basis with fares ranging from ₱ 12 to ₱ 19 . The Line 2 , on the other hand , has only one fare structure . Passengers are charged ₱ 12 for the first three stations , ₱ 13 for a journey of four to six stations , ₱ 14 for seven to nine stations and ₱ 15 for a trip along the entire line . 
 = = = Ticketing = = = 
 Before 2001 , passengers on the LRT Line 1 would purchase a token to enter the station . Subsequent upgrades in the fare collection system eventually transitioned the Yellow Line from a token @-@ based system to a ticket @-@ based system , with full conversion to a ticket @-@ based system achieved on September 9 , 2001 . Starting September 2015 , the old magnetic tickets were decommissioned and replaced by contactless @-@ based smart card technology . Passengers can enter the system paid areas with either a single journey or stored value Beep Card . The Beep Card can be used on all LRT and MRT lines . Tickets can be sold from ticket booths manned by station agents or on ticket machine / s . 
 = = = = Beep card = = = = 
 Beep is a reloadable contactless smart card aimed to be a replacement for the magnetic card @-@ based system in paying rail based rapid transit transportation fares in and around Metro Manila . Beep is also aimed to be used in lieu of cash in some convenience stores and other businesses . The Beep system is implemented and operated by AF Payments Incorporated , which is primarily owned by Ayala Corporation and Metro Pacific Investments Corporation . 
 = = = = Magnetic ticket = = = = 
 Previously , the system uses two types of tickets : a single journey ( one @-@ way ) ticket whose cost is dependent on the destination , and a stored value ( multiple @-@ use ) ticket available for ₱ 100 . Senior citizens and disabled passengers can receive fare discounts as mandated by law . Tickets would normally bear a picture of the incumbent president , though some ticket designs have done away with this practice . 
 Single journey tickets are only valid on the day of purchase and will be unusable afterward . They expire if not used to exit the same station after 30 minutes from entry or if not used to exit the system after 120 minutes from entry . If the ticket expires , the passenger will be required to buy a new one . 
 Stored value tickets are usable on either the LRT @-@ 1 or LRT @-@ 2 lines although a new fare will be charged when transferring from one line to the other . To reduce ticket queues , the LRTA is promoting the use of stored value tickets . Aside from benefitting from a lower fare structure on the LRT @-@ 1 , stored value ticket users can avail of a scheme called the Last Ride Bonus that grants the use of any residual amount in a stored value ticket less than the usual minimum ₱ 12 fare , or the appropriate fare for the station of arrival from the station of departure , as a full fare . Stored value tickets are not reloadable and are captured by the fare gate after the last use . They expire six months after the date of first use . 
 Tickets are used both to enter and exit the paid area of the system . A ticket inserted into a fare gate at the station of origin is processed and then ejected allowing a passenger through the turnstile . The ejected ticket is then retrieved while passing through so that it can be used at the exit turnstile at the destination station to leave the premises . Tickets are captured by the exit turnstiles to be reused by the system if they no longer have any value . If it is a stored value ticket with some value remaining , however , it is once again ejected by the fare gate to be taken by the passenger for future use . 
 = = = = Flash Pass = = = = 
 To better integrate the LRTA and MRTC networks , a unified ticketing system utilizing contactless smart cards , similar to the Octopus card in Hong Kong and the EZ @-@ Link card in Singapore , was made a goal of the <unk> . In a transitional move towards such a unified ticketing system , the Flash Pass was implemented on April 19 , 2004 , as a stopgap measure . However , plans for a unified ticketing system using smart cards have languished , leaving the Flash Pass to fill the role for the foreseeable future . Originally sold by both the LRTA and the Metro Rail Transit Corporation , the Blue Line operator , the pass was discontinued with the election of Benigno Aquino III as President of the Philippines in 2010 . 
 The pass consisted of two parts : the Flash Pass card and the Flash Pass coupon . A <unk> Flash Pass card used for validation had to be acquired before a Flash Pass coupon can be purchased . To obtain a card , a passenger needed to visit a designated station and fill out an application form . Although the card is issued free of charge and contains no expiry date , it is expected to be issued only once . Should it be lost , an affidavit of loss had to be submitted before a replacement can be issued . The Flash Pass coupon , which served as a ticket , was linked to the passenger 's Flash Pass card through the card number printed on the coupon . Coupons were sold for ₱ 250 and were valid for unlimited rides on all three lines of the LRTA and MRTC for one week . The card and coupon were used by showing them to a security guard at an opening along the fare gates , who after checking their validity allowed the holder to pass through . 
 = = Future expansion = = 
 Plans for expanding the LRTA network have been formulated throughout its history , and successive administrations have touted trains as one of the keys to relieving Metro Manila of its long @-@ standing traffic problems . Expansion of the system was one of the main projects mentioned in a ten @-@ point agenda laid out by former President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo in 2005 . 
 = = = Extensions = = = 
 A southern extension of LRT @-@ 1 is planned . The envisioned line would have 10 stations over 11 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 3 mi ) ending in Bacoor in the province of Cavite . It would be the first line extending outside the Metro Manila area . An unsolicited bid to build and operate this project from Canada 's SNC @-@ Lavalin was rejected by the Philippine government in 2005 . The government is working with advisers ( International Finance Corporation , White & Case , Halcrow , and others ) to conduct an open @-@ market invitation to tender for the construction of the extension and a 30 @-@ year concession to run it . An additional extension from Bacoor to Imus and from there a further extension to Dasmariñas , both in Cavite , are also being considered . 
 As of March 2012 , the government announced that the <unk> billion LRT @-@ 1 south extension project has already been approved by the National Economic and Development Authority ( NEDA ) with the bidding expected to take place by the end of March or early April 2012 . 
 The LRTA is also currently conducting studies on the feasibility of a 6 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometer ( 3 @.@ 9 mi ) , four @-@ station LRT @-@ 1 spur from Baclaran towards Terminal 3 of the Ninoy Aquino International Airport , with a projected daily capacity of 40 @,@ 000 passengers . Funding for the project could be sourced from either official development assistance or a public @-@ private partnership . 
 There is also a proposal for a 4 @-@ kilometer ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) eastern extension of the LRT Line 2 from Marikina , crossing into <unk> in Rizal and finally to <unk> Junction in <unk> , also in Rizal . The line could later be extended as far west as Manila North Harbor and as far east as <unk> in <unk> . The construction of the eastern extension to <unk> was approved by the National Economic and Development Authority ( NEDA ) in September 2012 . 
 = = = New lines = = = 
 A second extension of the LRT @-@ 1 from Bacoor to Dasmariñas in Cavite has been proposed . It is planned to be a separate line to be known as LRT @-@ 6 which would run for an additional 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from the future LRT @-@ 1 terminus at <unk> Station to Governor 's Drive in Dasmariñas along the Aguinaldo Highway . It would have 7 stations namely , <unk> , <unk> , Imus , <unk> Hari , <unk> , Congressional Avenue and Governor 's Drive . 
 LRT @-@ 4 , or the Ortigas – Taytay LRT Line , is a proposed 11 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) line , crossing through the eastern parts of Metro Manila to the southern parts of the province of Rizal . Six stations would be built along Ortigas Avenue and Taytay Diversion Road from the Ortigas MRT Station on EDSA to SM City Taytay in Taytay . This project was approved last June 2015 and will be implemented as a public @-@ private partnership project . 
 MRT @-@ 7 is a planned 13 @-@ station , 21 @-@ kilometer ( 13 mi ) line that starts in Quezon City and traverses Commonwealth Avenue , passing through Caloocan City and ending in the city of San Jose del Monte in Bulacan . This line finished the bidding stage and has been approved by the Department of Justice and the Department of Transportation and Communications . As of August 2010 the MRT @-@ 7 project is under review due to various concerns from several local governments where the rail project is proposed to run through , and may undergo major changes from the original . On May 2012 , the consortium of Marubeni @-@ <unk> won the contract to build MRT @-@ 7 for around $ 1 billion and would take an estimated 42 months to build starting early 2013 . 
 = = = Transfer of line operations = = = 
 DOTC Undersecretary for Public Information Dante Velasco has unveiled a study being conducted by the DOTC looking at the possibility of transferring operations of Line 3 ( MRT 3 ) from Metro Rail Transit Corporation ( MRTC ) to LRTA thus uniting Lines 1 , 2 , and 3 under one operator to improve maintenance costs and to form a more integrated transportation system . According to DOTC Undersecretary For Rails <unk> <unk> , the transfer is set by the government in June 2011 . 
 As of January 13 , 2011 , Light Rail Transit Authority Chief Rafael S. Rodriguez took over as officer @-@ in @-@ charge of MRT @-@ 3 in preparation for the integration of operations of LRT @-@ 1 , LRT @-@ 2 , and MRT @-@ 3 Lines . 
 = Partial Terms of Endearment = 
 " Partial Terms of Endearment " is the 21st and final episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . Directed by Joseph Lee and written by Danny Smith , the episode originally aired on BBC Three in the United Kingdom on June 20 , 2010 , and has not been allowed to air in the United States on Fox , the original television network of the series , due to its controversial nature . This is the last episode that is presented in standard format , the rest of the series uses high definition format and it is the final episode to have the current opening sequence which was updated during the second season . In the episode , Lois is approached by an old friend from college who asks her to become a surrogate mother . After arguing with her husband Peter who is against the idea , Lois decides to become a gestational carrier and undergoes in vitro fertilisation . However , while Lois is pregnant , the biological parents are killed in an automobile accident . Lois and Peter have to decide whether to abort the fetus , or carry it to term and give the baby up for adoption . Peter attempts to persuade his wife to get an abortion but changes his mind after pro @-@ life activists convince him that abortion is murder . Despite Peter 's objections , Lois goes ahead with the abortion . 
 The episode was banned from airing on the Fox Broadcasting Company due to concerns over its portrayal of the controversial subject of abortion . This is the second episode of Family Guy to be prevented from airing during the episode 's respective regular season run ; the first episode was the third season 's " When You Wish Upon a Weinstein " . Unlike that episode , Cartoon Network 's adult @-@ oriented block Adult Swim refused to air it upon Fox 's request . It was first announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 Critical responses to the episode were mostly positive ; critics praised the storyline , cultural references and its assessment of the subject of abortion . The episode was watched in just under a million homes in its original airing in the United Kingdom . Guest performances included Gary Beach , Jackson Douglas , Phil LaMarr , Will Sasso , Julia Sweeney , Wil Wheaton and Michael York , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Partial Terms of Endearment " was released on DVD in the United States , along with Seth and Alex Almost @-@ Live Comedy Show , on September 28 , 2010 . Even though this episode was placed at the end of season 8 , the episode was placed between " Go Stewie Go " and " Peter @-@ assment " in the UK . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While attending her college reunion at Salve Regina University with Peter , Lois spots her old roommate , Naomi Robinson , with whom she had a brief lesbian relationship in college . Peter is shocked but excited to discover that Lois was bisexual in college . Naomi indicates that she would like to discuss an important matter with them at their home . Assuming that he will participate in a threesome with Lois and Naomi , Peter sends Chris , Meg , Stewie , and Brian out of the house . After Naomi arrives , she introduces her husband Dale . Peter expects that they will now be participating in an orgy , and tries to seduce the three of them while dressed in various costumes . When they clear the air to a dismayed Peter that they 're not there for sex , Naomi and Dale tell Lois and Peter they 've had trouble conceiving and ask Lois to be a surrogate mother for them , and Lois considers the matter . 
 As the family eats breakfast the next morning , Lois reveals her intention to become a surrogate mother for Naomi and Dale , causing Peter to become upset at the thought of her being pregnant for nine months . Despite this , Lois decides to go to Dr. Hartman to have the in vitro fertilization performed , enduring more of Dr. Hartman 's shtick involving celebrity crossbreeds and having a tribe of bush men implant the egg with blowguns . A pregnancy test comes back positive the next day , and a furious Peter attempts to cause Lois to have a miscarriage before ultimately confronting her about the pregnancy . While she continues asserting her intention to provide a child to Naomi and Dale , Quahog 5 News suddenly reveals that Naomi and Dale died in a car crash . Devastated by the announcement , Lois questions whether she should have an abortion or continue with the pregnancy and put the baby up for adoption . 
 In an attempt to come to a decision , Lois and Peter decide to visit the local family @-@ planning center , and ultimately decide to abort the embryo . However , as Peter exits the center he encounters an anti @-@ abortion rally , where he is shown an anti @-@ abortion video by one of the protesters . The video causes him to reconsider about aborting the unborn baby . Returning home , Lois continues to advocate her right to choose , while Peter now attempts to argue the unborn child 's right to life and whether Lois has the responsibility of carrying it to term . At their wits ' end , the two decide to discuss the matter , once and for all . The next day , Lois talks with the family about " the wonderful new member of the Griffin family " , but then , after a few seconds of silence , Peter turns to the camera and says to the audience " We had the abortion " , promptly ending the episode . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was first announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 25 , 2009 , by series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane . It was written by fellow executive producer and series regular Danny Smith and directed by Joseph Lee , during the show 's eighth production season . The storyline was pitched by series regular Tom Devanney , and periodically references Billions and Billions ( 1997 ) , a book of essays by Carl Sagan . Seth MacFarlane asked Danny Smith to read Sagan 's essay , " Abortion : Is It Possible to Be Both ' Pro @-@ Life ' and ' Pro @-@ Choice ' " , before beginning to write the script . The episode was originally intended to air along with the rest of the eighth season schedule , and was approved for production by 20th Century Fox . However , the Fox Broadcasting Company asserted their right not to air the episode due to the subject matter . This was the second time that MacFarlane had been warned by Fox about the sensitive nature of an episode 's subject . Previously , the network had also disapproved of the season 3 episode " When You Wish Upon a Weinstein " , which was originally prevented from airing on Fox , but finally aired on Adult Swim , and eventually on Fox more than four years after it was rejected . Thinking the same would happen with " Partial Terms of Endearment " , MacFarlane believed that Fox would eventually run the episode on their network , stating , " Most of the time these things turn out to be nothing . " In a statement released by Fox , they noted their full support of " the producers ' right to make the episode and distribute it in whatever way they want . " 
 At the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , MacFarlane announced that the episode would become available on a special DVD release , with series producer Kara Vallow confirming the release would be available on September 28 , 2010 , along with Seth and Alex 's Almost Live Comedy Show . A month after the announcement , Kevin Reilly , President of Fox Entertainment , stated that the final decision not to air the episode was largely due to concerns about finances and advertisers : " Of all the issues , [ abortion ] is the one that seems to be the most of a hot button . Particularly at that moment in time , the economy was really struggling and there were a lot of very tough conversations going on with clients . " Reilly said that " the advertisers know what they ’ re getting " with Family Guy , and he thought that the episode handled the subject fine , but " this one felt like it could cause trouble , and it was just not worth it . " Despite the concerns in the U.S. about the episode , it aired on June 20 , 2010 , on BBC Three in the UK , as a part of the season 's regularly scheduled Sunday night run on the station . Although it was originally speculated that Adult Swim might air the episode , Fox stated that there were no plans to air it on their network . Several months before the episode debuted on television , the script was performed in a live table read at the Ricardo Montalbán Theatre in Hollywood , California on August 12 , 2009 . The special reading was attended by Academy of Television Arts and Sciences voters on the heels of the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . Family Guy was nominated for Outstanding Comedy Series , becoming the first animated program to be nominated in the category since The Flintstones in 1961 . Commenting about the event , MacFarlane said , " We did this to drum up Emmy votes , so we could lose by fewer votes . " 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Jackson Douglas , husband of Alex Borstein , appeared in the episode as Dale Robinson , actress Julia Sweeney appeared as Naomi Robinson , actress Rutina Wesley appeared as Cheryl , actor Wil Wheaton cameoed as an anti @-@ abortion protester and actor Michael York voiced the nature narrator . Actor Gary Beach , voice actor Phil LaMarr , and comedian / actor Will Sasso guest starred as various characters . Recurring guest voice actress Alexandra Breckenridge , actor Ralph Garman , and writers Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and John Viener made minor appearances throughout the episode . Recurring guest cast member Patrick Warburton guest appeared in the episode as well . This episode marked Sweeney 's first guest appearance since the season two episode " Wasted Talent " . 
 " Partial Terms of Endearment " , along with Seth and Alex Almost @-@ Live Comedy Show , was released on DVD in the United States on September 28 , 2010 . The set includes a brief audio commentary by Seth MacFarlane , voice actress Alex Borstein , writer Danny Smith and director Joseph Lee , as well as animatics , a table read of the episode , and nine downloadable original Family Guy songs . It was also released for digital retail in the United States the same day without the bonus features included on the DVD . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , Peter and Lois are shown entering her alma mater at Salve Regina University in Newport , Rhode Island . Later , after they are approached by Lois 's ex @-@ roommate Naomi and her husband Dale , Lois announces her intention to carry the couple 's baby , causing Peter to question why Lois is the one who has to become the couple 's surrogate . Their daughter , Meg , suggests that she could carry the baby herself , but Lois objects due to Meg 's inability to have a boyfriend " for more than a few weeks . " Meg notes her relationship with Sesame Street character Count von Count , who only left her after discovering she had at least three nipples . 
 Before Lois prepares to undergo in vitro fertilization , Dr. Hartman shows her several photos of babies conceived by celebrity couples , including actress Shelley Duvall and singer @-@ songwriter James Blunt ; actress Hilary Swank and actor Gary Busey ; Olympic medalist Florence Griffith @-@ Joyner and physicist Stephen Hawking ; and actress , writer and comedian Tina Fey and actor Joaquin Phoenix . Beginning the procedure , Lois objects to Dr. Hartman 's method of embryonic insertion . In response , he replies , " Well , perhaps you could tell them — if only you spoke Hovitos , " a reference to Raiders of the Lost Ark . Later , in an attempt to cause Lois to have a miscarriage , Peter lays down a series of Grey 's Anatomy DVDs in order to lure Lois into being punched in the stomach by the " Acme Miscarriage Kit " , a boxing glove attached to a crossbow . In a reference to the Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies cartoon series Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner , Peter ultimately ends up missing with the crossbow , causing the glove to bounce and hit a large rock and land inches in front of him as he is standing on a narrow cliff . The ground then drops out from underneath his feet , causing him to fall like Wile E. Coyote . 
 As Peter exits the abortion clinic , he notices a pro @-@ life rally nearby . At the rally , a protester shows Peter a video tape discouraging abortion ( as a reference to the cult classic 1936 American propaganda exploitation film Reefer Madness ) , portraying it as murder , larceny , jaywalking and securities fraud . The tape claims that abortion prevented Nazi leader Adolf Hitler 's would @-@ be assassin , a fourth Stooge brother , of The Three Stooges , and Islamic extremist Osama bin Laden 's America @-@ loving brother from being born . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was viewed in just under a million homes in its original airing on BBC Three in the United Kingdom , earning an audience share of 5 @.@ 7 percent , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on E4 . The reception of the episode represented a slight decrease from the previous week 's ratings . In a review of the episode 's original broadcast , The Mail on Sunday rated the double bill of " Partial Terms of Endearment " and " Go Stewie Go " as four out of five stars . 
 Reviews of the episode 's release on DVD were mostly positive , calling the episode " wickedly funny , no matter how offensive . " Frazier Moore of the Associated Press commented that " What , in other hands , could have been a serious , even heart @-@ wrenching story is on Family Guy a devilish burlesque — not to mention a wickedly astute examination of the current abortion clash . " Moore also noted , however , that " the uninitiated , the faint @-@ of @-@ heart and , most of all , the anti @-@ abortion crowd should maybe choose to take a pass . " Dave Itzkoff of The New York Times deemed the episode " typical of that audacious Fox animated comedy , teeming with rapid @-@ fire jokes and willfully offensive non sequiturs about disabled animals , God , Nazis , bodily functions and the sexual habits of ' Sesame Street ' characters . " In a slightly more mixed review of the DVD release , Cindy White of IGN criticized the episode for its shock value , but appreciated " that the writers didn 't cop out in the end , and actually picked a side . " White went on to comment that it was " hard to believe that the writers ever expected ' Partial Terms of Endearment ' to make it to air " and that " even devoted , longtime fans of the show may be a little uncomfortable with the subject matter . " White gave the release a 7 out of 10 rating . Assessing Family Guy 's impact on television , Mary Elizabeth Williams of Salon commented on the portrayal of abortion : " That Family Guy , that doofy , generally unfunny bastion of sophomoric jokes , should be one of the few shows brave enough to even address the topic is bananas [ ... ] And that Fox wouldn 't air the episode says we 're still a long way from having anybody on ' Glee ' or ' The Office ' or ' House ' look at those telltale lines on the stick and finally decide what millions of American women have — that they 're just not ready for motherhood . " 
 = SMS Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie = 
 SMS Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was an ironclad warship built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the 1880s , the last vessel of that type to be built for Austria @-@ Hungary . The ship , named for Archduchess Stephanie , Crown Princess of Austria , was laid down in November 1884 , was launched in April 1887 and completed in July 1889 . She was armed with a pair of 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in open barbettes and had a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Her service was limited , in large part due to the rapid pace of naval development in the 1890s , which quickly rendered her obsolescent . As a result , her career was generally limited to routine training and the occasional visit to foreign countries . In 1897 , she took part in an international naval demonstration to force a compromise over Greek and Ottoman claims to the island of Crete . Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was decommissioned in 1905 , hulked in 1910 , and converted into a barracks ship in 1914 . After Austria @-@ Hungary 's defeat in World War I , the ship was transferred to Italy as a war prize and was eventually broken up for scrap in 1926 . 
 = = Design = = 
 In the decades that followed the Austrian victory at the Battle of Lissa in 1866 , naval expenditure in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire were drastically reduced , in large part due to the veto power the Hungarian half of the empire held . Surrounded by potentially hostile countries powers on land , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire was more concerned with these threats , and so naval development was not prioritized . Admiral Friedrich von Pöck argued for several years to improve the strength of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , finally winning authorization to build the center battery ship Tegetthoff in 1875 . He spent another six years trying in vain to secure a sister ship to Tegetthoff . In 1881 , he called for a fleet of eleven armored warships in 1881 . Pöck ultimately had to resort to budgetary sleight of hand , appropriating funds that had been allocated to modernize the ironclad Erzherzog Ferdinand Max to build an entirely new vessel . He attempted to conceal the deception by referring to the ship officially as Ferdinand Max , though the actual Ferdinand Max was still anchored in Pola as a school ship . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was 85 @.@ 36 meters ( 280 ft 1 in ) long between perpendiculars and 87 @.@ 24 m ( 286 ft 3 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 17 @.@ 06 m ( 56 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 6 m ( 21 ft 8 in ) , and she displaced 5 @,@ 075 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 995 long tons ) . Her hull was constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames and was extensively subdivided into watertight compartments to improve the ship 's resistance to flooding . The ship was equipped with a ram bow that was manufactured in Germany by Krupp . She was fitted with two pole masts equipped with fighting tops for some of her light guns . Her crew number 430 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by a pair of compound steam engines driving two screw propellers ; the engines were built by Maudslay , Sons and Field of Britain . The number and type of the coal @-@ fired boilers that provided steam for the engines have not survived , though they were trunked into two funnels . Her propulsion system was rated to provide 8 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was armed with a main battery of two 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) 35 @-@ caliber guns mounted singly in an open barbette . They were placed forward in sponsons over the battery deck to maximize end @-@ on fire . The guns were manufactured by Krupp , while the carriages that carried them were built by Armstrong Mitchell & Co . The guns fired a 450 @-@ kilogram ( 990 lb ) shell using a 140 kg ( 310 lb ) charge of brown powder , which produced a muzzle velocity of 530 metres per second ( 1 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . While the open barbettes provided a wide field of fire for the slow @-@ firing guns , they were rapidly rendered obsolete by the successful application of quick @-@ firing ( QF ) technology to large @-@ caliber artillery pieces . 
 The main battery was supported by a secondary battery of six 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) 35 @-@ caliber guns , also built by Krupp . These were mounted in gun ports amidships , three on each side . She carried nine 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) QF guns for close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats ; seven were 44 @-@ caliber guns and the other two were shorter 33 @-@ caliber pieces , all built by Hotchkiss . Her gun armament was rounded out by a pair of 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 44 @-@ caliber QF guns and a pair of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) 15 @-@ caliber landing guns for use by landing parties . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried four 40 cm ( 16 in ) torpedo tubes ; one was mounted in the bow , another in the stern , and one on each broadside . 
 Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was protected with compound armor manufactured by the Dillinger Hütte works in Germany . The ship was protected by an armored belt that was 229 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The barbette for the main battery was 283 mm ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) thick , and the conning tower had sides that were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste . Her keel was laid down on 12 November 1884 , the last ironclad to be laid down for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . She was launched on 14 April 1887 and completed in July 1889 . The following year , the German emperor , Kaiser Wilhelm II , invited the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet to take part in the annual fleet training exercises in August . Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie , the ironclad Kronprinz Erzherzog Rudolf , and the protected cruiser Kaiser Franz Joseph I were sent to Germany under the command of Rear Admiral Johann von <unk> . While en route , the squadron made visits in Gibraltar and Britain ; during the latter stop , the ships took part in the Cowes Regatta , where they were reviewed by Queen Victoria . The ships also stopped in Copenhagen , Denmark and Karlskrona , Sweden . During the voyage back to Austria @-@ Hungary , the squadron visited Cherbourg , France and Palermo , Italy . 
 Celebrations to honor the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus 's first trans @-@ Atlantic voyage were held in several countries ; Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie , Kronprinz Erzherzog Rudolf , and Kaiser Franz Joseph I represented Austria @-@ Hungary during the ceremonies in Genoa , Italy , Columbus 's birthplace . During the 1893 fleet maneuvers , Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was mobilized to train alongside the ironclads Kronprinz Erzherzog Rudolf , Prinz Eugen , Kaiser Max , and Don Juan d 'Austria , among other vessels . Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie took part in an international naval demonstration off Crete in 1897 during a period of tension between Greece and the Ottoman Empire that culminated in the Greco @-@ Turkish War . The Austro @-@ Hungarian contingent , which also included the armored cruiser Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia , and the torpedo cruisers Tiger , Leopard , and Sebenico , three destroyers , and eight torpedo boats , was the third largest squadron to take part in the demonstration , after the British and Italian fleets . Austria @-@ Hungary , displeased with the settlement that left Crete with a Greek ruler but nominally under Turkish control , withdrew its ships in March 1898 , before the other members of the international fleet . 
 Already by 1898 , the ship was regarded by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as a second @-@ rate vessel , after less than 10 years in service . The rapid pace of naval development in the late 19th century had quickly rendered her obsolescent . She was decommissioned in 1905 , In 1908 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy attempted to sell the ship , Kronprinz Erzherzog Rudolf , and Tegetthoff to Uruguay in an attempt to raise funds for new projects , but the deal fell through . In 1910 , she was hulked and became a barracks ship for the mine warfare school in 1914 , and served in this role for the duration of World War I. Following the conclusion of the conflict , Kronprinzessin Erzherzogin Stephanie was ceded to Italy as a war prize in 1920 and eventually broken up for scrap in 1926 . 
 = Yank Adams = 
 Frank B. Adams ( December 19 , 1847 – after January 1923 ) , commonly known as Yank Adams , was a professional carom billiards player who specialized in finger billiards , in which a player directly manipulates the balls with his or her hands , instead of using an implement such as a cue stick , often by twisting the ball between one 's thumb and middle finger . Adams , who was sometimes billed as the " Digital Billiard Wonder " , has been called the " greatest of all digit billiards players " , and the " champion digital billiardist of the World . " George F. Slosson , a top billiards player of Adams ' era , named him the " greatest exhibition player who ever lived . " Adams ' exhibitions drew audiences of 1 @,@ 000 or more , leaving standing room only , even in small venues . 
 Adams ' career began when he found his aptitude for bowling translated to the playing of billiards . One day when he was 25 years old , he picked up some billiard balls and began to " bowl " on the table and soon discovered he could manipulate the balls with great accuracy in this manner . Largely self @-@ taught , Adams thereafter amassed a large repertoire of finger billiards shots . He engaged a manager and began to give performances , his first was at an engagement in New York City . Later , Adams traveled extensively , giving exhibitions and taking on challengers in cities across the United States and some in Europe . During his travels , Adams performed before the Vanderbilts , the Goulds , three U.S. Presidents , the Prince of Wales in London , and the Comte de Paris in Paris . One of the largest matches ever played of any form of billiards took place at Manhattan 's Gilmore 's Gardens in 1878 . Adams played using his fingers against William Sexton , the reigning cue champion of the world , who used a cue ; Adams won the three @-@ day competition in the game of straight rail . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Adams was raised in Norwich , Connecticut , which led to him being nicknamed " Yank " later in life . From a young age , he exhibited the substantial hand strength required for finger billiards . When he was less than a year old , he could hurt his mother with his grip ; she gave him chunks of bread to squeeze instead . Adams was large for his age , and in 1863 , he disguised his youth , and joined the Eighteenth Connecticut Volunteers , with whom he served for three years , fighting for the Union in the American Civil War . After being discharged , Adams worked as a carpenter from 1872 to 1875 , and then became a traveling salesman for the American Sterling @-@ Silver Company . 
 = = = Beginnings in billiards = = = 
 Adams finger billiards and exhibition work had its germination in his early bowling interest . By the time he was 17 , Adams was an adept bowler ; he often gave informal exhibitions of bowling tricks such as " cocked hat " , " back frame " , and letting the head pin remain standing . In a 1913 interview , Adams said that , " [ i ] n those days we rolled what was termed ' skew ball ' , similar to the english put on a cue ball in Billiards . " 
 When Adams was 25 he was employed as a traveling salesman for the Derby Silver Company in New York . One day , while he was waiting for customers in a Poughkeepsie hotel , he strolled into a billiard room , took six pool balls over to a billiard table , and commenced to " bowl " . The attention of everyone in the room was attracted by the manner in which Adams made the ball travel . One man asked for the privilege of placing the balls in a certain position for Adams to bowl at ; Adams made the shot easily . This started Adams ' career as a finger billiard expert . In the next town he traveled to , he hired a table , performed the same stunts with the balls , and added a few new shots . For three months after that Adams practiced various shots each day , and some of the shots he developed during that time became part of his regular exhibition repertoire . 
 When he returned to New York , Adams met with Maurice Daly , then the " dean of billiards " . Daly listened to Adams ' story , and said that he was not aware that any startling shots could be accomplished using only the hands . Daly offered Adams a set of four balls , and sat down to watch Adams . After 12 shots , Daly became greatly interested , often asking Adams to repeat shots . At the end of the performance , Daly told Adams that if he ever entertained any idea of entering the billiards field he would give Adams an engagement at his room . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = International success = = = 
 As Adams became more involved with billiards , he gave up his job with the silver company . Adams went to Sexton 's billiard parlor in the Bowery and Sexton employed Adams at Miner 's Bowery Theater at $ 115 a week . Adams sought to employ a manager as was typical of billiards professionals of the time ; he was taken on by Billy O 'Brien , a well known sports authority and one @-@ time pugilist who managed Dominick McCaffrey later in his career . O 'Brien organized an exhibition tour of the United States for Adams . Three months into the tour , Adams reached Chicago , where he played a three @-@ week engagement for Billy Emmett at $ 500 a week . After leaving the stage , Adams opened at O 'Connor 's billiard room , at Fourteenth Street and Fourth Avenue , where he played nightly for a year . Adams then resumed traveling , and gave exhibitions in nearly every city in the United States and a large number of cities in Europe . 
 In 1868 Adams appeared before the Prince of Wales in London and the Comte de Paris in Paris . While in London , John Roberts , Jr. offered Adams $ 300 per week for one year to play afternoon and evening at his Argyle Rooms . After playing for the Comte de Paris , the Frenchmen wanted Adams to state his figures for an indefinite period . Adams also played for three Presidents of the United States ; while in New York he was paid $ 100 per night by the Vanderbilt and Gould families . Bullocks Billiard Guide said that Adams had earned more than $ 70 @,@ 000 for exhibition alone over seven years , which was more than the combined earnings of all other listed <unk> . Though champion players with cues sometimes dabbled in finger billiards , it was said even of such greats as Jacob Schaefer , George Slosson , and Eugene Carter that " their work , compared with that of the Finger Wonder , is like a novice playing an expert . " 
 = = = Public exhibitions = = = 
 Adams ' first major public exhibition in New York was held on January 31 , 1878 , at the Union Square Billiard Rooms before a large audience ; he performed there nightly for a week . Reporting on the first night of the event , The New York Times wrote : 
 The intricacy of the various shots he played , as well as the marvelous accuracy with which they were executed , frequently roused the spectators to an unusual pitch of enthusiasm .... Many of Adams ' shots are entirely new , never having been attempted before by any billiards expert . Among them may be mentioned the wonderful " bottle " shot with which last evening 's exhibition was brought to a close . Two soda @-@ water bottles were placed at the head of the left @-@ hand rail , about a foot apart , a red ball being placed in the mouth of each bottle . A white ball was next placed against the right @-@ hand rail , directly opposite the lower bottle . Everything being in readiness , Adams then took the remaining white ball in his hand , and <unk> upon the ball in the mouth of the upper bottle , jumped his ball to the ball in the mouth of the other bottle , whence , falling upon the table it was carried by a reverse " English " to the middle of the top rail , whence it glided with unerring accuracy to the right @-@ hand rail and caromed upon the first @-@ mentioned white ball , its successful execution being greeted with great applause . 
 = = = Competitive play and rivalries = = = 
 = = = = M. Adrian Izar = = = = 
 Prior to Adams ' performances , finger billiards had been demonstrated in New York by French player M. Adrien Izar , who had astonished spectators with an exhibition held on September 20 , 1875 , before which the game was little known in the United States . In France and England , Izar was considered the game 's champion player . The night before his 1878 exhibition , Adams received a telegram in which Izar challenged him to play for the championship and named Chicago as the venue for contest . Adams replied that he was unwilling to leave New York at that time , but that he would pay Izar 's expenses to travel to New York . Adams later issued the following statement to newspapers : 
 I have never intended to play a public match in my line , having never arrogated to myself a superiority above other hand billiard players , although I have deemed myself the equal of any one living in my line , not excepting Mons . Izar , by whom continually letters are written , whose contents have for their purpose a derogation of my skill . That this may be checked , and summarily , I would state that I am willing to play Mons . Izar a match game for $ 500 a side , in New York City , Boston or Chicago , on a <unk> table , full size balls and Collender cushion ; the championship and gate money to be awarded the player showing the greatest variety of shots in connection with accuracy , and in all giving the most interesting exhibition of finger billiards . 
 = = = = William Sexton = = = = 
 On March 15 , 1878 , a billiards match of straight rail began that lasted three days at the game The match was between Adams and William Sexton , then the cue champion of the world , at Manhattan 's Gilmore 's Gardens — the predecessor venue of Madison Square Garden . The match pitted Adams ' finger billiards against Sexton using a cue , for a purse of $ 500 . The audience was one of the largest that had ever witnessed a billiards game . The terms of the contest stated that on each day of the match , Adams was required to score 2 @,@ 000 points , while Sexton needed only 1 @,@ 000 . 
 On the first day of the match , Adams scored 1 @,@ 110 points using finger billiards . Despite Adams ' impressive opening performance , by the third day of the match , Sexton was far in the lead . In Dewey @-@ Defeats @-@ Truman @-@ style , many newspapers reported that Sexton won the tournament , as their reporters left the venue at a time when Sexton had a seemingly indomitable lead and before the match was over . The New York Times , for example , reported that Sexton won the match , though they leavened the result by reporting that despite the prize fund , it was a " friendly match " , geared toward exhibition , and that " Adams could undoubtedly have run the game out on three occasions , but preferred to make ' display ' shots in place of his usual " nurse " play , against which a cue player stands no chance whatever . " However , with Sexton needed only seven points to win the championship , Adams stepped to the table and ran out , making 1 @,@ 181 points in a row to win the match . 
 = = = = Louis Shaw = = = = 
 Adams ' chief professional rivalry in later years was with Louis Shaw . In 1891 Adams and Shaw disagreed about the format of the finger billiards championship which they would both contest that year . Adams wanted the match to be played for a $ 500 stake , while Shaw wanted the receipts to be donated to the local firemen 's fund . 
 = = = Other accomplishments = = = 
 In 1879 , Adams was chosen to be the official referee for the championship Collender Billiard Tournament held at Tammany Hall . It was contested by top players <unk> Daly , Albert Garnier , Eugene Carter , A. P. <unk> , Randolph Heiser , William Sexton , George F. Slosson , and " the Wizard " , Jacob Schaefer , Sr. at the newly introduced carom billiards discipline called the champion 's game , an intermediary game between straight rail and <unk> . 
 In 1889 , Adams broke the world record run for successive straight rail points in a match with champion player Jacob Schaefer , Sr. , in which Adams scored 4 @,@ 962 counts in a row , which was 2 @,@ 400 points more than any prior competition high run , albeit with his fingers rather than with a cue . Adams stated in an interview in his later years that his personal high run was 6 @,@ 900 consecutive straight rail counts . 
 In 1890 , Adams returned to Paris after signing a contract with Eugene Carter to play at Carter 's billiard academy for thirteen weeks at 1 @,@ 000 francs ( approximately $ 200 ) per week . Afterwards , Adams went in London , under the management of M. Farini , to play at the room of John Roberts , Jr . On a previous trip to London in 1887 , Roberts offered Adams £ 60 a week for six months to give exhibitions , but Adams declined , citing a need to superintend his sporting journal . 
 Adams was the editor and proprietor of The Chicago Sporting Journal , and the general manager of the New York Sporting and Theatrical Journal . Through his association with the sporting journals , Adams was an intermediary for the issuance of challenge matches , such as boxing bouts . He held the winning stake and distributed the winnings upon the event 's conclusion . Adams owned a number of billiard parlors during his lifetime , including two in Chicago — one named the White Elephant , another called the Academy Billiard Hall , and one on Union Square at 60 East 14th Street in New York City . Adams ' business cards , in 1877 , said , " Yank Adams , champion finger billiardist of the world . Residence immaterial . " 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Adams continued to give exhibitions and was still able to perform well into his later years . For example , the New Rochelle Pioneer newspaper reported that Adams gave an exhibition on December 21 , 1915 at 68 years of age , at Chamberlain 's Derby Billiard Academy in New Rochelle , New York , and that he was " at his best and made some exceptionally brilliant shots in the presence of 300 lovers of the game . While at the table he kept up a continuous humorous monologue to the great pleasure of his audience . " In 1919 , when <unk> was 71 , the Brooklyn Daily Eagle reported that he gave an exhibition before a large audience at Lawler Brothers Billiard Academy of Brooklyn . 
 In 1923 , when Adams was 76 , the following newspaper story appeared in The Salt Lake Tribune , telling of his whereabouts : 
 Perhaps you old fellows , too , thought Yank had passed on , but he turned up in New York the other day and is now spending his last days in a Bronx flat . There was a time when Yank Adams was known in every billiard room in America . He was as much at home in Eddie <unk> 's room at San Francisco as at Tom Foley 's in Chicago of Maurice Daly 's in New York , and he knew all the billiard players and big and little room keepers from coast to coast . When the history of billiards is written and the names of Willie Hoppe , old and young Jake Schaefer and Welker Cochran are included with others of the great exponents of the indoor sport , there will be a distinct division for one man — the man who did the impossible , who could make the ivories travel the wrong way , or , in the language of the billiard realm , " make ' em talk all languages . " That man is Frank B. Adams , known the world over as " Yank " Adams , at one time and even now the world 's only finger billiardist who can make all the apparently impossible shots on the table without the aid of a cue . Adams is 76 years old , and after fifty years of exhibitions all over the world has retired from active work to live in the Bronx and conduct a billiard academy of his own at Burnside and Creston avenues in New York with his business manager for the last ten years , Samuel <unk> . Yank now lives at 635 West 136th street In New York . When I told Tom Foley , the daddy of all the <unk> , that Yank Adams was back in the business he laughed and said : " I thought Yank had cashed in . But he 's like all those billiard players . They never die . " 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Adams played only with his fingers , disdaining the cue stick entirely . He was known for his skill at finger billiards and for the quickness of his play . In exhibitions it was sometimes advertised that Adams would attempt to make 100 shots in 100 seconds . He would always begin by " feeling out " the cushions on the table , as the speed of the tables varied almost nightly , some fast and some slow . 
 Adams would sometimes accept challenge matches at his performances . For example , at an exhibition held in Omaha , Nebraska , on November 20 , 1889 , Adams played against twenty of the best players in the city . Adams manipulated the balls with his fingers , while his opponents used cues and were given a handicap equivalent to a 1 @,@ 000 point lead . 
 Adams performed about 80 shots per exhibition . He had a large repertoire of practiced shots — more than 500 — affording him the luxury to not having to repeat a single shot during a week @-@ long exhibition . The abundance of shots was unusual , and was described by one sports writer as " more extensive than the entire billiard fraternity put together " . The following description of Adams ' shots appeared in an 1891 newspaper article , which highlighted them as , " among his difficult feats " : 
 Two quart wine bottles are placed at the short end of the table , three feet apart ; a ball is placed on the top of each bottle , and a third ball , six feet from the bottles in the opposite corner . Adams makes the hand ball jump from bottle to bottle then to take an English in space , counting on the third bail , a double shot . 
 Fifteen balls are placed in a line , three inches apart . On the last ball is placed a piece of chalk , while two feet from the other end , at a square angle , is placed a single ball . Yank drops the hand ball with a Massé twist , which , after hitting the single ball , describes a semi @-@ circle , taken the cushion first , then makes a carrom on the fifteen balls , but is played with such a delicate calculation as barely to reach the last ball ; in fact , freezes against it so gently as not to dislodge the chalk previously placed thereon . 
 A derby hat is placed on the table , under which is a ball . One foot from the hat are two balls a foot apart , which he <unk> on , the hand ball continues striking the rim of the hat , forces it up , and goes under making the stroke on the third ball , then returns from under the hat when it rocks the second time . 
 He also stand at the head of the table , throwing the balls with a hundred @-@ yard force but has them stop eight feet away in such a position as to spell his name . 
 In an article in the St. Paul Daily Globe , the reporter summed up the events of Adams ' exhibition on April 26 , 1888 : 
 The great finger billiard exhibition came off last night at the Standard billiard hall to a packed house , and those who saw Yank Adams handle the spheres were more than delighted .... Shot after shot were made in lightning rapidity , spotting the ball , running the whole length of the rail , crossing over , with two cushions and counting , going under hats and in between them , cutting the letter S and making the carom , jump shots , masses and hundreds of others too complicated to put in type . Mr. A.M. Doherty played a game with the exhibitor , and at twenty @-@ eight points left the balls in a scattered position , which were gathered at one shot by Mr. Adams , who made fifty shots in sixty seconds . What seemed his most difficult shot was that of placing fifteen balls in a line , and a piece of chalk on the last ball . The hand ball was then dropped a distance of two feet , described a semi @-@ circle , making a carom on all of the balls and freezing against the last ball . Adams ' finger shots discount Schaeffer , Slosson and J. Carter combined . 
 The public flocked to Adams ' exhibitions ; often the pool room where he was performing could barely contain the crowd . When Adams performed in Rochester , New York in 1892 , the local paper reported that " [ n ] o man in these broad acres can draw the crowd " Yank " Adams does when an exhibition with the ivories is the card . Last night 's crowd was banked up , against the walls , twenty deep in <unk> and many witnessed the exhibition from the table tops and window ledges . " 
 = James I of Scotland = 
 James I ( late July 1394 – 21 February 1437 ) , King of Scotland from 1406 , was the son of King Robert III and Annabella Drummond . He was the last of three sons . By the time he was eight , both of his elder brothers were dead — Robert had died in infancy but David , Duke of Rothesay died suspiciously in Falkland Castle while being detained by his uncle , Robert , Duke of Albany . Although parliament exonerated Albany , fears for James 's safety grew during the winter of 1405 – 1406 and plans were made to send him to France . In February 1406 , James was accompanying nobles close to his father when they clashed with supporters of Archibald , 4th Earl of Douglas , forcing the prince to take refuge in the castle of the Bass Rock , a small islet in the Firth of Forth . He remained there until mid @-@ March , when he boarded a vessel bound for France , but on 22 March while off the English coast , pirates captured the ship and delivered James to Henry IV of England . Two weeks later , on 4 April the ailing Robert III died , and the 12 @-@ year @-@ old uncrowned King of Scots began his 18 @-@ year detention . 
 James was given a good education at the English Court , where he developed respect for English methods of governance and for Henry V to the extent that he served in the English army against the French during 1420 – 1421 . The Scottish King 's cousin , Murdoch Stewart , Albany 's son , a captive in England since 1402 , was traded for Henry Percy , Earl of Northumberland in 1416 . Eight more years passed before James was ransomed , by which time Murdoch had succeeded his father to the dukedom and the governorship of Scotland . James married Joan Beaufort , daughter of the Earl of Somerset in February 1424 shortly before his release in April when they journeyed to Scotland . This was not altogether a popular re @-@ entry to Scottish affairs , since James had fought on behalf of Henry V and at times against Scottish forces in France . Noble families would now not only have to pay increased taxes to cover the £ 40 @,@ 000 ransom repayments but would also have to provide hostages as security . Despite this , James held qualities that were admired . The contemporary <unk> by Walter Bower described James as excelling at sport and appreciative of literature and music . Unlike his father and grandfather he did not take mistresses , but had many children by his consort , Queen Joan . The King had a strong desire to impose law and order on his subjects , but applied it selectively at times . 
 To bolster his authority and secure the position of the crown , James launched pre @-@ emptive attacks on some of his nobles beginning in 1425 with his close kinsmen the Albany Stewarts resulting in the execution of Duke Murdoch and his sons . In 1428 James detained Alexander , Lord of the Isles , while attending a parliament in Inverness . Archibald , 5th Earl of Douglas , was arrested in 1431 , followed by George , Earl of March , in 1434 . The plight of the ransom hostages held in England was ignored and the repayment money was diverted into the construction of Linlithgow Palace and other grandiose schemes . 
 In August 1436 , James failed humiliatingly in his siege of the English @-@ held Roxburgh Castle and then faced an ineffective attempt by Sir Robert Graham to arrest him at a general council . James was murdered at Perth on the night of 20 / 21 February 1437 in a failed coup by his uncle and former ally Walter Stewart , Earl of Atholl . Queen Joan , although wounded , managed to evade the attackers and was eventually reunited with her son James II in Edinburgh Castle . 
 = = Prince and Steward of Scotland = = 
 James was probably born in late July 1394 at Dunfermline Abbey , 27 years after the marriage of his parents Robert III and Annabella Drummond . It was also at Dunfermline under his mother 's care that James would have spent most of his early childhood . The prince was seven years old when his mother died in 1401 and a year later his elder brother David , Duke of Rothesay was probably murdered by their uncle Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany after being held at Albany 's Falkland Castle . Prince James , now heir to the throne , was the only impediment to the transfer of the royal line to the Albany Stewarts . In 1402 Albany and his close Black Douglas ally Archibald , 4th Earl of Douglas were absolved of any involvement in Rothesay 's death clearing the way for Albany 's re @-@ appointed as the king 's lieutenant . Albany rewarded Douglas for his support by allowing him to resume hostilities in England . The Albany and Douglas affinity received a serious reversal in September 1402 when their large army was defeated by the English at <unk> and numerous prominent nobles and their followers were captured . These included Douglas himself , Albany 's son Murdoch , and the earls of Moray , Angus and Orkney . That same year , as well as the death of Rothesay , Alexander Leslie , Earl of Ross and Malcolm Drummond , lord of Mar had also died . The void created by these events was inevitably filled by lesser men who had not previously been conspicuously politically active . In the years between 1402 and 1406 , the northern earldoms of Ross , Moray and Mar were without adult leadership and with Murdoch Stewart , the Justiciar for the territory north of the Forth , a prisoner in England , Albany found himself reluctantly having to form an alliance with his brother Alexander Stewart , Earl of Buchan and Buchan 's son , also called Alexander to hold back the ambitions of the Lord of the Isles . Douglas 's absence from his power base in the Lothians and the Scottish Marches encouraged King Robert 's close allies Henry Sinclair , Earl of Orkney and Sir David Fleming of Biggar to take full advantage to become the principal political force in that region . 
 In December 1404 the king granted the royal Stewart lands in the west , in Ayrshire and around the Firth of Clyde , to James in regality protecting them from outside interference and providing the prince with a territorial centre should the need arise . Yet , in 1405 James was under the protection and tutelage of Bishop Henry Wardlaw of St Andrews on the country 's east coast . Douglas animosity was intensifying because of the activities of Orkney and Fleming who continued to expand their involvement in border politics and foreign relations with England . Although a decision to send the young prince to France and out of Albany 's reach was taken in the winter of 1405 – 06 , James 's departure from Scotland was unplanned . In February 1406 Bishop Wardlaw released James to Orkney and Fleming who , with their large force of Lothian adherents , proceeded into hostile Douglas east Lothian . James 's custodians may have been giving a demonstration of royal approval to further their interests in Douglas country . This provoked a fierce response from James Douglas of <unk> and his supporters who , at a place called Long <unk> Muir , engaged with and killed Fleming while Orkney and James escaped to the comparative safety of the Bass Rock islet in the Firth of Forth . They endured more than a month there before boarding the France @-@ bound <unk> , a ship from Danzig . On 22 March 1406 the ship was taken by English pirates and James became the hostage of King Henry IV of England . Robert III was at Rothesay Castle when he learned of his son 's capture , and he died soon after on 4 April 1406 and was buried in the Stewart foundation abbey of Paisley . 
 = = King in captivity = = 
 James , now the uncrowned King of Scots , began what proved to be his 18 @-@ year period as a hostage while at the same time Albany transitioned from his position of lieutenant to that of governor . Albany took James 's lands under his own control depriving the king of income and any of the regalia of his position and was referred to in records as ' the son of the late king ' . The king had a small household of Scots that included Henry Sinclair , Earl of Orkney , Alexander Seaton , the nephew of Sir David Fleming , and Orkney 's brother John Sinclair following the earl 's return to Scotland . In time , James 's household — now paid for by the English — changed from high ranking individuals to less notable men . Henry IV treated the young James well , providing him with a good education . James was ideally placed to observe Henry 's methods of kingship and political control having probably been admitted into the royal household on reaching adulthood . James used personal visits from his nobles coupled with letters to individuals to maintain his visibility in his kingdom . Henry died in 1413 and his son , Henry V , immediately ended James 's comparative freedom initially holding him in the Tower of London along with the other Scottish prisoners . One of these prisoners was James 's cousin , Murdoch Stewart , Albany 's son , who had been captured in 1402 at the Battle of <unk> Hill . Initially held apart but from 1413 until Murdoch 's release in 1415 they were together in the Tower and at Windsor Castle . 
 By 1420 , James 's standing at Henry V 's court improved greatly ; he ceased to be regarded as a hostage and more of a guest . James 's value to Henry became apparent in 1420 when he accompanied the English king to France where his presence was used against the Scots fighting on the <unk> side . Following the English success at the siege of Melun , a town southeast of Paris , the contingent of Scots were hanged for treason against their king . After his return to England , James attended Queen Catherine 's coronation on 23 February 1421 receiving an honoured position of sitting immediately on the queen 's left at the coronation banquet . In March , Henry began a circuit of the important towns in England as a show of strength and it was during this tour that James was knighted on Saint George 's day . By July , the two kings were back campaigning in France where James , evidently approving of Henry 's methods of kingship , seemed content to endorse the English king 's desire for the French crown . Henry appointed the Duke of Bedford and James as the joint commanders of the siege of Dreux on 18 July 1421 and on 20 August they received the surrender of the garrison . Henry died of dysentery on 31 August 1422 and in September James was part of the escort taking the English king 's body back to London . 
 The regency council of the infant King Henry VI was inclined to have James released as soon as possible . In the early months of 1423 their attempts to resolve the issue met with little response from the Scots , clearly influenced by the Albany Stewarts and adherents . Archibald , Earl of Douglas was an astute and adaptable power in Southern Scotland whose influence even eclipsed that of the Albany Stewarts . Despite his complicity in James 's brother 's death in Albany 's castle in 1402 Douglas was still able to engage with the king . From 1421 , Douglas had been in regular contact with James and they formed an alliance that was to prove pivotal in 1423 . Although Douglas was the pre @-@ eminent Scottish magnate his position in the borders and Lothians was jeopardized — not only did he have to forcibly retake Edinburgh Castle from his own designated warden but was very likely under threat from the earls of Angus and March . In return for James 's endorsement of Douglas 's position in the kingdom , the earl was able to deliver his affinity in the cause of the king 's home @-@ coming . Also , the relationship between Murdoch — now Duke of Albany following his father 's death in 1420 — and his own appointee Bishop William Lauder seemed to be under strain perhaps evidence of an influential grouping at odds with Murdoch 's stance . Pressure from these advocates for the king almost certainly compelled Murdoch to agree to a general council in August 1423 when it was agreed that a mission should be sent to England to negotiate James 's release . James 's relationship with the House of Lancaster changed in February 1423 when he married Joan Beaufort , a cousin of Henry VI and the niece of Thomas , Duke of Exeter and Henry , Bishop of Winchester . A ransom treaty of £ 40 @,@ 000 sterling ( less a dowry remittance of 10 @,@ 000 marks ) was agreed at Durham on 28 March 1424 to which James attached his own seal . The king and queen escorted by English and Scottish nobles reached Melrose Abbey on 5 April and were met by Albany who relinquished his governor 's seal of office . 
 = = Personal rule = = 
 = = = First acts = = = 
 Throughout the 15th century , Scottish kings suffered from a lack of crown revenue and James 's reign was no exception . The Albany regency had also been constrained with Duke Robert owed his fees of governorship . For the nobility , royal patronage ceased entirely following James 's capture ; irregular forms of political favours emerged with Albany allowing nobles such as the earl of Douglas and his brother James to remove funds from the customs . It was against this backdrop that James 's coronation took place at Scone on 21 May 1424 . The coronation parliament of the Three Estates witnessed the king perform a knighthood ceremony for eighteen prominent nobles including Alexander Stewart , Murdoch 's son ; an event probably intended to foster loyalty to the crown within the political community . Called primarily to discuss issues surrounding the finance of the ransom payments , the parliament heard James underline his position and authority as monarch . He ensured the passing of legislation designed to substantially improve crown income by revoking the patronage of royal predecessors and guardians . The earls of Douglas and Mar were immediately affected by this when their ability to remove large sums from the customs was blocked . Despite this , James was still dependent on the nobility — especially Douglas — for its support and initially adopted a less confrontational stance . The early exception to this was Walter Stewart , Albany 's son . Walter was the heir to the earldom of Lennox and had been in open revolt against his father during 1423 for not giving way to his younger brother Alexander for this title . He also disagreed with his father 's acquiescence to the return of James to Scotland . James had Walter arrested on 13 May 1424 and imprisoned on the Bass Rock — at this time , this was probably in Murdoch 's interests as well as James 's . It is probable that the king felt unable to move against the rest of the Albany Stewarts while Murdoch 's brother , John Stewart , Earl of Buchan and Archibald , Earl of Douglas were fighting the English on the <unk> cause in France . Buchan , a leader with an international reputation , commanded the large Scottish army but both he and Douglas fell at the Battle of Verneuil in August 1424 and the Scottish army routed . The loss of his brother and the large fighting force left Murdoch politically exposed . 
 = = = A ruthless and acquisitive king = = = 
 Douglas 's death at <unk> was to weaken the position of his son Archibald , the 5th earl . On 12 October 1424 , the king and Archibald met at Melrose Abbey ostensibly to agree the appointment of John Fogo , a monk of Melrose , to the abbacy . The meeting may also have been intended as an official acceptance of Douglas but it signalled a change in the Black Douglas predominance vis @-@ a @-@ vis the crown and other nobles . Important Douglas allies died in France and some of their heirs realigned with rival nobles through blood ties while at the same time Douglas experienced a loosening of allegiances in the Lothians and , with the loss of his command over Edinburgh Castle , this all served to improve James 's position . Even though , James continued to retain Black Douglas support allowing him to begin a campaign of political alienation of Albany and his family . The king 's rancor directed at Duke Murdoch had its roots in the past — Duke Robert was responsible for his brother David 's death and neither Robert nor Murdoch exerted themselves in negotiating James 's release and must have left the king with the suspicion that they held aspirations for the throne itself . Buchan 's lands did not fall to the Albany Stewarts but were forfeited by the crown , Albany 's father @-@ in @-@ law , Duncan , Earl of Lennox was imprisoned and in December the duke 's main ally Alexander Stewart , Earl of Mar settled his differences with the king . An acrimonious sitting of parliament in March 1425 precipitated the arrest of Murdoch , Isabella , his wife , and his son Alexander — of Albany 's other sons Walter was already in prison and James , his youngest , also known as James the Fat , escaped into the Lennox . 
 James the Fat led the men of Lennox and Argyll in open rebellion against the crown and this may have been what the king needed to bring a charge of treason against the Albany Stewarts . Murdoch , his sons Walter and Alexander and Duncan , Earl of Lennox were in Stirling Castle for their trial on 18 May at a specially convened parliament . An assize of seven earls and fourteen lesser nobles were appointed to hear the evidence that linked the prisoners to the rebellion in the Lennox . The four men were condemned , Walter on 24 May and the others on 25 May and immediately beheaded in ' front of the castle ' . James demonstrated a ruthless and avaricious side to his nature in the destruction of his close family , the Albany Stewarts , that yielded the three forfeited earldoms of Fife , Menteith and Lennox . An enquiry set up by James in 1424 into the dispersal of crown estates since the reign of Robert I exposed legal defects in a number of transactions where the earldoms of Mar , March and Strathearn together with the Black Douglas lordships of Selkirk and Wigtown were found to be problematic . Strathearn and March were forfeited in 1427 and 1435 respectively . Mar was forfeited in 1435 on the earl 's death without heir which also meant that the lordships of <unk> and Badenoch reverted to the crown . James sought to boost his income further through taxation and succeeded in getting parliament to pass legislation in 1424 for a tax to go towards paying off the ransom — £ 26 @,@ 000 was raised but James sent only £ 12 @,@ 000 to England . By 1429 , James stopped the ransom payments completely and used the remainder of the taxation on buying cannons and luxury goods from Flanders . Following a fire in the castle of Linlithgow in 1425 , funds were also diverted to the building of Linlithgow Palace which continued until James 's death in 1437 and absorbed an estimated one tenth of royal income . 
 = = = Relations with the church = = = 
 James asserted his authority not only over the nobility but also upon the Church and lamented that King David I 's benevolence towards the Church proved costly to his successors and that he was ' a sair <unk> to the <unk> ' . James also considered that the monastic institutions in particular needed improvement and that they should return to being strictly ordered communities . Part of James 's solution was to create an assembly of overseeing abbots and followed this up by establishing a Carthusian priory at Perth to provide other religious houses with an example of internal conduct . He also sought to influence Church attitudes to his policies by having his own clerics appointed to the bishoprics of Dunblane , Dunkeld , Glasgow and Moray . In March 1425 , James 's parliament directed that all bishops must instruct their clerics to offer up prayers for the king and his family ; a year later , parliament toughened up this edict insisting that the prayers be given at every mass under sanction of a fine and severe rebuke . This same parliament legislated that every person in Scotland should ' be governed under the king 's laws and statutes of this realm only ' . From this , laws were enacted in 1426 to restrict the actions of prelates whether it was to regulate their need to travel to the Roman Curia or their ability to purchase additional ecclesiastical positions while there . In James 's parliament of July 1427 , it is evident that statute being enacted had the purpose of reducing the powers of the church jurisdiction . 
 On 25 July 1431 , the general council of the Church convened in Basel but its initial full meeting did not take place until 14 December by which time Pope Eugenius and the council were in complete disagreement . It was the council and not the pope who requested that James send representatives of the Scottish church and it is known that two delegates — Abbot Thomas Livingston of <unk> and John de Winchester , canon of Moray and a servant of the king — were in attendance in November and December 1432 . In 1433 James , this time in response to a summons by the pope , appointed two bishops , two abbots and four dignatories to attend the council . Twenty – eight Scottish <unk> attended at intervals from 1434 to 1437 but the majority of the higher ranking churchmen sent proxy attendees but Bishops John Cameron of Glasgow and John de <unk> of Brechin attended in person as did Abbot Patrick Wotherspoon of Holyrood . Even in the midst of the Basel general council , Pope Eugenius instructed his legate , Bishop Antonio Altan of Urbino , to meet with James to raise the issue of the king 's controversial anti @-@ barratry laws of 1426 . The Bishop of Urbino arrived in Scotland in December 1436 and apparently a reconciliation between James and the papal legate had taken place by the middle of February 1437 but the events of 21 February when James was assassinated prevented the legate from completing his commission . 
 = = = The Highland problem = = = 
 In July 1428 , the king convened a general council at Perth aimed at obtaining finance for an expedition to the Highlands against the semi @-@ autonomous Lord of the Isles . The council initially resisted granting James the funds — even with royal support from the powerful Earls of Mar and Atholl — it eventually gave in to the king ’ s wishes . Although it seemed that an all @-@ out attack on the Gaels of the north was not the king 's intention , James had resolved to use a degree of force to strengthen royal authority . He told the assembly : 
 The leaders of the Gaelic kindreds in the north and west were summoned by James ostensibly to a sitting of parliament in Inverness . Of those assembled the king arrested around 50 of them including Alexander , the third Lord of the Isles and his mother , Mary , Countess of Ross around 24 August . A few were executed but the remainder , with the exception of Alexander and his mother , quickly released . During Alexander ’ s captivity James attempted to split Clann <unk> — Alexander 's uncle John Mór was approached by an agent of the king to take the clan leadership but his refusal to have any dealings with the king while his nephew was held prisoner led to John Mór 's attempted arrest and death . 
 The king 's need for allies in the west and north led him to soften his approach towards the Lord of the Isles and , hoping that Alexander would now become a loyal servant of the crown , he was given his freedom . Alexander , probably under pressure from his close kinsmen Donald Balloch , John Mór 's son , and Alasdair Carrach of Lochaber , led a rebellion attacking the castle and burgh of Inverness in spring 1429 . The crisis deepened when a fleet from the Lordship was dispatched to bring James the Fat back from Ulster ' to convey him home that he might be king ' . With James ’ s intention to form an alliance with the Ulster O <unk> of <unk> against the MacDonalds , the English became distrustful of the Scottish king ’ s motives and they themselves tried to bring James the Fat to England . Before he could become an active player , James the Fat died suddenly releasing James to prepare for decisive action against the Lordship . 
 The armies met on 21 June in Lochaber and Alexander , suffering the defection of Clan Chattan ( the <unk> ) and Clan Cameron , was heavily defeated . Alexander escaped probably to Islay but James continued his assault on the Lordship by taking the strongholds of Dingwall and Urquhart castles in July . The king pushed home his advantage when an army reinforced with artillery was dispatched to the isles . Alexander probably realised that his position was hopeless and tried to negotiate terms of surrender but James demanded and received his total submission . From August 1429 the king delegated royal authority to Alexander Stewart , Earl of Mar for the keeping of the peace in the north and west . The Islesmen rose again in September 1431 and inflicted two important defeats on the king 's men — Mar 's army was beaten at Inverlochy and Angus Moray ’ s in a fierce battle near Tongue in Caithness . This was a serious setback for James and his credibility was adversely affected . In 1431 , before the September uprising , the king had arrested two of his nephews , John Kennedy of Carrick and Archibald , Earl of Douglas possibly as a result of a conflict between John and his uncle , Thomas Kennedy in which Douglas may have become involved . Douglas 's arrest had raised tensions in the country and James acted to reduce the unrest by freeing the earl on 29 September — it was quite likely that the king made the earl 's release conditional on support at the forthcoming parliament at Perth at which James intended to push for further funding for the campaign against the Lordship . Parliament was in no mood to allow James unconditional backing — he was allowed a tax to fund his Highland campaign but parliament retained full control over the levy . The rules parliament attached to the taxation indicated a robust stand against further conflict in the north and probably led to the turnaround that took place on 22 October when the king ' forgave the offence of each earl , namely Douglas and Ross [ i.e. Alexander ] ' . For Douglas this was a formal acknowledgement of his having already been freed three weeks earlier but for Alexander this was a total reversal of crown policy towards the Lordship . Four summer campaigns against the Lordship were now officially at an end with James 's wishes having effectively been blocked by parliament . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 James 's release in 1424 did not herald a new Scottish relationship with its southern neighbour . He didn 't become the submissive king that the English council had hoped for but instead emerged as a confident and independently @-@ minded European monarch . The only substantive matters of contention between the two kingdoms were the payments due under the terms of James 's release and the renewal of the truce that would expire in 1430 . In 1428 after setbacks on the battlefield Charles VII of France sent his ambassador Regnault of Chartres , Archbishop of Rheims to Scotland to persuade James to renew the Auld Alliance — the terms were to include the marriage of the princess Margaret to Louis , the dauphin of France , and a gift of the province of Saintonge to James . The ratification of the treaty by Charles took place in October 1428 and James , now with the intended marriage of his daughter into the French royal family and the possession of French lands , had his political importance in Europe boosted . 
 The effectiveness of the alliance with France had virtually ceased after Verneuil and its renewal in 1428 did not alter that — James adopted a much more non @-@ aligned position with England , France and Burgandy while at the same time opening up diplomatic contacts with Aragon , Austria , Castile , Denmark , Milan , Naples and the Vatican . Generally , Scotto – English relations were relatively amiable and an extension of the truce until 1436 helped the English cause in France and the promises made in 1428 of a Scottish army to help Charles VII and the marriage of James 's eldest daughter to the French king 's son Louis were unrealised . James had to balance his European responses carefully – England 's ally , the Duke of Burgundy whose possessions included Scotland 's major trading partners , the Low Countries , ensured support for France would be muted . The truce with England expired in May 1436 but James 's perception of the Anglo @-@ French conflict changed following a realignment of the combatants . The breakdown of the talks between England and France in 1435 precipitated an alliance between Burgundy and France and a request from France for Scottish involvement in the war and for the fulfilment of the promised marriage of Princess Margaret to the Dauphin . In the spring of 1436 Princess Margaret sailed to France and in August Scotland entered the war with James leading a large army to lay siege to the English enclave of Roxburgh Castle . The campaign was to prove pivotal , the Book of Pluscarden describes ' a detestable split and most unworthy difference arising from <unk> ' within the Scottish camp and the historian Michael Brown explains that a contemporary source has James appointing his young and inexperienced cousin Robert Stewart of Atholl as the constable of the host ahead of the experienced march wardens , the earls of Douglas and Angus . Brown explains that both earls possessed considerable local interests and that the effects of such a large army living off the land may have created considerable resentment and hostility in the area . When the militant prelates of York and Durham together with the Earl of Northumberland took their forces into the marches to relieve the fortress , the Scots swiftly retreated — a chronicle written a year later said that the Scots ' had fled <unk> and ignominiously ' — but the effects and the manner of the defeat and the loss of their expensive artillery was a major reversal for James both in terms of foreign policy and internal authority . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Walter Stewart was the youngest of Robert II 's sons and the only one not to have been provided with an earldom during his father 's lifetime . Walter 's brother , David , earl of Strathearn and Caithness had died before 5 March 1389 when his daughter Euphemia was first recorded as countess of Strathearn . Walter , now ward to his niece , administered Strathearn for the next decade and a half during which time he aided his brother Robert , Earl of Fife and Guardian of Scotland by enforcing law and order upon another brother Alexander , lord of Badenoch — he again supported Robert ( now Duke of Albany ) against their nephew , David , Duke of Rothesay in 1402 . Albany most likely engineered the marriage of Euphemia to one of his affinity , Patrick Graham and by doing so ended Walter 's involvement in Strathearn . Duke Robert , possibly to make up for the loss of the fruits of Strathearn , made Walter earl of Atholl and Lord of Methven . In 1413 , Graham was killed in a quarrel with his own principal servant in the earldom , John Drummond . 
 The Drummond kindred were close to Atholl and the earl 's renewed involvement in Strathearn as ward to Graham 's son despite strong opposition from Albany hint at Atholl 's possible party to the murder . The bad blood now existing between Albany and Atholl led James on his return to Scotland in 1424 to ally himself with Earl Walter , his uncle . Atholl participated at the assize that sat over the 24 / 25 May 1425 that tried and found the prominent members of the Albany Stewarts guilty of rebellion — their executions followed swiftly . 
 James granted Atholl the positions of Sheriff of Perth and <unk> and also the earldom of Strathearn but this , significantly , in life @-@ rent only — acts that confirmed Earl Walter 's policing remit given by Albany and his already effective grip on Strathearn . Atholl 's elder son , David had been one of the hostages sent to England as a condition of James 's release and had died there in 1434 — his younger son , Alan died in the king 's service at the Battle of Inverlochy in 1431 . David 's son Robert was now Atholl 's heir and both were now in line to the throne after the young Prince James . James continued to show favour to Atholl and appointed his grandson Robert as his personal chamberlain but by 1437 , after a series of setbacks at the hands of James , the earl and Robert probably viewed the king 's actions as a prelude to further acquisitions at Atholl 's expense . Atholl 's hold on the rich earldom of Strathearn was weak and both he and Robert would have realised that after the earl 's death Strathearn would have reverted to the crown . This meant that Robert 's holdings would have been the relatively impoverished earldoms of Caithness and Atholl and amounted to no more than what was in the Earl Walter 's possession in the years between 1406 and 1416 . 
 The retreat from Roxburgh exposed the king to questions regarding his control over his subjects , his military competence and his diplomatic abilities yet he remained determined to continue with the war against England . Just two months after the Roxburgh fiasco , James called a general council in October 1436 to finance further hostilities through more taxation . The estates firmly resisted this and their opposition was articulated by their speaker Sir Robert Graham , a former Albany attendant but now a servant of Atholl . The council then witnessed an unsuccessful attempt by Graham to arrest the king resulting in the knight 's imprisonment followed by banishment but James did not see Graham 's actions as part of any extended threat . In January 1437 , Atholl received yet another rebuff in his own heartlands when James overturned the chapter of Dunkeld Cathedral whose nominee was replaced by the king 's nephew and firm supporter , James Kennedy . 
 = = = Conspiracy and regicide = = = 
 The reaction against the king at the general council had shown Atholl that James was not only on the back @-@ foot but his political standing had received a huge set @-@ back and may have convinced the earl that James 's death was now a viable course of action . Atholl had seen how assertive action by two of his brothers at different times had allowed them to take control of the kingdom and that as James 's nearest adult relative , the earl must have considered that decisive intervention on his part at this time could prove to be equally successful . 
 The destruction of the Albany Stewarts in 1425 appears to have played a significant part in the conspiracy against the king . Their judicial killing and forfeiture of their lands impacted on the servants who administered and depended on these estates for their living . The vacuum left by this was filled by Atholl in whose employment many of these disaffected Albany men appear . These included Sir Robert Graham who only three months earlier had attempted to arrest the king at the Perth council , and the brothers Christopher and Robert Chambers . Even although Robert Chambers was a member of the Royal household , the old Albany ties were stronger . 
 A general council was held in Atholl 's heartland in Perth on 4 February 1437 and crucially for the conspirators , the king and queen had remained in the town at their lodgings in the Blackfriars monastery . In the evening of 20 February 1437 the king and queen were in their rooms and separated from most of their servants . Atholl 's grandson and heir Robert Stewart , the king 's chamberlain , allowed his co @-@ conspirators — thought to number about thirty — led by Robert Graham and the Chambers brothers access to the building . James was alerted to the men 's presence giving the king time to hide in a sewer tunnel but with its exit recently blocked off to prevent tennis balls getting lost , James was trapped and killed . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The assassins had achieved their priority in killing the king but the queen , although wounded , had escaped . Importantly , the six @-@ year @-@ old king , now James II , had been safeguarded from Atholl 's control by the removal of the earl 's associate , John Spens , from his role as James 's custodian . Spens vanished from the records following the regicide but the re @-@ allocation of his positions and lands immediately following the murder indicate his part in the plot . Yet , in the chaos following the murder , it appeared that the queen 's attempt to position herself as regent was not guaranteed . No surviving documentation exists that suggest that there was any general feeling of horror or condemnation aimed at the murderers . It was possible that had the botched attempt at killing the queen succeeded and had Atholl taken control of the young king then his attempted coup might have succeeded . The queen 's small group of loyal supporters that included the Earl of Angus and William Crichton ensured her continued hold of James . This in itself greatly reinforced her situation but Atholl still had followers . By the first week of March neither side seemed to have ascendancy and the Bishop of Urbino , the pope 's envoy , called for the council to pursue a peaceful outcome . 
 Despite this by the middle of March it is probable that both Angus and Crichton had mobilised to move against Atholl . It is equally likely that Atholl had gathered his forces to resist <unk> into his heartlands — on 7 March the queen and the council entreated the burgess ' of Perth to resist the forces of the ' <unk> traitors ' . 
 The position of Atholl and his circle of close supporters only collapsed after Earl Walter 's heir Robert Stewart had been captured and who , in Shirley 's account , confessed to his part in the crime . Walter was taken prisoner by Angus and held at the Edinburgh Tolbooth where he was tried and beheaded on 26 March 1437 , the day after the coronation of the young James II . Sir Robert Graham , the leader of the band of assassins was captured by former Atholl allies and was tried at a session of the council sitting at Stirling castle and subsequently executed sometime shortly after 9 April . 
 Queen Joan 's pursuit of the regency ended probably at the council of June 1437 when Archibald , 5th Earl of Douglas was appointed to act as lieutenant @-@ general of the kingdom . 
 King James ' embalmed heart may have been taken on pilgrimage to the Holy Land following his interment at Perth Charterhouse , as the Exchequer Rolls of Scotland for 1443 note the payment of £ 90 to cover the costs of a knight of the Order of St John who had returned it to the Charterhouse from the Island of Rhodes . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 James was a paradoxical figure . Although a prisoner of England he still received a good education and developed into a cultured individual becoming a poet , an accomplished musician and skilled in sports . Walter Bower , abbot of Inchcolm , lists James 's qualities as a musician — ' not just as an enthusiastic amateur ' but a master , ' another Orpheus . ' His mastery included the organ , drum , flute and lyre . James 's sporting abilities such as wrestling , hammer throwing , archery and jousting are also listed by Bower . He described James as possessing an ' eagerness ' in ' literary composition and writing ' , the best known of which is his love poem , The Kingis Quair . Bower characterised the king as ' a tower , a lion , a light , a jewel , a pillar and a leader ' and was ' our law giver king ' who ended the ' thieving , dishonest conduct and plundering ' . 
 Abbot Bower also described the king as capable of stabbing a near relative through the hand for creating a disturbance at court . The abbot was generally supportive of James but that he and others ' regretted the demise of the Albany Stewarts and that he was confounded by James 's greed for territory and wealth . Although Bower didn 't dwell at length on the negative aspects of James 's character he alluded to the dismay of even those close to the king at his harsh regime . John Shirley 's account of the events leading up to James 's murder in the work The <unk> of the Kynge of <unk> provided an accurate narrative of politics in Scotland and which must have depended upon knowledgeable witnesses . The <unk> describes James as ' <unk> ' and whose actions were motivated by revenge and ' <unk> . . . than for <unk> <unk> <unk> ' . Shirley agrees with Bower as far as the Albany Stewarts were concerned when he wrote that the <unk> ' <unk> <unk> the people of the land sore <unk> and <unk> ' . Writing nearly a century later both the chroniclers John Mair and Hector Boece relied extensively on Bower for their own narratives . They described James as the embodiment of good monarchy with Mair 's eulogy that James ' ... indeed excelled by far in virtue his father , grandfather and his great @-@ grandfather nor will I give precedence over the first James to any of the Stewarts ' while Boece in similar vein calls James the ' <unk> <unk> Prince that <unk> was <unk> his days ' . Late in the 16th century the early historians George Buchanan and Bishop John Lesley from opposite ends of the religious spectrum both looked favourably on James 's reign but were uneasily mindful of an enduring aggressive history regarding the king . 
 The first 20th century history of James I was written by <unk> Balfour @-@ Melville in 1936 and continued the theme of James as the strong upholder of law and order and when describing Albany 's trial and execution he writes ' the King had proved that high rank was no defence for lawlessness ; the crown was enriched by the revenues of Fife , Menteith and Lennox ' . Balfour @-@ Melville views James as a lawmaker and a ' reformer ' whose legislation was aimed at not only increasing the position of the king but of parliament . Michael Lynch describes how James 's positive reputation began immediately after his death when the Bishop of Urbino kissed James 's wounds and declared him to be a martyr . He suggests that the praise of the pro @-@ James Scottish chroniclers and also of some modern historians to ' find strong king 's to applaud ' should not diminish the extent of parliament 's ability to restrain the king nor minimise the confrontation that took place between James and a more self @-@ assured parliament . Stephen Boardman takes the view that by the time of his death James had succeeded in breaking down the constraints on the exercise of royal authority which were rooted in the ' settlement of the kingdom ' by Robert II . Christine <unk> describes how opposing views were the result of ' competing propaganda after the murder ' . To those who were glad to see the king dead , James was a tyrant who without reason aggressively assailed the nobility imposing forfeiture on their estates and who ' failed to deliver justice to his people ' . She also provides the opposite viewpoint that the king was seen as giving ' strong leadership against magnate excesses ' and that the murder ' was a disaster for the Scottish people , leaving them to endure the instability of years of consequent faction fighting ' . <unk> continues that James was the example for the Stewart kings to follow by putting ' Scotland firmly within a European context ' . Michael Brown describes James as an ' able , aggressive and opportunistic politician ' whose chief aim was to establish a monarchy that had stature and was free from the confrontations that had beset his father 's reign . He characterises James as ' capable of highly effective short @-@ term interventions ' yet had failed to achieve a position of unqualified authority . Brown writes that James had come to power after ' fifty years when kings looked like magnates and magnates acted like kings ' and succeeded in completely changing the outlook and objectives of the monarchy . His policy of reducing the power and influence of the magnates , continued by his son James II , led to a more subordinate nobility . Alexander Grant repudiates James 's reputation as the ' law giver ' and explains that nearly all of the king 's legislation were reconstructs of laws laid down by previous monarchs and concludes that ' the idea of James 's return in 1424 marks a turning @-@ point in the development of Scots law is an exaggeration ' . At James 's death only the Douglases of the predominant <unk> houses was left and , according to Grant , this reduction was the most far @-@ reaching change to the nobility and was ' by far the most important consequence of James I 's reign ' . 
 = = Marriage and issue = = 
 On February 2 , 1424 , he married , in London , Joan Beaufort , daughter of John Beaufort , 1st Earl of Somerset and Margaret Holland . Together they had eight children : 
 Margaret Stewart ( 1424 - 16 August 1445 ) , married the Dauphin Louis , future Louis XI of France , at Tours , 24 June 1436 . 
 Isabella Stewart ( 1426 - 13 October 1494 / 5 March 1499 ) , married Francis I , Duke of Brittany , at <unk> , 30 October 1442 . 
 Joan Stewart ( 1428 - aft . 16 October 1486 ) ; she was deaf and dumb , known as " the dumb lady of Dalkeith " . Married on 1459 to James Douglas , 1st Earl of Morton ( + 1493 ) . 
 Alexander Stewart , Duke of Rothesay ( born and died 16 October 1430 ) , elder twin of James II . 
 James II of Scotland ( 16 October 1430 - 3 August 1460 ) . 
 Eleanor Stewart ( 1433 - 20 November 1480 ) , married Sigismund , Archduke of Austria , at Merano , 12 February 1449 . 
 Mary Stewart , Countess of Buchan ( 1434 / 35 – 20 March 1465 ) , married Wolfert VI of <unk> in 1444 . 
 Annabella Stewart ( 1436 - 1509 ) , married firstly 14 December 1447 Louis of Savoy , Count of Geneva , secondly in 1458 George Gordon , 2nd Earl of Huntly . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Fictional portrayals = = 
 James I has been depicted in plays , historical novels and short stories . They include : 
 The Caged Lion ( 1870 ) by Charlotte Mary Yonge . The novel depicts the captivity of James I in the Kingdom of England , with the main events taking place in 1421 @-@ 1422 . A friendly relationship with Henry V of England is prominently featured . Catherine of Valois and Richard Whittington are the most prominent among the secondary characters . 
 A King 's Tragedy ( 1905 ) by May Wynne . The novel depicts events of the years 1436 @-@ 1437 . The action leads to the assassination of James I. Catherine Douglas is among the characters featured . 
 Lion Let Loose ( 1967 ) by Nigel Tranter . Covers the life of James I from c . 1405 to his death in 1437 . 
 A Royal Poet ( 1819 ) by Washington Irving . The author muses over the greatness of James I while on an excursion to Windsor Castle , mentioning two of his poems : " The Kingis Quair " and " Christ ’ s Kirk of the Green " . 
 James I : The Key Will Keep The Lock ( 2014 ) by Rona Munro . A co @-@ production between the National Theatre of Scotland , Edinburgh International Festival and the National Theatre of Great Britain . The James Plays – James I , James II and James III – are a trio of history plays by Rona Munro . Each play stands alone as a vision of a country <unk> with its past and future . This play focuses on the personal development of James I after his release by Henry V of England , his marriage to Joan and the struggles with the noble families in order to establish his authority in Scotland . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = PlayStation = 
 PlayStation ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> , officially abbreviated PS ) is a series of video game consoles created and owned by Sony Interactive Entertainment . The brand was first introduced on December 3 , 1994 in Japan with the launch of the original PlayStation console . It now consists of four home consoles , as well as a media center , an online service , a line of controllers , two handhelds and a phone , as well as multiple magazines . 
 The original console in the series , the PlayStation , was the first video game console to ship 100 million units , 9 years and 6 months after its initial launch . Its successor , the PlayStation 2 , was released in 2000 . The PlayStation 2 is the best @-@ selling home console to date , having reached over 155 million units sold as of December 28 , 2012 . Sony 's next console , the PlayStation 3 , was released in 2006 and has sold over 80 million consoles worldwide as of November 2013 . Sony 's latest console , the PlayStation 4 , was released in 2013 , selling 1 million consoles in its first 24 hours on sale , becoming the fastest selling console in history . 
 The first handheld game console in the PlayStation series ( called the PlayStation Portable , or PSP ) , sold a total of 80 million units worldwide by November 2013 . Its successor , the PlayStation Vita , which launched in Japan on December 17 , 2011 and in most other major territories in February 2012 , had sold over 4 million units by January 2013 . PlayStation TV is a microconsole and a non @-@ portable variant of the PlayStation Vita handheld game console . Other hardware released as part of the PlayStation series includes the PSX , a digital video recorder which was integrated with the PlayStation and PlayStation 2 , though it was short lived due to its high price and was never released outside Japan , as well as a Sony Bravia television set which has an integrated PlayStation 2 . The main series of controllers utilized by the PlayStation series is the DualShock , which is a line of vibration @-@ feedback gamepad having sold 28 million controllers as of June 28 , 2008 . 
 The PlayStation Network is an online service with over 110 million users worldwide ( as of July 2013 ) . It comprises an online virtual market , the PlayStation Store , which allows the purchase and download of games and various forms of multimedia , a subscription @-@ based online service known as PlayStation Plus and a social gaming networking service called PlayStation Home , which had over 41 million users worldwide at the time of its closure in March 2015 . PlayStation Mobile ( formerly PlayStation Suite ) is a software framework that provides PlayStation content on mobile devices . Version <unk> supports both PlayStation Vita , PlayStation TV and certain devices that run the Android operating system , whereas version 2 @.@ 00 released in 2014 would only target PlayStation Vita and ( optionally ) PlayStation TV . Content set to be released under the framework consist of only original PlayStation games currently . 
 7th generation PlayStation products also use the XrossMediaBar , which is an award @-@ winning graphical user interface . A new touch screen @-@ based user interface called LiveArea was launched for the PlayStation Vita , which integrates social networking elements into the interface . Additionally , PlayStation 2 and original PlayStation 3 consoles also featured support for Linux @-@ based operating systems , though this has since been discontinued . The series has also been known for its numerous marketing campaigns , the latest of which being the " Greatness Awaits " commercials in the United States . 
 The series also has a strong line @-@ up of first @-@ party titles due to Sony Interactive Entertainment Worldwide Studios , a group of fifteen first @-@ party developers owned by Sony Interactive Entertainment which are dedicated to developing first @-@ party games for the series . In addition , the series features various budget re @-@ releases of titles by Sony with different names for each region ; these include the Greatest Hits , Platinum , Essentials , Favorites ( this in Latin America ) and The Best ranges of titles . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 PlayStation was the brainchild of Ken Kutaragi , a Sony executive who had just finished managing one of the company 's hardware engineering divisions at that time and would later be dubbed as " The Father of the PlayStation " . 
 The console 's origins date back to 1988 where it was originally a joint project between Nintendo and Sony to create a CD @-@ ROM for the Super Famicom . Although Nintendo denied the existence of the Sony deal as late as March 1991 , Sony revealed a Super Famicom with a built @-@ in CD @-@ ROM drive , that incorporated Green Book technology or CD @-@ i , called " Play Station " ( also known as SNES @-@ CD ) at the Consumer Electronics Show in June 1991 . However , a day after the announcement at CES , Nintendo announced that it would be breaking its partnership with Sony , opting to go with Philips instead but using the same technology . The deal was broken by Nintendo after they were unable to come to an agreement on how revenue would be split between the two companies . The breaking of the partnership infuriated Sony President Norio Ohga , who responded by appointing Kutaragi with the responsibility of developing the PlayStation project to rival Nintendo . 
 At that time , negotiations were still on @-@ going between Nintendo and Sony , with Nintendo offering Sony a " non @-@ gaming role " regarding their new partnership with Philips . This proposal was swiftly rejected by Kutaragi who was facing increasing criticism over his work with regard to entering the video game industry from within Sony . Negotiations officially ended in May 1992 and in order to decide the fate of the PlayStation project , a meeting was held in June 1992 , consisting of Sony President Ohga , PlayStation Head Kutaragi and several senior members of Sony 's board . At the meeting , Kutaragi unveiled a proprietary CD @-@ ROM @-@ based system he had been working on which involved playing video games with 3D graphics to the board . Eventually , Sony President Ohga decided to retain the project after being reminded by Kutaragi of the humiliation he suffered from Nintendo . Nevertheless , due to strong opposition from a majority present at the meeting as well as widespread internal opposition to the project by the older generation of Sony executives , Kutaragi and his team had to be shifted from Sony 's headquarters to Sony Music , a completely separate financial entity owned by Sony , so as to retain the project and maintain relationships with Philips for the <unk> development project ( which helped lead to the creation of the DVD ) . 
 According to SCE 's producer Ryoji <unk> and chairman Shigeo Maruyama , there was uncertainty over whether the console should primarily focus on 2D sprite graphics or 3D polygon graphics . It was only after witnessing the success of Sega 's Virtua Fighter in Japanese arcades that " the direction of the PlayStation became instantly clear " and 3D polygon graphics became the console 's primary focus . 
 = = = Formation of Sony Computer Entertainment = = = 
 At Sony Music , Kutaragi worked closely with Shigeo Maruyama , the CEO of Sony Music , and with Akira Sato to form Sony Computer Entertainment , Inc . ( SCEI ) on November 16 , 1993 . A building block of SCEI was its initial partnership with Sony Music which helped SCEI attract creative talent to the company as well as assist SCEI in manufacturing , marketing and producing discs , something that Sony Music had been doing with Music Discs . The final two key members of SCEI were Terry <unk> , the President of SCEI from Sony 's headquarters , and Olaf Olafsson . Olafsson was CEO and president of New York @-@ based Sony Interactive Entertainment which was the mother company for the 1994 @-@ founded Sony Computer Entertainment of America ( SCEA ) . 
 The PlayStation project , SCEI 's first official project , was finally given the green light by Sony executives in 1993 after a few years of development . Also in 1993 , Phil Harrison , who would later become President of Sony Computer Entertainment Worldwide Studios , was recruited into SCEI to attract developers and publishers to produce games for their new PlayStation platform . 
 After a demonstration of Sony 's distribution plan as well as tech demos of its new console to game publishers and developers in a hotel in Tokyo in 1994 , numerous developers began to approach PlayStation . Two of whom later became major partners were Electronic Arts in the West and Namco in Japan . One of the factors which attracted developers to the platform was the use of a 3D @-@ capable , CD @-@ ROM @-@ based console which was much cheaper and easier to manufacture for in comparison to Nintendo 's rival console , which used cartridge systems . The project eventually hit Japanese stores in December 1994 and gained massive sales due to its lower price point than its competitor , the Sega Saturn . Popularity of the console spread after its release worldwide in North America and Europe . 
 = = Home consoles = = 
 = = = PlayStation = = = 
 The original PlayStation , released on December 3 , 1994 , was the first of the ubiquitous PlayStation series of console and hand @-@ held game devices . It has included successor consoles and upgrades including the Net <unk> ( a special black PlayStation with tools and instructions to program PlayStation games and applications ) , " PSone " ( a smaller version of the original ) and the PocketStation ( a handheld which enhances PlayStation games and also acts as a memory card ) . It was part of the fifth generation of video game consoles competing against the Sega Saturn and the Nintendo 64 . By December 2003 , the PlayStation and PSone had shipped a combined total of 102 @.@ 49 million units , eventually becoming the first video game console to sell 120 million units . 
 = = = = PSone = = = = 
 Released on July 7 , 2000 , concurrently with its successor the PlayStation 2 , the PSone was a considerably smaller , redesigned version of the original PlayStation video game console . The PSone went on to outsell all @-@ other consoles , including its successor , throughout the remainder of the year . It featured two main changes from its predecessor , the first being a cosmetic change to the console and the second being the home menu 's Graphical User Interface ; a variation of the GUI previously used only on PAL consoles up to that point . 
 = = = PlayStation 2 = = = 
 Released in 2000 , 15 months after the Dreamcast and a year before its other competitors , the Xbox and the Nintendo GameCube , the PlayStation 2 is part of the sixth generation of video game consoles , and is backwards @-@ compatible with most original PlayStation games . Like its predecessor , it has received a slimmer redesign , and was also released built into the PSX DVR and the Sony BRAVIA <unk> HDTV . It is the most successful home console in the world , having sold over 155 million units sold as of December 28 , 2012 . On November 29 , 2005 , the PS2 became the fastest game console to reach 100 million units shipped , accomplishing the feat within 5 years and 9 months from its launch . This achievement occurred faster than its predecessor , the PlayStation , which took " 9 years and 6 months since launch " to reach the same figure . PlayStation 2 shipments in Japan ended on December 28 , 2012 . The Guardian reported on January 4 , 2013 that PS2 production had ended worldwide . But studies show that many people all around the world still own one even if it is no longer in use . PlayStation 2 has been ranked as the best selling console of all time as of 2015 . 
 = = = = Slimline model = = = = 
 Released in 2004 , four years after the launch of the original PlayStation 2 , the PlayStation 2 Slimline was the first major redesign of the PlayStation 2 . Compared to its predecessor , the Slimline was smaller , thinner , quieter and also included a built @-@ in Ethernet port ( in some markets it also has an integrated modem ) . In 2007 , Sony began shipping a revision of the Slimline which was lighter than the original Slimline together with a lighter AC adapter . In 2008 , Sony released yet another revision of the Slimline which had an overhauled internal design incorporating the power supply into the console itself like the original PlayStation 2 resulting in a further reduced total weight of the console . 
 = = = PlayStation 3 = = = 
 Released on November 17 , 2006 in North America , the PlayStation 3 is a seventh generation game console from Sony . It competes with the Microsoft Xbox 360 and the Nintendo Wii . The PS3 is the first console in the series to introduce the use of motion @-@ sensing technology through its Sixaxis wireless controller . The console also incorporates a Blu @-@ ray Disc player and features high @-@ definition resolution . The PS3 was originally offered with either a 20 GB or 60 GB hard drive , but over the years its capacity increased in increments available up to 500 GB . The PlayStation 3 has sold over 80 million consoles worldwide as of November 2013 . 
 = = = = Slim model = = = = 
 Like its predecessors , the PlayStation 3 was re @-@ released in 2009 as a " slim " model . The redesigned model is 33 % smaller , 36 % lighter , and consumes 34 % to 45 % less power than previous models . In addition , it features a redesigned cooling system and a smaller Cell processor which was moved to a <unk> manufacturing process . It sold in excess of a million units within its first 3 weeks on sale . The redesign also features support for CEC ( more commonly referred to by its manufacturer brandings of <unk> , <unk> Link , <unk> and others ) which allows control of the console over HDMI by using the remote control as the controller . The PS3 slim also runs quieter and is cooler than previous models due to its 45 nm Cell . The PS3 Slim no longer has the " main power " switch ( similar to PlayStation 2 slim ) , like the previous PS3 models , which was located at the back of the console . It was officially released on September 1 , 2009 in North America and Europe and on September 3 , 2009 in Japan , Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = = = Super Slim model = = = = 
 In 2012 , Sony revealed a new " Super Slim " PlayStation 3 . The new console , with a completely redesigned case which has a sliding door covering the disc drive ( which has been moved to the top of the console ) , is 4 @.@ 3 pounds , almost three pounds lighter than the previous " slim " model . The console comes with either <unk> flash memory or a 250GB , <unk> hard drive . Several bundles which include a Super Slim PS3 and a selection of games are available . 
 = = = PlayStation 4 = = = 
 The PlayStation 4 ( PS4 ) is the latest video game console from Sony Computer Entertainment announced at a press conference on February 20 , 2013 . In the meeting , Sony revealed some hardware specifications of the new console . The eighth @-@ generation system , launched in the fourth quarter of 2013 , introduced the x86 architecture to the PlayStation series . According to lead system architect , Mark Cerny , development on the PlayStation 4 began as early as 2008 . PlayStation Europe CEO Jim Ryan emphasized in 2011 that Sony wanted to avoid launching the next @-@ generation console behind the competition . 
 Among the new applications and services , Sony introduced the PlayStation App , allowing PS4 owners to turn smartphones and tablets into a second screen to enhance gameplay . The company also plans to debut PlayStation Now game streaming service , powered by technology from Gaikai . By incorporating a share button on the new controller and making it possible to view in @-@ game content being streamed live from friends , Sony plans to place more focus on social gameplay as well . The PlayStation 4 was first released in North America on November 15 , 2013 . 
 = = = Comparison = = = 
 = = Handheld systems = = 
 = = = PocketStation = = = 
 The PocketStation was a miniature game console created by SCE as a peripheral for the original PlayStation . Released exclusively in Japan on December 23 , 1999 , it featured a monochrome LCD , a speaker , a real @-@ time clock and infrared communication capability . It could also be used as a standard PlayStation memory card by connecting it to a PlayStation memory card slot . It was extremely popular in Japan and Sony originally had plans to release it in the United States but the plan was ultimately scrapped due to various manufacturing and supply @-@ and @-@ demand problems . 
 = = = PlayStation Portable = = = 
 The PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) was Sony 's first handheld console to compete with Nintendo 's DS console . The original model ( PSP @-@ 1000 ) was released in December 2004 and March 2005 , The console is the first to utilize a new proprietary optical storage medium known as Universal Media Disc ( UMD ) , which can store both games and movies . It contains 32 MB of internal flash memory storage , expandable via Memory Stick PRO Duo cards . It has a similar control layout to the PS3 with its PlayStation logo button and its ( ' Triangle ' ) , ( ' Circle / O ' ) , ( ' Cross / X ' ) and ( ' Square ' ) buttons in their white @-@ colored forms . 
 = = = = PSP @-@ 2000 and PSP @-@ 3000 models = = = = 
 The PSP @-@ 2000 ( also known as the Slim & Lite in PAL territories ) was the first major hardware revision of the PlayStation Portable , released in September 2007 . The 2000 series was 33 % lighter and 19 % slimmer than the original PlayStation Portable . The capacity of the battery was also reduced by ⅓ but the run time remained the same as the previous model due to lower power consumption . Older model batteries will still work and they extend the amount of playing time . The PSP Slim & Lite has a new gloss finish . Its serial port was also modified in order to accommodate a new video @-@ out feature ( while rendering older PSP remote controls incompatible ) . On a PSP @-@ 2000 , PSP games will only output to external monitors or TVs in progressive scan mode , so that televisions incapable of supporting progressive scan will not display PSP games ; non @-@ game video will output in either progressive or interlaced mode . USB charging was also made possible . Buttons are also reportedly more responsive on the PSP @-@ 2000 . In 2008 , Sony released a second hardware revision called the PSP @-@ 3000 which included several features that were not present in the PSP @-@ 2000 , such as a built @-@ in microphone and upgraded screen , as well as the ability to output PSP games in interlaced mode . 
 = = = = PSP Go model = = = = 
 Released in October 2009 , the PSP Go is the biggest redesign of the PlayStation Portable to date . Unlike previous PSP models , the PSP Go does not feature a UMD drive but instead has 16 GB of internal flash memory to store games , videos and other media . This can be extended by up to <unk> with the use of a Memory Stick Micro ( M2 ) flash card . Also unlike previous PSP models , the PSP Go 's rechargeable battery is not removable or replaceable by the user . The unit is 43 % lighter and 56 % smaller than the original PSP @-@ 1000 , and 16 % lighter and 35 % smaller than the PSP @-@ 3000 . It has a 3 @.@ 8 " 480 × 272 LCD ( compared to the larger 4 @.@ 3 " 480 × 272 pixel LCD on previous PSP models ) . The screen slides up to reveal the main controls . The overall shape and sliding mechanism are similar to that of Sony 's <unk> COM @-@ 2 internet device . The PSP Go is being produced and sold concurrently with its predecessor the PSP @-@ 3000 although it will not replace it . All games on the PSP Go must be purchased and downloaded from the PlayStation Store as the handheld is not compatible with the original PSP 's physical media , the Universal Media Disc . The handheld also features connectivity with the PlayStation 3 's controllers the Sixaxis and DualShock 3 via Bluetooth connection . 
 = = = = PSP @-@ E1000 model = = = = 
 The PSP @-@ E1000 is a budget @-@ focused PSP model which , unlike previous PSP models , does not feature Wi @-@ Fi or stereo speakers ( replaced by a single mono speaker ) and has a matte " charcoal black " finish similar to the slim PlayStation 3 . The E1000 was announced at Gamescom 2011 and available across the PAL region for an RRP of € 99 @.@ 99 . 
 = = = PlayStation Vita = = = 
 Released in Japan on December 17 , 2011 and North America on February 22 , 2012 , the PlayStation Vita was previously codenamed Next Generation Portable ( <unk> ) . It was officially unveiled by Sony on January 27 , 2011 at the PlayStation Meeting 2011 . The original model of the handheld , the PCH @-@ 1000 series features a 5 @-@ inch OLED touchscreen , two analog sticks , a rear touchpad , Sixaxis motion sensing and a 4 core ARM Cortex @-@ A9 <unk> processor . 
 The new PCH @-@ 2000 series system is a lighter redesign of the device that was announced at the <unk> Press Conference in September 2013 prior to the Tokyo Game Show . This model is 20 % thinner and 15 % lighter compared to the original model , has an additional hour of battery life , an LCD instead of OLED , includes a micro USB Type B port , 1GB of internal storage memory . It was released in Japan on October 10 , 2013 in six colors : white , black , pink , yellow , blue , and olive green , and in North America on May 6 , 2014 . 
 = = Other hardware = = 
 = = = PSX ( 2003 ) = = = 
 Released solely in Japan in 2003 , the Sony PSX was a fully integrated DVR and PlayStation 2 video game console . It was the first Sony product to utilize the XrossMediaBar ( XMB ) and can be linked with a PlayStation Portable to transfer videos and music via USB . It also features software for video , photo and audio editing . PSX supports online game compatibility using an internal broadband adapter . Games that utilize the PS2 HDD ( for example , Final Fantasy XI ) are supported as well . It was the first product released by Sony under the PlayStation brand that did not include a controller with the device itself . 
 = = = Television sets = = = 
 Released in 2010 , the Sony BRAVIA <unk> is a 22 inch 720p television which incorporates a PlayStation 2 console , along with 4 HDMI ports . 
 A 24 inch 1080p PlayStation branded 3D television , officially called the PlayStation 3D Display , was released in late 2011 . A feature of this 3D television is <unk> . During multiplayer games , each player will only see their respective screen ( in full HD ) appear on the television through their respective 3D glasses , instead of seeing a split screen ( e.g. player 1 will only see player 1 's screen displayed through their 3D glasses ) . 
 = = = Sony Ericsson Xperia Play = = = 
 The Xperia Play is an Android @-@ powered smartphone with a slide @-@ up gamepad resembling the PSP Go developed by Sony Ericsson aimed at gamers , and is the first to be PlayStation Certified . Also can download PlayStation Suite App . 
 = = = Sony Tablets = = = 
 Sony Tablets are PlayStation Certified Android tablets , released in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 . They offer connectivity with PlayStation 3 controllers , and integrate with the PlayStation network using a proprietary application . The following models were released between 2011 and 2013 : S , Sony Tablet S , Sony Tablet P , Xperia Tablet S and Xperia Tablet Z. 
 = = = PlayStation TV = = = 
 PlayStation TV , known in Asia as PlayStation Vita TV , is a microconsole and a non @-@ portable variant of the PlayStation Vita handheld . It was announced on September 9 , 2013 at a Sony Computer Entertainment Japan presentation . Instead of featuring a display screen , the console connects to a television via HDMI . Users can play using a DualShock 3 controller , although due to the difference in features between the controller and the handheld , certain games are not compatible with PS TV , such as those that are dependent on the system 's touch @-@ screen , rear touchpad , microphone or camera . The device is said to be compatible with over 100 Vita games , as well as various digital PlayStation Portable , PlayStation and PC Engine titles . The system supports Remote Play compatibility with the PlayStation 4 , allowing players to stream games from the PS4 to a separate TV connected to PS TV , and also allows users to stream content from video services such as Hulu and Niconico , as well as access the PlayStation Store . The system was released in Japan on November 14 , 2013 , in North America on October 14 , 2014 , and in Europe and Australasia on November 14 , 2014 . 
 = = = PlayStation VR = = = 
 PlayStation VR is an upcoming virtual reality device that is produced by Sony Computer Entertainment . It makes two sets of images , one being visible on a TV and one for the headset . The PlayStation VR includes 3D audio technology so you can hear from all angles . Some of the prominent features for the PlayStation VR is that it includes a 5 @.@ 7 inch 1920 X RGB X 1080 resolution OLED display . It also can handle <unk> which can eliminate blur and produce a smooth image . The device is also known for its low latency build to less than <unk> . The speculated date of release is October 2016 . 
 = = Games = = 
 Each console has a variety of games . Most games released on the original PlayStation are backwards compatible and can be played directly on its successors , the PlayStation 2 , PSX and PlayStation 3 . Some of these games can also be played on the PlayStation Portable but they must be purchased and downloaded from a list of PSone Classics from the PlayStation Store . Games released on the PlayStation 2 can currently only be played on the original console as well as the PSX and the early models of the PlayStation 3 which are backwards compatible . The PlayStation 3 has two types of games , those released on Blu @-@ ray Discs and downloadable games from the PlayStation Store . The PlayStation Portable consists of numerous games available on both its physical media , the Universal Media Disc and the Digital Download from the PlayStation Store . However , some games are only available on the UMD while others are only available on the PlayStation Store . The PlayStation Vita consists of games available on both its physical media , the PlayStation Vita card and digital download from the PlayStation Store . 
 = = = First party games = = = 
 Sony Computer Entertainment Worldwide Studios is a group of video game developers owned by Sony Computer Entertainment . It is dedicated to developing video games exclusively for the PlayStation series of consoles . The series has produced several best @-@ selling franchises such as the Gran Turismo series of racing video games as well as critically acclaimed titles such as the Uncharted series . Other notable franchises include God of War , Twisted Metal and more recently , LittleBigPlanet ( series ) , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 Greatest Hits ( North America ) , Platinum Range ( PAL territories ) and The Best ( Japan and Asia ) are video games for the Sony PlayStation , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , and PlayStation Portable consoles that have been officially re @-@ released at a lower price by Sony . Each region has its own qualifications to enter the re @-@ release program . Initially , during the PlayStation era , a game had to sell at least 150 @,@ 000 copies ( later 250 @,@ 000 ) and be on the market for at least a year to enter the Greatest Hits range . During the PlayStation 2 era , the requirements increased with the minimum number of copies sold increasing to 400 @,@ 000 and the game had to be on the market for at least 9 months . For the PlayStation Portable , games had to be on the market for at least 9 months with 250 @,@ 000 copies or more sold . Currently , a PlayStation 3 game must be on the market for 10 months and sell at least 500 @,@ 000 copies to meet the Greatest Hits criteria . PSone Classics were games that were released originally on the PlayStation and have been re @-@ released on the PlayStation Store for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable . Classics HD are compilations of PlayStation 2 games that have been remastered for the PlayStation 3 on a single disc with additional features such as upscaled graphics , PlayStation Move support , 3D support and PlayStation Network trophies . PlayStation Mobile ( formerly PlayStation Suite ) is a cross @-@ platform , cross @-@ device software framework aimed at providing PlayStation content , currently original PlayStation games , across several devices including PlayStation Certified Android devices as well as the PlayStation Vita . 
 = = Online services = = 
 = = = PlayStation 2 online service = = = 
 Online gaming on PlayStation consoles first started in July 2001 with the release of PlayStation 2 's unnamed online service in Japan . Later in August 2002 saw its release in North America , followed by the European release in June 2003 . This service was shutdown on the 31st of March 2016 . 
 = = = PlayStation Network = = = 
 Released in 2006 , the PlayStation Network is an online service focusing on online multiplayer gaming and digital media delivery . The service is provided and run by Sony Computer Entertainment for use with the PlayStation 3 , and was later implemented on the PlayStation Portable , PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 4 video game consoles . The service currently has over 110 million users worldwide ( as of July 2013 ) . The Sony Entertainment Network provides other features for users like PlayStation Home , PlayStation Store , and Trophies . 
 = = = PlayStation Store = = = 
 The PlayStation Store is an online virtual market available to users of the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable game consoles via the PlayStation Network . The store uses both physical currency and PlayStation Network Cards . The PlayStation Store 's gaming content is updated every Tuesday and offers a range of downloadable content both for purchase and available free of charge . Available content includes full games , add @-@ on content , playable demos , themes and game and movie trailers . The service is accessible through an icon on the XMB on the PS3 and PSP . The PS3 store can also be accessed on the PSP via a Remote Play connection to the PS3 . The PSP store is also available via the PC application , Media Go . As of September 24 , 2009 , there have been over 600 million downloads from the PlayStation Store worldwide . 
 Video content such as films and television shows are also available from the PlayStation Store on the PlayStation 3 and PSP and will be made available on some new Sony BRAVIA televisions , <unk> laptop computers and Sony Blu @-@ ray Disc players from February 2010 . 
 = = = Life with PlayStation = = = 
 Life with PlayStation was a Folding @ home application available for PlayStation 3 which connected to Stanford University ’ s Folding @ home distributed computer network and allowed the user to donate their console 's spare processing cycles to the project . Folding @ home is supported by Stanford University and volunteers make a contribution to society by donating computing power to this project . Research made by the project may eventually contribute to the creation of vital cures . The Folding @ home client was developed by Sony Computer Entertainment in collaboration with Stanford University . Life with PlayStation also consisted of a 3D virtual view of the Earth and contained current weather and news information of various cities and countries from around the world , as well as a World Heritage channel which offered information about historical sites , and the United Village channel which is a project designed to share information about communities and cultures worldwide . As of PlayStation 3 system software update version 4 @.@ 30 on October 24 , 2012 , the Life With PlayStation project has ended . 
 = = = PlayStation Plus = = = 
 PlayStation Plus , a subscription @-@ based service on the PlayStation Network , compliments the standard PSN services . It enables an auto @-@ download feature which allows the console to automatically download game patches and system software updates . Subscribers also gain early or exclusive access to some betas , game demos , premium downloadable content ( such as full game trials of retail games like Infamous and LittleBigPlanet ) and other PlayStation Store items , as well as a free subscription to <unk> . Other downloadable items include PlayStation Store discounts and free PlayStation Network games , PSone Classics , PlayStation Minis , themes and avatars . 
 = = = PlayStation Blog = = = 
 PlayStation Blog is an online PlayStation focused gaming blog which is part of the PlayStation Network . It was launched on June 11 , 2007 and since its launch , has featured in numerous interviews with third @-@ party companies such as Square Enix . It also has posts from high @-@ ranking Sony Computer Entertainment executives such as Jack <unk> , President and Chief Executive Officer of Sony Computer Entertainment . A sub @-@ site of the blog called PlayStation Blog Share was launched on March 17 , 2010 and allowed readers of the blog as well as users of the PlayStation Blog to submit ideas to the PlayStation team about anything PlayStation @-@ related and vote on the ideas of other submissions . 
 = = = PlayStation App = = = 
 The PlayStation App is an application that was released on January 11 , 2011 in several European countries for iOS ( version 4 and above ) and for Android ( version 1 @.@ 6 and above ) , and has been installed more than 3 @.@ 6 million times as of March 2 , 2014 . It allows users to view their trophies , see which of their PSN friends are online and read up to date information about PlayStation . It does not feature any gaming functionality . 
 = = = PlayStation Mobile = = = 
 The PlayStation Mobile ( formerly PlayStation Suite ) is a software framework that will be used to provide downloadable PlayStation content to devices running Android 2 @.@ 3 and above as well as the PlayStation Vita . The framework will be cross @-@ platform and cross @-@ device , which is what Sony calls " hardware @-@ neutral " . It is currently set to release before the end of calendar year 2011 . In addition , Android devices that have been certified to be able to play back PlayStation Suite content smoothly will be certified with the PlayStation Certified certification . 
 = = = PlayStation Now = = = 
 PlayStation Now ( PS Now ) is a Gaikai @-@ based video game streaming service used to provide PlayStation gaming content to PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) , PlayStation 4 ( PS4 ) , PlayStation Vita , PlayStation TV and BRAVIA televisions . The service currently allows users to pay for access to a selection of original PlayStation 3 titles on either a per @-@ game basis or via a subscription . PlayStation Now was announced on January 7 , 2014 at the 2014 Consumer Electronic Show . At CES , Sony presented demos of The Last of Us , God of War : Ascension , Puppeteer and Beyond : Two Souls , playable through PS Now on Bravia TVs and PlayStation Vitas . PlayStation Now was launched in Open Beta in the United States and Canada on PS4 on July 31 , 2014 , on PS3 on September 18 , 2014 , on PS Vita and PS TV on October 14 , 2014 , with support for select 2014 Bravia TVs coming later in the year . 
 = = = Online social networking services = = = 
 = = = = PlayStation Home = = = = 
 PlayStation Home is a community @-@ based social gaming networking service for the PlayStation 3 on the PlayStation Network ( PSN ) . It is available directly from the PlayStation 3 XrossMediaBar . Membership is free , and only requires a PSN account . Home has been in development since early 2005 and started an open public beta test on December 11 , 2008 . Home allows users to create a custom avatar , which can be made to suit the user 's preference . Users can decorate their avatar 's personal apartment ( " <unk> " ) with default , bought , or won items . They can travel throughout the Home world ( except cross region ) , which is constantly updated by Sony and partners . Each part of the world is known as a space . Public spaces can just be for display , fun , or for meeting people . Home features many mini @-@ games which can be single player or multiplayer . Users can shop for new items to express themselves more through their avatars or <unk> . Home features video screens in many places for advertising , but the main video content is shown at the theatre for entertainment . Home plays host to a variety of special events which range from prize @-@ giving events to entertaining events . Users can also use Home to connect with friends and customize content . Xi , a once notable feature of Home , is the world 's first console based Alternate Reality Game that took place in secret areas in Home and was created by <unk> . 
 = = = = Room for PlayStation Portable = = = = 
 " Room " ( officially spelled as R ∞ M with capital letters and the infinity symbol in place of the " oo " ) was being beta tested in Japan from October 2009 to April 2010 . Development of Room has been halted on April 15 , 2010 due to negative feedback from the community . Announced at TGS 2009 , it was supposed to be a similar service to the PlayStation Home and was being developed for the PSP . Launching directly from the PlayStation Network section of the XMB was also to be enabled . Just like in Home , PSP owners would have been able to invite other PSP owners into their rooms to " enjoy real time communication . " A closed beta test had begun in Q4 2009 in Japan . 
 = = Software = = 
 = = = XrossMediaBar = = = 
 The XrossMediaBar , originally used on the PSX , is a graphical user interface currently used for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable , as well as a variety of other Sony devices . The interface features icons that are spread horizontally across the screen . Navigation moves the icons instead of a cursor . These icons are used as categories to organize the options available to the user . When an icon is selected on the horizontal bar , several more appear vertically , above and below it ( selectable by the up and down directions on a directional pad ) . The XMB can also be accessed in @-@ game albeit with restrictions , it allows players to access certain areas of the XMB menu from within the game and is only available for the PlayStation 3 . Although the capacity to play users ' own music in @-@ game was added with this update , the feature is dependent on game developers who must either enable the feature in their games or update existing games . 
 = = = LiveArea = = = 
 LiveArea , designed to be used on the PlayStation Vita , is a graphical user interface set to incorporate various social networking features via the PlayStation Network . It has been designed specifically as a touchscreen user interface for users . 
 = = = Linux operating systems = = = 
 = = = = Linux for PlayStation 2 = = = = 
 In 2002 , Sony released the first useful and fully functioning operating system for a video game console , after the Net <unk> experiment for the original PlayStation . The kit , which included an internal hard disk drive and the necessary software tools , turned the PlayStation 2 into a full @-@ fledged computer system running Linux . Users can utilize a network adapter to connect the PlayStation 2 to the internet , a monitor cable adaptor to connect the PlayStation 2 to computer monitors as well as a USB Keyboard and Mouse which can be used to control Linux on the PlayStation 2 . 
 = = = = Linux for PlayStation 3 = = = = 
 The PlayStation 3 ( excluding PlayStation 3 Slim ) also supports running Linux OS on <unk> prior to 3 @.@ 21 without the need for buying additional hardware purchase . Yellow Dog Linux provides an official distribution that can be downloaded , and other distributions such as Fedora , Gentoo and Ubuntu have been successfully installed and operated on the console . The use of Linux on the PlayStation 3 allowed users to access 6 of the 7 <unk> Processing Elements ; Sony implemented a hypervisor restricting access to the <unk> . The feature to install a second operating system on a PlayStation 3 was removed in a firmware update released in 2010 . 
 = = Controllers = = 
 = = = Early PlayStation controllers = = = 
 Released in 1994 , the PlayStation control pad was the first controller made for the original PlayStation . It featured a basic design of a D @-@ pad , 4 main select buttons ( ( ' Green Triangle ' ) , ( ' Red Circle / Red O ' ) ) , ( ' Blue Cross / Blue X ' ) and ( ' Pink Square ' ) , and start and select buttons on the face . ' Shoulder buttons ' are also featured on the top [ L1 , L2 , R1 , R2 ] ( named by the side [ L = Left , R = Right ] and 1 and 2 [ top and bottom ] ) . In 1996 , Sony released the PlayStation Analog Joystick for use with flight simulation games . The original digital controller was then replaced by the Dual Analog in 1997 , which added two analog sticks based on the same <unk> technology as the Analog Joystick . This controller was then also succeeded by the DualShock controller . 
 = = = DualShock series and Sixaxis = = = 
 Released in 1998 , the DualShock controller for the PlayStation succeeded its predecessor , the Dual Analog , and would go on to become the longest running series of controllers for the PlayStation brand . In addition to the inputs of the original , digital , controller ( , , , , L1 , L2 , R1 , R2 , Start , Select and a D @-@ pad ) , the DualShock featured two analog sticks in a similar fashion to the previous Dual Analog controller , which can also be depressed to activate the L3 and R3 buttons . 
 The DualShock series consists of four controllers : the DualShock which was the fourth controller released for the PlayStation ; the DualShock 2 , the only standard controller released for the PlayStation 2 , and the DualShock 3 , the second and current controller released for the PlayStation 3 , and the DualShock 4 , which went through a massive redesign and is the default input of the PlayStation 4 , and upon release was compatible with the PS3 originally only via USB and eventually with a firmware update , Bluetooth connectivity was enabled . The Sixaxis was the first official controller for the PlayStation 3 , and is based on the same design as the DualShock series ( but lacking the vibration motors of the DualShock series of controllers ) . 
 Like the Dual Analog , the DualShock and DualShock 2 feature an " Analog " button between the analog sticks that toggles the analog sticks on and off ( for use with games which support only the digital input of the original controller ) . On the PlayStation 3 Sixaxis and DualShock 3 controllers , the analog sticks are always enabled . Beginning with the Sixaxis , a ' PlayStation button ' ( which featured the incorporated PS logo and is similar in function to the Xbox 360 " Guide " button ) was included on controllers . The PlayStation button replaces the " Analog " button of the DualShock and DualShock 2 controllers . Pressing the PS button on the PS3 brings up the XMB , while holding it down brings up system options ( such as quit the game , change controller settings , turn off the system , and turn off the controller ) . 
 = = = PlayStation Move = = = 
 PlayStation Move is a motion @-@ sensing game controller platform for the PlayStation 3 video game console by Sony Computer Entertainment ( SCE ) . Based on the handheld motion controller wand , PlayStation Move uses the PlayStation Eye webcam to track the wand 's position and the inertial sensors in the wand to detect its motion . First revealed on June 2 , 2009 , PlayStation Move was launched in Q3 / Q4 2010 . Hardware available at launch included the main PlayStation Move motion controller and an optional PlayStation Move sub @-@ controller . Although PlayStation Move is implemented on the existing PlayStation 3 console , Sony states that it is treating Move 's debut as its own major " platform launch " , planning an aggressive marketing campaign to support it . In addition to selling the controllers individually , Sony also plans to provide several different bundle options for PlayStation Move hardware ; including a starter kit with a PS Eye , a Move motion controller , and a demo / sampler disc , priced under US $ 100 ; a full console pack with a PS3 console , DualShock 3 gamepad , PS Eye , and Move motion controller ; and bundles of a Move motion controller with select games . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Magazines = = = 
 The PlayStation brand has a wide series of magazines , from across different continents , covering PlayStation related articles and stories . Many of these magazines work closely with Sony and thus often come with demo discs for PlayStation games . Currently there are three magazines still in circulation namely PlayStation : The Official Magazine , PlayStation Official Magazine , Official PlayStation Magazine ( Australia ) . However , over the years , many PlayStation magazines have spawned while a few have also become defunct , these include the Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine , Official UK PlayStation Magazine , Official UK PlayStation 2 Magazine . 
 = = = CD ROM Magazine = = = 
 PlayStation Underground was a non @-@ traditional magazine that Sony Computer Entertainment America produced and published between Spring 1997 to Spring 2001 . Subscribers received two PlayStation CDs , along with a booklet and colorful packaging every quarter . The CDs contained interviews , cheats , programmers moves , game demos and one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind Memory Card saves . Several issues showed how a game was created from basic design to final product . Since the CDs could only be run on a PlayStation , it proved a useful marketing tool which spawned a line of PlayStation Underground <unk> Demo CDs and which contained highlights from recent issues of PlayStation Underground , along with seemingly as many game demos that could be packed on a single CD . Unlike PlayStation Underground these were available in most stores for $ 4 @.@ 95 , were published twice a year in Summer and Winter and usually spotlighted newly released or coming soon games . By 2001 , Sony had decided to phase out Underground to focus on the <unk> with the release of the PlayStation 2 . PlayStation Underground CDs are mainly in the hands of collectors these days . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The PlayStation has been known for several advertising campaigns . 
 = = = Slogans = = = 
 Advertising slogans used for each PlayStation console iteration : 
 PlayStation 
 " <unk> Lives " ( The first letter ' E ' was printed in red to denote the word , ready . Enos stood for Ready , Ninth of September ) 
 " U R Not e " ( The letter ' E ' was printed in red to denote the word , ready , as in You Are Not Ready ) 
 " Do Not <unk> The Power of PlayStation . " ( From the <unk> - Society Against PlayStation — series of adverts ) 
 " Playstation " ( Seen on several PlayStation systems and games commercials ) 
 PSone 
 " Wherever , Whenever , Forever . " 
 PlayStation 2 
 " The Beginning . " 
 " Live In <unk> <unk> , <unk> In urs . " ( The PlayStation face button icons were used to denote certain letters : Live In Your World , Play In Ours ) 
 " ( Welcome to the ) Third Place . " 
 " Fun , Anyone ? " 
 " The ultimate just got better – PlayStation 9 – teleport yours today . " 
 PlayStation Portable 
 " PSP <unk> Yeah " ( PSP @-@ 1000 Series ) 
 " Dude , Get Your Own ... " ( PSP @-@ 2000 Series ) 
 " Everywhere Just Got Better " ( PSP @-@ 3000 Series and PSPgo ) 
 " It 's GO Time " ( PSPgo ) 
 " Your Whole World In Your Hands " ( UK & Europe Territories ) 
 " Step Your Game Up " ( US Territory , PSP @-@ 3000 Series and PSPgo ) 
 PlayStation 3 
 " The Wait Is Over " 
 " Welcome <unk> " ( the number three is used to denote an ' e ' and was printed in red ) 
 " This is Living . " 
 " Play <unk> " ( the number three is used to denote an ' e ' and was printed in red ) 
 " It Only Does Everything " ( US Commercials ) ( PS3 Slim ) 
 " The Game Is Just The Start . Start PS3 . " ( EU countries ) 
 " Long Live Play " ( PS3 Slim ) 
 " Never Stop Playing " ( PS3 Slim ) 
 " Greatness Awaits " ( PS3 <unk> ) 
 PlayStation Move 
 " This Changes Everything " . 
 " Move Into The Action " 
 PlayStation Network 
 " Download , Play , Connect . " 
 PlayStation Vita 
 " Never Stop Playing . " 
 " The World is in Play . " ( EU only ) 
 PlayStation 4 
 " See the Future " 
 " Push the boundaries of Play " 
 " Greatness Awaits " 
 " This is 4 the Players " 
 " Where the Greatest Play " 
 = = = Notable advertising campaigns = = = 
 = = = = It Only Does Everything = = = = 
 The most notable of recent PlayStation commercials is the series of " It Only Does Everything " commercials featuring a fictional character called Kevin Butler who is a Vice President at PlayStation . These commercials usually advertise the PlayStation 3 and its games through a series of comedic answers to " Dear PlayStation " queries . These commercials garnered popularity among gamers , though its debut commercial received criticism from the Nigerian government due to a reference to the common 419 scams originating in Nigeria . Sony issued an apology and a new version of the advert with the offending line changed was produced . 
 A spin @-@ off of the campaign has been created for the PlayStation Portable which features similar campaign commercials called the " Step Your Game Up " campaign featuring a fictional teenage character named Marcus Rivers acting in a similar fashion to Kevin Butler but answering the " Dear PlayStation " queries about the PSP . 
 = = = = Netherlands Ceramic White PSP Commercials = = = = 
 In July 2006 , an advertising campaign in the Netherlands was released in which a white model dressed entirely in white and a black model dressed entirely in black was used to compare Sony 's new Ceramic White PSP and the original Piano Black PSP . This series of ads depicted both models fighting with each other and drew criticism from the media for being racist , though Sony maintains that the ad did not feature any racist message . 
 = = = = All I want for Xmas is a PSP = = = = 
 In November 2006 , a marketing company employed by Sony 's American division created a website entitled " All I want for Xmas is a PSP " , designed to promote the PSP virally . The site contained a blog which was purportedly written by " Charlie " , a teenage boy attempting to get his friend Jeremy 's parents to buy him a PSP , and providing a " music video " of either Charlie or Jeremy " rapping " about the PSP . Visitors to the website quickly recognized that the website was registered to a marketing company , exposing the campaign on sites such as YouTube and digg . Sony was forced to admit that the site was in fact a marketing campaign and in an interview with next @-@ <unk> , Sony admitted that the idea was " poorly executed " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2005 , Australian newspaper The Age wrote an article about the PlayStation brand . Among the numerous interviews conducted with various people in the industry was an interview with Dr Jeffrey Brand , associate professor in communication and media at Bond University who said , " PlayStation re @-@ ignited our imagination with video games " . Game designers Yoshiki Okamoto called the brand " revolutionary — PlayStation has changed gaming , distribution , sales , image and more " , while Evan Wells of Naughty Dog said " PlayStation is responsible for making playing games cool . " 
 In 2009 , <unk> , Inc. listed the PlayStation brand as number 13 on their " The <unk> 100 : Top Social Brands of 2009 " . The ranking was based on various aspects mainly dealing with popular social media sites in aspects such as Social Networking , Video Sharing , Photo Sharing and Blogs . 
 In 2010 , Gizmodo stated that the PlayStation brand was one of the last Sony products to completely stand apart from its competitors , stating that " If you ask the average person on the street what their favorite Sony product is , more often than not you 'll hear PlayStation " . As of April 2012 , the PlayStation brand is the " most followed " brand on social networking site , Facebook , with over 22 million fans and followers in total which is more than any other brand in the entertainment industry . A study by Greenlight 's Entertainment Retail has also shown that the PlayStation brand is the most interactive making 634 posts and tweets on social networking sites Facebook and Twitter . 
 In July 2014 , Sony boasted in a company release video that the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita sold a combined total of 100 million units . It was announced at Tokyo Game Show on September 1 , 2014 , that PlayStation home game consoles claim 78 % market share of all home consoles in Japan . 
 As of 2015 , PlayStation is the strongest selling console brand worldwide . 
 = EarthBound = 
 EarthBound , known as Mother 2 in Japan , is a 1994 Japanese role @-@ playing video game co @-@ developed by Ape Inc. and HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game console . As Ness and his party of four , the player travels the world to collect melodies en route to defeating the evil alien force Giygas . It is the second game of the Mother series , and the only one to be released in the English language until its predecessor was released under the name EarthBound Beginnings in 2015 as part of Wii U 's Virtual Console . EarthBound was released in Japan on August 27 , 1994 , and in North America on June 5 , 1995 . 
 The game had a lengthy development period which spanned five years . Its making involved a number of Japanese luminaries , including writer Shigesato Itoi , musician / songwriter Keiichi Suzuki , sound designer Hirokazu Tanaka , and future Nintendo president Satoru Iwata . Themed around an idiosyncratic portrayal of Americana and Western culture , it subverted popular role @-@ playing game traditions by featuring a real world setting while parodying numerous staples of the genre . Itoi , who directed the game , wanted it to reach non @-@ gamers with its intentionally goofy tone . It was heavily marketed upon release via a promotional campaign which sardonically proclaimed " this game stinks " . 
 Initial reviewers had little praise for EarthBound in the United States , where it sold half as many copies as in Japan . Critics attribute this to a combination of the game 's simple graphics , the satirical marketing campaign , and a lack of market interest in the genre . In the ensuing years , a dedicated fan community spawned which advocated for the series . Starting in 1999 , Ness became a featured character in each of the Super Smash Bros. series of video games which furthered public knowledge of EarthBound . Upon retrospection , the game received wide critical acclaim , and was deemed by many to be a timeless classic . A Japan @-@ only sequel , Mother 3 , was released for the Game Boy Advance in 2006 . In 2013 , EarthBound was reissued and given a worldwide release for the Wii U Virtual Console following many years of fan lobbying , marking its debut in many territories including Europe . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 EarthBound features many traditional role @-@ playing game elements : the player controls a party of characters who travel through the game 's two @-@ dimensional world composed of villages , cities , caves , and dungeons . Along the way , the player fights battles against enemies and the party receives experience points for victories . If enough experience points are acquired , a character 's level will increase . This pseudo @-@ randomly increases the character 's attributes , such as offense , defense , and the maximum hit points ( HP ) and psychic points ( PP ) of each character . Rather than using an overworld map screen like most console RPGs of its era , the world is entirely seamless , with no differentiation between towns and the outside world . Another non @-@ traditional element is the perspective used for the world . The game uses oblique projection , while most 2D RPGs use a " top down " view on a grid or an isometric perspective . 
 Unlike its predecessor , EarthBound does not use random encounters . When physical contact occurs between a character and an enemy , the screen dissolves into battle mode . In combat , characters and enemies possess a certain amount of HP . Blows to an enemy reduce the amount of HP . Once an enemy 's HP reach zero , that enemy is defeated . If a specific type of enemy is defeated , there is a chance that the character will receive an item after the battle . In battle , the player is allowed to choose specific actions for their characters . These actions can include attacking , healing , spying ( reveals enemy weakness / strengths ) , mirroring ( emulate a specific enemy ) , and running away . Characters can also use special PSI attacks that require PP . Once each character is assigned a command , the characters and enemies perform their actions in a set order , determined by character speed . Whenever a character receives damage , the HP box gradually " rolls " down , similar to an odometer . This allows players an opportunity to heal the character or win the battle before the counter hits zero , after which the character is knocked unconscious . If all characters are rendered unconscious , the game transitions to an endgame screen , asking if the player wants to continue . An affirmative response brings Ness , conscious , back to the last telephone he saved from , with half the money on his person at the time of his defeat , and with other party members showing as still unconscious . Because battles are not random , tactical advantages can be gained . If the player physically contacts an enemy from behind ( indicated by a translucent green swirl which fills the screen ) , the player is given a first @-@ strike priority . However , this also applies to enemies , who can also engage the party from behind ( in this case , the swirl is red ) . Neutral priority is indicated by a gray swirl . Additionally , as Ness and his friends become stronger , battles with weaker enemies are eventually won automatically , forgoing the battle sequence , and weaker monsters will begin to flee from Ness and his friends rather than chase them . 
 Currency is indirectly received from Ness ' father , who can also save the game 's progress . Each time the party wins a battle , Ness ' father deposits money in an account that can be withdrawn at ATMs . In towns , players can visit various stores where weapons , armor , and items can be bought . Weapons and armor can be equipped to increase character strength and defense , respectively . In addition , items can be used for a number of purposes , such as healing . Towns also contain several other useful facilities such as hospitals where players can be healed for a fee . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game took place a few years later after the events of Mother . The player starts as a young boy named Ness as he investigates a nearby meteorite crash with his neighbor , Pokey . He finds that an alien force , Giygas , has enveloped and consumed the world in hatred and consequently turned animals , humans , and objects into malicious creatures . A bee from the future instructs Ness to collect melodies in a Sound Stone to preemptively stop the force . While visiting these eight Sanctuaries , Ness meets three other kids named Paula , Jeff , and Poo — " a psychic girl , an eccentric inventor , and a <unk> martial artist " , respectively — who join his party . Along the way , Ness visits the cultists of Happy Happy Village , where he saves Paula , and the zombie @-@ infested Threed , where the two of them fall prey to a trap . After Paula telepathically instructs Jeff in a Winters boarding school to rescue them , they continue to the city of Fourside and the seaside resort Summers . Meanwhile , Poo , the prince of <unk> , partakes in a violent meditation called " Mu Training " before joining the party as well . The party continues to travel to the <unk> desert , the Deep Darkness swamp and a forgotten underworld where dinosaurs live and as the Sound Stone is eventually filled , Ness visits Magicant alone , a surreal location in his mind where he fights his personal dark side . Upon returning to <unk> , he and his party travel back in time to fight a young Giygas , a battle known for its " feeling of isolation , ... incomprehensible attacks , ... buzzing static " and reliance on prayer . 
 = = Development = = 
 The first Mother was released for the NES in 1989 . Its sequel , Mother 2 , or EarthBound , was developed over five years by Ape ( later Creatures ) and HAL , and published through Nintendo . The game was written and designed by Japanese author , musician , and advertiser Shigesato Itoi , and produced by Satoru Iwata , who became Nintendo 's president and CEO . Mother 2 was made with a development team different from that of the original game , and most of its members were unmarried and willing to work all night on the project . Mother 2 's development took much longer than planned and came under repeated threat of cancellation . Itoi has said that the project 's dire straits were resolved when Iwata joined the team . Ape 's programming team had more members than HAL on the project . The HAL team ( led by lead programmer Iwata ) worked on the game programming , while the Ape team ( led by lead programmer Kouji Malta ) worked on specific data , such as the text and maps . They spent biweekly retreats together at the HAL office in view of Mount Fuji . 
 The game continues Mother 's story in that Giygas reappears as the antagonist ( and thus did not die at the end of Mother ) and the player has the option of choosing whether to continue the protagonist 's story by choosing whether to name their player @-@ character the same as the original . He considered interstellar and interplanetary space travel instead of the confines of a single planet in the new game . After four months , Itoi scrapped the idea as cliché . Itoi sought to make a game that would appeal to populations that were playing games less , such as girls . 
 The Mother series titles are built on what Itoi considered " reckless wildness " , where he would offer ideas that encouraged his staff to contribute new ways of portraying scenes in the video game medium . He saw the titles foremost as games and not " big scenario scripts " . Itoi has said that he wanted the player feel emotions such as " distraught " when playing the game . The game 's writing was intentionally " quirky and goofy " in character , and written in the Japanese kana script so as to give dialogue a conversational feel . Itoi thought of the default player @-@ character names when he did not like his team 's suggestions . Many of the characters were based on real life personalities . For instance , the desert miners were modeled on specific executives from a Japanese construction company . The final battle dialogue with Giygas was based on Itoi 's recollections of a traumatic scene from the <unk> film The Military Policeman and the <unk> Beauty that he had accidentally seen in his childhood . Itoi referred to the battle background animations as a " video drug " . The same specialist made nearly 200 of these animations , working solely on backgrounds for two years . 
 The idea for the rolling HP meter began with pachinko balls that would drop balls off the screen upon being hit . This did not work as well for characters with high health . Instead , around 1990 , they chose an odometer @-@ style hit points counter . The bicycle was one of the harder elements to implement — it used controls similar to a tank before it was tweaked . Iwata felt that the Ape programmers were particularly willing to tackle such challenges . The programmers also found difficulty implementing the in @-@ game delivery service , where the delivery person had to navigate around obstacles to reach the player . They thought it would be funny to have the delivery person run through obstacles in a hurry on his way off @-@ screen . The unusual maps laid out with diagonal streets in oblique projection required extra attention from the artists . Itoi specifically chose against having an overworld map , and didn 't want to artificially distinguish between towns and other areas . Instead , he worked to make each town unique . His own favorite town was Threed , though it was Summers before then . 
 Mother 2 was designed to fit within an eight megabit limit , but was expanded in size and scope twice : first to 12 megabits and second to 24 megabits . The game was originally scheduled for release in January 1993 on a 12 megabit cartridge . It was finished around May 1994 and the Japanese release was set for August 27 , 1994 . With the extra few months , the team played the game and added small , personal touches . Itoi told Weekly Famitsu that Shigeru Miyamoto liked the game and that it was the first role @-@ playing game that Miyamoto had completed . Mother 2 would release in North America about a year later . 
 = = = North American release = = = 
 As was traditional for Nintendo , Mother 2 was developed in Japan and localized in the United States , a process in which the game is translated into English for Western audiences . As the only game in the Mother series to be released in North America at the time , its title " Mother 2 " was changed to " EarthBound " to avoid confusion about what it was a sequel to . 
 Nintendo of America 's Dan Owsen began the English localization project and converted about ten percent of the script before moving to another project . Marcus Lindblom filled Owsen 's position around January 1995 . Lindblom credits Owsen with coining some of the game 's " most iconic phrases " , such as " say fuzzy pickles " . Lindblom himself was given liberties to make the script " as weird as [ he ] wanted " , as Nintendo wanted the script to be more American than a direct translation would be . He worked alone and with great latitude due to no divisional hierarchies . Lindblom was aided by Japanese writer Masayuki Miura , who translated the Japanese script and contextualized its tone , which Lindblom positively described as " a glass half full " . 
 Lindblom was challenged by the task of culturally translating " an outsider 's view of the U.S. " for an American audience . He also sought to stay true to the original text , though he never met or spoke with Itoi . In addition to reworking the original puns and humor , Lindblom added private jokes and American cultural allusions to Bugs Bunny , comedian Benny Hill , and This Is Spinal Tap . Apart from the dialogue , he wrote the rest of the game 's text , including combat prompts and item names . As one of several Easter eggs , he named a non @-@ player character for his daughter , Nico , who was born during development . While Lindblom took the day off for her birth , he proceeded to work 14 @-@ hour days without weekends for the next month . The game also includes protection against piracy that , when triggered , increases enemy counts to make the game less enjoyable . Additionally , right before players reach the end of the pirated copy 's story , their game resets and deletes its saved file in an act that IGN declared " arguably the most devious and notorious example of ' creative ' copy protection " . 
 Under directives from Nintendo , Lindblom worked with the Japanese artists and programmers to remove references to intellectual property , religion , and alcohol from the American release , such as a truck 's Coca @-@ Cola logo , the red crosses on hospitals , and crosses on tombstones . Alcohol became coffee , Ness was no longer nude in the Magicant area as seen in the image , and the Happy <unk> blue cultists were made to look less like Ku Klux Klansmen . The team was not concerned with music licensing issues and considered itself somewhat protected under the guise of parody . Lindblom recalled that the music did not need many changes . The graphical fixes were not finished until March 1995 , and the game was not fully playable until May . EarthBound was released on June 5 , 1995 in North America . 
 Though Nintendo spent about $ 2 million on marketing , the American release was ultimately viewed as unsuccessful within Nintendo . The game 's atypical marketing campaign was derived from the game 's unusual humor . As part of Nintendo 's larger " Play It Loud " campaign , EarthBound 's " this game stinks " campaign included foul @-@ smelling scratch and sniff advertisements . 1UP.com called the scratch and sniff advertising campaign " infamously ill @-@ conceived " , and Digital Trends described the campaign as " bizarre " and " based around fart jokes " . GamePro reported that they received more reader complaints about the game 's scratch and sniff ad than about any other 1995 advertisement . The campaign was also expensive . It emphasized magazine advertisements and had the extra cost of the strategy guide included with each game . Aaron Linde of Shacknews wrote that the price of the packaged game curtailed sales . Between the poor sales and the phasing out of the Super NES , the game did not receive a European release . 
 Lindblom and his team were devastated by the release 's poor critical response and sales . He recalled that the game was hurt by reception of its graphics as " simplistic " at a time when critics placed high importance on graphics quality . Lindblom felt that the game 's changes to the RPG formula ( e.g. , the rolling HP meter and fleeing enemies ) were ignored in the following years , though he thought the game had aged well at the time of its Virtual Console re @-@ release in 2013 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Mother composers Keiichi Suzuki and Hirokazu Tanaka returned to make the EarthBound soundtrack , along with newcomers Hiroshi Kanazu and Toshiyuki Ueno . In comparison with Mother , Itoi said that EarthBound had more " jazzy " pieces . Suzuki told Weekly Famitsu that the Super NES afforded the team more creative freedom with its eight @-@ channel <unk> based SPC700 , as opposed to the old Nintendo Entertainment System 's restriction of five channels of basic waveforms . This entailed higher sound quality and music that sounds closer to his regular compositions . Itoi believes that EarthBound may be the first video game to use vibrato , or " string @-@ bending " , in its music . The soundtrack was released by Sony Records on November 2 , 1994 . 
 In Suzuki 's songwriting process , he would first compose on a synthesizer before working with programmers to get it in the game . His personal pieces play when the player is walking about the map , out of battle . Suzuki 's favorite piece is the music that plays while the player is on a bicycle , which he composed in advance of this job but found appropriate to include . He wrote over 100 pieces , but much of it was not included in the game . The team wrote enough music as to fill eight megabits of the 24 megabit cartridge — about two compact discs . 
 According to Tanaka , the Beach Boys were repeatedly referenced between him and Suzuki , and that he would often listen to co @-@ founder Brian Wilson 's 1988 eponymous album while on the way to Suzuki 's home . Suzuki has stated that the percussive arranging in the game 's soundtrack was based on the Beach Boys ' albums Smile ( unreleased ) and Smiley Smile ( 1967 ) , which both contained American themes shared with Van Dyke Parks ' Song Cycle ( 1968 ) . To Suzuki , Smile evoked the bright and dark aspects of America , while Song Cycle displayed a hazy sound mixed with American humor and hints of Ray Bradbury , a style which he considered essential to the soundtrack of Mother . Tanaka recalls Randy Newman being the first quintessentially American composer he could think of , and that his albums Little Criminals ( 1977 ) and Land of Dreams ( 1988 ) were influential . While Suzuki corroborated with his own affinity for Harry Nilsson 's Nilsson Sings Newman ( 1970 ) , he also cited John Lennon as a strong influence due to the common theme of love in his music , which was also a prominent theme in the game , and that his album John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band ( 1970 ) helped him to avoid excessive instrumentation over the SNES 's technical constraints . 
 The soundtrack contains direct musical quotations of some classical and folk music ; the composers also derived a few samples culled from other sources including commercial pop and rock music . The texture of the work was partially influenced by some salsa , reggae , and dub music . Speaking about Frank Zappa 's Make a Jazz Noise Here ( 1991 ) , Tanaka felt that Zappa would have been the best at creating a live performance of Mother music , but could not detail Zappa 's specific influence on EarthBound . Additionally , he felt that the mix tape Wired Magazine Presents : Music Futurists ( 1999 ) presented a particular selection of artists which embody the ethos of EarthBound , running the gamut from space age composer Esquivel to avant @-@ garde trumpeter Ben Neill , along with innovators Sun Ra , Steve Reich , Todd Rundgren , Brian Eno , and Can . Tanaka also mentioned that he listened to the various artists compilation Stay Awake : Various Interpretations of Music from Vintage Disney Films ( 1988 ) heavily during EarthBound 's development . Miscellaneous influences on Suzuki and Tanaka for EarthBound include the music of Michael Nyman , Miklós Rózsa 's film score for The Lost Weekend ( 1948 ) , and albums by various other pop / rock musicians . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game originally received little critical praise from the American press , and sold poorly in the United States : around 140 @,@ 000 copies , as compared to twice as many in Japan . Kotaku described EarthBound 's 1995 American release as " a dud " and blamed the low sales on " a bizarre marketing campaign " and graphics " cartoonish " beyond the average taste of players . The game was released when RPGs were not popular in the United States , and visual taste in RPGs was closer to Chrono Trigger and Final Fantasy VI . The game was especially expensive due to the included strategy guide . While the game <unk> on Itoi 's celebrity in Japan , it became a " curio " for European audiences . 
 Multiple reviewers described the game as " original " or " unique " and praised its script 's range of emotions and humor . IGN 's Scott Thompson said the game teetered between solemn and audacious in its dialogue and gameplay , and noted its deviance from RPG tropes in aspects such as choice of attacks in battle . He found the game both " bizarre and memorable " . Official Nintendo Magazine 's Simon Parkin thought the game 's script was its best asset , as " one of the medium 's strongest and idiosyncratic storylines " that fluctuated " between humorous and poignant " . GameZone 's David Sanchez thought its script was " clever " and " sharp " , as it displayed a wide range of emotions that made him want to talk to all non @-@ player characters . GamesTM wrote that the game designers spoke with their players through the non @-@ playable characters , and noted how Itoi 's interests shaped the script , its allusions to popular culture , and its " strangely existential narrative framework " . 
 Critics praised its " real world " setting , which was seen as an uncommon choice . IGN 's Thompson noted its 1990s homage as " a love letter to 20th @-@ century Americana " , with a payphone as a save point , ATMs to transfer money , yo @-@ <unk> as weapons , skateboarders and hippies as enemies , and references to classic rock bands . Official Nintendo Magazine 's Parkin noted the theme 's distance from the " knights and dragons " common to the Japanese role @-@ playing game genre . Reviewers noted the game 's steep difficulty . IGN 's Thompson wrote that the beginning was the hardest , and that aspects such as limited inventory , experience grinds , and monetary penalties upon death were unfriendly for players new to Japanese RPGs . He also cited the quick respawn time for foes and ultimate need to not avoid battles given the difficulty of bosses . 
 Reviewers described the game 's ambiance as cheery and full of charm . David Sanchez of GameZone thought the game 's self @-@ awareness added to its charm , where the player learned through the game 's poking lighthearted fun . He added that the music was an " absolute delight " and complimented its range from space sounds to themes to " bizarre " battle tracks that varied with the enemy type . GamesTM wrote that the game 's reputation comes from the " consistent ... visual language " in its Charles M. Schulz @-@ esque character and world design . Kotaku 's Jason Schreier found the ending unsatisfying and <unk> , despite finding the ending credits with its character curtain call and photo album of " fuzzy pickles " moments all " wonderful " . 
 Of the original reviewers , Nicholas Dean Des Barres of DieHard GameFan wrote that EarthBound was not as impressive as Final Fantasy III , although just as fun . He praised the game 's humor and wrote that the game completely defied his first impressions . Des Barres wrote that " past the graphics " , which were purposefully 8 @-@ bit for nostalgia , the game is not an " entry level " or a " child 's " RPG , but " highly intelligent " and " captivating " . The Brazilian Super GamePower explained that those expecting a Dungeons and Dragons @-@ style RPG will be disappointed by the childish visuals , which were unlike other 16 @-@ bit games . They wrote that the American humor was too mature and that the gameplay was too immature , as if for beginners . GamePro gave the game a mixed review , commenting that " The lack of a convincing story line and the dull NES @-@ clone graphics ... will make serious RPG fans a little cautious about approaching EarthBound . " They said the " saving graces are the fairly good music " and " hilarious adult humor " but added that " the humor is too mature for little kids , and the gameplay is too immature for older gamers . " 
 Reviewing the game years after its release , IGN 's Scott Thompson wrote that EarthBound balances " dark Lovecraftian apocalypse and silly lightheartedness " , and was just as interesting nearly a decade after its original release . While he lamented a lack of " visual feedback " in battle animations , he felt the game had innovations that still feel " smart and unique " : the rolling HP meter and lack of random battles . Thompson also noted that technical issues like animation slowdown with multiple enemies on @-@ screen went unfixed in the rerelease . Official Nintendo Magazine 's Parkin found the game to provide a more potent experience than developers with more resources and thought its battle sequences were " sleek " . Nintendo World Report 's Justin Baker was surprised by the " excellent " battle system and controls , which he found to be underreported in other reviews despite their streamlined , grind @-@ reducing convenience . He wrote that some of the menu interactions were clunky . GamesTM felt that the game was " far from revolutionary " , compared to Final Fantasy VI and Chrono Trigger , and that its battle scenes were unexciting . The magazine compared the game 's " chosen one " story to a " throwaway Link 's Awakening / Goonies hybrid narrative " . Reviewers praised Nintendo for digitizing the Player 's Guide , though IGN noted that it was technically easier to view it on another tablet rather than switching the Wii U 's view mode . Multiple reviewers concluded that the game had aged well . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its release , the game 's English localization has found praise . Localization reviewer Clyde Mandelin described the Japanese @-@ to @-@ English conversion as " top @-@ notch for its time " . Kotaku found the localization " funny , clever , and evocative " , and 1UP.com said it was " unusually excellent " for the time . IGN wrote that Nintendo was " dead wrong " for believing that Americans would not be interested in " such a chaotic and satirical world " . Critics consider the game one of the weirdest and most surreal role @-@ playing games . Examples include using items such as the Pencil Eraser to remove pencil statues , experiencing in @-@ game hallucinations , meeting " a man who turned himself into a dungeon " , and battling piles of vomit , taxi cabs , and walking nooses . 
 EarthBound was listed in 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die , where Christian Donlan wrote that the game is " name @-@ checked by the video gaming cognoscenti more often than it 's actually been played " . Similarly , Eurogamer 's Simon Parkin described it as a " sacred cow amongst gaming 's cognoscenti " . Mott called the game " utterly brilliant " and praised its overworld and battle system . Kotaku described aspects of the game 's story , such as the " Mr. Saturn coffee break " , as " poignant " . Jeremy Parish of USgamer called EarthBound " the all @-@ time champion " of self @-@ aware games that " warp ... perceptions and boundaries " and break the fourth wall , citing its frequent internal commentary about the medium and the final scenes where the player is directly addressed by the game . He thought the final scene was " perhaps the most clever and powerful moment in a clever and powerful game " . David Sanchez of GameZone wrote that EarthBound " went places no other game would " in the 1990s or even in the present day , including " trolling " the player " before trolling was cool " . Author Hiromi Kawakami told Itoi that she had played the game " about 80 times " . GamesTM said the game felt fresh because of its reliance on " personal experiences " made it " exactly the sort of title that would thrive today as an indie hit " . He called this accomplishment " remarkable " and credited Nintendo 's commitment to the " voices of creators " . IGN 's Nadia Oxford said that nearly two decades since the release , its final boss fight against Giygas continues to be " one of the most epic video game standoffs of all time " and noted its emotional impact . Kotaku wrote that the game was content to make the player " feel lonely " , and , overall , was special not for any individual aspect but for its method of using the video game medium to explore ideas impossible to explore in other media . 
 Critics consider EarthBound a " classic " or " must @-@ play " among video games . The game was included top 50 games of all time lists , including that of Famitsu readers in 2006 and IGN readers in 2005 and 2006 . IGN ranks EarthBound 13th in its top 100 SNES games and 26th among all games , crediting its " distinct and unforgettable " in @-@ game world , perspective on Americanism , unconventional settings , and 1960s music . Gamasutra named the game one of its 20 " essential " Japanese role @-@ playing games . The rerelease was Justin Haywald of GameSpot 's game of the year , and Nintendo Life 's Virtual Console game of the year . GameZone said it " would be a great disservice " to merely call EarthBound " a gem " . GamesTM noted that the few British players who imported the game regarded it as " a retro classic " . IGN 's Scott Thompson too appraised the game as " the true definition of a classic " . 
 Several critics referred to the game as among their all @-@ time favorites . EarthBound has been cited as an official influence on video games Costume Quest , South Park : The Stick of Truth ( via series creator Trey Parker ) , Lisa , Kyoto Wild , Citizens of Earth , and Undertale . Additionally , EarthBound has been reported as an unofficial influence on Contact . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 EarthBound is known for having a cult following , which developed over time well after its release . Colin Campbell of Polygon wrote that " few gaming communities are as passionate and active " as EarthBound 's , and 1UP.com 's Bob Mackey wrote that no game was as poised to have a cult following . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas wrote in 2006 that EarthBound 's " persistent " , " ambitious " , and " religiously dedicated collective of hardcore fans " would be among the first groups to influence Nintendo 's decision @-@ making through their purchasing power on Virtual Console . Digital Trends 's Anthony John Agnello wrote that " no video game fans have suffered as much as EarthBound fans " , and cited Nintendo 's reluctance to release Mother series games in North America . IGN described the series as neglected by Nintendo in North America for similar reasons . Nintendo president Satoru Iwata later credited the community response on their online Miiverse social platform as leading to EarthBound 's eventual rerelease on their Virtual Console platform . Physical copies of EarthBound were hard to find before the rerelease , and in 2013 , were worth twice its initial retail price . 
 Wired described the amount of EarthBound " fan art , videos , and tributes on fan sites like EarthBound Central or Starmen.net " as mountainous . Reid Young of Starmen.net and Fangamer credits EarthBound 's popularity to its " labor of love " nature , with a " double @-@ coat of thoughtfulness and care " across all aspects of the game by a development team that appeared to love their work . Young started the fansite that would become Starmen.net in 1997 while in middle school . It became " the definitive fan community for EarthBound on the web " and had " almost inexplicable " growth . Shacknews described the site 's collection of fan @-@ made media as " absolutely massive " . It also provided a place to aggregate information on the Mother series and to coordinate fan actions . 
 The EarthBound fan community at Starmen.net coalesced with the intent to have Nintendo of America acknowledge the Mother series . The community drafted several thousand @-@ person petitions for specific English @-@ language Mother series releases , but in time , their request shifted to no demand at all , wanting only their interest to be recognized by Nintendo . A 2007 campaign for a Mother 3 English localization led to the creation of a full @-@ color , 270 @-@ page art book — The EarthBound Anthology — sent to Nintendo and press outlets as demonstration of consumer interest . Shacknews called it more of a proposal than a collection of fan art , and " the greatest gaming love letter ever created " . Upon " little " response from Nintendo , they decided to localize the game themselves . Starmen.net co @-@ founder and professional game translator Clyde " Tomato " Mandelin led the project from its November 2006 announcement to October 2008 finish . They then printed a " professional quality strategy guide " through Fangamer , a video game merchandising site that spun off from Starmen.net. The Verge cited the effort as proof of the fan base 's dedication . 
 Other fan efforts include EarthBound , USA , a full @-@ length documentary on Starmen.net and the fan community , and Mother 4 , a fan @-@ produced sequel to the Mother series that went into production when Itoi definitively " declared " that he was done with the series . After following the fan community from afar , Lindblom came out to fans in mid @-@ 2012 and the press became interested in his work . He had planned a book about the game 's development , release , and fandom before a reply from Nintendo discouraged him from pursuing the idea . He plans to continue to communicate directly with the community about the game 's history . 
 = = = Ness = = = 
 EarthBound 's Ness became widely known from his later appearance as an ensemble cast member in the Super Smash Bros. series , including the original Super Smash Bros. and its sequels : Melee , Brawl , and 3DS / Wii U. Ness was among the biggest surprise inclusions in the original 1999 Super Smash Bros. , which gave Mother series fans " hope for the future " of the series . IGN wrote that Ness was " one of the most powerful characters " when players perfected his odd controls and psychic powers . In Europe , which did not see an EarthBound release , Ness was better known for his role in the fighting game than for his original role in the role @-@ playing game . 
 He returned in the 2001 Melee with two other references to EarthBound : Mr. Saturn items , which could be tossed at enemies , and an unlockable battle arena based on the EarthBound city of Fourside . Ness was joined by Mother 3 's Lucas in Brawl . In 2012 , Official Nintendo Magazine 's Thomas East wrote that Ness was an unpopular character in the series and should be removed from future installments . Ness returned in 3DS / Wii U , the sequel to Brawl , and Lucas was added later as downloadable content . Nintendo also produced Ness and Lucas Amiibo figurines . 
 = = = Sequels and rerelease = = = 
 A sequel to EarthBound was announced for the Nintendo 64 in 1996 as Mother 3 ( EarthBound 64 in North America ) . It was slated for release on the 64DD , an expansion peripheral for the Nintendo 64 that used a magneto @-@ optical drive . In development hell , the game struggled to find a firm release date and in 2000 , was later cancelled altogether when the 64DD flopped . 
 In April 2003 , a Japanese television advertisement revealed that a combined Mother 1 + 2 cartridge and Mother 3 were in development for the Game Boy Advance . The latter abandoned the Nintendo 64 version 's 3D , but kept its plot . Mother 3 was released in Japan in 2006 , whereupon it became a bestseller . It did not receive a North American release on the basis that it would not sell . Around Mother 3 's 2006 release , Itoi stated that he had no plans to make Mother 4 , which he has reaffirmed repeatedly . IGN described the series as neglected by Nintendo in North America , as Mother 1 , Mother 1 + 2 , and Mother 3 were not released outside Japan . Despite this , Ness ' recurrence in the Super Smash Bros. series signaled favorable odds for the future of the Mother series . 
 At the outset of the Wii 's Virtual Console platform in 2006 , IGN rated EarthBound as having a " very high " probability of a release on the digital distribution platform , adding that " Nintendo is listening " . Though the game was rated the most desired Virtual Console release in a Nintendo Power poll , rated for release by the ESRB , and able to be published with little effort , the Wii version did not materialize . The game was commonly believed to be withheld from rerelease due to music licensing concerns , and the Starmen.net community was told that " undisclosed legal <unk> " were preventing the release . English localizer Marcus Lindblom instead hypothesized that Nintendo did not realize the magnitude of the game 's popular support and did not consider it a priority project . In 2008 , Nintendo removed the game 's demo from the Masterpieces collection of the North American release of Super Smash Bros. Brawl . 
 At the end of 2012 , Itoi announced that the rerelease was moving forward , and a January 2013 Nintendo Direct presentation announced the Japanese rerelease for the Wii U Virtual Console as part of a celebration of anniversaries of the NES and Mother 2 . Following the Japanese March 20 , 2013 release and citing fan interest on Nintendo 's Miiverse social platform , company president Satoru Iwata announced a North American and European release of EarthBound , which was released July 18 , 2013 alongside a digitized and free online version of the game 's original Player 's Guide . The game was a " top @-@ seller " on the Wii U Virtual Console . Kotaku users and first @-@ time EarthBound players had an " overwhelmingly positive " response to the game . Simon Parkin wrote that the game 's rerelease was a " momentous occasion " as the return of " one of Nintendo 's few remaining lost classics " after 20 years . EarthBound was later released as a Virtual Console title on the New Nintendo 3DS on March 3 , 2016 in Europe , and on March 24 , 2016 in North America . 
 = Darvin Moon = 
 Darvin Moon ( born October 1 , 1963 ) is an American self @-@ employed logger and amateur poker player who was the runner @-@ up of the 2009 World Series of Poker ( WSOP ) US $ 10 @,@ 000 no @-@ limit Texas hold 'em main event . It was his first time playing in the World Series of Poker . Moon , who taught himself how to play poker , ran a small logging company in the Maryland Panhandle before earning a 2009 World Series seat by winning a $ 130 satellite tournament . 
 Moon earned the chip lead early in the tournament , and eventually entered the final table as the chip leader , with about 30 percent of the chips in play . Although Moon briefly lost the lead , he eventually regained it after eliminating veteran players like Steve Begleiter and Phil Ivey . Moon ultimately lost heads up against Joe Cada , earning Moon US $ 5 @.@ 18 million for his second @-@ place finish . 
 Although some criticized his playing style and lack of experience , Moon was also praised for his working stiff personality and self @-@ deprecating manner . Moon participated in the 2010 National Heads @-@ Up Poker Championship , but lost in the second round to Annie Duke . He also competed in the 2010 World Series of Poker main event , but was eliminated on the second day . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Darvin Moon lives in the western Maryland town of Oakland , at the foot of Backbone Mountain . Prior to entering the World Series of Poker , Moon lived in a 14 by 70 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 by 21 @.@ 3 m ) trailer with his wife , Wendy . Moon owns and operates a small logging company with other family members . Most of his days were spent in pine forests scattered throughout the Maryland Panhandle . Moon taught himself how to play poker , and he first started playing with his grandfather at a young age . He started playing frequently around 2006 and studied the game by watching televised poker . Moon regularly played home games at such places as fire departments , Elks Lodges and American Legion buildings . 
 = = 2009 WSOP = = 
 Darvin Moon earned his seat in the 2009 World Series of Poker no @-@ limit Texas hold 'em main event by winning a $ 130 satellite tournament at the Wheeling Island Casino in Wheeling , West Virginia . He lost two Wheeling Island tournaments before finishing in first place on his third attempt , winning a $ 10 @,@ 000 main event seat and $ 6 @,@ 000 for expenses . The event marked Moon ’ s first time playing in the WSOP , as well as visiting Las Vegas , Nevada and riding in a commercial plane . Due to the poor economy 's impact on the logging business , Moon considered keeping the $ 10 @,@ 000 instead of entering the tournament , but decided to play after visiting the Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino and watching World Series games there . 
 On the first day of the tournament , Moon was dealt pocket aces six times and got three @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind on the flop three times . He performed well on the first day and continued a successful streak throughout the tournament , although he himself proclaimed it was luck . He eliminated several professional poker players during the tournament , including David <unk> . He eventually obtained the chip lead and kept it until the seventh day of play . At that time he fell to tenth place , but won a few big hands to recover and ended the day back in the lead . He eliminated Billy Kopp in one of the biggest hands in the tournament when his Q ♦ J ♦ led to a higher flush than Kopp 's 5 ♦ 3 ♦ . Moon entered the final table as the chip leader , holding 58 @.@ 6 million chips , or about 30 percent of the chips in play . 
 During the final table , Moon eliminated Steve Begleiter and seasoned pro Phil Ivey . In both cases , Moon was behind but caught cards to win ; Ivey lost with A @-@ K to Moon 's A @-@ Q when a queen came up on the flop , and Begleiter 's pocket queens lost to Moon 's A @-@ Q when he caught an ace on the river . Moon lost the chip lead during the November Nine game , but his knockout win against Begleiter brought him back into the chip lead with 63 @.@ 9 million chips . He made it to the final two players and went heads up against Joe Cada , with Moon at 58 @.@ 85 million and Cada at 135 @.@ 95 million . Moon briefly recovered the chip lead from Cada , but lost it during the 79th heads @-@ up hand , where Cada bet 3 million chips with his J @-@ 9 on a 10 @-@ 5 @-@ 9 @-@ 10 turn after the flop was checked , Moon check @-@ raised all in with 8 @-@ 7 . Cada called with his remaining 58 million chips , won the hand and regained the chip lead and the momentum for the duration of the match . 
 Commentators later criticized Moon for making such an expensive bluff for a small pot , and Moon seemed visibly disappointed after the game . Storms Reback , of All In Magazine , said the hand was a crucial moment for Moon , and that his fatigue from it may have resulted in a bad call at the final hand of the tournament . After 18 hours of play , Moon ended up finishing second against Cada when his Q ♦ J ♦ succumbed to Cada 's 9 ♦ 9 ♣ . He won $ 5 @,@ 182 @,@ 601 for his second @-@ place finish . 
 After the tournament ended , Moon was congratulated by professional poker player Phil Hellmuth , who said , " I 'm proud of you , Darvin . " Some were critical of both Moon and Cada . Mike Matusow , a professional poker player with a reputation for trash @-@ talking , called the heads @-@ up contest between the two " a new low for poker as a skilled game " . Storms Reback , of All In Magazine , said Moon was " out of his league " at the tournament , and made a number of questionable calls and bets . As an example , Reback cited a hand in which Moon attempted to bluff by re @-@ raising a bet by Begleiter for 15 million chips , then folding when Begleiter went all in for an additional 6 million , even though Moon was getting better than 7 @-@ to @-@ 1 odds on his money . Moon said he planned to spend some of his World Series winnings on putting relatives through college and charitable contributions to his home town , including a new youth ball field and recreation center . Moon said of his victory , " We ain 't gonna change . The next time you see us , we 'll be wearing jeans and everything else , like we always have . " 
 = = Post @-@ WSOP poker career = = 
 Moon played few major poker games since the 2009 World Series of Poker , preferring instead to play local games among friends in the Oakland area . When asked how he had done in those games , Moon replied , " I 've done all right . I 've held my own . " Moon joined 63 other players in the 2010 National Heads @-@ Up Poker Championship at the Caesars Palace in Las Vegas . He paid the $ 20 @,@ 000 buy @-@ in from his personal funds . Moon was paired against online qualifier William Huntress in the first round of the tournament on March 5 . ESPN writer Gary Wise said Huntress stood " as good a chance of toppling an invited player as any qualifier ever has " , and questioned why Moon participated in the tournament given Moon 's past claims of disinterest in media exposure and sponsorship . However , <unk> writer Mickey <unk> predicted Moon would do well in the tournament due to his unpredictable play . Moon defeated Huntress when his K ♦ 10 ♣ held out against Huntress ' J ♣ 8 ♠ . The flop was A ♣ Q ♣ 4 ♣ , giving Huntress the better draw , but Moon won with king @-@ high when another club failed to come on the turn or river , advancing Moon to the second round . He lost in that round to Annie Duke , whose three Kings bested Moon 's two pair of Queens and Tens . Duke went on to win the tournament . 
 In August 2010 , Moon joined Chris Moneymaker and Jonathan Duhamel in hosting the Mega Stack Series XVII , a live poker tournament at Foxwoods Resort Casino that drew 2 @,@ 200 participants and had a total prize pool of more than $ 1 million . The next month , Moon entered the 2010 World Series of Poker no @-@ limit Texas hold @-@ em main event . Early in the tournament , Moon doubled up with pocket kings against a player with pocket jacks . He was eliminated on day two , however , after moving all in with 10 ♦ 9 ♦ on a 9 ♣ 4 ♣ 2 ♣ flop . His opponent had pocket aces , and Moon received no help with a K ♦ turn and 5 ♦ river . Leaving the poker room , he said to his wife , " At least the pressure 's off , honey . " 
 In 2011 , Moon accepted a deal to become Tour Ambassador for Heartland Poker Tour , wearing the patch of the nationally @-@ televised tour and playing in several HPT events . HPT President Todd Anderson of Moon : " Darvin is our kind of guy . He 's worked hard his entire life and now lives the dream that attracts so many to the game . " Moon became a fan favorite among HPT 's tour regulars when he declined an invitation for the November Nine taping in 2010 to play an HPT stop in Iowa . A last minute replacement for an ill Scotty Nguyen , Moon bonded with HPT ’ s crew and players . Moon said , " I 'm very comfortable with the HPT folks . They 're like family . " 
 = = Personality and style = = 
 Moon displayed what he described as a humble and self @-@ deprecating manner during the World Series of Poker , repeatedly acknowledging his lack of poker experience throughout the tournament , and often attributing his success to luck and a high number of strong cards , rather than talent . Moon adopted a phrase , " If I win , I win . If I lose , I lose , " which reflected his casual approach to the game . Moon also said one of his philosophies was , " Make the other guy pay to see the cards " , a strategy attributed to many re @-@ raises Moon made during the 2009 WSOP despite weak hands . Moon had almost no experience in heads @-@ up poker , which some commentators said factored into his loss against Cada in the final hours of the 2009 World Series . Many fans and commentators praised his working stiff style , with some dubbing him " Darvin Gump " , a reference to the underdog protagonist of the 1994 drama film , Forrest Gump . Moon has also been nicknamed the " Luddite Logger " because of his distaste for anything technological , including credit cards and online poker . Moon refused to sign a sponsorship deal with an Internet poker company during the 2009 tournament because he said he did not want to answer to anybody . Moon wore a New Orleans Saints hat throughout the tournament because , " I like cheering for the underdog . " Moon was invited to guest at the Saints games for their entire playoff run , and watched them win Super Bowl XLIV against the Indianapolis Colts in Miami . 
 = Synchrony ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Synchrony " is the nineteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Howard Gordon and David Greenwalt and directed by James Charleston . The episode aired in the United States on April 13 , 1997 on the Fox network . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Synchrony " earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 , being watched by 18 @.@ 09 million people upon its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a murder for which the suspect presents an incredible alibi — that the death was foretold by an old man able to see into the future . Upon investigating the case , the duo discover an increasingly bizarre series of events that leads Mulder to believe time travel is involved . 
 Gordon and Greenwalt wrote the episode after being inspired by an article in Scientific American about time travel and quantum physics . The idea of a scientist trying to stop the invention of something terrible was inspired by Manhattan Project physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer , who complained to Harry S. Truman about the 1945 atomic bombings of Japan . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Cambridge , Massachusetts , MIT cryogenics researchers Jason Nichols ( Joseph Fuqua ) and Lucas Menand ( Jed Rees ) become embroiled in an argument as they walk down a city street . They are approached by an old man ( Michael Fairman ) , who warns Menand that he will be run over by a bus at 11 : 46 pm that evening , but Menand ignores him . After the man is arrested by campus security , his prophecy is proven true when Jason tries , but fails , to save Menand , who is promptly run over by a bus and killed at the exact time ( 11 : 46 pm ) . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate the case , learning that Jason was taken into custody after the bus driver told police that he pushed Menand into the path of his vehicle . However , Jason tells authorities that he was trying to save Menand . The security guard who arrested the old man is found frozen to death after exposure to a chemical refrigerant . Mulder interviews Jason , who explains Menand threatened to go public with a claim that Jason had falsified data on a research paper . 
 The old man kills Dr. Yonechi ( Hiro Kanagawa ) , a Japanese researcher , by pricking him with a metallic stylus , introducing an unknown chemical into his body . The agents approach Nichols ' girlfriend and colleague , Lisa <unk> ( Susan Lee Hoffman ) , who recognizes the chemical compound as a rapid freezing agent that Jason had been engineering for years . However , she claims that the compound has not yet been invented and that if Yonechi was injected with the chemical , he may not be dead . With Lisa 's help , Scully and a team of medical personnel successfully resuscitate Yonechi , only for his body temperature to rapidly increase until he bursts into flames . Police receive a tip that the old man is living at a nearby hotel . Inside the old man 's room , the agents discover a faded color photograph picturing Jason , Yonechi and Lisa toasting champagne glasses in the <unk> lab . Mulder realizes from the picture that the old man is a time traveller who is attempting to alter that future , and that he is none other than Jason Nichols . 
 Lisa locates the elderly man and confronts him ; however , he injects her with the chemical after explaining that Lisa will be responsible for the coming future . Scully successfully resuscitates Lisa . Jason confronts his elderly self in the computer mainframe room at the cryogenic lab , where the old man has erased all of Jason 's files from the computer . The old man tells Jason that the success of their research made time travel possible , but also plunged the world into chaos . Jason lunges at the old man , choking him . Wrapping his arms around his younger self , the old man bursts into flames , and the fire consumes them both . Later , Lisa sets to work at the cryonics lab , attempting to reconstruct the chemical compound . 
 = = Development = = 
 After Howard Gordon and Chris Carter finished their work on " Unrequited " , Carter introduced Gordon to David Greenwalt , who had been added to The X @-@ Files producers , and asked the duo to create a script for an upcoming episode . Gordon and Greenwalt got together in Simi Valley and had difficulties in creating a good plot ; the one they initially worked with the most , involving a prisoner that gets free by changing his body with another man , was eventually discarded as Gordon felt it was too similar to other episodes written by him . Eventually the duo saw an article in Scientific American about time travel and decided to work with that , following the magazine 's reports that , while classical physics does not allow for temporal displacement to happen , quantum physics does allow for the possibility . 
 Gordon decided that to make " time travel in an X @-@ Files way " , the best way was with " a guy that turns out to be you " . He therefore added the plot about a regretful scientist trying to stop developments from ever occurring . The scientist 's character was inspired by a story Gordon heard about Manhattan Project physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer berating Harry S. Truman on the 1945 atomic bombings of Japan , and the writer wondered " What if Oppenheimer could go back to the past and ' <unk> ' the bomb ? " . Eventually Gordon and Greenwalt found another philosophical question that becomes Jason 's motivation to halt his own research — " Life itself is about the unknown and discovering what is in front of us . But if everyone , or maybe some people , knew what would happen , that would create a new set of horrors , and it would need to be stopped " . The script took over a week of writing , with sessions of 15 daily hours and the contributions of John Shiban , Frank Spotnitz and Ken Horton . Gordon was still reworking the teleplay the weekend before shooting began in Vancouver , including the removal of two " useless characters " that included a Stephen Hawking @-@ inspired scientist in a wheelchair . David Duchovny declared that a few scenes were created during production " because no one could know if the audience understood what was happening " . 
 Gordon stated that " In the end , I think it worked , but it 's getting there that 's really difficult . " The experience was hard enough for Gordon to consider giving up and not delivering the script at all , and he eventually swore he would never work with time travel again . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Synchrony " originally aired on the Fox network on April 13 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 18 @.@ 01 million viewers . 
 The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode a " B- " . Handlen considered that while " ' Synchrony ' has all the pieces of my favorite kind of episode , [ it ] doesn 't really work as well as it should " due to an emotional detachment that made him not care about the scientists and their story , and his finding Old Jason 's actions to be illogical . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave " Synchrony " two out of four stars , considering it a middling episode with some effective moments , but complaining about plot holes , " not particularly compelling " supporting characters , and feeling that time travel " takes away from the reality that is this show 's foundation " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two and a half stars out of five , praising the " high concept that is told without pretension " . The two also called the episode " solid and watchable " despite flaws such as the underdevelopment of the script and not fully exploring the " concept with such potential " that is time travel . 
 = Old Trafford = 
 Old Trafford is a football stadium in Old Trafford , Greater Manchester , England , and the home of Manchester United . With a capacity of 75 @,@ 635 , it is the largest club stadium of any football team in the United Kingdom , the third @-@ largest stadium and the second @-@ largest football stadium in the United Kingdom , and the eleventh @-@ largest in Europe . It is about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) from Old Trafford Cricket Ground and the adjacent tram stop . 
 Nicknamed " The Theatre of Dreams " by Bobby Charlton , Old Trafford has been United 's home ground since 1910 , although from 1941 to 1949 the club shared Maine Road with local rivals Manchester City as a result of Second World War bomb damage . Old Trafford underwent several expansions in the 1990s and 2000s , including the addition of extra tiers to the North , West and East Stands , almost returning the stadium to its original capacity of 80 @,@ 000 . Future expansion is likely to involve the addition of a second tier to the South Stand , which would raise the capacity to around 95 @,@ 000 . The stadium 's record attendance was recorded in 1939 , when 76 @,@ 962 spectators watched the FA Cup semi @-@ final between Wolverhampton Wanderers and Grimsby Town . 
 Old Trafford has hosted FA Cup semi @-@ finals , England fixtures , matches at the 1966 World Cup and Euro 96 and the 2003 Champions League Final , as well as rugby league 's annual Super League Grand Final and the final of two Rugby League World Cups . It also hosted football matches at the 2012 Summer Olympics , including women 's international football for the first time in its history . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and early years = = = 
 Before 1902 , Manchester United were known as Newton Heath , during which time they first played their football matches at North Road and then Bank Street in Clayton . However , both grounds were blighted by wretched conditions , the pitches ranging from gravel to marsh , while Bank Street suffered from clouds of fumes from its neighbouring factories . Therefore , following the club 's rescue from near @-@ bankruptcy and renaming , the new chairman John Henry Davies decided in 1909 that the Bank Street ground was not fit for a team that had recently won the First Division and FA Cup , so he donated funds for the construction of a new stadium . Not one to spend money frivolously , Davies scouted around Manchester for an appropriate site , before settling on a patch of land adjacent to the Bridgewater Canal , just off the north end of the Warwick Road in Old Trafford . 
 Designed by Scottish architect Archibald Leitch , who designed several other stadia , the ground was originally designed with a capacity of 100 @,@ 000 spectators and featured seating in the south stand under cover , while the remaining three stands were left as terraces and uncovered . Including the purchase of the land , the construction of the stadium was originally to have cost £ 60 @,@ 000 all told . However , as costs began to rise , to reach the intended capacity would have cost an extra £ 30 @,@ 000 over the original estimate and , at the suggestion of club secretary J. J. Bentley , the capacity was reduced to approximately 80 @,@ 000 . Nevertheless , at a time when transfer fees were still around the £ 1 @,@ 000 mark , the cost of construction only served to reinforce the club 's " Moneybags United " epithet , with which they had been tarred since Davies had taken over as chairman . 
 In May 1908 , Archibald Leitch wrote to the Cheshire Lines Committee ( CLC ) – who had a rail depot adjacent to the proposed site for the football ground – in an attempt to persuade them to subsidise construction of the grandstand alongside the railway line . The subsidy would have come to the sum of £ 10 @,@ 000 , to be paid back at the rate of £ 2 @,@ 000 per annum for five years or half of the gate receipts for the grandstand each year until the loan was repaid . However , despite guarantees for the loan coming from the club itself and two local breweries , both chaired by club chairman John Henry Davies , the Cheshire Lines Committee turned the proposal down . The CLC had planned to build a new station adjacent to the new stadium , with the promise of an anticipated £ 2 @,@ 750 per annum in fares offsetting the £ 9 @,@ 800 cost of building the station . The station – Trafford Park – was eventually built , but further down the line than originally planned . The CLC later constructed a modest station with one timber @-@ built platform immediately adjacent to the stadium and this opened on 21 August 1935 . It was initially named United Football Ground , but was renamed Old Trafford Football Ground in early 1936 . It was served on match days only by a shuttle service of steam trains from Manchester Central railway station . It is currently known as Manchester United Football Ground . 
 Construction was carried out by Messrs <unk> and Smith of Manchester and development was completed in late 1909 . The stadium hosted its inaugural game on 19 February 1910 , with United playing host to Liverpool . However , the home side were unable to provide their fans with a win to mark the occasion , as Liverpool won 4 – 3 . A journalist at the game reported the stadium as " the most handsomest [ sic ] , the most spacious and the most remarkable arena I have ever seen . As a football ground it is unrivalled in the world , it is an honour to Manchester and the home of a team who can do wonders when they are so disposed " . 
 Before the construction of Wembley Stadium in 1923 , the FA Cup Final was hosted by a number of different grounds around England including Old Trafford . The first of these was the 1911 FA Cup Final replay between Bradford City and Newcastle United , after the original tie at Crystal Palace finished as a no @-@ score draw after extra time . Bradford won 1 – 0 , the goal scored by Jimmy Speirs , in a match watched by 58 @,@ 000 people . The ground 's second FA Cup Final was the 1915 final between Sheffield United and Chelsea . Sheffield United won the match 3 – 0 in front of nearly 50 @,@ 000 spectators , most of whom were in the military , leading to the final being nicknamed " the Khaki Cup Final " . On 27 December 1920 , Old Trafford played host to its largest pre @-@ Second World War attendance for a United league match , as 70 @,@ 504 spectators watched the Red Devils lose 3 – 1 to Aston Villa . The ground hosted its first international football match later that decade , when England lost 1 – 0 to Scotland in front of 49 @,@ 429 spectators on 17 April 1926 . Unusually , the record attendance at Old Trafford is not for a Manchester United home game . Instead , on 25 March 1939 , 76 @,@ 962 people watched an FA Cup semi @-@ final between Wolverhampton Wanderers and Grimsby Town . 
 = = = Wartime bombing = = = 
 In 1936 , as part of a £ 35 @,@ 000 refurbishment , an 80 @-@ yard @-@ long roof was added to the United Road stand ( now the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand ) for the first time , while roofs were added to the south corners in 1938 . Upon the outbreak of the Second World War , Old Trafford was requisitioned by the military to be used as a depot . Football continued to be played at the stadium , but a German bombing raid on Trafford Park on 22 December 1940 damaged the stadium to the extent that a Christmas day fixture against Stockport County had to be switched to Stockport 's ground . Football resumed at Old Trafford on 8 March 1941 , but another German raid on 11 March 1941 destroyed much of the stadium , notably the main stand ( now the South Stand ) , forcing the club 's operations to move to Cornbrook Cold Storage , owned by United chairman James W. Gibson . After pressure from Gibson , the War Damage Commission granted Manchester United £ 4 @,@ 800 to remove the debris and £ 17 @,@ 478 to rebuild the stands . During the reconstruction of the stadium , Manchester United played their " home " games at Maine Road , the home of their cross @-@ town rivals , Manchester City , at a cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 a year plus a percentage of the gate receipts . The club was now £ 15 @,@ 000 in debt , not helped by the rental of Maine Road , and the Labour MP for Stoke , Ellis Smith , petitioned the Government to increase the club 's compensation package , but it was in vain . Though Old Trafford was reopened , albeit without cover , in 1949 , it meant that a league game had not been played at the stadium for nearly 10 years . United 's first game back at Old Trafford was played on 24 August 1949 , as 41 @,@ 748 spectators witnessed a 3 – 0 victory over Bolton Wanderers . 
 = = = Completion of the master plan = = = 
 A roof was restored to the Main Stand by 1951 and , soon after , the three remaining stands were covered , the operation culminating with the addition of a roof to the Stretford End ( now the West Stand ) in 1959 . The club also invested £ 40 @,@ 000 in the installation of proper floodlighting , so that they would be able to use the stadium for the European games that were played in the late evening of weekdays , instead of having to play at Maine Road . In order to avoid obtrusive shadows being cast on the pitch , two sections of the Main Stand roof were cut away . The first match to be played under floodlights at Old Trafford was a First Division match between Manchester United and Bolton Wanderers on 25 March 1957 . 
 However , although the spectators would now be able to see the players at night , they still suffered from the problem of obstructed views caused by the pillars that supported the roofs . With the 1966 FIFA World Cup fast approaching , this prompted the United directors to completely redesign the United Road ( north ) stand . The old roof pillars were replaced in 1965 with modern @-@ style <unk> on top of the roof , allowing every spectator a completely unobstructed view , while it was also expanded to hold 20 @,@ 000 spectators ( 10 @,@ 000 seated and 10 @,@ 000 standing in front ) at a cost of £ 350 @,@ 000 . The architects of the new stand , Mather and Nutter ( now <unk> Fuller ) , rearranged the organisation of the stand to have terracing at the front , a larger seated area towards the back , and the first private boxes at a British football ground . The east stand – the only remaining uncovered stand – was developed in the same style in 1973 . With the first two stands converted to cantilevers , the club 's owners devised a long @-@ term plan to do the same to the other two stands and convert the stadium into a bowl @-@ like arena . Such an undertaking would serve to increase the atmosphere within the ground by containing the crowd 's noise and focusing it onto the pitch , where the players would feel the full effects of a capacity crowd . Meanwhile , the stadium hosted its third FA Cup Final , hosting 62 @,@ 078 spectators for the replay of the 1970 final between Chelsea and Leeds United ; Chelsea won the match 2 – 1 . The ground also hosted the second leg of the 1968 Intercontinental Cup , which saw Estudiantes de La Plata win the cup after a 1 – 1 draw . The 1970s saw the dramatic rise of football hooliganism in Britain , and a knife @-@ throwing incident in 1971 forcing the club to erect the country 's first perimeter fence , restricting fans from the Old Trafford pitch . 
 1973 saw the completion of the roof around the circumference of the stadium , along with the addition of 5 @,@ 500 seats to the Scoreboard End and the replacement of the old manual scoreboard with an electronic one in the north @-@ east corner . Then , in 1975 , a £ 3 million expansion was begun , starting with the addition of the Executive Suite to the Main Stand . The suite 's restaurant overlooked the pitch , but the view was still obstructed by the roof pillars . Therefore , in kind with the roofs of the United Road Stand and the Scoreboard End , the Main Stand roof was replaced with a cantilever design . The Executive Suite and cantilever roof were then extended to the full length of the stand , allowing for the relocation of the club offices from the south @-@ east corner to the Main Stand . The south @-@ east quadrant was then removed and replaced in 1985 with a seated section bringing the total seating capacity of the stadium to 25 @,@ 686 ( 56 @,@ 385 overall ) . The completion of the cantilever roof around three sides of the stadium allowed for the replacement of the old floodlight pylons , and the attachment of a row of floodlights around the inner rim of the roof in 1987 . 
 = = = Conversion to all @-@ seater = = = 
 With every subsequent improvement made to the ground since the Second World War , the capacity steadily declined . By the 1980s , the capacity had dropped from the original 80 @,@ 000 to approximately 60 @,@ 000 . The capacity dropped still further in 1990 , when the Taylor Report recommended , and the government demanded that all First and Second Division stadia be converted to all @-@ seaters . This meant that £ 3 – 5 million plans to replace the Stretford End with a brand new stand with an all @-@ standing terrace at the front and a cantilever roof to link with the rest of the ground had to be drastically altered . This forced redevelopment , including the removal of the terraces at the front of the other three stands , not only increased the cost to around £ 10 million , but also reduced the capacity of Old Trafford to an all @-@ time low of around 44 @,@ 000 . In addition , the club was told in 1992 that they would only receive £ 1 @.@ 4 million of a possible £ 2 million from the Football Trust to be put towards work related to the Taylor Report . 
 The club 's resurgence in success and increase in popularity in the early 1990s ensured that further development would have to occur . In 1995 , the 30 @-@ year @-@ old North Stand was demolished and work quickly began on a new stand , to be ready in time for Old Trafford to host three group games , a quarter @-@ final and a semi @-@ final at Euro 96 . The club purchased the Trafford Park trading estate , a 20 @-@ acre ( 81 @,@ 000 m2 ) site on the other site of United Road , for £ 9 @.@ 2 million in March 1995 . Construction began in June 1995 and was completed by May 1996 , with the first two of the three phases of the stand opening during the season . Designed by <unk> Fuller , with <unk> Laurie as project and construction managers and Campbell Reith Hill as structural engineers , the new three @-@ tiered stand cost a total of £ 18 @.@ 65 million to build and had a capacity of about 25 @,@ 500 , raising the capacity of the entire ground to more than 55 @,@ 000 . The cantilever roof would also be the largest in Europe , measuring 58 @.@ 5 m ( 192 ft ) from the back wall to the front edge . Further success over the next few years guaranteed yet more development . First , a second tier was added to the East Stand . Opened in January 2000 , the stadium 's capacity was temporarily increased to about 61 @,@ 000 until the opening of the West Stand 's second tier , which added yet another 7 @,@ 000 seats , bringing the capacity to 68 @,@ 217 . It was now not only the biggest club stadium in England but the biggest in all of the United Kingdom . Old Trafford hosted its first major European final three years later , playing host to the 2003 UEFA Champions League Final between Milan and Juventus . 
 From 2001 to 2007 , following the demolition of the old Wembley Stadium , the England national football team was forced to play its games elsewhere . During that time , the team toured the country , playing their matches at various grounds from Villa Park in Birmingham to St James ' Park in Newcastle . From 2003 to 2007 , Old Trafford hosted 12 of England 's 23 home matches , more than any other stadium . The latest international to be held at Old Trafford was England 's 1 – 0 loss to Spain on 7 February 2007 . The match was played in front of a crowd of 58 @,@ 207 . 
 = = = 2006 expansion = = = 
 Old Trafford 's most recent expansion , which took place between July 2005 and May 2006 , saw an increase of around 8 @,@ 000 seats with the addition of second tiers to both the north @-@ west and north @-@ east quadrants of the ground . Part of the new seating was used for the first time on 26 March 2006 , when an attendance of 69 @,@ 070 became a new Premier League record . The record continued to be pushed upwards before reaching its current peak on 31 March 2007 , when 76 @,@ 098 spectators saw United beat Blackburn Rovers 4 – 1 , meaning that just 114 seats ( 0 @.@ 15 % of the total capacity of 76 @,@ 212 ) were left unoccupied . In 2009 , a reorganisation of the seating in the stadium resulted in a reduction of the capacity by 255 to 75 @,@ 957 , meaning that the club 's home attendance record would stand at least until the next expansion . 
 Old Trafford celebrated its 100th anniversary on 19 February 2010 . In recognition of the occasion , Manchester United 's official website ran a feature in which a memorable moment from the stadium 's history was highlighted on each of the 100 days leading up to the anniversary . From these 100 moments , the top 10 were chosen by a panel including club statistician Cliff Butler , journalist David Meek , and former players Pat Crerand and Wilf McGuinness . At Old Trafford itself , an art competition was run for pupils from three local schools to create their own depictions of the stadium in the past , present and future . Winning paintings were put on permanent display on the concourse of the Old Trafford family stand , and the winners were presented with awards by artist Harold Riley on 22 February . An exhibition about the stadium at the club museum was opened by former goalkeeper Jack Crompton and chief executive David Gill on 19 February . The exhibition highlighted the history of the stadium and features memorabilia from its past , including a programme from the inaugural match and a 1 : 220 scale model hand @-@ built by model artist Peter Oldfield @-@ Edwards . Finally , at Manchester United 's home match against Fulham on 14 March , fans at the game received a replica copy of the programme from the first Old Trafford match , and half @-@ time saw relatives of the players who took part in the first game – as well as those of the club chairman John Henry Davies and stadium architect Archibald Leitch – taking part in the burial of a time capsule of Manchester United memorabilia near the centre tunnel . Only relatives of winger Billy Meredith , wing @-@ half Dick Duckworth and club secretary Ernest Mangnall could not be found . 
 Old Trafford was used as a venue for several matches in the football competition at the 2012 Summer Olympics . The stadium hosted five group games , a quarter @-@ final and a semi @-@ final in the men 's tournament , and one group game and a semi @-@ final in the women 's tournament , the first women 's international matches to be played there . Since 2006 , Old Trafford has also been used as the venue for Soccer Aid , a biennial charity match initially organised by singer Robbie Williams and actor Jonathan Wilkes ; however , in 2008 , the match was played at Wembley Stadium . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The Old Trafford pitch is surrounded by four covered all @-@ seater stands , officially known as the Sir Alex Ferguson ( North ) , East , Sir Bobby Charlton ( South ) and West Stands . Each stand has at least two tiers , with the exception of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , which only has one tier due to construction restrictions . The lower tier of each stand is split into Lower and Upper sections , the Lower sections having been converted from terracing in the early 1990s . 
 = = = Sir Alex Ferguson Stand = = = 
 The Sir Alex Ferguson Stand , formerly known as the United Road stand and the North Stand , runs over the top of United Road . The stand is three tiers tall , and can hold about 26 @,@ 000 spectators , the most of the four stands . It can also accommodate a few fans in executive boxes and hospitality suites . It opened in its current state in 1996 , having previously been a single @-@ tiered stand . As the ground 's main stand , it houses many of the ground 's more popular facilities , including the Red Café ( a Manchester United theme restaurant / bar ) and the Manchester United museum and trophy room . Originally opened in 1986 as the first of its kind in the world , the Manchester United museum was in the south @-@ east corner of the ground until it moved to the redeveloped North Stand in 1998 . The museum was opened by Pelé on 11 April 1998 , since when numbers of visitors have jumped from 192 @,@ 000 in 1998 to more than 300 @,@ 000 visitors in 2009 . 
 The North Stand was renamed as the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand on 5 November 2011 , in honour of Alex Ferguson 's 25 years as manager of the club . A 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) statue of Ferguson , sculpted by Philip Jackson , was erected outside the stand on 23 November 2012 in recognition of his status as Manchester United 's longest @-@ serving manager . 
 = = = Sir Bobby Charlton Stand = = = 
 Opposite the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand is the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , formerly Old Trafford 's main stand and previously known as the South Stand . Although only a single @-@ tiered stand , the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand contains most of the ground 's executive suites , and also plays host to any VIPs who may come to watch the match . Members of the media are seated in the middle of the Upper South Stand to give them the best view of the match . The television gantry is also in the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , so the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand is the one that gets shown on television least often . Television studios are located at either end of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , with the club 's in @-@ house television station , MUTV , in the East studio and other television stations , such as the BBC and Sky , in the West studio . 
 The dugout is in the centre of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , raised above pitch level to give the manager and his coaches an elevated view of the game . Each team 's dugout flanks the old players ' tunnel , which was used until 1993 . The old tunnel is the only remaining part of the original 1910 stadium , having survived the bombing that destroyed much of the stadium during the Second World War . On 6 February 2008 , the tunnel was renamed the Munich Tunnel , as a memorial for the 50th anniversary of the 1958 Munich air disaster . The current tunnel is in the South @-@ West corner of the ground , and doubles as an entrance for the emergency services . In the event that large vehicles require access , the seating above the tunnel can be raised by up to 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . The tunnel leads up to the players ' dressing room , via the television interview area , and the players ' lounge . 
 On 3 April 2016 , the South Stand was renamed the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand before kick @-@ off of the Premier League home match against Everton , in honour of Manchester United legend Sir Bobby Charlton who made his Manchester United debut 60 years ago . 
 = = = West Stand = = = 
 Perhaps the best @-@ known stand at Old Trafford is the West Stand , also known as the Stretford End . Traditionally , the stand is where the hard @-@ core United fans are located , and also the ones who make the most noise . Originally designed to hold 20 @,@ 000 fans , the Stretford End was the last stand to be covered and also the last remaining all @-@ terraced stand at the ground before the forced upgrade to seating in the early 1990s . The reconstruction of the Stretford End , which took place during the 1992 – 93 season , was carried out by Alfred McAlpine . When the second tier was added to the Stretford End in 2000 , many fans from the old " K Stand " moved there , and decided to hang banners and flags from the barrier at the front of the tier . So ingrained in Manchester United culture is the Stretford End , that Denis Law was given the nickname " King of the Stretford End " , and there is now a statue of Law on the concourse of the stand 's upper tier . 
