 = = = East Stand = = = 
 The East Stand at Old Trafford was the second to be converted to a cantilever roof , following the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand . It is also commonly referred to as the Scoreboard End , as it was the location of the scoreboard . The East Stand can currently hold nearly 12 @,@ 000 fans , and is the location of both the disabled fans section and the away section ; an experiment involving the relocation of away fans to the third tier of the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand was conducted during the 2011 – 12 season , but the results of the experiments could not be ascertained in time to make the move permanent for the 2012 – 13 season . The disabled section provides for up to 170 fans , with free seats for carers . Old Trafford was formerly divided into sections , with each section sequentially assigned a letter of the alphabet . Although every section had a letter , it is the K Stand that is the most commonly referred to today . The K Stand fans were renowned for their vocal support for the club , and a large array of chants and songs , though many of them have relocated to the second tier of the West Stand . 
 The East Stand has a tinted glass façade , behind which the club 's administrative centre is located . These offices are the home to the staff of Inside United , the official Manchester United magazine , the club 's official website , and its other administrative departments . Images and advertisements are often emblazoned on the front of the East Stand , most often advertising products and services provided by the club 's sponsors , though a tribute to the Busby Babes was displayed in February 2008 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Munich air disaster . Above the megastore is a statue of Sir Matt Busby , who was Manchester United 's longest @-@ serving manager until he was surpassed by Sir Alex Ferguson in 2010 . There is also a plaque dedicated to the victims of the Munich air disaster on the south end of the East Stand , while the Munich Clock is at the junction of the East and South Stands . On 29 May 2008 , to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Manchester United 's first European Cup title , a statue of the club 's " holy trinity " of George Best , Denis Law and Bobby Charlton , entitled " The United Trinity " , was unveiled across Sir Matt Busby Way from the East Stand , directly opposite the statue of Busby . 
 The Manchester United club shop has had six different locations since it was first opened . Originally , the shop was a small hut near to the railway line that runs alongside the ground . The shop was then moved along the length of the South Stand , stopping first opposite where away fans enter the ground , and then residing in the building that would later become the club 's merchandising office . A surge in the club 's popularity in the early 1990s led to another move , this time to the forecourt of the West Stand . With this move came a great expansion and the conversion from a small shop to a " megastore " . Alex Ferguson opened the new megastore on 3 December 1994 . The most recent moves came in the late 1990s , as the West Stand required room to expand to a second tier , and that meant the demolition of the megastore . The store was moved to a temporary site opposite the East Stand , before taking up a 17 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m2 ) permanent residence in the ground floor of the expanded East Stand in 2000 . The floor space of the megastore was owned by United 's kit sponsors , Nike , who operated the store until the expiry of their sponsorship deal at the end of July 2015 , when ownership reverted to the club . 
 = = = Pitch and surroundings = = = 
 The pitch at the ground measures approximately 105 metres ( 115 yd ) long by 68 metres ( 74 yd ) wide , with a few metres of run @-@ off space on each side . The centre of the pitch is about nine inches higher than the edges , allowing surface water to run off more easily . As at many modern grounds , 10 inches ( 25 cm ) under the pitch is an underground heating system , composed of 23 miles ( 37 km ) of plastic pipes . Former club manager Alex Ferguson often requested that the pitch be relaid , most notably half @-@ way through the 1998 – 99 season , when the team won the Treble , at a cost of about £ 250 @,@ 000 each time . The grass at Old Trafford is watered regularly , though less on wet days , and mowed three times a week between April and November , and once a week from November to March . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , when Manchester United Football Club owned the Manchester Giants , Manchester 's basketball franchise , there were plans to build a 9 @,@ 000 @-@ seater indoor arena on the site of what is now Car Park E1 . However , the chairman at the time , Martin Edwards , did not have the funds to take on such a project , and the basketball franchise was eventually sold . In August 2009 , the car park became home to the Hublot clock tower , a 10 @-@ metre ( 32 ft 10 in ) -tall tower in the shape of the Hublot logo , which houses four 2 @-@ metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) -diameter clock faces , the largest ever made by the company . 
 The east side of the stadium is also the site of Hotel Football , a football @-@ themed hotel and fan clubhouse conceived by former Manchester United captain Gary Neville . The building is located on the east side of Sir Matt Busby Way and on the opposite side of the Bridgewater Canal from the stadium , and can accommodate up to 1 @,@ 500 supporters . It opened in the summer of 2015 . The venture is conducted separately from the club and was funded in part by proceeds from Neville 's testimonial match . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2009 , it was reported that United continued to harbour plans to increase the capacity of the stadium further , with the next stage pointing to a redevelopment of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , which , unlike the rest of the stadium , remains single tier . A replication of the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand development and North @-@ East and North @-@ West Quadrants would see the stadium 's capacity rise to an estimated 95 @,@ 000 , which would give it a greater capacity than Wembley Stadium ( 90 @,@ 000 ) . Any such development is likely to cost around £ 100m , due to the proximity of the railway line that runs adjacent to the stadium , and the corresponding need to build over it and thus purchase up to 50 houses on the other side of the railway . Nevertheless , the Manchester United group property manager confirmed that expansion plans are in the pipeline – linked to profits made from the club 's property holdings around Manchester – saying " There is a strategic plan for the stadium ... It is not our intention to stand still " . One criticism of the plans , however , is that increasing the height of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand would further reduce the amount of light coming onto the pitch , which has caused problems in similarly large stadia – such as Wembley Stadium , the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium and the San Siro ; according to Alex Ferguson , the developments on the other stands have already caused problems . It was also suggested that , should such an expansion take place , Old Trafford could be used instead of Wembley for big matches such as England internationals – in order to increase the ability of fans in the north of the country to watch England play ; and FA Cup semi @-@ finals – to maintain the prestige of the national stadium for the final . 
 In March 2016 ( ten years after the previous redevelopment ) , talk of the redevelopment of the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand re @-@ emerged . The stadium 's provision for disabled fans is below standards required by regulations . Increasing capacity for disabled supporters is estimated to reduced overall capacity by 3 @,@ 000 . Five different solutions have been considered for the summer of 2017 . One option is to increase the capacity up to 80 @,@ 000 by adding a second tier to the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand , bringing it to a similar height to the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand opposite but without a third level . Replication of the corner stands on the other side of the stadium would further increase the stadium 's capacity to 88 @,@ 000 and increase the number of executive facilities . Housing on Railway Road and the railway line itself have previously impeded improvements to this stand but the demolition of housing and engineering advances mean that the additional tier could now be built at reduced cost . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Old Trafford has also been used for purposes other than football . Before the Old Trafford football stadium was built , the site was used for games of shinty , the traditional game of the Scottish Highlands . During the First World War , the stadium was used by American soldiers for games of baseball . On 17 September 1981 , the North Section of cricket 's Lambert & Butler Floodlit Competition was played there ; in the semi @-@ finals , Nottinghamshire defeated Derbyshire and Lancashire beat Yorkshire , before Lancashire beat Nottinghamshire by 8 runs in the final to reach the national final , played between the other regional winners at Stamford Bridge the next day . 
 Old Trafford has played host to both codes of rugby football , although league is played there with greater regularity than union . The Super League grand final has been played at Old Trafford every year since the introduction of the playoff system in 1998 , and is set to continue to do so until 2017 ; the first rugby league match to be played at Old Trafford was held during the 1924 – 25 season , when a Lancashire representative side hosted the New Zealand national team , with Manchester United receiving 20 per cent of the gate receipts . The first league match to be held at Old Trafford came in November 1958 , with Salford playing against Leeds under floodlights in front of 8 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 The first rugby league Test match played at Old Trafford came in 1986 , when Australia beat Great Britain 38 – 16 in front of 50 @,@ 583 spectators in the first test of the 1986 Kangaroo tour . The 1989 World Club Challenge was played at Old Trafford on 4 October 1989 , with 30 @,@ 768 spectators watching Widnes beat the Canberra Raiders 30 – 18 . Old Trafford also hosted the second Great Britain vs Australia Ashes tests on both the 1990 and 1994 Kangaroo Tours . The stadium also hosted the semi @-@ final between England and Wales at the 1995 Rugby League World Cup ; England won 25 @-@ 10 in front of 30 @,@ 042 fans . The final rugby league international played at Old Trafford in the 1990s saw Great Britain record their only win over Australia at the ground in 1997 in the second test of the Super League Test series in front of 40 @,@ 324 fans . 
 When the Rugby League World Cup was hosted by Great Britain , Ireland and France in 2000 , Old Trafford was chosen as the venue for the final ; the match was contested by Australia and New Zealand , and resulted in a 40 – 12 win for Australia , watched by 44 @,@ 329 spectators . Old Trafford was also chosen to host the 2013 Rugby League World Cup Final . The game , played on 30 November , was won by Australia 34 – 2 over defending champions New Zealand , and attracted a crowd of 74 @,@ 468 , a world record for a rugby league international . During the game , Australia winger Brett Morris suffered a heavy crash into the advertising boards at the Stretford End , emphasising questions raised pre @-@ match over the safety of Old Trafford as a rugby league venue , in particular the short in @-@ goal areas and the slope around the perimeter . 
 Old Trafford hosted its first rugby union international in 1997 , when New Zealand defeated England 25 – 8 . A second match was played at Old Trafford on 6 June 2009 , when England beat Argentina 37 – 15 . The stadium was one of 12 confirmed venues set to host matches of the 2015 Rugby World Cup ; however , in April 2013 United pulled out of the contract over concerns about pitch quality and not wanting to compromise their relationship with the 13 @-@ man code . In October 1993 , a WBC – WBO Super @-@ Middleweight unification fight was held at the ground , with around 42 @,@ 000 people paying to watch WBO champion Chris Eubank fight WBC champion Nigel Benn . 
 Aside from sporting uses , several concerts have been played at Old Trafford , with such big names as Bon Jovi , Genesis , Bruce Springsteen , Status Quo , Rod Stewart and Simply Red playing . An edition of Songs of Praise was recorded there in September 1994 . Old Trafford is also regularly used for private functions , particularly weddings , Christmas parties and business conferences . The first wedding at the ground was held in the Premier Suite in February 1996 . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded at Old Trafford was 76 @,@ 962 for an FA Cup semi @-@ final between Wolverhampton Wanderers and Grimsby Town on 25 March 1939 . However , this was before the ground was converted to an all @-@ seater stadium , allowing many more people to fit into the stadium . Old Trafford 's record attendance as an all @-@ seater stadium currently stands at 76 @,@ 098 , set at a Premier League game between Manchester United and Blackburn Rovers on 31 March 2007 . This is also the Premier League 's record attendance . Old Trafford 's record attendance for a non @-@ competitive game is 74 @,@ 731 , set on 5 August 2011 for a pre @-@ season testimonial between Manchester United and New York Cosmos . The lowest recorded attendance at a competitive game at Old Trafford in the post @-@ War era was 11 @,@ 968 , as United beat Fulham 3 – 0 on 29 April 1950 . However , on 7 May 1921 , the ground hosted a Second Division match between Stockport County and Leicester City for which the official attendance was just 13 . This figure is slightly misleading as the ground also contained many of the 10 @,@ 000 spectators who had stayed behind after watching the match between Manchester United and Derby County earlier that day . 
 The highest average attendance at Old Trafford over a league season was 75 @,@ 826 , set in the 2006 – 07 season . The greatest total attendance at Old Trafford came two seasons later , as 2 @,@ 197 @,@ 429 people watched Manchester United win the Premier League for the third year in a row , the League Cup , and reach the final of the UEFA Champions League and the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup . The lowest average attendance at Old Trafford came in the 1930 – 31 season , when an average of 11 @,@ 685 spectators watched each game . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Adjacent to the Sir Bobby Charlton Stand of the stadium is Manchester United Football Ground railway station . The station is between the Deansgate and Trafford Park stations on the Southern Route of Northern Rail 's Liverpool to Manchester line , and is only open on matchdays . The ground is also serviced by both the Altrincham , Eccles and East Didsbury lines of the Manchester Metrolink network , with the nearest stops being Exchange Quay at nearby Salford Quays , and Old Trafford , which it shares with the Old Trafford Cricket Ground . Both stops are a five @-@ minute walk from the football ground . There are plans for the Wharfside tram stop to be built on Trafford Wharf Road , which is within close proximity of the stadium . The stop will link the proposed Trafford Park Line to the existing Pomona station , on the Eccles – Piccadilly Line . 
 Buses 255 and 256 , which are run by Stagecoach Manchester and 263 , which is run by Arriva North West run from Piccadilly Gardens in Manchester to Chester Road , stopping near Sir Matt Busby Way , while Stagecoach 's 250 service stop outside Old Trafford on Wharfside Way and <unk> service stops across from Old Trafford on Water 's Reach . There are also additional match buses on the 255 service , which run between Old Trafford and Manchester city centre . Other services that serve Old Trafford are Arriva 's 79 service ( Stretford – Swinton ) , which stops on Chester Road and 245 ( Altrincham – Exchange Quay ) , which stops on Trafford Wharf Road , plus First Greater Manchester service 53 ( Cheetham – Pendleton ) and Stagecoach 's 84 service ( Withington Hospital – Manchester ) , which stop at nearby Trafford Bar tram stop . Visitors to the ground travelling by car can park in any of the ground 's car parks , which are all within 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) of the stadium . 
 = Jonathon Band = 
 Admiral Sir Jonathon Band GCB , DL ( born 2 February 1950 ) was the First Sea Lord and Chief of the Naval Staff from 2006 to 2009 , the most senior serving officer in the Royal Navy . Before serving as First Sea Lord he was Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Fleet . Since becoming First Sea Lord , Band had been a firm advocate of the creation of new ships to meet new threats and maintain the status of the Royal Navy as one of the world 's leading naval forces . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born the son of Victor and Muriel Band , Band attended two independent schools : <unk> School , a preparatory school , in Ashurst Wood , West Sussex , and from the age of thirteen , Haileybury and Imperial Service College . He entered the Royal Navy in 1967 , before undertaking sea training in the Far East . He returned to the UK on an undergraduate programme and studied for three years at the University of Exeter , gaining a BA in 1972 . 
 = = Early naval career = = 
 After graduating from Exeter , Band served in junior officer appointments in HMS Lewiston and HMS Rothesay . He was confirmed in the rank of sub @-@ lieutenant on 1 September 1971 . In the mid 1970s , he undertook an exchange programme with the United States Navy and served on board the guided missile cruiser , USS Belknap , which is now no longer in service . He was promoted to lieutenant on 30 January 1974 . Following warfare training in 1976 and 1977 he served for two years as the principal warfare officer and operations officer on board the frigate HMS Eskimo . This appointment included deployments to the West Indies and South Atlantic . 
 From 1979 and 1981 he commanded the minesweeper HMS <unk> for nearly two years in the Fishery Protection Squadron around the British coast . Between 1981 and 1983 he also served as flag lieutenant to Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Fleet , a period where he was involved in the Falklands War . Promoted to the rank of commander on 30 June 1983 , he assumed command of the frigate HMS Phoebe . The frigate operated in NATO waters , at the time of the RN ’ s first operational experience with surface ship towed passive sonar . In 1985 he attended the Joint Services Defence College and was soon appointed to the Defence Staff in the Ministry of Defence in the Directorate of Defence Policy . Promoted to captain on 30 June 1988 , he left the Directorate of Policy and commanded HMS Norfolk . He was also responsible for helping re @-@ equip 9th Frigate Squadron , the first Type 23 frigate squadron . 
 In 1991 , he became the Assistant Director Navy Plans and Programmes in the Ministry of Defence , a period that saw the implementation of the “ Options for Change ” Review . In 1994 he was a member of the Defence Costs Study ( Front Line First ) Secretariat . He was appointed Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the Queen on 9 April 1995 . His last sea command was that of HMS Illustrious , the aircraft carrier , between 1995 and 1997 . The period included two operational deployments to the Adriatic in which he and Illustrious supported the intervention of the U.S. , the United Nations , and NATO operations in Bosnia . 
 In May 1997 he was elevated to flag rank and promoted to rear admiral . He returned to the Ministry of Defence as Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff . This appointment included the period of the Strategic Defence Review , in which he was heavily involved in the Royal Navy 's contributions to the review . He left this appointment in December 1999 and assumed the position of team leader of the Defence Education and Training Study in January 2000 with the rank of vice admiral . 
 = = Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Fleet = = 
 After a tour as Deputy Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Fleet from May 2001 , Band was promoted to full admiral and served as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Fleet , responsible for the preparation and operation of the ships , submarines and aircraft of the Royal Navy based at Northwood between August 2002 and November 2005 . In that post he was involved in the planning of the Iraq War and also had a NATO command as Commander Allied Maritime Component Command , Northwood . He was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in the 2002 New Year Honours . 
 In 2003 he spoke out for the crew of the HMS Turbulent , for their efforts on achieving the longest deployment time of a submarine . Turbulent was away for more than ten months and he stated " They are a huge credit . The submarine has done the equivalent of going twice around the world . " In March 2004 he spent several weeks touring naval facilities and ships in the Caribbean , including Antigua . 
 In the Trafalgar 200 celebrations , celebrating the British victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , Band attended the ceremonies and the fleet review in the UK . In an interview , he stated : 
 Trafalgar 200 is important internationally . It celebrates the fact that mariners are a great club of people who have a joint respect for the sea . There is no greater connecting medium in the world than the ocean , and it unites us 
 = = First Sea Lord = = 
 In February 2006 Band took over the positions of First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff from Admiral Sir Alan West and in a press statement set out the Navy 's priorities in the 21st century . Upon taking up the post of First Sea Lord he became the professional head of the Royal Navy . Band is a proponent for the Sustained surface combatant capability and the creation of new ships to maintain the Royal Navy as one of the world 's leading navies . These include the new Type 45 destroyer and the Royal Navy <unk> programme , designed to replace the UK 's current aircraft carriers . 
 In June 2006 he went on a fact finding and diplomatic mission to Pakistan where he met the head of the Pakistan Air Force , the head of the Pakistan Navy and the Army Chief of Staff . On the following day he met with the President of Sri Lanka Mahinda <unk> . In November 2006 he attended a press conference on HMS Illustrious , which was moored in the River Thames at Greenwich . He announced that the 25th anniversary of the Falklands War would be commemorated across 8 @,@ 000 miles and four time zones – in London , Pangbourne and the Falkland Islands – from 14 to 17 June 2007 . 
 In February 2007 , at a journalists ' briefing , he warned that the Royal Navy needed another £ 1 billion to meet future foreign policy demands and appealed to the Government for additional funding , a third of the navy 's annual operating budget , to spend on building more modern ships . In a later interview with the Daily Telegraph he said that an increase of more than 30 per cent in the fleet 's day @-@ to @-@ day budget was necessary to pay for better sailors ' wages , the running of ships and improved accommodation . He threatened to resign as head of the navy if the Government failed to agree to pay for two new aircraft carriers – the Royal Navy <unk> programme , which it had previously promised . 
 In May 2007 the Government gave the £ <unk> go @-@ ahead for the new aircraft carriers . Band said : 
 This is a significant decision to invest in the future , to be able to deliver air power around the world . I am entirely content that the country will get the navy it deserves ; a powerful navy for the future ; which is entirely right because we are a large player on the world scene . 
 In 2007 he was awarded an honorary degree in law from the University of Portsmouth . He was appointed Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath in the 2008 Birthday Honours and succeeded by Mark Stanhope as First Sea Lord on 21 July 2009 . 
 = = Later professional life = = 
 In early 2009 Band became a patron for the International Scott Centenary Expedition 2012 ; their aim is to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Scott 's race to the South Pole and the subsequent deaths of the polar party on the Ross Ice Shelf . He became a Deputy Lieutenant of Hampshire on 27 November 2009 and a non @-@ executive director of the cruise company , Carnival Corporation & plc , in April 2010 . 
 Band has also become a non @-@ executive director of the British arm of the American defense contractor Lockheed Martin who produce the F35 @-@ B aircraft which will be utilized on the new aircraft carriers . He is also a Younger Brother of Trinity House and a liveryman of the Shipwrights ' Company . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1979 he married Sarah Asbury : they have two daughters and live in Southsea , Portsmouth . 
 = Arsenal Stadium = 
 Arsenal Stadium was a football stadium in Highbury , North London , which was previously the home ground of Arsenal Football Club between 6 September 1913 and 7 May 2006 . It was mainly known as " Highbury " due to its location and was given the affectionate nickname of the " Home of Football " by the club . 
 It was originally built in 1913 on the site of a local college 's recreation ground and was significantly redeveloped twice . The first reconstruction came in the 1930s from which the Art Deco East and West Stands date . There was a second development ; the first phase was completed in 1989 which added executive boxes to the Clock End , and afterward in 1993 a new North Bank Stand was constructed , both following the recommendations of the Taylor Report which replaced the terraces to make the stadium an all @-@ seater with four stands . However , further attempts to expand the stadium were blocked by the community , and the resulting reduction in capacity and matchday revenue eventually led to Arsenal opting to build a new stadium , to become known as the Emirates Stadium in nearby Islington . After the club moved to their new stadium upon the conclusion of the 2005 @-@ 06 season , Highbury was redeveloped as a residential development known as Highbury Square , with the Clock End and North Bank stands being demolished ; parts of the East and West Stands remained and were incorporated into the new development due to their listed status . 
 The stadium also hosted international matches – both for England and in the 1948 Summer Olympics – and FA Cup semi @-@ finals , as well as boxing , baseball and cricket matches . Its presence also led to the local London Underground station being renamed to Arsenal in 1932 , making it the only station on the Underground network to be named after a football club . 
 In addition to its architecture , the stadium was known for its small but immaculate pitch and for the famous clock which was positioned in the southern side of the ground since its introduction in 1930 . 
 = = History = = 
 The original stadium was built in 1913 , when Woolwich Arsenal moved from the Manor Ground in Plumstead , South East London to Highbury , leasing the recreation fields of St John 's College of Divinity for £ 20 @,@ 000 . The lease negotiation also agreed that no matches were to be played on " holy days " and that no " intoxicating liquor " would be sold at the stadium ; however , these stipulations were dropped within a year . The stadium was hurriedly built over the summer of that year , and was designed by Archibald Leitch , architect of many other football grounds of that era . It featured a single stand on the eastern side and the other three sides had banked terracing . The new stadium cost £ 125 @,@ 000 . It opened whilst not fully complete , with Arsenal 's first match of the 1913 – 14 season , a 2 – 1 Second Division win against Leicester Fosse on 6 September 1913 . Leicester 's Tommy Benfield scored the first goal at the new ground while George <unk> was the first Arsenal player to do so . Highbury hosted its first England match in 1920 . 
 The Australian rugby league team suffered the first loss of their 1921 – 22 Kangaroo tour of Great Britain at Highbury to an English side 4 points to 5 before approximately 12 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Arsenal bought the stadium site outright in 1925 , for £ 64 @,@ 000 . 
 No significant portion of Leitch 's original stadium remains today following a series of bold redevelopments during the 1930s . The idea was to create a ground for London that could capture the grandeur of Villa Park , home of Birmingham club Aston Villa . The Highbury project was ambitious in its scale and reach , the first stand completed being the West Stand , designed by Claude Waterlow Ferrier and William Binnie in the Art Deco style which opened in 1932 . On 5 November the same year the local Tube station was renamed from Gillespie Road to Arsenal . Leitch 's main stand was demolished to make way for a new East Stand , matching the West , in 1936 . The West Stand cost £ 45 @,@ 000 while the East Stand went far over budget and ended up costing £ 130 @,@ 000 , mainly thanks to the expense of the facade . The North Bank terrace was given a roof and the southern terrace had a clock fitted to its front , giving it the name the Clock End . 
 During the 1948 Summer Olympics , the stadium hosted the football preliminaries . For the next 50 years , the stadium changed little , although during the Second World War the North Bank terrace was bombed and had to be rebuilt ; the roof was not restored until 1956 . Floodlights were fitted in 1951 , with the first floodlit match being a friendly against Hapoel Tel Aviv on 19 September of that year . The floodlights that adorn Dalymount Park , once stood at the Arsenal stadium . They were shipped to Dublin in 1962 . The inaugural floodlit match saw Arsenal beat Bohemians 3 – 8 . <unk> heating was added in 1964 . Unlike at many other grounds , Arsenal refused to install perimeter fencing , even at the height of hooliganism in the 1980s , which made it ineligible for use as an FA Cup semi @-@ final venue . 
 Before the Taylor report and the era of all @-@ seater stadiums in Britain , both the North Bank and Clock End consisted of terracing , and the stadium often saw crowds of up to 60 @,@ 000 or more ; its largest attendance was 73 @,@ 295 on 9 March 1935 when Arsenal played Sunderland in the First Division ; the game finished 0 – 0 . When the ground was initially constructed , it was to " accommodate 90 @,@ 000 spectators " . 
 The Clock End was redeveloped in 1988 / 89 with the addition of a roof and 48 executive boxes [ 4 ] , while seating was fitted into the remaining standing area in 1993 . 
 In the early 1990s , the Taylor report on the Hillsborough disaster was published , which recommended that football stadia become all @-@ seater . The North Bank , which had become home of Arsenal 's most passionate supporters , was demolished at the end of the 1991 – 92 season . During redevelopment , a giant mural of fans was placed behind the goal at that end , to give the illusion that the players were kicking towards a crowd rather than a construction site . The mural initially attracted criticism for its absence of black fans , which was quickly rectified . Populous ( then <unk> Partnership ) designed all @-@ seater two @-@ tier North Bank Stand , the last area of Highbury to be refurbished , which was opened in August 1993 at a cost of £ 20 million amid strong opposition from local residents . The new North Bank Stand contained a museum and a concourse with video arcades , bars , confectionery counters , souvenir shops and fast @-@ food stands . The old stand had received a fitting send off with a 5 – 1 defeat of Southampton , though the new stand had a less auspicious start , the first game being a surprise 0 – 3 defeat to Coventry City with all 3 goals coming from striker Micky Quinn . The first victory came 10 days later against Leeds United . 
 = = Structure = = 
 At the time of its closure , the stadium consisted of four separate all @-@ seater stands ; the pitch was aligned north @-@ south , with the North Bank Stand ( formerly the Laundry End ) and South Stand ( popularly known as the Clock End ) at the ends of the field . The East and West Stands ran alongside the pitch and are two of the few examples of British football stands designed in the Art Deco style . The East Stand incorporated the club 's offices and was well known for its marble halls ( though the floors were actually terrazzo ) which are often cited in media depictions of the stadium , and the facade that faces onto <unk> Road . The East Stand is considered architecturally significant enough to have been designated a Grade II listed building . 
 The stadium 's main entrances were on Gillespie Road , <unk> Road and Highbury Hill . When it closed , Highbury had a capacity of 38 @,@ 419 ( approximately 12 @,@ 500 in the North Bank , 11 @,@ 000 in the West Stand , 9 @,@ 000 in the East Stand and 6 @,@ 000 in the Clock End ) , all seated , and had Jumbotron screens in the south @-@ east and north @-@ west corners . 
 Arsenal Stadium was well known for its very small immaculately @-@ kept pitch , which measured only 109 × 73 yards ( 100 × 67 metres ) . Arsenal 's groundsmen , Steve Braddock and his successor Paul Burgess , have won the FA Premier League 's Groundsman of the Year award several times for their work on the stadium . 
 = = Closure and redevelopment = = 
 The post @-@ Taylor capacity of Highbury was limited to 38 @,@ 419 , while Arsenal 's success during the 1990s and 2000s meant that virtually every home match was filled to near capacity . Restrictions , such as the East Stand 's status as a listed building and the fact the stadium was surrounded on all sides by a residential area , made any future expansion of Highbury difficult and expensive , although the club 's directors would have liked to have kept Arsenal at a modernized and expanded Highbury . In October 2004 , it was confirmed that the new stadium would be called the Emirates Stadium as part of a sponsorship deal with Emirates Airlines . 
 In October 1998 , just after Arsenal started playing Champions League games at Wembley , the club made an unsuccessful bid to buy the stadium and make it their permanent home to share with the England national football team , although at the time Wembley was two years away from closure for a redevelopment which was not completed until more than six years later . 
 In November 1999 , Arsenal decided to leave Highbury and construct a new 60 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium in nearby Ashburton Grove , which opened in July 2006 . Arsenal 's offices were moved to a new building , Highbury House , which was named in commemoration of the former stadium . 
 For their final season at Highbury ( 2005 – 06 ) Arsenal ran a series of promotions honouring the stadium 's legacy . A commemorative logo was designed featuring the club 's traditional Art Deco crest from the 1930s , and the club 's history at Highbury was celebrated through a series of themed matchdays . On the field , Arsenal temporarily set aside their traditional red shirts with white sleeves for the season and adopted a solid redcurrant shirt , the colour they wore during their first season at Highbury in 1913 – 14 . 
 Arsenal 's final game at the stadium was their FA Premier League match on 7 May 2006 against Wigan Athletic , the last game of the season . The team needed to better the result of neighbours Tottenham Hotspur to again secure qualification for the Champions League . Having been 2 – 1 behind , a hat trick by captain and all @-@ time leading goal scorer Thierry Henry secured qualification , with Henry kneeling down to kiss the turf on scoring what proved to be the final goal seen at the stadium . The last goal scored in a regulation game at the stadium came in a Football Aid charity match when lifelong fan Alan Alger scored a penalty in the final minute of a fixture played on Thursday 8 June 2006 ( exactly one month and one day after Henry 's goal ) . After the stadium 's closure , Arsenal held an auction to sell off many of the stadium 's parts , including pieces of the pitch , the goalposts and former manager George Graham 's desk . Sale of the stadium 's seats had to be cancelled after it was found they contained trace amounts of the toxic metal cadmium . 
 As of 2010 , Arsenal Stadium was redeveloped and converted into flats in a project known as " Highbury Square " , a scheme that had 711 properties built on the site . The North Bank and Clock End stands were demolished . The exteriors of the listed Art Deco East Stand and the matching West Stand were preserved and incorporated into the new developments , while the rest of the stands ' structures were removed , and the pitch became a communal garden . In October 2005 the proposed flats went on sale ; as of May 2006 all properties in the North , East and West Stands had been taken . 
 Arsenal 's famous clock was moved from Highbury to the outer side of the new stadium , with a new larger version of the feature added inside the ground in August 2010 . At the same time as the unveiling of the new clock , the south stands at the venue were also renamed Clock End inline with the same name previously used at Highbury . 
 = = Other roles = = 
 As well as being home to Arsenal , it also hosted games as home stadium for England matches ; 12 internationals were played at Highbury from 1920 to 1961 , most of them being friendlies . These included both England 's first full home international against opposition outside of Great Britain and Ireland ( Belgium in 1923 ) , and the " Battle of Highbury " , England 's 3 – 2 win over World Champions Italy in 1934 , where a record seven Arsenal players started the match , the most players from a single club to play in an England fixture . Highbury was also used as a football venue for two matches in the 1948 London Olympics – a first @-@ round match and a quarter @-@ final . It was also provisionally named as one of London 's two host stadiums for the 1966 FIFA World Cup ( along with Wembley ) , but was eventually dropped with White City Stadium taking the role instead . By the time of Euro 96 , the pitch had been ruled too small for international football and the stadium would have been ineligible . 
 Highbury was the venue for twelve FA Cup semi @-@ finals as a neutral ground , the first in 1929 and the last in 1997 , although between 1984 and 1992 it was off the FA 's list of approved venues , after Arsenal 's refusal to install perimeter fencing following a pitch invasion by Everton fans during their semi @-@ final against Southampton . It also hosted the London XI 's home leg against Lausanne Sports in the 1955 – 58 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup semi @-@ finals ; London won 2 – 0 on the night and 3 – 2 on aggregate . 
 Arsenal did not always play their home matches at Highbury in the 93 years they were based there . During the Second World War the stadium was used as an ARP station and was bombed ; Arsenal played their matches at White Hart Lane , home of North London rivals Tottenham Hotspur , until Highbury re @-@ opened in 1946 . More recently , Arsenal 's home UEFA Champions League matches in the 1998 – 99 and 1999 – 00 seasons were played at Wembley Stadium , as Highbury 's already limited capacity had to be reduced to accommodate advertising hoardings . Arsenal 's record at Wembley ( <unk> W2 D1 L3 ) was relatively poor , and after two seasons the club switched back to playing at Highbury , not least because since Wembley closed for rebuilding in October 2000 , it would not have been able to host their 2000 – 01 campaign . 
 Highbury has also hosted several cricket games and also baseball matches involving American servicemen between 1916 and 1919 . It was the venue for the 1966 World Heavyweight boxing title bout between Henry Cooper and Muhammad Ali , which Ali won . It has featured on the silver screen as well , having been the backdrop for at least two movies : The Arsenal Stadium Mystery , and Fever Pitch . 
 = = Record scorelines = = 
 Arsenal 's biggest win at Highbury came on 9 January 1932 , with an 11 – 1 victory over Darwen in the FA Cup . Their biggest defeats were 0 – 5 losses to Huddersfield Town in the First Division on 14 February 1925 and against Chelsea in the League Cup on 11 November 1998 . 
 = = Final record of results = = 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal 's complete competitive record at Highbury is as follows : 
 = = = England = = = 
 England 's record at Highbury is as follows : 
 = = = FA Cup semi @-@ finals = = = 
 FA Cup semi @-@ finals held at Highbury are listed below . Arsenal never played a semi @-@ final at their own stadium . Teams in bold went on to win the competition that year 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In Charlie Higson 's post @-@ apocalyptic young adult horror novel The Enemy ( 2009 ) , nine @-@ year @-@ old " Small Sam " is kidnapped by a group of grownups and taken to a spectator box in which they have set up camp , in Arsenal Stadium , after a worldwide sickness has infected adults turning them into something akin to zombies . Sam ultimately escapes , only after setting his captors afire ( which ultimately sets the structure afire ) , and dodging various groups of adults scattered throughout the stadium structure and playing field . 
 = Rachel Bradley = 
 Rachel Louise Bradley is a fictional character portrayed by Helen Baxendale in the British comedy @-@ drama television series Cold Feet . Rachel is introduced in the pilot episode ( 1997 ) , where she begins a relationship with Adam Williams ( James Nesbitt ) . Their relationship has highs and lows throughout the series ; Rachel reveals a secret husband in the first series ( 1998 ) and has an abortion in the second ( 1999 ) , which supposedly prevents her from conceiving a child in the future . She and Adam marry in the third series ( 2000 ) and are surprised to discover that she is pregnant in the fourth ( 2001 ) . They both begin raising their child in the fifth series ( 2003 ) , but Rachel 's life is cut short when she is killed in a car crash . 
 The character was originally devised as " the fantasy girlfriend " , and was constructed as an amalgamation of writer Mike Bullen 's female friends . As the series was developed , input into Rachel 's storylines was provided by Cold Feet 's producers Andy Harries and Christine Langan ; Rachel and Adam attempt in vitro fertilisation in the third series , which Harries and his wife had also tried . It was originally planned for Rachel and Adam to adopt a child during the fourth series , but Helen Baxendale 's real @-@ life pregnancy meant the storyline had to be rewritten . 
 Both character and actress received mixed reviews from critics throughout the series ; Baxendale received the Best Actress award from the Broadcasting Press Guild for her portrayal of Rachel in the pilot and was nominated for a British Comedy Award . However , television reviewers criticised the character when the series began . Rachel 's diagnosis with Asherman 's syndrome in the fourth series drew criticism from the British Pregnancy Advisory Service , which had been consulted during the writing of the storyline . When the series ended , there was a 20 % increase in the number of people taking out life insurance policies with one provider , Tesco Personal Finance , which a spokesperson for the company attributed to Rachel 's premature death . 
 = = Creation and backstory = = 
 Rachel Bradley was devised by writer Mike Bullen as one of the two central characters in the pilot episode of Cold Feet , the other being Adam Williams . Bullen conceived her as " the fantasy girlfriend " by incorporating elements of a man 's perfect girlfriend , such as actress Cameron Diaz . He also incorporated elements of a female friend whom he had known since the age of four . 
 Helen Baxendale , then popularly known for her starring role as Dr Claire Maitland in the BBC medical drama Cardiac Arrest , became available halfway through the casting process of the pilot , and was invited to audition . Baxendale was initially reluctant to read for the role , as she believed that she would not be able to give a good comic performance . Executive producer Andy Harries persuaded her that she had already performed black comedy in Cardiac Arrest , and so would be well @-@ suited to the part of Rachel . Producer Christine Langan described Baxendale as " perfect for the idolized Rachel " and her reading with Nesbitt as having " unmistakable chemistry " . Hermione Norris also auditioned for the role , but Baxendale was eventually cast . By the time of the third series , Baxendale 's initial concerns had gone and she felt comfortable acting with the comic actors . Speaking retrospectively , she found Rachel difficult to play : 
 I was playing the nice girl . It 's really hard to play . All the other characters came from somebody and I said to Mike [ the writer ] , ' Where do I come from ? ' And he said , ' You were the fantasy girl . ' I found it hard to make anything of that . In the end I felt the only thing I could do was to make it as hyper real as I could . I 'm not a natural comedienne . 
 The character 's backstory is presented in Cold Feet : A Man 's / Woman 's Guide to Life , which was compiled by Jonathan Rice from Mike Bullen 's scripts . Rachel read French at the University of Manchester , then spent a season working as a chalet girl in the French Alps . There she met Karen ( Hermione Norris ) who became her best friend . When both returned to England , Karen married David Marsden ( Robert Bathurst ) and Rachel began a career in the advertising industry . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 = = = Relationship with Adam = = = 
 At the beginning of the pilot episode , Rachel is dumped by her boyfriend Simon Atkinson ( Stephen Mapes ) , who has recently taken a job in Hong Kong and does not want to " burden " Rachel with deciding whether to emigrate with him . Shortly afterwards , her car collides with that of Adam Williams on a supermarket car park . The two get into a row over whose fault the crash was and he smoothes things over by giving him her phone number , ostensibly in case there is a problem with the insurance . She writes her number in the muck on his rear windscreen but it later washes off in the rain . Some time later , Rachel 's friend Karen advises her to call Adam and go on a date with him . Their first date does not go well , but they see each other again . Three months later , they row , and Rachel gets back together with Simon , who has returned to Hong Kong . Adam wins her back by serenading her while wearing nothing but a rose between his buttocks . 
 The first series begins nine months later . Rachel and Adam move into their first house together . He is horrified to discover that she has been married for over six years . She contacts her husband Kris Bumstead ( Lennie James ) and after briefly considering going back to him and dumping Adam , she gets the divorce . After a misunderstanding with Karen , Rachel worries that Adam has stopped finding her sexually attractive , and they agree to indulge in each other 's sexual fantasies . Rachel shares her with Adam : to have sex in a shop window . Adam arranges to get the keys to a shop , and he and Rachel act out her fantasy , though are arrested when a <unk> leads the police to them . 
 In Series 1 , Episode 6 , Rachel reveals to Karen that she is pregnant , but is unsure whether the father is Adam or Kris , whom she had sex with while he was in Manchester . She devastates Adam by first turning down his proposal of marriage , after he believes he is the father of the child , and then by leaving Manchester on a train . Adam arrives at the station shortly before her train leaves and pledges to love the child regardless of who it 's father is . Rachel demonstrates that he does not mean it , and the train departs for London . 
 = = = Abortion and infertility = = = 
 Six months later , Rachel returns to Manchester , and moves into Karen and David 's spare room . After Pete spots her at the supermarket , Adam prepares for what he thinks will be her homecoming with his child . Instead , Rachel reveals that she had the pregnancy terminated , unable to cope with not knowing whether the father was Adam or Kris . The abortion story was devised to avoid having all three couples in the series having children . Bullen and the executive producers Andy Harries and Christine Langan all agreed that having Rachel suffer a miscarriage would be a " cop out " but they split on whether she should terminate the pregnancy ; Harries worried about the effect it would have on the character within the narrative , and what the audience would think of her , while Langan convinced him that it would be braver and more realistic for the character to go through with it . 
 Rachel ponders whether to get back together with Adam but is left humiliated when she arrives at his house in the middle of the night and finds him apparently in the middle of an orgy with his new girlfriend Amy ( Rosie Cavaliero ) and lodger " Rachel 2 " ( Rachel Fielding ) . She resolves to get her old job back , and starts dating a co @-@ worker , the much younger Danny Burke ( Hugh Dancy ) . After a short fling , she dumps Danny and agrees to be friends with Adam , even accompanying him to his school reunion . She then has a brief flirtation with David 's younger wayward brother Nick Marsden ( Stephen Moyer ) before getting back together with Adam after learning he has had treatment for testicular cancer . On a trip away to Lindisfarne to see in the year 2000 , Rachel feels she is ready to put their past incidents behind her . 
 Now in a committed relationship , Rachel and Adam begin trying for a baby . The storyline was devised because Harries wanted Cold Feet to reflect relevant issues in contemporary society ; in vitro fertilisation featured heavily in the news during 2000 , and Harries felt that incorporating it into the series would help to raise awareness of it , as well as provide fodder for the characters ' story arcs . Rachel 's intracytoplasmic sperm injection treatment incorporated aspects of the real life IVF treatment experienced by Harries and his wife Rebecca Frayn , and eminent fertility scientist Sammy Lee was consulted extensively throughout the development of the plot . After spending several thousand pounds on IVF treatment , Rachel 's doctor informs her that she is infertile due to Asherman 's syndrome , most likely caused by her abortion . Despite being unable to have children naturally , Rachel and Adam are determined to continue their relationship ; Adam proposes to her and they are married in a civil ceremony in Series 3 , Episode 8 . In the same episode , she is reunited with her estranged parents , Brian and Mary ( Paul Ridley and Sue Holderness ) . Before the episode , Rachel had not spoken to them for years ; her father because of his bigotry and abuse of her mother , and her mother for staying with him . She refuses to allow Paul to give her away , and instead asks David to , despite learning that he has been having an extra @-@ marital affair . At the reception , she inadvertently reveals to her parents that her sister , their other daughter Lucy , has come out as a lesbian . 
 = = = Son , death and funeral = = = 
 At the beginning of Series 4 , Rachel is broody and upset that she is infertile . She and Adam begin an application process for an adoption , and are soon paired up with eight @-@ year @-@ old Laura ( Katie Riddoch ) , the daughter of a drug addict . Adam and Laura bond at their first meeting at her foster home , and Adam and Rachel begin plans for her to move in with them . However , after a routine hospital appointment reveals that Rachel is four months pregnant , social worker Ruth Wylie ( Samantha Spiro ) retracts the adoption application , concerned about the effect a new baby will have on Laura if she moves in with Adam and Rachel . Adam and Rachel vow to take legal action against the adoption agency but change their minds after Laura 's foster mother Jean ( Jacqueline Pilton ) persuades them to think of the effect it will have on Laura . Reluctantly , Adam and Rachel walk away from the adoption and instead plan for their own baby . The original Series 4 story arc for Adam and Rachel was radically different , and had to be changed considerably after Helen Baxendale learned she was pregnant . Mike Bullen quipped at the time , " We 're looking at a number of ideas , including alien abduction " . Though heavily pregnant , Rachel 's doctor advises her that it is safe to fly to Australia for Pete and Jo 's ( John Thomson and Kimberley Joseph ) wedding in Series 4 , Episode 8 . On the day of the wedding ceremony , Rachel collapses outside the hotel , having gone into labour two months prematurely , and is rushed to hospital . She gives birth to a boy , whom she names Matthew Sydney Williams . 
 At the beginning of Series 5 , set three months after the birth , Rachel appears overprotective of Matthew ; she refuses to let Adam hold him and never lets him out of her sight . After Adam abruptly leaves Matthew 's naming ceremony , feeling unable to love his child because he is coming between him and his wife , Rachel reveals that the baby fell off the kitchen table when she left him unattended for a matter of seconds . Baxendale said of the story , " Rachel 's take on motherhood is quite real in my experience because she 's had such trouble conceiving for a start and then all the problems with the birth [ ... ] She becomes obsessed with the baby and excludes Adam from everything . They have to work hard to resolve their differences and there is a big transition . I can see why she behaves the way she does — you do become over @-@ protective with a baby . It 's amazing what your body does to you and the instincts that suddenly take over . Being a mum myself , I have got real empathy with Rachel . " However , Observer television reviewer Kathryn Flett criticised the plot as unrealistic : 
 As an obsessive new mother who has spent many an hour hovering over my son with a thermometer and a pre @-@ emptive bottle of <unk> , Rachel 's contention that she didn 't want to go out for dinner with Adam because she couldn 't bear to leave three @-@ month @-@ old Matthew in the care of their best friend 's children 's nanny was just one niggling implausibility too far . After three months of being on baby duty 24 hours a day , every woman I 've ever come across has , ordinary guilt aside , all but wept with joy at the prospect of a bowl of pasta and a glass of wine consumed somewhere other than <unk> . None of which would matter a jot , of course , had Cold Feet not been feted for reflecting the lives of its target audience . 
 After her revelation to Adam , Rachel is more willing to leave Matthew in some else 's care ; after her maternity leave ends and she returns to work , Adam looks after Matthew during his period of unemployment . When they discover their rented house is being put up for sale , Rachel and Adam find the perfect family home to buy . As Rachel drives to the auction , her car is hit by a highway maintenance truck . She is taken to hospital for emergency treatment but dies later that night . A church funeral service is held for her and her ashes are scattered in Portmeirion , the location being where Adam states Matthew was conceived . Although the character dies in the penultimate episode , Baxendale appears in the final episode as an apparition of Rachel . Baxendale believed the character was being punished by divine retribution for the " terrible sin " of terminating her pregnancy . 
 In 2011 , Baxendale told Digital Spy that she had been involved in discussions with Cold Feet 's creative staff about how to incorporate Rachel into a possible revival of the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her performance in the pilot episode , Helen Baxendale was nominated for Top TV Comedy Actress at the British Comedy Awards 1997 . At the Broadcasting Press Guild Awards 1998 , she was presented with the Best Actress award , for her performance in Cold Feet and An Unsuitable Job for a Woman . Her portrayal received mixed reviews from television critics when the series began . In the Daily Record , Kathleen Morgan wrote that Baxendale had lost her edge since playing Dr Maitland in Cardiac Arrest ; " Instead of making a triumphant return to British television as a tough @-@ talking woman , she has been cast as another spineless character . " Sara Villiers wrote in The Scotsman , " Rachel is so unfeasibly bland and nice that she has consigned Baxendale to the title Most Irritating Woman on the Telly . " 
 The plot of Rachel 's infertility was analysed on an episode of BBC Radio 4 's Woman 's Hour . Ann Furedi of the British Pregnancy Advisory Service , which had supplied information to the writing team during the research stages , stated that there had not been a recorded case of Asherman 's syndrome in the United Kingdom since the second world war . Further to that , she stated that the consensus among medical groups was that there was no real direct link between abortions and infertility ; rather an untreated infection could increase the chances of fertility problems if it interfered with an abortion . Christine Geraghty , then senior lecturer in film and TV at Goldsmith 's College , countered that the factual accuracy of the storyline depended on how the producers wanted to portray the issue to viewers . Her opinion was backed up by an ITV statement , which said that " stories for Cold Feet are not just chosen in order to make people aware of the issues involved ; they 're also chosen for their dramatic potential and relevance to modern living " . Woman 's Hour presenter Jenni Murray developed the discussion in an article for The Guardian ; she mentioned that no impression was given that Rachel had suffered an incorrectly performed operation or had had to travel to eastern Europe for it , and that it was improbable that Rachel managed to conceive a child after all . 
 Critics were retrospective of both Rachel and of Baxendale 's performance when the series ended . In the New Statesman , Andrew Billen wrote that Rachel " was as near to a sex symbol as this comedy drama about six cold @-@ footed yuppies produced . She was also materialistic , unfaithful , self @-@ absorbed , tricky and had not the first clue about men [ ... ] Yet her death , caused by a moment of carelessness behind the wheel , was powerful and shocking , a tribute to the extent to which we have invested and believed in her . " Observer critic Kathryn Flett noted that Baxendale 's high @-@ profile role in Friends made her the " star " of Cold Feet in the first series , but both she and Rachel had been " eclipsed " by the other actors and characters by the time of the final series . Spectator critic Simon Hoggart wrote , " I wasn 't as sorry about poor old Rachel as I should have been . It was one of those deaths which makes you think , ' Oh , her poor baby boy , ' rather than ' Goodness , how we 'll miss her . ' " Hoggart attributed his ambivalence to Baxendale 's portrayal of the character as a " fraught , snippy " woman . Matt Greenhalgh , who co @-@ wrote the episode featuring Rachel 's death , called killing off the character " a privilege " . 
 Tesco Personal Finance recorded a 20 % increase in people taking out life insurance policies , which a spokesman attributed to the accident scenes being " portrayed in such a dramatic and realistic way " . Following the broadcast of the final episode , Portmeirion information services received 50 requests for wedding packs , at a time when three weddings a week were being held there . 
 The character 's death was and continues to be ranked in public polls of various opinions . It was voted Best Drama Moment on the BBC 's annual TV Moments broadcast in 2004 . The same year , a poll conducted for National Pub Week ranked the scene where a barman scoops some of Rachel 's ashes into a bucket the fifth best of various pub @-@ related television scenes . In 2008 , the death was ranked at number three in Sky One 's 50 Greatest TV Endings programme . In a 2010 public poll to promote Freeview HD , Rachel 's death was ranked as the seventh most emotional TV moment . In 2011 , Rachel 's wedding to Adam was placed at number nine in Channel 5 's Greatest TV Weddings programme . Colin McAllister opined that every woman 's heart broke when they married . 
 = Action of 7 May 1794 = 
 The Action of 7 May 1794 was a minor naval action fought between a British ship of the line and a French frigate early in the French Revolutionary Wars . The French Navy sought to disrupt British trade by intercepting and capturing merchant ships with roving frigates , a strategy countered by protecting British convoys with heavier warships , particularly in European waters . On 5 May 1794 , the British escorts of a convoy from Cork sighted two French ships approaching and gave chase . The ships , a frigate and a corvette , outmatched by their opponents , separated and the convoy escorts did likewise , each following one of the raiders on a separate course . 
 By the evening one of the French ships had successfully escaped , but the other was still under pursuit , Captain Charles Linois of Atalante attempting a number of tactics to drive off his opponent but without success . Eventually , after a chase lasting nearly two days , the French ship came within range of the much larger British 74 @-@ gun third rate HMS Swiftsure and despite a brave defence was soon forced to surrender after suffering more than 40 casualties . Although he had surrendered his ship , Linois was widely praised for his actions in defending his ship against such heavy odds . 
 In the aftermath of the engagement , a French battle squadron that formed part of the developing Atlantic campaign of May 1794 pursued both ships for the rest of the day ; their quarry eventually escaped after dark . Atalante was later taken into the Royal Navy as HMS Espion . 
 = = Background = = 
 The outbreak of war between Britain and France in the spring of 1793 came at a time of differing fortunes for the navies of the two countries . The Royal Navy had been at a state of heightened readiness since 1792 in preparation for the conflict , while the French Navy had still not recovered from the upheavals of the French Revolution , which had resulted in the collapse of the naval hierarchy and a dearth of experienced officers and seamen . French naval strategy early in the war was to send squadrons and light vessels to operate along British trade routes , in order to disrupt British mercantile operations . This resulted in Britain forming its merchant ships into convoys for mutual protection , escorted by warships while in European waters to defend against roving attacks by French ships . 
 By the spring of 1794 , France was in turmoil following the failure of the harvest , which threatened the country with starvation . In order to secure food supplies , France turned to its American colonies and the United States , which assembled a large grain convoy in Hampton Roads . To ensure the security of this convoy , the French Navy dispatched most of its Atlantic Fleet to sea during May 1794 , operating in a series of large squadrons , independent cruisers and one major fleet under Villaret de Joyeuse . On 5 May , two French ships operating independently , the 36 @-@ gun frigate Atalante under Captain Charles Linois and the corvette Levrette , spied a British convoy sailing south @-@ west , three days out from Cork , and closed to investigate . 
 = = Pursuit = = 
 The convoy that Linois had sighted was under the protection of two ships of the line , the Swiftsure under Captain Charles Boyles and the 64 @-@ gun HMS St Albans under Captain James Vashon . At 17 : 45 , with the French frigates closing from the west and aware that they could not defend the whole convoy without immediate direct action , Boyles turned Swiftsure and St Albans towards the newcomers , hoisting their colours and Swiftsure firing three shots in the direction of the larger ship , Atalante . Together the British ships hugely outweighed and outmatched the French vessels , and as soon as Linois realised his mistake he gave orders for his ships to turn and make all sail to escape pursuit , raising the French tricolour and firing his stern @-@ chasers , guns fitted in the rear of the ship , at his pursuers . 
 The French ships immediately separated . St Albans then followed Levrette while Swiftsure concentrated on Atalante . Throughout the rest of the evening the two chases continued . Then after darkness fell Levrette was able to outrun and escape from St Albans . Swiftsure however remained in touch with Atalante so that by 04 : 00 on 6 May the French frigate was approximately 2 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 4 @.@ 6 km ) ahead of the ship of the line to the northwest , with the wind direction to the north @-@ northeast . For the entire following day Linois could not escape Boyles ' pursuit , and at 17 : 30 Swiftsure was close enough to open fire again , using the bow @-@ chasers for an hour and a half until Atalante once more pulled out of range . During the evening the French frigate was able to keep 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) in front of Swiftsure , but at midnight Linois switched his course to the south , hoping that the darkness would cloak the manoeuvre and that <unk> would be able to escape Boyles . 
 At 02 : 00 it became clear that Linois 's ploy had failed and that Swiftsure was still following Atalante . More importantly , the manoeuvre had severely slowed the frigate . Although Linois hauled closer to the wind , Boyles was able to come within range at 02 : 30 , firing his starboard guns into the smaller ship . Although his crew were exhausted by the extended chase Linois returned fire , the warships exchanging shot at long @-@ range and the frigate suffering far more serious damage during the brief engagement . By 03 : 25 Linois was forced to surrender , his ship 's rigging in tatters and casualties mounting among his crew . Boyles then provided a prize crew to the frigate and took most of the surviving French crew aboard his own ship as prisoners of war . Casualties on the French ship were heavy , with ten killed and 32 wounded from the 274 men aboard , compared to a single man lost on Swiftsure , which had also suffered some damage to its rigging . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Boyles was not long able to enjoy his victory undisturbed : at 10 : 00 on 7 May , shortly after the removal of the French prisoners had been completed , sails were spotted on the horizon . These were rapidly identified as three French ships of the line that were making all haste to intercept and capture Swiftsure and Atalante . These ships were part of a squadron under Contre @-@ Admiral Joseph @-@ Marie Nielly that had sailed from Rochefort the day before in search of the American grain convoy shortly due in European waters . Issuing rapid orders , Boyles instructed Atalante 's prize crew to separate their ship from Swiftsure in order to force the French to split their forces ; the frigate and the ship of the line fleeing on different courses . Atalante soon outran pursuit and escaped into the Atlantic , the prize crew even managing to replace the damaged main topsail in the midst of the chase with the assistance of the French prisoners on board . Swiftsure was slower but Boyles was still able to increase the distance between his vessel and the French during the day , finally losing sight of his pursuers at 22 : 00 . 
 Both ships arrived safely at Cork on 17 May , Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Kingsmill informing the Admiralty of the action by letter . Atalante subsequently served the Royal Navy as a 36 @-@ gun frigate under the name HMS Espion as there was already a ship named HMS Atalanta in service . For his lengthy and brave resistance , Linois was highly praised , particularly by the historian William James , who wrote in 1827 that Linois ' " endeavours . . . were highly meritorious " and considered that in an engagement against a British frigate " the Atalante , if conquered at all , would have been dearly purchased . " Shortly after his arrival in Britain , Linois was exchanged and returned to France . 
 = BBD ( song ) = 
 " BBD " ( Bad Bitches <unk> ) is a song recorded by American rapper Azealia Banks for her debut studio album Broke with Expensive Taste ( 2014 ) . It was released as the first promotional single from the album on January 1 , 2013 . Production of the song was handled by Apple Juice Kid , with Sup Doodle providing co @-@ production for the track . Banks , Jonathan Harris and Kevin James all contributed to the song 's writing . Critical reception of the song was generally positive , with critics claiming the song to be the one of the first party anthems of the new year . Banks clarified on her Twitter account that " BBD " was not the first official single from Broke with Expensive Taste , writing " Y 'all know i love dropping songs tho ! Lol " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2011 , it was reported that Banks was working on her debut studio album with British producer Paul Epworth , despite not being signed to a record label at the time . In January 2012 , Banks signed a deal with Interscope and Polydor Records to work on new music , and a month later , she announced the title of the album to be Broke with Expensive Taste . Banks released " BBD " on New Year 's Day , premiering the song on her SoundCloud account , with it later being sent to radio the same month . The track was confirmed to be apart of Broke with Expensive Taste , when Banks posted the track listing of the album to her Instagram account . Approximately a year later , she handed a complete version of the album in to the labels , which included " BBD " . Banks initially thought it would receive favorable reception from the labels ; however , the representatives told Banks that she had not recorded a " hit " single for the album . Ultimately , Banks ended the record deal with Interscope and Polydor in July 2014 . She later approached Jeff Kwatinetz and signed a contract with his company , Prospect Park , which ultimately led to the long @-@ awaited release of Broke with Expensive Taste on November 7 , 2014 . 
 Throughout December 2014 , Banks released a series of videos in which she gave a track @-@ by @-@ track commentary for all of the songs from Broke with Expensive Taste , and revealed how each song came to be , dubbed the ' 16 Days of Azealia ' . During the commentary video for " BBD " , Banks described the song as " another one of those records " , going on to compare it to her earlier " rowdy " songs such as <unk> 's " Fuck up the Fun " and " <unk> " . She described the creation of the song as a process , summing it up in as " I was like , ok , I 'm gonna make a trap record " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " BBD " is a hip @-@ hop song with heavy trap influences , that runs for a total duration of three minutes and eighteen seconds . Manny Faces from <unk> described the track as " a musically frantic , bass heavy <unk> @-@ snare Apple Juice Kid / Sup Doodle @-@ co @-@ production " , while one The Huffington Post writer described the song as " Chicago rave meets southern rap " . <unk> writer <unk> <unk> thought that the track was " EDM @-@ inspired " , which allowed Banks to " show off of her rapid @-@ fire flow " , whereas MTV writer Phillip Mlynar described the tracks instrumental as a " slinky bopping beat " . Genevieve Oliver from Pretty Much Amazing thought that the track " effortlessly amalgamates hip @-@ hop and dance trends ( a little trap @-@ y , a little rave @-@ y , Azealia said on Twitter ; not to mention the song 's title appears to reference Bell Biv Devoe ) with her own already @-@ classic rapid @-@ fire , sassy wordplay " . Maura Johnston from Pop Dust described the track as witch @-@ hop , calling the song " minimalist and dark " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received general acclaim from critics . Manny Faces from <unk> cited the song as an improvement from her previous material , writing " It ’ s a little harder , a little less sloppy and a little more promising than some of her previous efforts , many of which have drowned in sonic experimentation that , in some opinions ( mine ) , haven ’ t done her any favors " . A writer for <unk> hailed the track as " [ The ] first 2013 party jam " , adding that the song " will jolt you awake this Wednesday morning more quickly than that venti coffee you 've been nursing since 9 am " . Rolling Stone writer Jody Rosen gave " BBD " three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , describing the song as " a typically fleet , flashy collection of disses and boasts that glory in estrogen power , Sapphic delights , and the fun of cuckolding stupid dudes " . Spin writer Marc Hogan thought that the track reflected well on Banks ' sense of style , writing " With the squiggly high @-@ end and wobbly sub @-@ bass of what we ’ re really calling trap @-@ rave now , huh , plus some masterfully timed quiet @-@ loud dynamic shifts , the track displays the <unk> foul @-@ mouthed rapper ’ s usual immaculately stylish beat selection " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Banks first performed " BBD " at the 2013 Glastonbury Festival , on June 29 , 2013 . She later performed the track during her set at the 2013 Reading Festival , on August 25 , 2013 . One writer for NME deemed " BBD " to be a highlight of Banks ' set , citing its " explicit , bumping rhyme " . Banks also included " BBD " on the set list to her Broke with Expensive Taste World Tour ( 2014 – 15 ) . According to <unk> Potts , during Banks ' gig at the Irving Plaza , " ' BBD ' and ' Wallace ' were similarly received , the audience 's enthusiasm building as each second passed " . The track was also well received when performed in Europe , with The Independent writer David Pollock highlighting it as one of the best received numbers of the night , along with " No Problems " and " 212 " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Broke with Expensive Taste liner notes . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 " BBD " contains excerpts from " Swoop " , as originally performed by <unk> ! ETC ! and <unk> . 
 " BBD " contains excerpts from " Trap Shit V9 " , as originally performed by <unk> . 
 = = = Locations = = = 
 Recorded at Glenwood Place Studios ( Burbank , California ) 
 Mixed at Germano Studios ( New York City , New York ) 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Vocals – Azealia Banks 
 Songwriting – Azealia Banks , Jonathan Harris , Kevin James 
 Production – Apple Juice Kid 
 Co @-@ production – Sup Doodle 
 Engineering – Rick McRae 
 Recording – Rick McRae 
 Mixing – Rick McRae 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Wild and the Innocent ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Wild and the Innocent " is the tenth episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on January 10 , 1997 . The episode was written by Jorge Zamacona , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " The Wild and the Innocent " featured guest appearances by Heather McComb and Jeffrey Donovan . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , is following the trail of a murderous couple who are trying to track down a child that had been sold to another family . 
 " The Wild and the Innocent " makes reference to Ernest Renan , and featured several actors who would later appear in related series . The episode received mixed reviews , and has been compared to the works of Flannery O 'Connor and Cormac McCarthy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Twenty @-@ year @-@ old Maddie Haskel ( Heather McComb ) , attends her mother 's funeral in <unk> Coeur , Missouri , and returns to the family home afterwards . There , Jim Gilroy ( John Pyper @-@ Ferguson ) attempts to rape her , but he is beaten unconscious by Haskel 's boyfriend , Bobby Webber ( Jeffrey Donovan ) . Webber and Haskel drive off with Gilroy hostage in the boot of the car , but are later stopped by a state trooper . When the trooper notices noise coming from the car 's trunk , he is shot dead by Webber . 
 Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , a member of the private investigative organization the Millennium Group , informs his friend and fellow Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) about the Missouri shooting . Records for the car show it to be registered to Gilroy , but Watts points out that Gilroy is simply an alias , and the man is actually Jake Waterson , a serial rapist who murdered three women several years earlier before disappearing . Searching Waterson 's address — Haskel 's family home — for clues , Black and Watts find the word " angel " carved into a television , but do not know what it means . Black also views footage taken by the trooper 's dashboard camera , realizing that Waterson is not the shooter , but is unable to identify Webber . 
 Elsewhere , Webber savagely beats Waterson , repeatedly asking him " where is he ? " . Webber and Haskel then break into a farmhouse , confronting the family with the same question . When they do not answer , Webber kills them both before realizing that Waterson had given him the address as a decoy . Webber threatens to kill Waterson unless he tells him the truth . Waterson complies , but is locked in the car 's trunk again , and the car is pushed into a lake . Webber and Haskel steal the dead couple 's car , and drive off . 
 Waterson 's submerged car is recovered by police before he drowns , and he is charged with the earlier rapes and murders . However , he refuses to reveal anything about the state trooper 's shooting . Black reads several letters found in Haskel 's home , written to her father but never posted , and deduces that " Angel " is Haskel 's son . Waterson 's bank account reveals a $ 7 @,@ 000 deposit shortly after Angel 's birth — Black realizes that Waterson , who is Haskel 's stepfather , sold the child for the money . Investigating the records of the lawyer who brokered the sale reveals the identity of the child 's recipients , a Mr and Mrs Travis . 
 Meanwhile , Webber storms into the Travis ' house , demanding the child be returned . When Haskel takes hold of her son , he begins to cry , and she realizes he is already in a good home . She hands the child back over to Mrs Travis . However , Webber protests angrily , causing Haskel to snatch his gun from him , and shoot him dead . Black later visits Haskel in jail and comforts her , telling her she did the right thing . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Wild and the Innocent " is the second episode of the series directed by Thomas J. Wright , who had previously helmed " Dead Letters " . Wright would go on to direct twenty @-@ six episodes across all three seasons , as well as directing " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . The episode also marks the second contribution to the series from writer Jorge Zamacona , who had written the earlier " Kingdom Come " ; this would be the last Millennium episode penned by Zamacona . 
 The episode opens with a quote from the French philosopher Ernest Renan , taken from A Skeptic 's Prayer — " O Lord , if there is a Lord , save my soul , if I have a soul " . Guest star Steve <unk> , who played one of the state troopers in the episode , would have a minor recurring role in The X @-@ Files as assassin Scott Ostelhoff . Fellow guest actor John Pyper @-@ Ferguson would reappear in Millennium 's second season , playing an unrelated character in " Anamnesis " . Pyper @-@ Ferguson also appeared in " Leviathan " , an episode of Millennium creator Chris Carter 's next series , Harsh Realm . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Wild and the Innocent " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 10 , 1997 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 1 , meaning that roughly 7 @,@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by approximately 6 @.@ 9 million households . 
 " The Wild and the Innocent " received mixed reviews from critics . Writing for The A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B- , noting that he was unsure whether it was " one of the series ' very best episodes or one of its very worst " . VanDerWerff praised McComb 's performance , but felt that Donovan was " a kid playing dress @-@ up as the bad guy " ; he also noted the episode 's similarity to the works of Flannery O 'Connor , and described it as " nicely baroque , filled with lots of nice little moments and characters along the way " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 1 out of 5 , describing it as " irritating , poorly cast and terribly written " . Gibron felt that the episode 's setting " reduces Millennium to a ridiculous movie of the week " , adding that the voice @-@ over narration makes it " a chore to sit through " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five , describing it as " a quirky failure " . Shearman and Pearson felt that " The Wild and the Innocent " was a " curious mix of the cloyingly sentimental and the unremittingly bleak " , finding similarities to the works of Cormac McCarthy ; however , they felt that it did not work well as an episode of Millennium , finding the minimal involvement of the series ' main characters and the distinct difference in setting to detract from the episode as a whole . 
 = A Lesson in Romantics = 
 A Lesson in Romantics is the debut studio album from American rock band Mayday Parade . The band resulted from the merger of Kid Named Chicago and Defining Moment . In June 2006 the band released an EP , Tales Told by Dead Friends , which they sold to people by following the 2006 edition of Warped Tour and offering copies ; it eventually sold 10 @,@ 000 copies . The band signed to Fearless Records in August . A Lesson in Romantics was recorded in early 2007 with producers Zack Odom and Kenneth Mount . Vocalist / guitarist Jason Lancaster left the band in March 2007 citing a lack of writing credit on the band 's releases . Prior to the release of A Lesson in Romantics , " Black Cat " , " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " , and " Jamie All Over " were made available for streaming . After the album 's release , the band participated in the 2007 edition of Warped Tour . 
 A Lesson in Romantics was released through Fearless in July . A music video for " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " was released in November , and the song was released as a single a month later . " Jamie All Over " was released as a single in May 2008 and a music video for the song was released two months later . The band then toured as part of the 2008 edition of Warped Tour . The music video for " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " earned two MTV Video Music Awards nominations in 2008 . In January 2009 a music video was released for " Miserable at Best " . A Lesson in Romantics is the band 's most commercially successful release , selling over 200 @,@ 000 copies . It was released on vinyl in November 2011 . The album was featured on Rock Sound 's 2014 list - The 51 Most Essential Pop Punk Albums of All Time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mayday Parade was formed in the winter of 2005 following the merger of two local Tallahassee bands , Kid Named Chicago and Defining Moment . Kid Named Chicago featured vocalist / guitarist Jason Lancaster , guitarist Alex Garcia and drummer Jake Bundrick , while Defining Moment featured vocalist Derek Sanders , guitarist Brooks Betts , and bassist Jeremy <unk> . In June 2006 , their EP Tales Told by Dead Friends was released . The band followed the 2006 edition of Warped Tour , selling copies of the EP to people in line . By the end of summer , the group had sold 10 @,@ 000 copies of the EP . These sales caught the attention of Fearless Records , which signed Mayday Parade on August 29 . Fearless label president Bob Becker said the group : " were really believable , they were obviously good musicians , and they were really tight sounding . And we already knew they were hard @-@ working . " Between late September and early November , the band went on the Text on the Dance Floor tour with Mêlée , Wheatus , <unk> , Lakes , and Fall of Transition . Tales Told by Dead Friends was re @-@ released through Fearless on November 7 . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 All of the songs on A Lesson in Romantics were written while touring after Warped Tour . The songs are about : " being in a relationship while you 're on the road , and the different hardships that come with that . " Unlike the band 's EP , the album was " more put together " and " more organized " , according to Garcia . Sanders thought it stood up " pretty well " to the EP , noting that it was " just as catchy " , but " more powerful . " " Jamie All Over " was originally recorded by Kid Named Chicago , Lancaster 's previous band . Sanders claimed the song was " kind of a tough one to choose " because the band had a lot of new material to choose from , but felt " pretty happy " with its inclusion . According to Garcia , the final track was called " You Be the Anchor That Keeps My Feet on the Ground , I 'll Be the Wings That Keep Your Heart in the Clouds " because the band was " trying to be poetic " . 
 Mayday Parade went into the studio in January 2007 . Recording took place at Tree Sound , located in Atlanta , Georgia . The band worked with producers Zack Odom and Kenneth Mount , who also engineered the sessions . " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " from Tales Told by Dead Friends was re @-@ recorded because the song had previously received a big response from fans . Natalie <unk> provided additional vocals on " Jersey " , while Daniel Lancaster provided additional vocals on " Jamie All Over " . Mixing was done by Mark Needham , while Steve Hall mastered the album at Future Disc , located in McMinnville , Oregon . 
 = = Release = = 
 Lancaster left the band in March 2007 citing a lack of writing credit on the band 's releases . <unk> and Bundrick filled in for Lancaster 's vocals , while Garcia and Betts performed Lancaster 's guitar parts . Garcia said this change made the guitars " sound more clear " and not " clutter [ ed ] " ; on the other hand , the group found it hard working out who should sing Lancaster 's parts . Lancaster 's departure hurt Sanders personally as " he was a good friend " . Later that month , the band supported Plain White T 's on their U.S. tour . On April 4 , " Black Cat " was made available for streaming via Hot Topic 's Myspace profile . On April 13 , the release of A Lesson in Romantics was announced . Between early May and late June , the band went on tour with support from <unk> for Blue Eyes , Driver Side Impact , and Sick City . The track listing was revealed on May 18 . On June 6 , the band made " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " available for streaming via their Myspace profile . " Jamie All Over " was made available for streaming on June 19 via AbsolutePunk . 
 Mayday Parade toured as part of the 2007 edition of Warped Tour . Following this , A Lesson in Romantics was released on July 10 through Fearless Records . In August , the band went on tour with Olympia and Sound the Alarm . The music video for " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " , directed by Marco de la Torre , was filmed in September . In late September 2007 , the band supported Paramore in Japan and Australia . The band went on a co @-@ headlining tour with Madina Lake in October and November . The " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " music video was released on November 14 , and the single was released on December 3 . The band went on the <unk> and Open <unk> Tour alongside All Time Low , Every Avenue , and Just Surrender in January 2008 . In April and May , the band went on the Explosions In Your Pants Tour with support from My American Heart and the Graduate . A music video was filmed for " Jamie All Over " in May , and the single was released on May 20 . 
 Mayday Parade went on the 2008 edition of Warped Tour , playing all summer @-@ long for the first time . Sanders explained that the group " finally felt like one of the real bands " on Warped Tour ; they " had a bus for the first time this year " . Following this , Independent Label Group , who help promote and market Fearless releases , persuaded Target Corporation to sell A Lesson in Romantics in its stores . The video for " Jamie All Over " was released through MTV on July 21 . The song was released to radio on September 2 . In October and November , the band supported All Time Low on the Compromising of Integrity , Morality , & Principles in Exchange for Money tour . A music video for " Miserable at Best " , directed by Mark Staubach , was released on January 9 , 2009 on the band 's Myspace . On November 21 , 2011 , the album was released on vinyl with a different colored cover . A white vinyl edition was released a year later , on August 28 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 A Lesson in Romantics is considered a fan favorite . Daniel Thompson of Music Emissions wrote that : " every song is spectacular on this album and is a potential hit . " Despite its eventual success and acclaim , A Lesson In Romantics received little attention from professional music critics . Reviewers noted the improved sound from the band 's debut EP , Tales Told by Dead Friends . Joe <unk> from AbsolutePunk.net wrote that : " after their unimpressive release of the EP Tales Told By Dead Friends in November , the band 's back with their debut album that will surely become one of your most played of the Summer . " Sputnikmusic reviewer Adam Knott gave the album a score of 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , calling it " a hell of a lot better " than most pop punk records . 
 A Lesson in Romantics debuted at number 8 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums chart , staying on the chart for six weeks . The album finally dropped off on the chart dated March 1 , 2008 before eventually returning on the chart on July 12 . It stayed on the chart for 70 consecutive weeks . The album also charted on the Independent Albums chart , peaking at number 31 . In January 2009 , it was announced that the album had sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies . The album would later become the band 's biggest selling album , selling over 200 @,@ 000 copies . " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " was ranked at number 194 on the New York Post 's 2007 list of best songs to download . In 2008 , the music video for " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " was nominated at the MTV Video Music Awards for Best Rock Video and Video of the Year . The album was number 42 on Rock Sound 's The 51 Most Essential Pop Punk Albums of All Time list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Mayday Parade . 
 " Jamie All Over " ( Kid Named Chicago cover ) – 3 : 36 
 " Black Cat " – 3 : 23 
 " When I Get Home , You 're So Dead " – 3 : 13 
 " Jersey " – 3 : 29 
 " If You Wanted a Song Written About You , All You Had to Do Was Ask " – 4 : 04 
 " Miserable at Best " – 5 : 20 
 " Walk on Water or Drown " – 3 : 29 
 " Ocean and Atlantic " – 3 : 30 
 " I 'd Hate to Be You When People Find Out What This Song Is About " – 4 : 01 
 " Take This to Heart " – 4 : 07 
 " Champagne 's for Celebrating ( I 'll Have a Martini ) " – 3 : 58 
 " You Be the Anchor That Keeps My Feet on the Ground , I 'll Be the Wings That Keep Your Heart in the Clouds " – 4 : 40 
 2008 reissue bonus tracks 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel per 2008 reissue booklet . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Virginia State Route 37 = 
 State Route 37 ( SR 37 ) is a primary state highway in the U.S. state of Virginia . It forms a western bypass of Winchester , connecting to Interstate 81 at both ends . Although the road is a freeway , neither I @-@ 81 connection is freeway standard ; the south end ( exit 310 ) is a diamond interchange with two traffic signals , while , at the north end , drivers must use a short piece of U.S. Route 11 to connect with I @-@ 81 at exit 317 . In addition to local access , the highway connects to U.S. Route 50 and U.S. Route 522 , two major highways that lead west and northwest into West Virginia and north to Interstate 70 at Hancock , Maryland . An eastern bypass , known locally as " Route 37 East " , has been proposed in statewide and local plans to complete the loop . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 37 begins at an intersection with <unk> Road ( SR 847 ) , a local frontage road along the east side of I @-@ 81 , and Tasker Road ( SR 642 ) , which leads southeast to US 522 near <unk> . It immediately crosses I @-@ 81 at exit 310 , a diamond interchange with two traffic signals on SR 37 , and then becomes a freeway , soon junctioning US 11 ( Valley Pike ) with a partial cloverleaf . The next interchange is a diamond at Cedar Creek Grade ( SR 622 ) , and SR 37 reaches its approximate midpoint at US 50 ( Northwestern Pike ) , another diamond . A trumpet interchange completed in 2001 connects to the Winchester Medical Center , and the final diamond is with US 522 ( Frederick Pike ) at the northwestern corner . SR 37 ends at a partial Y interchange with US 11 ( Martinsburg Pike ) , at which SR 37 traffic can only access US 11 north and only traffic from US 11 south can access SR 37 , although a northbound exit to <unk> Lane was added in about 2000 to allow SR 37 traffic to access US 11 south . About 1 / 2 mile ( 1 km ) of US 11 is a divided highway , connecting SR 37 with I @-@ 81 at exit 317 . 
 = = Future = = 
 In early Fall 2014 VDOT will start work at Route 37 's southern terminus ' exit at I @-@ 81 . They will extend Route 37 north to a new diamond interchange with Front Royal Pike ( US 522 ) . Then Route 37 will continue northward to Millwood Pike ( US 50 / US 17 ) and have another diamond interchange . The next exit will be at <unk> Road ( State Route 657 ) with another diamond interchange . The next and final exit will be a half cloverleaf interchange with VA 7 , but it is not final that it will be a half cloverleaf because of Valley Mill Road ( State Route 659 ) . The problem with this is that the intersection with Valley Mill Road is where the southbound exit for Route 37 is to come into Route 7 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 37 was defined as the proposed Winchester By @-@ Pass by 1963 , and was included in the statewide Arterial Network when it was created in 1964 . When I @-@ 81 opened past Winchester in November 1965 , it included an interchange south of Winchester , taking traffic between I @-@ 81 and US 11 along a short connecting road . The north half of the bypass , from US 50 west of Winchester north and east to US 11 north of the city , opened in the late 1960s , and the semicircle was completed in the late 1970s , with the linking of Route 37 to the existing I @-@ 81 / US 11 connection . A new bridge carrying southbound SR 37 over I @-@ 81 was built , but otherwise the diamond interchange was not modified . The only change to the major bypass since it was constructed has been a new trumpet interchange serving the Winchester Medical Center ; construction began in September 2000 and was completed in November 2001 . A single ramp from SR 37 north to <unk> Lane , allowing traffic at the north end of the bypass to access US 11 south , was built in about 2000 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Frederick County . 
 = Ninja Gaiden ( NES video game ) = 
 Ninja Gaiden ( <unk> ) , known in Japan as Ninja Ryūkenden ( <unk> , literally " Legend of the Ninja Dragon Sword " ) and as Shadow Warriors in Europe , is a side @-@ scrolling action @-@ platforming video game . It was developed and published by Tecmo for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) ; its development and release coincided with the beat ' em up arcade version of the same name . It was released in December 1988 ( 1988 @-@ 12 ) in Japan , in March 1989 in North America , and in August 1991 ( 1991 @-@ 08 ) in Europe . It has been ported to several other platforms , including the PC Engine , the Super NES , the Virtual Console , and mobile phones . 
 The story follows a ninja named Ryu Hayabusa as he journeys to America to avenge his murdered father . There , he learns that a person named " the Jaquio " plans to take control of the world by unleashing an ancient demon through the power contained in two statues . Featuring platforming gameplay similar to Castlevania and the NES version of Batman , players control Ryu through six " Acts " that comprise 20 levels ; they encounter enemies that must be dispatched with Ryu 's katana and other secondary weapons . 
 Ninja Gaiden has been renowned for its elaborate story and usage of anime @-@ like cinematic cutscenes . It received extensive coverage and won several awards from video gaming magazines , while criticism focused on its high and unforgiving difficulty , particularly in the later levels . Over fifteen years after its release , the game continued to receive acclaim from print and online publications . It was novelized as part of the Worlds of Power NES game adaptations written by Seth Godin and Peter Lerangis , and it spawned a soundtrack CD . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ninja Gaiden features a ninja named Ryu Hayabusa who seeks revenge for the death of his father and gradually finds himself involved in a sinister plot that threatens the entire world . The story opens with Ryu 's father Ken being killed in a duel by an unknown assailant . After the duel , Ryu finds a letter written by Ken which tells Ryu to find an archeologist named Walter Smith in America . Before Ryu can find Walter , Ryu is shot and kidnapped by a mysterious young woman ; she hands him a demonic @-@ looking statue before releasing him . Ryu then finds Walter , and Walter tells him of the demon statues he and Ken had found in the Amazon ruins . Walter tells Ryu of an evil demon named Jashin , that " <unk> " defeated and whose power was confined into two " Light " and " Shadow " demon statues . Ryu shows Walter the " Shadow " demon statue given to him from the woman , but during their conversation , a masked figure suddenly breaks into the cabin and steals the Shadow statue . Ryu gives chase , defeats the masked figure , and retrieves the statue ; but when he returns he finds that Walter is dying and the Light statue is missing . Right after Walter dies , three armed men confront Ryu and tell him to come with them . 
 Ryu is taken to an interrogation room , where he meets Foster , head of the Special Auxiliary Unit of the Central Intelligence Agency . Foster tells Ryu about a more @-@ than @-@ 2000 @-@ year @-@ old temple Walter discovered in some ruins in the Amazon . He continues by saying that Walter , one day , mysteriously sealed the ruins , in which nobody has since ventured near . Foster explains to Ryu that they have been monitoring the activity of someone named Guardia de <unk> , also known as " the Jaquio " , who recently moved into the temple . Using the statues , the Jaquio plans to awaken Jashin and use it to destroy the world . Foster asks Ryu to go to the temple and eliminate him . After making it into the temple , Ryu discovers that the Jaquio is holding captive the girl who handed him the " Shadow " statue earlier . He orders Ryu to give up the demon statue after threatening the girl 's life . Ryu is then dropped from sight through a trapdoor and into a catacomb . 
 After fighting his way back to the top of the temple , Ryu encounters Bloody Malth , whom Ryu defeats . While dying , Malth reveals that he was the one who dueled with Ryu 's father , that his father is still alive and that Ryu will meet him as he presses onward . When he reaches the temple 's inner chambers , he discovers that his father was not killed but was instead possessed by an evil figure . He destroys the evil figure , which releases Ken from its hold . Jaquio , enraged from Ken 's release from the possession , shows himself ; he immediately tries to kill Ryu with a fiery projectile , but Ken throws himself in front of Ryu and takes the hit . Jaquio is killed during the ensuing fight by Ryu , but then a lunar eclipse occurs , causing the demon statues to transform into Jashin . After Ryu defeats the demon , Ken tells him he does not have much longer to live due to Jaquio 's attack . He tells Ryu to leave him behind in the temple while it collapses and to take the young woman with him . Afterwards , Foster , communicating via satellite , orders the girl to kill Ryu and steal the demon statues ; she chooses to be with Ryu instead of carrying out the order . The two kiss , and the girl tells Ryu her name , Irene Lew ; the two watch as the sun rises . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ninja Gaiden is a side @-@ scrolling platform game in which the player takes control of the player character , Ryu Hayabusa , and guides him through six " Acts " that comprise 20 levels . Ryu 's physical strength is represented by a life meter , which decreases when he is hit by an enemy or projectile . A " life " is lost when the life meter depletes entirely , when Ryu falls off of the screen , or when the timer runs out . A game over screen appears when all lives are lost ; however , the player may restart the level on which this occurred by continuing . At the end of every act , the player fights a boss ; bosses have life meters that the player depletes with attacks . A boss is defeated when its life meter is depleted entirely . Each boss is one of the " Malice Four " – evil underlings of the Jaquio , the game 's main antagonist . The Malice Four consist of Barbarian , <unk> , <unk> , and their leader Bloody Malth . 
 Players attack enemies by thrusting at them with Ryu 's Dragon Sword – a katana @-@ like sword passed down from the Hayabusa clan for generations . They can also use " secondary " weapons that consume Ryu 's " spiritual strength " . Secondary weapons include throwing stars , " windmill throwing stars " which cut through enemies and return like boomerangs , a series of twirling fireballs named " the art of the fire wheel " , and a mid @-@ air slashing technique called the " jump & slash " . When Ryu 's spiritual strength meter becomes too low , the player cannot use secondary weapons . Players can replenish Ryu 's spiritual strength by collecting red and blue " spiritual strength " items found in lamps and lanterns . Other items found along the way include hourglasses that freeze all enemies and projectiles for five seconds , bonus point containers , potions that restore six units of physical strength , " invincible fire wheels " that make Ryu temporarily invincible to attacks , and 1 @-@ ups . 
 Ryu has the ability to jump on and off ladders and walls , and by using the directional pad , he can climb up or down ladders . Ryu can spring off walls by holding the directional pad in the opposite direction he is facing and pressing the jump button . He cannot attack while on walls or ladders . Players can use this technique to get Ryu to climb up spaces between walls and columns by holding down the jump button and alternating between left and right on the directional pad . Ryu can also vertically climb a single wall by springing off it and then quickly pressing the directional pad back towards the wall . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ninja Gaiden was developed by Tecmo , who also developed the Tecmo Bowl and <unk> series . The game was released in December 1988 in Japan under the title Ninja Ryukenden , which literally translates to Legend of the Dragon Sword . It was developed and released around the same time as the beat ' em up arcade version of the same name ; neither of the two games were ports of each other but were parallel projects developed by different teams . According to developer Masato Kato ( listed as " <unk> " in the game 's credits ) , the term " ninja " was gaining popularity in North America , prompting Tecmo to develop a ninja @-@ related game for the NES at the same time the arcade version of Ninja Gaiden was being developed . The NES version was developed and directed by Hideo Yoshizawa ( listed as " <unk> " ) . Ninja Gaiden was also Masato Kato 's first full @-@ time project as a video game designer , and he contributed the game 's graphics , animations and instruction manual illustrations . 
 Drawing inspiration from the Mario series , Yoshizawa kept the same title but changed everything else ; it became a platformer as opposed to a beat ' em up such as Double Dragon ; the gameplay was modeled after Konami 's Castlevania , with Ryu being equipped with a katana @-@ like Dragon Sword , shurikens , and ninpo techniques such as fire wheels . In designing the protagonist Ryu Hayabusa , the development team wanted him to be unique from other ninjas . They designed him with a ninja vest in order to place emphasis on his muscles , and they furnished him with a cowl that arched outward . They originally wanted to equip Ryu with sensors and a helmet with an inside monitor to check his surroundings , but that idea was scrapped . According to Kato , they utilized specific locations and environments to justify the need for having a ninja for a main character . 
 Yoshizawa placed greater emphasis on story as opposed to the arcade version , and he wrote and designed the plot that included over 20 minutes of cinematic cutscenes – the first time an NES game contained such sequences . Tecmo called the cutscene system " Tecmo Theater " , in which the game reveals the storyline between Acts through the usage of animated sequences . These sequences are used at the beginning of each Act to introduce new characters such as Irene Lew , Walter Smith , and the Jaquio . This feature uses techniques such as close @-@ ups , alternate camera angles , differing background music , and sound effects . It was used to make the game more enjoyable for players . Unlike earlier titles such as Final Fantasy , the cutscenes consisted of large anime art on the top half of the screen with dialogue on the bottom half . This made the artistic style more reminiscent of other manga titles such as Lupin III and Golgo 13 . Dimitri Criona , Tecmo USA 's director of sales and marketing , said that the advantages of console games over arcade games allowed the creation of a longer game and the inclusion of cutscenes , which Tecmo trademarked as " cinema screens " ; he noted the lack of motivation to drop quarters that has allowed this on home consoles , which required a different reward structure than in arcade games . The game contains a feature that was originally a glitch but left in the final game intentionally , according to Masato Kato . When losing to any of the final three bosses in the game , the player is sent back to the beginning of the sixth act . 
 When the game 's text was translated from Japanese to English , the game needed to be reprogrammed in order to accomplish this ; different companies handled this process in different ways . Tecmo 's Japanese writers wrote rough translations in English , and they would then fax them to the American division . According to Criona , the American division would " edit it and put it back together , telling the story in a context that an American English speaker would understand . This would go back and forth several times . " Moreover , the game 's text was stored in picture files instead of raw computer text , and because of the NES ' hardware limitations , the English text need to be very clear and concise to fall within those limitations ; many times , different words with the same meaning but with less characters had to be used . All symbols and objects were scrutinized by Nintendo of America , who had specific rules on what could be included for North American releases ; for instance , any Satanic , Christian , or any other religious , sexual , or drug @-@ related references were not allowed . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Since the game 's title was deemed too difficult to read for English audiences , it was renamed when it was released in Western markets . In early 1988 advertisements from Nintendo Fun Club News , Tecmo used Dragon Ninja as a tentative title for the U.S. release . They decided to use the title Ninja Gaiden when the game was released in the U.S. in March 1989 ; the title literally meant " Ninja Side @-@ Story " , but the game was not intended as a spin @-@ off of the arcade version . According to an interview with developer Masato Kato , the staff , determining how to translate " Ryukenden " into English , went with Ninja Gaiden " because it sounded cool " . In Europe , the game was scheduled to be released in September 1990 , but the release was delayed until September 1991 . It was retitled as Shadow Warriors – just as Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles was renamed Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles – as ninjas were considered a taboo subject in Europe . It was one of many ninja @-@ related video games around the time , such as The Legend of Kage , Ninja Warriors , and Shinobi . 
 Upon Ninja Gaiden 's North American release , Nintendo of America , whose play @-@ testers liked the game and gave it high ratings , decided to help with its marketing . It was featured prominently in Nintendo 's house organ Nintendo Power ; according to Criona , it did not take a lot of effort to market the game through the magazine , nor did Tecmo or Nintendo do much else to promote it . The game 's demand eventually exceeded its supply . While Tecmo anticipated that the game would be a hit , they did not realize at the time its impact it would have in the video game industry , according to Kohler , " with its groundbreaking use of cinematics " . Yoshizawa would go on to direct the sequel Ninja Gaiden II : The Dark Sword of Chaos ( 1990 ) and remained as an executive producer for Ninja Gaiden III : The Ancient Ship of Doom ( 1991 ) , while Masato Kato took over directing the game design . 
 Ninja Gaiden received preview coverage in the January – February 1989 issue of Nintendo Power in its " Pak Watch " section , where it " got the highest marks of any title we 've [ the magazine 's staff ] seen in a long time " , and that it was expected to be No. 1 on their " Player 's Poll " quickly . The preview compared Ryu 's ability to climb and spring off walls to the gameplay in Metroid . The game was unveiled at the 1989 International Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas , and its display featured a demo of the game and a live person dressed as a ninja . Tecmo predicted that the game would be the top @-@ selling third @-@ party title for the NES . 
 = = Ports = = 
 = = = PC Engine = = = 
 The game was first ported to the PC Engine in 1992 and was published by Hudson Soft and released only in Japan ; it featured an alternate English and Traditional Chinese translation , more colorful and detailed graphics , and difficulty and gameplay tweaks . In order to switch among the three different languages , the player will have to pause the Select + I + II together at the title screen . 
 = = = SNES = = = 
 It appeared as a remake for the Ninja Gaiden Trilogy compilation for the Super NES in 1995 . Some reviewers appreciated the redrawn graphics and music in this version , but others found them to be an inadequate effort . Electronic Gaming Monthly reviewers compared it unfavorably to another updated NES remake , Mega Man : The Wily Wars ; they called the version " an exact port @-@ over with no noticeable enhancements in graphics , sound and play control " . 
 = = = Other ports and re @-@ releases = = = 
 The Ninja Gaiden has since been ported to other consoles . Along with the other two games in the Ninja Gaiden trilogy , the SNES version was featured as an unlockable game in the 2004 Xbox Ninja Gaiden game . 
 The NES version was released on Wii 's Virtual Console on April 10 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 04 @-@ 10 ) in Japan and on May 14 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 05 @-@ 14 ) in North America . Europeans , Australians , and New Zealanders have been able to purchase the game as part of " Hanabi Festival " on September 21 , 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 09 @-@ 21 ) . The PC Engine version was also released for Virtual Console in Japan on April 21 , 2009 ( 2009 @-@ 04 @-@ 21 ) . The NES version was also released for the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console , with an original release date set for November 8 , 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 11 @-@ 08 ) . However , it was delayed until December 13 , 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 12 @-@ 13 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ninja Gaiden received strong publicity in Nintendo Power in 1989 and 1990 . It was featured on the cover of the magazine 's March – April 1989 issue and was referenced in the following issue in a Howard and Nester comic strip . It was one of the featured games in both March – April and May – June 1989 issues of the magazine ; both issues included a walkthrough up to the fifth Act , a review , and a plot overview . Underlining the game 's difficulty , it appeared in several issues in the magazine 's " Counselor 's Corner " and " Classified Information " help sections . The game debuted at No. 3 on its " Top 30 " list for July – August 1989 , behind Zelda II : The Adventure of Link and Super Mario Bros. 2 ; it stayed at No. 3 in the following September – October 1989 issue . The game was featured in the " Nintendo Power Awards ' 89 " as one of the top games that year . It was nominated for " Best Graphics and Sound " , " Best Challenge " , " Best Theme , Fun " , " Best Character " ( Ryu Hayabusa ) , " Best Ending " , and " Best Overall " ; and it won for " Best Challenge " and " Best Ending " . In its preview of Ninja Gaiden II : The Dark Sword of Chaos , the magazine said that " the colorful , detailed and dynamic cinema scenes of the original Ninja Gaiden set a standard for action game narration that has since been widely emulated . These cinema scenes made Ninja Gaiden play almost like a movie . " 
 The game received strong reviews and publicity from other video gaming magazines at the time . In a review from VideoGames & Computer Entertainment , the presentation and gameplay was compared to Castlevania , while the cinematic cutscenes were compared favorably to Karateka and other computer games by <unk> . The review praised the game 's animation in these cutscenes and noted Tecmo 's usage of close @-@ ups and body movements . The reviewer said that while the cutscenes were not fluid , they were effective and entertaining and gave important information as to what the player was supposed to do . He appreciated that the game had unlimited continues which slightly offset its difficulty , but he criticized it for having <unk> background graphics especially in the indoor levels , saying that some bottomless pits and items in these levels become slightly camouflaged . From July to October 1989 , the game was listed at No. 1 on Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Top Ten Video Games " list ; it fell to No. 2 on the list behind Mega Man 2 in the following November issue . In their " Best and Worst of 1989 " , it received awards for " Best Game of the Year " for the NES and " Best Ending in a Video Game " for all consoles . The staff said that Ninja Gaiden " proved to be an instant winner " with its cinematic cutscenes and unique gameplay . They added that the game 's climax was better than some movies ' climaxes at the time and that it established continuity for a sequel , which would be released the following year . Later in June 1994 , the magazine ranked it at No. 4 in a special list of " Top Ten Most Difficult Games " of all time for all consoles . 
 Ninja Gaiden was featured on the cover of the pilot issue of UK magazine Mean Machines in July 1990 ; the magazine was distributed as part of the July 1990 issue of Computer and Video Games . In its review , Julian Rignall compared the game to its beat ' em up arcade counterpart , which was titled Shadow Warriors . He noted that the game has great graphics that feature diverse backgrounds and character sprites ; he gave special praise to its usage of cartoon @-@ like animation sequences between Acts in which the game 's plot unfolds . He enjoyed the game 's difficulty especially with the bosses , but he noted that the game will seem tough at first until players get accustomed to the controls . He criticized the game for its sound , which he said did not fit with the graphics and was " racy " , but said that " what 's there is atmospheric and suits the action " . He highly recommended the game to fans of the beat ' em up and combat genres . 
 The game ( the NES version now officially titled Shadow Warriors in Europe ) was reviewed again in Mean Machines ' July 1991 issue . In the review , Matt Regan and Paul Glancey praised the game 's detailed and animated character sprites and its difficulty level . Regan was impressed with the game 's high standards of gameplay , sound , and overall depth ; he noted the game 's frustrating difficulty but pointed out that it has unlimited continues . Glancey compared the game to the 1990 NES version of Batman with the similarities of wall @-@ jumping mechanics ; he said that its graphics were not as well @-@ developed as Batman 's but were still satisfactory . He praised its detailed sprites and their animations along with the " Tecmo Theater " concept , noting that the cutscenes " help supply a lot of atmosphere " . He said that it is of the best arcade @-@ style games on the NES as well as the best ninja @-@ related game on the system . 
 The game received some praise and criticism in the August 1991 issue of German magazine Power Play . The review praised the game for its attention to detail and challenge and noted that players need to master certain gameplay skills to move on . Criticisms included a " lack of variety " and dullness in gameplay , in which it was compared to a " visit to the tax office " . The PC Engine version was briefly mentioned in the December 1991 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly as part of a review of games that have been released outside the U.S. They noted the faithful translation from the NES version as well as the revamped and more detailed graphics ; they said that " PC Engine owners should not miss this one ! " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In 2004 , Tecmo began releasing low @-@ priced episodic installments of Ninja Gaiden for AT & T and Verizon mobile phones on both BREW and Java platforms . The official English Tecmo Games mobile website advertised it for a future release along with a mobile version of Tecmo Bowl . They planned to release the entire game throughout 2004 in a series of four installments – similar to what Upstart Games did when they ported the NES version of Castlevania to mobile phones . The port featured the same visuals and soundtrack found on the NES version , and each installment was to consist of several levels of gameplay at a time . The first installment , titled Ninja Gaiden Episode I : Destiny , was released on July 15 , 2004 ( 2004 @-@ 07 @-@ 15 ) , and it included only the first Act from the NES version but added two new levels . The second installment was planned to be released in North America and was previewed by GameSpot in September 2004 , but it – along with the third and fourth installments – was never released . 
 The mobile phone port of Ninja Gaiden was met with some praise and criticism . IGN 's Levi Buchanan and GameSpot 's Damon Brown praised the port for its accurate translation from the NES to mobile phones , saying that the gameplay , graphics , and cinematic cutscenes remain true to the NES version . They praised the game 's controls , despite the game 's omission of the ability to duck so that pressing " down " on the phone 's directional pad could be used for secondary weapons ; Brown said the port had better controls than most other mobile phone games at the time . They both criticized the port for its lack of sound quality , but Buchanan said that this was not Tecmo 's fault . In a preview of the port , GameSpot 's Avery Score pointed to generally inferior American @-@ made handsets as the reason for its sound shortcomings . 
 Retro Gamer took a look back at Ninja Gaiden in its March 2004 issue , in the midst of the release of the 2004 Xbox remake . They said that the game broke the mold of conventional video game titles by including a plot with cinematic cutscenes added between gameplay segments . They added that the concept of adding cinematics for a game 's introduction , plot , and ending was a new concept which " naturally impressed the gaming public " . They noted the game 's high difficulty level , saying that the game " threw up an immense challenge even for the veteran gamer , and almost dared you to complete it mentally and physically intact " . Chris Kohler , in his 2004 book Power @-@ Up : How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life , said , while it wasn 't as far @-@ reaching as Tecmo Bowl , " it ended up revolutionizing video games with its courageous , unique , and trailblazing use of cinema scenes " . 
 Upon its release on the Virtual Console , Ninja Gaiden was met with high praise , especially for its elaborate story , amount of narrative , and usage of anime @-@ like cinematic sequences . Some critics have bemoaned its gameplay for being too similar to Castlevania ; similarities include identical displays on the top of the screen , items contained in breakable lanterns , and a nearly identical " secondary weapons " feature . A 1UP.com review noted that the two games have different dynamics and that several actions possible in Ninja Gaiden would be impossible in Castlevania . Contemporary reviews have considered the game " groundbreaking " for its pioneering use of stylized cutscenes , high quality music , and dark atmosphere . One review said that the game makes up for its high difficulty level with good gameplay . IGN said that it is one of the best platforming video games of all time . 
 Reviewers have criticized the game for its high and unforgiving difficulty level especially late in the game . A review from 1UP.com referred to the latter levels as an " unfair display of intentional cheapness " . In his review of the Virtual Console version , GameSpot 's Alex Navarro said " the game will beat you to a pulp " and that it " assaults you time and time again with its punishing difficulty , insidiously placed enemies , and rage @-@ inducing boss fights " . According to his review , the game starts easy , but the difficulty starts to increase halfway through the second Act and continues through the sixth Act ; Navarro describes the sixth Act 's difficulty as being " one of the bottom levels of gaming hell " . IGN said that this game was one of the most difficult video games of all time , setting the trend for the rest of the series ; however , they pointed out that its difficulty and graphics are " defining characteristics [ that ] have carried over through the years into modern day [ Ninja ] Gaiden sequels " . ScrewAttack listed the game as the seventh hardest title in the NES library . 
 Over fifteen years after its creation , Ninja Gaiden has maintained its position as one of the most popular games for the NES . A 2006 Joystiq reader poll , with over 12 @,@ 000 votes , listed the game at No. 10 in a list of top NES games . Another reader poll from GameSpot listed the game at No. 10 in its top 10 NES games list . It was No. 17 on IGN 's " Top 100 NES Games " list . In August 2001 in its 100th issue , Game Informer listed the game at No. 93 in their " Top 100 Games of All Time " list . In 2006 Electronic Gaming Monthly featured a follow @-@ up to their " The 200 Greatest Videogames of Their Time " , in which readers wrote in and discussed games they felt were ignored on the list ; the game was listed at No. 16 in the top 25 games discussed . At the end of 2005 , Nintendo Power ran a serial feature titled " The Top 200 Nintendo Games Ever " . The list , which included games for all Nintendo systems , had the game at No. 89 . In August 2008 , the same magazine ranked it the tenth best NES game of all time ; they praised the gameplay and described the cinematic cutscenes as revolutionary for its time . The game 's music received honorable mention in IGN 's list of " Best 8 @-@ Bit Soundtracks " . Its introduction was featured in IGN 's " Top 100 Video Game Moments " list at # 53 ; it was also listed as the second best video game cutscene of all time in Complex magazine . 
 Nintendo Power honored the game in its November 2010 issue , which celebrated the 25th anniversary of the NES . The magazine listed its box art , which depicts a ninja with a burning city in the background , as one of its favorite designs in the NES library . The magazine 's Editor in Chief Chris Slate was equally impressed by the game 's box art . He also reminisced the game 's high level of difficulty with its re @-@ spawning enemies and enemy birds that knocked players into pits , saying this game " may have taught me how to curse " . He further praised gameplay features such as clinging on walls and using ninpo techniques , and he noted the game 's cinematic cutscenes , including the ominous opening sequence that featured two ninjas who launch into the air at each other and clashing their swords in the moonlight . He said that " Ninja Gaiden was about as cool as an 8 @-@ bit game could be , especially for ninja @-@ crazed kids of the ' 80s who , like me , had worn out their VHS copies of Enter the Ninja " . In a July 2011 issue , Retro Gamer listed the game 's opening as one of the most popular ones at the time . The magazine noted how its usage of cutscenes , animations , and overall presentation put the game above most other action titles at the time . While it lauded the controls and gameplay elements , as with other reviews , it criticized the difficulty , calling it " one of the most challenging games on the console " . It noted how defeated enemies re @-@ spawn in certain spots , how enemies are placed on the edges of platforms , and the structure of the final level . 
 = = Related media = = 
 In July 1990 Scholastic Corporation published a novelization of Ninja Gaiden under the Worlds of Power series of NES game adaptations , created and packaged by Seth Godin under the pseudonym " F. X. Nine " . Godin and Peter Lerangis , under the pseudonym " A. L. Singer " , wrote the novelization . As with the other Worlds of Power books , the amount of violence present in the video game was toned down in the novelization , because Godin and Scholastic were concerned that some of the material in the video game was inappropriate for a young audience . The novel did not strictly adhere to the game 's storyline ; for instance , the ending was changed so that Ryu 's father survived . Ryu 's father remained alive in the story because Godin believed that the revised ending was consistent with the Worlds of Power character and as real @-@ life fathers Godin and Lerangis felt reluctance to leave Ryu without a father . The book 's cover , otherwise a replication of the North American box art , had the kunai held in Ryu 's front hand was airbrushed out , leaving him to prod the air with an empty fist . 
 A soundtrack CD , Ninja Ryukenden : Tecmo GSM @-@ 1 , was released by Pony Canyon in February 1989 . The first half of the CD starts with an arranged medley of the game 's music . It then continues with enhanced versions of the game 's music which utilized stereophonic sound and additional PCM channels . The remainder of the CD features music from the arcade version . 
 = Synthetic diamond = 
 A synthetic diamond ( also known as an artificial diamond , cultured diamond , or cultivated diamond ) is diamond produced in an artificial process , as opposed to natural diamonds , which are created by geological processes . Synthetic diamond is also widely known as HPHT diamond or CVD diamond after the two common production methods ( referring to the high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature and chemical vapor deposition crystal formation methods , respectively ) . While the term synthetic is associated by consumers with imitation products , artificial diamonds are made of the same material ( pure carbon , crystallized in isotropic 3D form ) . In the U.S. , the Federal Trade Commission has indicated that the alternative terms laboratory @-@ grown , laboratory @-@ created , and [ manufacturer @-@ name ] <unk> " would more clearly communicate the nature of the stone " . 
 Numerous claims of diamond synthesis were documented between 1879 and 1928 ; most of those attempts were carefully analyzed but none were confirmed . In the 1940s , systematic research began in the United States , Sweden and the Soviet Union to grow diamonds using CVD and HPHT processes . The first reproducible synthesis was reported around 1953 . Those two processes still dominate the production of synthetic diamond . A third method , known as detonation synthesis , entered the diamond market in the late 1990s . In this process , nanometer @-@ sized diamond grains are created in a detonation of carbon @-@ containing explosives . A fourth method , treating graphite with high @-@ power ultrasound , has been demonstrated in the laboratory , but currently has no commercial application . 
 The properties of synthetic diamond depend on the details of the manufacturing processes ; however , some synthetic diamonds ( whether formed by HPHT or CVD ) have properties such as hardness , thermal conductivity and electron mobility that are superior to those of most naturally formed diamonds . Synthetic diamond is widely used in abrasives , in cutting and polishing tools and in heat sinks . Electronic applications of synthetic diamond are being developed , including high @-@ power switches at power stations , high @-@ frequency field @-@ effect transistors and light @-@ emitting diodes . Synthetic diamond detectors of ultraviolet ( UV ) light or high @-@ energy particles are used at high @-@ energy research facilities and are available commercially . Because of its unique combination of thermal and chemical stability , low thermal expansion and high optical transparency in a wide spectral range , synthetic diamond is becoming the most popular material for optical windows in high @-@ power CO2 lasers and gyrotrons . It is estimated that 98 % of industrial grade diamond demand is supplied with synthetic diamonds . 
 Both CVD and HPHT diamonds can be cut into gems and various colors can be produced : clear white , yellow , brown , blue , green and orange . The appearance of synthetic gems on the market created major concerns in the diamond trading business , as a result of which special spectroscopic devices and techniques have been developed to distinguish synthetic and natural diamonds . 
 = = History = = 
 After the 1797 discovery that diamond was pure carbon , many attempts were made to convert various cheap forms of carbon into diamond . The earliest successes were reported by James Ballantyne Hannay in 1879 and by Ferdinand Frédéric Henri Moissan in 1893 . Their method involved heating charcoal at up to 3500 ° C with iron inside a carbon crucible in a furnace . Whereas Hannay used a flame @-@ heated tube , Moissan applied his newly developed electric arc furnace , in which an electric arc was struck between carbon rods inside blocks of lime . The molten iron was then rapidly cooled by immersion in water . The contraction generated by the cooling supposedly produced the high pressure required to transform graphite into diamond . Moissan published his work in a series of articles in the 1890s . 
 Many other scientists tried to replicate his experiments . Sir William Crookes claimed success in 1909 . Otto Ruff claimed in 1917 to have produced diamonds up to 7 mm in diameter , but later retracted his statement . In 1926 , Dr. J Willard Hershey of McPherson College replicated Moissan 's and Ruff 's experiments , producing a synthetic diamond ; that specimen is on display at the McPherson Museum in Kansas . Despite the claims of Moissan , Ruff , and Hershey , other experimenters were unable to reproduce their synthesis . 
 The most definitive replication attempts were performed by Sir Charles Algernon Parsons . A prominent scientist and engineer known for his invention of the steam turbine , he spent about 40 years ( 1882 – 1922 ) and a considerable part of his fortune trying to reproduce the experiments of Moissan and Hannay , but also adapted processes of his own . Parsons was known for his painstakingly accurate approach and methodical record keeping ; all his resulting samples were preserved for further analysis by an independent party . He wrote a number of articles — some of the earliest on HPHT diamond — in which he claimed to have produced small diamonds . However , in 1928 , he authorized Dr. C.H. Desch to publish an article in which he stated his belief that no synthetic diamonds ( including those of Moissan and others ) had been produced up to that date . He suggested that most diamonds that had been produced up to that point were likely synthetic spinel . 
 = = = GE diamond project = = = 
 In 1941 , an agreement was made between the General Electric ( GE ) , Norton and Carborundum companies to further develop diamond synthesis . They were able to heat carbon to about 3 @,@ 000 ° C ( 5 @,@ 430 ° F ) under a pressure of 3 @.@ 5 gigapascals ( 510 @,@ 000 psi ) for a few seconds . Soon thereafter , the Second World War interrupted the project . It was resumed in 1951 at the Schenectady Laboratories of GE , and a high @-@ pressure diamond group was formed with Francis P. Bundy and H.M. Strong . Tracy Hall and others joined this project shortly thereafter . 
 The Schenectady group improved on the anvils designed by Percy Bridgman , who received a Nobel Prize for his work in 1946 . Bundy and Strong made the first improvements , then more were made by Hall . The GE team used tungsten carbide anvils within a hydraulic press to squeeze the carbonaceous sample held in a <unk> container , the finished grit being squeezed out of the container into a gasket . The team recorded diamond synthesis on one occasion , but the experiment could not be reproduced because of uncertain synthesis conditions , and the diamond was later shown to have been a natural diamond used as a seed . 
 Hall achieved the first commercially successful synthesis of diamond on December 16 , 1954 , and this was announced on February 15 , 1955 . His breakthrough was using a " belt " press , which was capable of producing pressures above 10 GPa ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 psi ) and temperatures above 2 @,@ 000 ° C ( 3 @,@ 630 ° F ) . The press used a pyrophyllite container in which graphite was dissolved within molten nickel , cobalt or iron . Those metals acted as a " solvent @-@ catalyst " , which both dissolved carbon and accelerated its conversion into diamond . The largest diamond he produced was 0 @.@ 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 0059 in ) across ; it was too small and visually imperfect for jewelry , but usable in industrial abrasives . Hall 's co @-@ workers were able to replicate his work , and the discovery was published in the major journal Nature . He was the first person to grow a synthetic diamond with a reproducible , verifiable and well @-@ documented process . He left GE in 1955 , and three years later developed a new apparatus for the synthesis of diamond — a tetrahedral press with four anvils — to avoid violating a U.S. Department of Commerce secrecy order on the GE patent applications . Hall received the American Chemical Society Award for Creative Invention for his work in diamond synthesis . 
 = = = Later developments = = = 
 An independent diamond synthesis was achieved on February 16 , 1953 in Stockholm by the ASEA ( Allmänna Svenska <unk> <unk> ) , one of Sweden 's major electrical manufacturing companies . Starting in 1949 , ASEA employed a team of five scientists and engineers as part of a top @-@ secret diamond @-@ making project code @-@ named <unk> . The team used a bulky split @-@ sphere apparatus designed by <unk> von Platen and Anders <unk> . Pressure was maintained within the device at an estimated 8 @.@ 4 GPa for an hour . A few small diamonds were produced , but not of gem quality or size . The work was not reported until the 1980s . During the 1980s , a new competitor emerged in Korea , a company named <unk> Diamond ; it was followed by hundreds of Chinese enterprises . <unk> Diamond allegedly accomplished diamond synthesis in 1988 by misappropriating trade secrets from GE via a Korean former GE employee . 
 Synthetic gem @-@ quality diamond crystals were first produced in 1970 by GE , then reported in 1971 . The first successes used a pyrophyllite tube seeded at each end with thin pieces of diamond . The graphite feed material was placed in the center and the metal solvent ( nickel ) between the graphite and the seeds . The container was heated and the pressure was raised to about 5 @.@ 5 GPa . The crystals grow as they flow from the center to the ends of the tube , and extending the length of the process produces larger crystals . Initially , a week @-@ long growth process produced gem @-@ quality stones of around 5 mm ( 1 carat or 0 @.@ 2 g ) , and the process conditions had to be as stable as possible . The graphite feed was soon replaced by diamond grit because that allowed much better control of the shape of the final crystal . 
 The first gem @-@ quality stones were always yellow to brown in color because of contamination with nitrogen . <unk> were common , especially " plate @-@ like " ones from the nickel . Removing all nitrogen from the process by adding aluminium or titanium produced colorless " white " stones , and removing the nitrogen and adding boron produced blue ones . Removing nitrogen also slowed the growth process and reduced the crystalline quality , so the process was normally run with nitrogen present . 
 Although the GE stones and natural diamonds were chemically identical , their physical properties were not the same . The colorless stones produced strong fluorescence and phosphorescence under short @-@ wavelength ultraviolet light , but were inert under long @-@ wave UV . Among natural diamonds , only the rarer blue gems exhibit these properties . Unlike natural diamonds , all the GE stones showed strong yellow fluorescence under X @-@ rays . The De Beers Diamond Research Laboratory has grown stones of up to 25 carats ( 5 @.@ 0 g ) for research purposes . Stable HPHT conditions were kept for six weeks to grow high @-@ quality diamonds of this size . For economic reasons , the growth of most synthetic diamonds is terminated when they reach a mass of 1 carat ( 200 mg ) to 1 @.@ 5 carats ( 300 mg ) . 
 In the 1950s , research started in the Soviet Union and the US on the growth of diamond by pyrolysis of hydrocarbon gases at the relatively low temperature of 800 ° C. This low @-@ pressure process is known as chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) . William G. <unk> reportedly achieved vapor deposition of diamond over diamond substrate in 1953 , but it was not reported until 1962 . Diamond film deposition was independently reproduced by Angus and coworkers in 1968 and by <unk> and Fedoseev in 1970 . Whereas <unk> and Angus used large , expensive , single @-@ crystal diamonds as substrates , <unk> and Fedoseev succeeded in making diamond films on non @-@ diamond materials ( silicon and metals ) , which led to massive research on inexpensive diamond coatings in the 1980s . 
 In recent years , there has been a rise in cases of undisclosed synthetic diamond melee being found in set jewelry and within diamond parcels sold in the trade . Due to the relatively inexpensive cost of diamond melee , as well as relative lack of universal knowledge for identifying large quantities of melee efficiently , not all dealers have made an effort to test diamond melee to correctly identify whether it is of natural or man @-@ made origin . However , international laboratories are now beginning to tackle the issue head @-@ on , with significant improvements in synthetic melee identification being made . 
 = = Manufacturing technologies = = 
 There are several methods used to produce synthetic diamond . The original method uses high pressure and high temperature ( HPHT ) and is still widely used because of its relatively low cost . The process involves large presses that can weigh hundreds of tons to produce a pressure of 5 GPa at 1500 ° C. The second method , using chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) , creates a carbon plasma over a substrate onto which the carbon atoms deposit to form diamond . Other methods include explosive formation ( forming detonation <unk> ) and <unk> of graphite solutions . 
 = = = High pressure , high temperature = = = 
 In the HPHT method , there are three main press designs used to supply the pressure and temperature necessary to produce synthetic diamond : the belt press , the cubic press and the split @-@ sphere ( BARS ) press . Diamond seeds are placed at the bottom of the press . The internal part of press is heated above 1400 ° C and melts the solvent metal . The molten metal dissolves the high purity carbon source , which is then transported to the small diamond seeds and precipitates , forming a large synthetic diamond . 
 The original GE invention by Tracy Hall uses the belt press wherein the upper and lower anvils supply the pressure load to a cylindrical inner cell . This internal pressure is confined radially by a belt of pre @-@ stressed steel bands . The anvils also serve as electrodes providing electric current to the compressed cell . A variation of the belt press uses hydraulic pressure , rather than steel belts , to confine the internal pressure . Belt presses are still used today , but they are built on a much larger scale than those of the original design . 
 The second type of press design is the cubic press . A cubic press has six anvils which provide pressure simultaneously onto all faces of a cube @-@ shaped volume . The first multi @-@ anvil press design was a tetrahedral press , using four anvils to converge upon a tetrahedron @-@ shaped volume . The cubic press was created shortly thereafter to increase the volume to which pressure could be applied . A cubic press is typically smaller than a belt press and can more rapidly achieve the pressure and temperature necessary to create synthetic diamond . However , cubic presses cannot be easily scaled up to larger volumes : the pressurized volume can be increased by using larger anvils , but this also increases the amount of force needed on the anvils to achieve the same pressure . An alternative is to decrease the surface area to volume ratio of the pressurized volume , by using more anvils to converge upon a higher @-@ order platonic solid , such as a dodecahedron . However , such a press would be complex and difficult to manufacture . 
 The BARS apparatus is the most compact , efficient , and economical of all the diamond @-@ producing presses . In the center of a BARS device , there is a ceramic cylindrical " synthesis capsule " of about 2 cm3 in size . The cell is placed into a cube of pressure @-@ transmitting material , such as pyrophyllite ceramics , which is pressed by inner anvils made from cemented carbide ( e.g. , tungsten carbide or <unk> hard alloy ) . The outer octahedral cavity is pressed by 8 steel outer anvils . After mounting , the whole assembly is locked in a disc @-@ type barrel with a diameter about 1 meter . The barrel is filled with oil , which <unk> upon heating , and the oil pressure is transferred to the central cell . The synthesis capsule is heated up by a coaxial graphite heater and the temperature is measured with a thermocouple . 
 = = = Chemical vapor deposition = = = 
 Chemical vapor deposition is a method by which diamond can be grown from a hydrocarbon gas mixture . Since the early 1980s , this method has been the subject of intensive worldwide research . Whereas the mass @-@ production of high @-@ quality diamond crystals make the HPHT process the more suitable choice for industrial applications , the flexibility and simplicity of CVD setups explain the popularity of CVD growth in laboratory research . The advantages of CVD diamond growth include the ability to grow diamond over large areas and on various substrates , and the fine control over the chemical impurities and thus properties of the diamond produced . Unlike HPHT , CVD process does not require high pressures , as the growth typically occurs at pressures under 27 kPa . 
 The CVD growth involves substrate preparation , feeding varying amounts of gases into a chamber and energizing them . The substrate preparation includes choosing an appropriate material and its crystallographic orientation ; cleaning it , often with a diamond powder to abrade a non @-@ diamond substrate ; and optimizing the substrate temperature ( about 800 ° C ) during the growth through a series of test runs . The gases always include a carbon source , typically methane , and hydrogen with a typical ratio of 1 : 99 . Hydrogen is essential because it selectively etches off non @-@ diamond carbon . The gases are ionized into chemically active radicals in the growth chamber using microwave power , a hot filament , an arc discharge , a welding torch , a laser , an electron beam , or other means . 
 During the growth , the chamber materials are etched off by the plasma and can incorporate into the growing diamond . In particular , CVD diamond is often contaminated by silicon originating from the silica windows of the growth chamber or from the silicon substrate . Therefore , silica windows are either avoided or moved away from the substrate . Boron @-@ containing species in the chamber , even at very low trace levels , also make it unsuitable for the growth of pure diamond . 
 = = = Detonation of explosives = = = 
 Diamond nanocrystals ( 5 nm in diameter ) can be formed by detonating certain carbon @-@ containing explosives in a metal chamber . These nanocrystals are called " detonation nanodiamond " . During the explosion , the pressure and temperature in the chamber become high enough to convert the carbon of the explosives into diamond . Being immersed in water , the chamber cools rapidly after the explosion , suppressing conversion of newly produced diamond into more stable graphite . In a variation of this technique , a metal tube filled with graphite powder is placed in the detonation chamber . The explosion heats and compresses the graphite to an extent sufficient for its conversion into diamond . The product is always rich in graphite and other non @-@ diamond carbon forms and requires prolonged boiling in hot nitric acid ( about 1 day at 250 ° C ) to dissolve them . The recovered nanodiamond powder is used primarily in polishing applications . It is mainly produced in China , Russia and Belarus and started reaching the market in bulk quantities by the early 2000s . 
 = = = Ultrasound cavitation = = = 
 Micron @-@ sized diamond crystals can be synthesized from a suspension of graphite in organic liquid at atmospheric pressure and room temperature using ultrasonic cavitation . The diamond yield is about 10 % of the initial graphite weight . The estimated cost of diamond produced by this method is comparable to that of the HPHT method ; the crystalline perfection of the product is significantly worse for the ultrasonic synthesis . This technique requires relatively simple equipment and procedures , but it has only been reported by two research groups , and has no industrial use as of 2012 . Numerous process parameters , such as preparation of the initial graphite powder , the choice of ultrasonic power , synthesis time and the solvent , are not yet optimized , leaving a window for potential improvement of the efficiency and reduction of the cost of the ultrasonic synthesis . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Traditionally , the absence of crystal flaws is considered to be the most important quality of a diamond . Purity and high crystalline perfection make diamonds transparent and clear , whereas its hardness , optical dispersion ( luster ) and chemical stability ( combined with marketing ) , make it a popular gemstone . High thermal conductivity is also important for technical applications . Whereas high optical dispersion is an intrinsic property of all diamonds , their other properties vary depending on how the diamond was created . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Diamond can be one single , continuous crystal or it can be made up of many smaller crystals ( <unk> ) . Large , clear and transparent single @-@ crystal diamonds are typically used in gemstones . Polycrystalline diamond ( PCD ) consists of numerous small grains , which are easily seen by the naked eye through strong light absorption and scattering ; it is unsuitable for gems and is used for industrial applications such as mining and cutting tools . Polycrystalline diamond is often described by the average size ( or grain size ) of the crystals that make it up . Grain sizes range from nanometers to hundreds of micrometers , usually referred to as " nanocrystalline " and " microcrystalline " diamond , respectively . 
 = = = Hardness = = = 
 Synthetic diamond is the hardest material known , where hardness is defined as resistance to indentation . The hardness of synthetic diamond depends on its purity , crystalline perfection and orientation : hardness is higher for flawless , pure crystals oriented to the [ 111 ] direction ( along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice ) . <unk> diamond produced through CVD diamond growth can have a hardness ranging from 30 % to 75 % of that of single crystal diamond , and the hardness can be controlled for specific applications . Some synthetic single @-@ crystal diamonds and HPHT nanocrystalline diamonds ( see <unk> ) are harder than any known natural diamond . 
 = = = Impurities and inclusions = = = 
 Every diamond contains atoms other than carbon in concentrations detectable by analytical techniques . Those atoms can aggregate into macroscopic phases called inclusions . Impurities are generally avoided , but can be introduced intentionally as a way to control certain properties of the diamond . Growth processes of synthetic diamond , using solvent @-@ catalysts , generally lead to formation of a number of impurity @-@ related complex centers , involving transition metal atoms ( such as nickel , cobalt or iron ) , which affect the electronic properties of the material . 
 For instance , pure diamond is an electrical insulator , but diamond with boron added is an electrical conductor ( and , in some cases , a superconductor ) , allowing it to be used in electronic applications . Nitrogen impurities hinder movement of lattice dislocations ( defects within the crystal structure ) and put the lattice under compressive stress , thereby increasing hardness and toughness . 
 = = = Thermal conductivity = = = 
 Unlike most electrical insulators , pure diamond is a good conductor of heat because of the strong covalent bonding within the crystal . The thermal conductivity of pure diamond is the highest of any known solid . Single crystals of synthetic diamond enriched in 12C ( 99 @.@ 9 % ) , isotopically pure diamond , have the highest thermal conductivity of any material , 30 W / cm · K at room temperature , 7 @.@ 5 times higher than copper . Natural diamond 's conductivity is reduced by 1 @.@ 1 % by the 13C naturally present , which acts as an inhomogeneity in the lattice . 
 Diamond 's thermal conductivity is made use of by jewelers and gemologists who may employ an electronic thermal probe to separate diamonds from their imitations . These probes consist of a pair of battery @-@ powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip . One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip : if the stone being tested is a diamond , it will conduct the tip 's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop . This test takes about 2 – 3 seconds . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Machining and cutting tools = = = 
 Most industrial applications of synthetic diamond have long been associated with their hardness ; this property makes diamond the ideal material for machine tools and cutting tools . As the hardest known naturally occurring material , diamond can be used to polish , cut , or wear away any material , including other diamonds . Common industrial applications of this ability include diamond @-@ tipped drill bits and saws , and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive . These are by far the largest industrial applications of synthetic diamond . While natural diamond is also used for these purposes , synthetic HPHT diamond is more popular , mostly because of better reproducibility of its mechanical properties . Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds , as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high @-@ speed machining , leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives . 
 The usual form of diamond in cutting tools is micrometer @-@ sized grains dispersed in a metal matrix ( usually cobalt ) sintered onto the tool . This is typically referred to in industry as polycrystalline diamond ( PCD ) . PCD @-@ tipped tools can be found in mining and cutting applications . For the past fifteen years , work has been done to coat metallic tools with CVD diamond , and though the work still shows promise it has not significantly replaced traditional PCD tools . 
 = = = Thermal conductor = = = 
 Most materials with high thermal conductivity are also electrically conductive , such as metals . In contrast , pure synthetic diamond has high thermal conductivity , but negligible electrical conductivity . This combination is invaluable for electronics where diamond is used as a heat sink for high @-@ power laser diodes , laser arrays and high @-@ power transistors . Efficient heat dissipation prolongs the lifetime of those electronic devices , and the devices ' high replacement costs justify the use of efficient , though relatively expensive , diamond heat sinks . In semiconductor technology , synthetic diamond heat spreaders prevent silicon and other semiconducting materials from overheating . 
 = = = Optical material = = = 
 Diamond is hard , chemically inert , and has high thermal conductivity and a low coefficient of thermal expansion . These properties make diamond superior to any other existing window material used for transmitting infrared and microwave radiation . Therefore , synthetic diamond is starting to replace zinc selenide as the output window of high @-@ power CO2 lasers and gyrotrons . Those synthetic diamond windows are shaped as disks of large diameters ( about 10 cm for gyrotrons ) and small thicknesses ( to reduce absorption ) and can only be produced with the CVD technique . 
 Recent advances in the HPHT and CVD synthesis techniques improved the purity and crystallographic structure perfection of single @-@ crystalline diamond enough to replace silicon as a diffraction grating and window material in high @-@ power radiation sources , such as synchrotrons . Both the CVD and HPHT processes are also used to create designer optically transparent diamond anvils as a tool for measuring electric and magnetic properties of materials at ultra high pressures using a diamond anvil cell . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 Synthetic diamond has potential uses as a semiconductor , because it can be doped with impurities like boron and phosphorus . Since these elements contain one more or one less valence electron than carbon , they turn synthetic diamond into p @-@ type or n @-@ type semiconductor . Making a p – n junction by sequential doping of synthetic diamond with boron and phosphorus produces light @-@ emitting diodes ( LEDs ) producing UV light of 235 nm . Another useful property of synthetic diamond for electronics is high carrier mobility , which reaches 4500 cm2 / ( V · s ) for electrons in single @-@ crystal CVD diamond . High mobility is favorable for high @-@ frequency field @-@ effect transistors . The wide band gap of diamond ( 5 @.@ 5 eV ) gives it excellent dielectric properties . Combined with the high mechanical stability of diamond , those properties are being used in prototype high @-@ power switches for power stations . 
 Synthetic diamond transistors have been produced in the laboratory . They are functional at much higher temperatures than silicon devices , and are resistant to chemical and radiation damage . While no diamond transistors have yet been successfully integrated into commercial electronics , they are promising for use in exceptionally high @-@ power situations and hostile non @-@ oxidizing environments . 
 Synthetic diamond is already used as radiation detection device . It is radiation hard and has a wide bandgap of 5 @.@ 5 eV ( at room temperature ) . Diamond is also distinguished from most other semiconductors by the lack of a stable native oxide . This makes it difficult to fabricate surface MOS devices , but it does create the potential for UV radiation to gain access to the active semiconductor without absorption in a surface layer . Because of these properties , it is employed in applications such as the <unk> detector at the Stanford Linear Accelerator and BOLD ( Blind to the Optical Light Detectors for VUV solar observations ) . A diamond VUV detector recently was used in the European <unk> program . 
 Conductive CVD diamond is a useful electrode under many circumstances . <unk> methods have been developed for covalently linking DNA to the surface of polycrystalline diamond films produced through CVD . Such DNA modified films can be used for detecting various biomolecules , which would interact with DNA thereby changing electrical conductivity of the diamond film . In addition , diamonds can be used to detect redox reactions that cannot ordinarily be studied and in some cases degrade redox @-@ reactive organic contaminants in water supplies . Because diamond is mechanically and chemically stable , it can be used as an electrode under conditions that would destroy traditional materials . As an electrode , synthetic diamond can be used in waste water treatment of organic effluents and the production of strong oxidants . 
 = = = Gemstones = = = 
 Synthetic diamonds for use as gemstones are grown by HPHT or CVD methods , and currently represent approximately 2 % of the gem @-@ quality diamond market . However , there are indications that the market share of synthetic jewelry @-@ quality diamonds may grow as advances in technology allows for larger higher @-@ quality synthetic production on a more economic scale . They are available in yellow and blue , and to a lesser extent colorless ( or white ) . The yellow color comes from nitrogen impurities in the manufacturing process , while the blue color comes from boron . Other colors , such as pink or green , are achievable after synthesis using irradiation . Several companies also offer memorial diamonds grown using cremated remains . 
 Gem @-@ quality diamonds grown in a lab can be chemically , physically and optically identical ( and sometimes superior ) to naturally occurring ones . The mined diamond industry has undertaken legal , marketing and distribution countermeasures to protect its market from the emerging presence of synthetic diamonds . Synthetic diamonds can be distinguished by spectroscopy in the infrared , ultraviolet , or X @-@ ray wavelengths . The <unk> tester from De Beers uses UV fluorescence to detect trace impurities of nitrogen , nickel or other metals in HPHT or CVD diamonds . 
 At least one maker of laboratory @-@ grown diamonds has made public statements about being " committed to disclosure " of the nature of its diamonds , and laser @-@ inscribes serial numbers on all of its gemstones . The company web site shows an example of the lettering of one of its laser inscriptions , which includes both the words " <unk> created " and the serial number prefix " LG " ( laboratory grown ) . 
 In May 2015 , a record was set for an HPHT colorless diamond at 10 @.@ 02 carats . The faceted jewel was cut from a 32 @.@ 2 @-@ carat stone that was grown within 300 hours . 
 Traditional diamond mining has led to human @-@ rights abuses in Africa and elsewhere . The 2006 Hollywood movie Blood Diamond helped to publicize the situation . Consumer demand for synthetic diamonds is increasing , albeit from a small base , as customers look for stones which are ethically sound , and are cheaper . 
 According to a report from the Gem & Jewellery Export Promotional Council , synthetic diamonds accounted for 0 @.@ 28 % of diamond produced for use as gem stones in 2014 . Lab diamond jewellery is sold in the United States by brands including Pure Grown Diamonds ( formerly known as <unk> ) and Lab Diamonds Direct ; and in the UK by Nightingale online jewellers . 
 = Oryzomys albiventer = 
 Oryzomys albiventer is a rodent in the genus Oryzomys of family Cricetidae from interior western Mexico , in the states of Jalisco , Guanajuato , and Michoacán . First described in 1901 as a separate species , it was later lumped under O. couesi and the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) until it was reinstated as a species in 2009 . It differs from neighboring Oryzomys populations in size and measurements and is a large , brightly colored species with a long tail and robust skull and molars . Its range has been much impacted by agricultural development , but isolated populations are thought to persist . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Oryzomys albiventer was first described by C.H. Merriam in 1901 on the basis of ten specimens from Ameca , Jalisco . He named the animal albiventer after the white color of its underparts and considered it most closely related to Oryzomys aquaticus ( currently included in Oryzomys couesi ) . Two years later , D.G. Eliot described Oryzomys molestus on the basis of a single individual from <unk> , Jalisco ; the name molestus means " troublesome , irksome " . Eliot considered Oryzomys fulgens , another current synonym of O. couesi , as the closest relative of his new species . In his 1918 review of North American Oryzomys , E.A. Goldman assessed the holotype of O. molestus , an old male , as merely a large example of albiventer , and reduced albiventer to one of many subspecies of O. couesi . He considered it closely related to three other highland Mexican forms . In 1960 , E.R. Hall argued that O. couesi was the same species as the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) of the United States , and listed albiventer as a subspecies of the latter . Later , O. couesi was again accepted as separate from the marsh rice rat , but O. albiventer was still classified under O. couesi . 
 In a 2009 revision of the Oryzomys of western Mexico , M.D. Carleton and J. Arroyo @-@ Cabrales noted substantial differences in coloration and measurements between highland populations ( albiventer ) and lowland populations ( mexicanus ) in Jalisco . On the basis of these differences , they recognized O. albiventer as a species separate from the lowland populations , which they classified under O. couesi . They confirmed that Eliot 's molestus was based on a large example of O. <unk> , but left the status of the three forms Goldman had associated with albiventer — crinitus , aztecus , and regillus — open , noting that there was no convincing evidence that these represented the same species as O. albiventer . The identity and exact provenance of fulgens ( supposed to be from the Valley of Mexico ) , and consequently its relationship to O. albiventer , remain unknown . 
 O. albiventer is part of the genus Oryzomys , which currently includes about eight species distributed from the eastern United States ( O. palustris ) into northwestern South America ( O. gorgasi ) . O. albiventer is further part of the O. couesi section , which is centered on the widespread Central American O. couesi and also includes various other species with more limited and peripheral distributions . Many aspects of the systematics of the O. couesi section remain unclear and it is likely that the current classification underestimates the true diversity of the group . Oryzomys previously included many other species , which were progressively removed in various studies culminating in a contribution by Marcelo Weksler and coworkers in 2006 that removed more than forty species from the genus . All are classified in the tribe Oryzomyini ( " rice rats " ) , a diverse assemblage of American rodents of over a hundred species , and on higher taxonomic levels in the subfamily Sigmodontinae of family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 In 1904 , Eliot used the common name " white @-@ bellied rice rat " for O. albiventer and " <unk> rice rat " for O. molestus . In 1918 , Goldman also used " white @-@ bellied rice rat " for O. albiventer . 
 = = Description = = 
 Oryzomys albiventer is a large and long @-@ tailed Oryzomys . The upperparts are brightly ochraceous , becoming grayer toward the front . The hairs on the underparts are pale gray near the bases and white in the outer half , so that the underparts appear pale grayish according to Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales ( not white as claimed by Merriman ) . The tail is dark above and light below . The skull and molars are relatively robust . O. albiventer has broad zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) , long incisive foramina ( perforations of the palate between the incisors and the molars ) , and long nasal bones that extend behind the premaxillary bones . Compared to its lowland relative O. couesi mexicanus , O. albiventer is larger and more brightly colored and has larger molars but narrower incisive foramina . 
 In twelve specimens , total length is 245 to 314 mm ( 9 @.@ 6 to 12 @.@ 4 in ) , averaging 285 @.@ 4 mm ( 11 @.@ 24 in ) ; head and body length is 116 to 142 mm ( 4 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 6 in ) , averaging 130 @.@ 0 mm ( 5 @.@ 12 in ) ; tail length is 129 to 173 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 to 6 @.@ 8 in ) , averaging 155 @.@ 4 mm ( 6 @.@ 12 in ) ; hindfoot length is 33 to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) , averaging 36 @.@ 1 mm ( 1 @.@ 42 in ) ; and skull length ( occipitonasal length ) is 30 @.@ 0 to 34 @.@ 5 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 to 1 @.@ 36 in ) , averaging 32 @.@ 9 mm ( 1 @.@ 30 in ) . 
 = = Distribution and conservation = = 
 O. albiventer occurs at about 1 @,@ 200 to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 3 @,@ 900 to 5 @,@ 900 ft ) elevation in northern Michoacán , southern Guanajuato , and central and eastern Jalisco , mostly in the area around Lake Chapala . Its range has seen massive agricultural development and although populations may survive , the current distribution of the species is certainly highly fragmented . More survey work is needed to assess the distribution and status of O. albiventer . 
 = Benjaminville Friends Meeting House and Burial Ground = 
 The Benjaminville Friends Meeting House and Burial Ground is a Friends Meeting House of the Religious Society of Friends ( Quakers ) , located north of the rural village of Holder in McLean County , Illinois . It was once the site of a now @-@ defunct village called Benjaminville , founded in 1856 after Quakers settled the area . More Quakers followed , and the burial ground , then the current meeting house in 1874 , were constructed . This site , listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places since 1983 , is all that remains of that village . 
 The burial ground preceded the meeting house , as the site was home to another meeting house that was constructed in 1859 . The Benjaminville Meeting House represents a well @-@ constructed example of Quaker meeting house architecture and contains within its design many of the major elements associated with the style . It is unique in that it allowed both male and female friends to worship together in the same room . The burial ground , however , maintains a strict separation , not by gender but by religious affiliation ; there are three sections , one for Quakers , one for non @-@ Quakers , and one for distant relatives of both . 
 = = Building = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The Benjaminville Friends Meeting House is located on a relatively elevated area of land east of Bloomington , Illinois , near the community of Holder . The land was originally flat , treeless prairie but today is designated mostly for agricultural use . The unincorporated community of <unk> is located nearby as well . To the east a large wind farm is being constructed within Arrowsmith Township . The building is the last extant structure in the now @-@ defunct village of Benjaminville , Illinois . 
 = = = History = = = 
 In 1859 , three years after the first Quaker settlers arrived in the area , a meeting house was constructed on the site of the present @-@ day Friends meeting house for US $ 1 @,@ 000 . Quakers continued to flow into the area through the 1860s and in 1874 the current Friends meeting house was constructed and it has seen little change since it was built . Some minor alterations have taken place , including the addition of a concrete porch to the entryway and a shed on the east ( rear ) facade . The shed was added around 1910 to serve as a storage space and a privy . The building became a social , political , and religious hub for the area Quakers and the site was visited by Friends from other meeting houses around the state . The building is no longer owned by a religious institution , though there are occasional services held there . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The Benjaminville Friends Meeting House is located on a 2 @.@ 5 acres ( 10 @,@ 000 m2 ) site planted with grass and native deciduous trees . The location is surrounded by crops and is well isolated from other nearby structures . The rectangular , balloon framed building is situated on an east @-@ west axis , with its front facade facing west . The long side measures 42 ft ( 13 m ) and the shorter gable ends of the building measure 32 ft ( 10 m ) . The building 's entrance is found on its south elevation and consists of dual doors which bisect the walls at the jambs . The Friends meeting house in Benjaminville is a typical example of traditional Quaker meeting houses . Elements common to Quaker meeting houses east of the Allegheny Mountains and found on the Benjaminville example are : plain , undecorated interiors , lack of stained glass , rectangular shaped log or frame construction , some type of partition within the interior space , an attached burial ground , exterior simplicity , separate men 's and women 's entrances , and the entryway location along the long wall . 
 The interior room , like the exterior , is oriented east @-@ west . The most prominent decorative element inside is the hand graining detail on the wood surfaces . An elevated gallery lines the north wall facing the pews which are bisected by 3 ½ ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) tall , 5 in ( 13 cm ) wide beaded board partition . The pews , partition , door , and window trim are all hand grained . The interior walls are covered with 6 in ( 15 cm ) pine wainscotting . The original iron stoves have been replaced with oil @-@ burning stoves , set into the original flues . 
 The building is considered a fine example of traditional Quaker architecture because it contains all of the elements found in the typical meeting house . However , the building does have one major difference on its interior when compared with most meeting houses . Traditionally , Quaker meeting houses had two rooms , divided by a movable partition , termed " shutters , " meant to separate men from women during meetings ; these shutters are noticeably absent on the Benjaminville Meeting House . The members of the meeting at the Benjaminville Meeting House were among " pioneers " within the Society of Friends in that they were one of the first seven groups to allow men and women to meet as one group of Friends . The room inside the Benjaminville building was simply divided with a waist @-@ high partition as opposed to the movable wall . 
 While most Friends meeting houses were very plain in their designs and ornamentation , individual craftsmen were encouraged to be " guided by ( their ) own inner light " when working on building a meeting house . As such , the dominant decorative element on the Benjaminville building is fine hand graining on most of the interior wood surfaces . The decoration should not be seen as an affront to the traditional and typical Quaker style used in meeting houses . Instead it stands as a testament to the fact that the Society of Friends encouraged craftsmen to create as " the spirit moved them . " 
 = = Cemetery = = 
 The cemetery was established soon after the original meeting house was built in 1859 . Burial grounds were typical accompaniments to Friends meeting houses . While burial grounds were encouraged in the 1825 Quaker Rules of Discipline , the burial of non @-@ Quakers in Quaker cemeteries was not . To satisfy this rule burials at Benjaminville were separated into two separate sections to allow an area for non @-@ Quakers . A newer section contains a mix of Quaker and non @-@ Quaker descendants of those originally buried there . 
 Non @-@ Quaker burials were originally confined to the northern section of the cemetery , the portion directly behind the meeting house . Members of the Society of Friends were buried in the middle portion of the cemetery , today surrounded by a loop in the gravel road that traverses the site . The most recent burials are found in the southernmost section of the cemetery , furthest from the meeting house . The entire burial ground is approximately 160 by 200 ft ( 49 by 61 m ) , for a total area of 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m2 ) . 
 Burials are oriented east @-@ west . The burial ground covers most of the site 's land and is planted with grass and trees . The surrounding land is predominantly of agricultural use but there are some nearby residences . To the east a wind farm is under construction . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Benjaminville Friends Meeting House is a particularly well @-@ preserved example of a Quaker meeting house . For several years after 1874 the building was the focus of settlement in Benjaminville , a town one author described as " one of the strongest settlements of Friends that is to be found anywhere in the state " in 1879 . The structure is of historical and architectural significance . As an example of the meeting house style used by the Society of Friends , the Benjaminville building is representative of an architectural type that remained virtually unchanged from the colonial American period through the 19th century . The Benjaminville Friends Meeting House and its burial ground were listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on December 13 , 1983 . 
 = Orme ( horse ) = 
 Orme ( 1889 – 17 September 1915 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse . He was trained at Kingsclere by John Porter for the 1st Duke of Westminster . As a two @-@ year @-@ old he won the Middle Park and Dewhurst Stakes . As a three @-@ year @-@ old he was not well enough to take part in the 2000 Guineas and Epsom Derby , but came back to win the Eclipse Stakes . Orme stayed in training as a four @-@ year @-@ old and won another Eclipse Stakes , becoming the first horse to win the race twice , a feat that has only been repeated four times since . After he had retired from racing , he became a successful sire and was Champion sire of Great Britain in 1899 . His son Flying Fox won the Triple Crown and the Eclipse Stakes . Orme also sired Epsom Derby winner <unk> and 1000 Guineas winner Witch Elm . His regular jockeys were George Barrett and Morny Cannon . 
 = = Background = = 
 Orme was a bay colt born in 1889 at Eaton Stud in Cheshire . He was bred by the 1st Duke of Westminster . Orme stood 16 hands high and had a large white star , with no other white markings . His sire was the unbeaten 2000 Guineas , Epsom Derby and St. Leger winner Ormonde . Orme was one of Ormonde 's first crop of foals . By the time Orme reached a racecourse , Ormonde had been exported to Argentina . Ormonde did not become a great sire due to fertility problems , producing only a few foals most years . However , he did also sire Goldfinch , a horse that was a top class two @-@ year @-@ old and won the New Stakes . In the United States , he sired Futurity Stakes winner <unk> . Orme was clear @-@ winded , unlike his sire , who was a <unk> . 
 Orme 's dam Angelica was an unraced sister to the outstanding sire St. Simon . They were progeny of Galopin and St. Angela , a daughter of King Tom . The Duke of Westminster had purchased Angelica in 1886 when she was carrying a foal by <unk> . The foal was Blue Green , who went on to win the Queen Alexandra Stakes . Orme was Angelica 's fifth foal . 
 Orme showed great promise as a yearling , with trainer John Porter saying he had great expectations for him after only having him for a few months . In October 1890 Orme and Orville were described as " [ t ] he two finest yearlings in the Duke of Westminster 's stud . " 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1891 : Two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Prior to Orme 's first appearance on a racecourse , John Porter tested him over five furlongs against the three @-@ year @-@ old Massacre and three two @-@ year @-@ olds , including Orville . Ridden by George Barrett , Orme won the trial by half a length from Massacre . 
 = = = = Early career = = = = 
 Orme started his racing career in August 1891 at the Glorious Goodwood meeting at Goodwood Racecourse . He was ridden by George Barrett and started the 4 / 5 favourite in the Richmond Stakes . 20 / 1 outsider Ben Avon led the field of eight in the early stages of the race , with Orme in the middle of the pack . Orme took the lead with a quarter of a mile left to run , and despite showing his inexperience , he won easily by three quarters of a length from <unk> ( who was carrying more weight than Orme ) , the two then colliding as they pulled up . At the same meeting , two days later , Orme also started in the Prince of Wales ' Stakes . He started as the 1 / 2 favourite and led the field from the start . Dunure made some progress from the back of the field into second place , but none of the runners could get to Orme , who won by one length . Dunure was second and <unk> was third , four lengths behind Dunure . After these two races , he was already as short as 5 / 1 for the 1892 Epsom Derby . After Goodwood the Duke of Westminster refused a big offer to purchase Orme . 
 Orme then took on older horses in the valuable Lancashire Plate , where he started the 7 / 4 favourite . In the last few furlongs Orme challenged the four @-@ year @-@ old Signorina for the lead , and as they approached the main stand , <unk> challenged the pair . Orme drew level with Signorina , but the filly edged away slightly again and won an exciting race by half a length from Orme , <unk> a head back in third . Orme received £ 1000 for finishing second . 
 = = = = October = = = = 
 He returned to racing against horses of his own age , starting the 8 / 15 favourite of a field of ten runners for the six @-@ furlong Middle Park Plate at Newmarket . As the field neared the finish , Orme was travelling the best , and as soon as Barrett let him go , he immediately took the lead . El Diablo tried to close , but could not get to Orme , with the latter winning easily by a couple of lengths , <unk> being a neck back from El Diablo in third . Orme then started in the Dewhurst Plate , but his presence deterred many owners from entering and he faced only two rivals . He started as the 6 / 100 favourite , with El Diablo at 20 / 1 and Hatfield at 50 / 1 . Orme led from the start , and with two furlongs to run he began to stride away . El Diablo tried to close , but Orme won by three @-@ quarters of a length from him and was never extended . Hatfield finished well behind Orme and El Diablo in third place . Orme 's final race of the season came on 30 October in the Home @-@ bred Foal Post Stakes over five furlongs and 140 yards at Newmarket . He started as the 3 / 100 favourite and faced three rivals . Orme lead throughout the race and won easily by two lengths from Esmond , with <unk> a further three lengths back in third place . 
 He finished his two @-@ year @-@ old season with a record of five wins and a second place from six starts . At the end of the season , some even believed that he was better than his sire Ormonde , the ' horse of the century ' . One writer rated him ten pounds superior to the next best two @-@ year @-@ old La Fleche , with her being one pound superior to <unk> . Some were more cautious , however , suggesting that Orme had not beaten any top horses . 
 = = = 1892 : Three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Going into the 1892 season Orme was a strong favourite for the Epsom Derby , with odds as short as 2 / 1 in December . In March he was still favourite , but had drifted out slightly to 5 / 2 due to the support for stablemate La Fleche . 
 = = = = Suspected poisoning = = = = 
 In late April there were reports that Orme had a sore throat . This caused Orme to drift in the betting for the Derby , and La Fleche became the favourite . Orme was withdrawn from the 2000 Guineas , but returned to doing gentle exercise and it was hoped that he would still be able to make the Derby . The Duke of Westminster hinted that he had been poisoned . In early May , Orme had still not improved , and connections stated that he had been poisoned with mercury . It was suspected that the culprit may have been a well @-@ known backer of Derby rival La Fleche , with the poison being administered in a lozenge that Orme chewed , blistering his tongue . However , a dentist that removed part of a decayed tooth from Orme suggested that the illness was not due to poisoning , but to the decayed tooth . 
 By mid @-@ May it was clear that he would not make the Derby and he was removed from the race on the 23 May . Orme 's trainer John Porter and Williams , the veterinary surgeon , remained convinced that he had been poisoned and was not just suffering from bad teeth . A reward of £ 1 @,@ 000 was even offered for information that would lead to the conviction of the guilty party . The poisoning was investigated by George Lewis , a solicitor , who concluded that the horse had been poisoned . He stated that the horse was fine on the morning of the 21 April , but a few hours later his tongue was so inflamed he could not hold it in his mouth ; something so sudden , Lewis argued , could not have been caused by a decaying tooth . He suggested that the poison may have in fact been attempted to be administered by some ball being put down his throat , but due to the struggles of the horse , it burst in his mouth , blistering his tongue . The Derby was won by Sir Hugo , but many believed that Orme would have won easily had he made the race . 
 = = = = Summer return = = = = 
 Porter ran Orme in a trial four days before the Eclipse Stakes at Sandown Park as preparation . He raced against his five @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ brother Blue Green and the six @-@ year @-@ old <unk> . Despite conceding weight to both of them , he won by the trial by two lengths from <unk> . In the Eclipse he faced six rivals and started the 5 / 4 favourite , with Sussex Stakes winner Orvieto next in the betting at 11 / 4 . During the race Orme was ridden in the middle of the field . As they turned into the finishing straight , Orme and Orvieto were close behind the two leaders ; the two then took over the lead in the straight . As they neared the finish , Orvieto had a slight advantage , but as Barrett asked Orme for an effort , he responded and got in front to win by a neck from Orvieto , with St. Damien finishing only three quarters of a length behind Orvieto . The race was worth over £ 9000 . Twelve days later Orme lined up as the 1 / 5 favourite for the Sussex Stakes . In the last few furlongs he battled with Watercress , and it was not until 50 yards from the finish that he came out on top , going on to win by a head from Watercress . 
 = = = = St. Leger Stakes = = = = 
 Orme had apparently improved significantly since Goodwood , and jockey George Barrett said , " I would stake my life he can beat Watercress 100 yards . I never was on such a horse in my life . " Orme 's previous wins made him favourite for the race , starting at 10 / 11 , with 1000 Guineas and Epsom Oaks winner La Fleche second favourite at 7 / 2 . Also near the front of the betting were Derby winner Sir Hugo at 10 / 1 and May Duke at 100 / 7 . 
 In the race the early pace was slow , and Barrett positioned Orme near the front of the field . As they turned into the finishing straight , Orme was just leading from La Fleche , but Barrett soon picked up the whip and it was clear Orme was beaten . La Fleche went on to win easily by two lengths from Sir Hugo , with Watercress a further three lengths back in third , May Duke in fourth and Orme in fifth . The remainder of the field , led by The Lover , were at least twenty lengths behind Orme . After the race Barrett said : " I never was so disappointed in my life . He never took hold of his bit as he used to do ; run as dead as a stone , and wouldn 't make an effort . " Other jockeys in the race agreed , saying Orme was " sulking " throughout the race . After the race , some suggested that Orme simply did not stay , the St Leger distance being too far for him . 
 = = = = Autumn = = = = 
 Orme next raced in the Great Foal Stakes at Newmarket . He won easily by 1 ½ lengths from Versailles , with Dunure in third place . He then faced only one rival in the Champion Stakes , Orvieto , whom he defeated in the Eclipse . Orme started the 1 / 3 favourite and made the running , leading by a length with two furlongs to run . Barrett then asked Orme to quicken , and Orvieto could not keep up , with Orme going on to win by a couple of lengths . 
 Two weeks later he faced Sir Hugo , Orvieto , El Diablo and Frank Marsh in the Limekiln Stakes at the Newmarket Houghton meeting . Orme started the 4 / 5 favourite , and with two furlongs to run he strode into the lead . Without even being asked for an effort , he won easily by three lengths from El Diablo , with Sir Hugo in third . The next day he won the Subscription Stakes easily from Porridge , after leading from the start and never being caught . He raced again the next day , his third race in as many days , in a Free Handicap Sweepstakes over ten furlongs where he faced five opponents . Orme started as the 4 / 6 favourite , Bushey Park was at 5 / 1 . Next in the betting came El Diablo , The Lover and Therapia all priced at 100 / 12 . Bushey Park led in the early stages until Orme went into the lead with about two furlongs left to run . El Diablo overtook Orme in the final 100 yards and beat him by one and a half lengths . The Lover finished in third place , three quarters of a length behind Orme . Orme had to carry 16 pounds more weight than El Diablo and 22 pounds more than The Lover . 
 = = = 1893 : Four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Orme returned to the track as a four @-@ year @-@ old in the Rous Memorial Stakes at Royal Ascot . His only opposition was the four @-@ year @-@ old filly Lady Lena . Lady Lena briefly challenged Orme in the closing stages , but new jockey Morny Cannon only had to shake the reins a couple of times and Orme went away to win easily by a couple of lengths . He then went back to Sandown to attempt to win another Eclipse Stakes . He started the 2 / 1 second favourite , with the evens favourite being La Fleche who beat him in the St Leger . La Fleche was being hard ridden a long way from the finish . Soon after Orme took over the lead , but began to hang left . In the final furlong Medicis passed La Fleche and began to challenge Orme , but could not get on terms and Orme won by half a length , with La Fleche a further three lengths back in third . 
 Orme and La Fleche met again in the Gordon Stakes at Goodwood with two other opponents , Watercress and Royal Harry . Starting favourite , Orme had La Fleche in trouble with more than a quarter of a mile still to run . He seemed to have the race won , but then veered left forcing Morny Cannon to pull him back and allowing La Fleche to draw level . However Orme pulled away again and won by a neck , with Watercress a further six lengths back in third . Orme 's final race came in the Limekiln Stakes where he had to carry 10 stone . He finished second to <unk> , who was receiving 33 pounds . During the autumn Orme 's legs had started to give him trouble and during the Limekiln a suspensory ligament gave way . This injury brought an end to his racing career , and he was retired to stud . Throughout his racing career he won a total of £ 32 @,@ 528 in prize money . 
 = = Race record = = 
 Note : F 
 = <unk> , L = 
 Lengths 
 = = Assessment = = 
 At the end of 1891 he was considered by many to be the top two @-@ year @-@ old . During the 1892 season he earned £ 13 @,@ 023 , the second highest of any horse and only bettered by La Fleche . By the time he retired at the end of the 1893 season , he had earned £ 32 @,@ 528 throughout his racing career . This was the third highest of any horse in history , behind only Donovan and Ayrshire . When Orme was at his best , John Porter rated him 7 to 10 pounds inferior to Ormonde , whom Porter also trained . Porter also believed that Orme was a better racehorse at age four than he had been at two and three . 
 = = Stud record = = 
 Orme was retired to stud at the end of his four @-@ year @-@ old season , and on 26 October 1893 he left Newmarket for Eaton Stud . His first covering was St. Mary , a daughter of Hermit , which resulted in his first foal ( a chestnut colt ) being born in January 1895 . His stud fee for 1898 was 200 guineas , plus one guinea for the groom . Orme became a successful stallion and was champion sire of Great Britain and Ireland in 1899 , with more than double the winnings of any other sire that year , largely thanks to his son Flying Fox . His son Duke of Westminster was sold for £ 20 @,@ 050 as a two @-@ year @-@ old . His fee was still 200 guineas in 1902 . In total Orme sired 242 winners of races worth a total of £ 122 @,@ 568 . 
 = = = Notable progeny = = = 
 s 
 = stallion , m = 
 mare , g = gelding 
 Flying Fox went on to be champion sire in France three times . His progeny included Prix du Jockey Club and Grand Prix de Paris winner Ajax , Prix de Diane winner Flying Star , Poule d 'Essai des Poulains and Prix du <unk> winner <unk> , Poule d 'Essai des Poulains and Prix du Jockey Club winner <unk> , Poule d 'Essai des Poulains and Eclipse Stakes winner Val d 'Or and Prix de la Forêt winner Adam . 
 <unk> went on to sire Epsom Derby and St. James 's Palace Stakes winner Grand Parade and 1000 Guineas winner Diadem . Orme 's son <unk> Thrush sired July Cup winner Thrush . Orme 's daughter Topiary was the dam of the St Leger and Eclipse winner Tracery . Orme 's daughter <unk> was the dam of the American horse <unk> , who was only defeated once in his career . Another daughter Osella was the dam of Grosser Preis von Baden winner Ossian and Preis der Diana winner Ostrea . 
 Orme was pensioned from stud duty in 1912 . He died at Eaton Stud on 17 September 1915 aged 26 and was buried near his grandsire Bend Or . Orme 's sire line continues today mainly through Ajax 's son Teddy . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Note : b . 
 = Bay , br . = 
 Brown , ch . = Chestnut 
 = Goodbye ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Goodbye " is the second episode of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 104th episode overall . It was written by Krista Vernoff and directed by Bill D 'Elia . The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on September 24 , 2009 . In " Goodbye " , the staff at Seattle Grace Hospital come to terms with the death of their colleague Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) . Further storylines include Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) being engaged in a vehicular collision , Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) receiving a job as an attending physician at a neighboring hospital , and Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) ' s marriage with Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) taking a toll after her near @-@ death experience . 
 The episode was the second part of the two @-@ hour season six premiere special , the first being " Good Mourning " , and was filmed in Los Angeles , California . The special was the first premiere that Knight did not appear in , following an early release from his contract , and Jessica Capshaw ( Dr. Arizona Robbins ) ' first premiere in which she received star billing , having been upgraded from a recurring star from season five . Shannon Lucio reprised her role as a guest star , in addition to Amy Madigan , Martha Plimpton , Zack Shada , Mitch Pileggi , and Zoe Boyle . " Goodbye " opened to generally positive critical reviews , with Chyler Leigh ( Dr. Lexie Grey ) ' s and Ramirez 's performances praised in particular . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 17 @.@ 03 million Americans , and garnered a 6 @.@ 7 / 17 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking first for the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the episode , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) and Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) are undergoing couples therapy with the hospital 's psychiatrist , Dr. Wyatt ( Amy Madigan ) . The two are instructed not to engage in sexual activity , until their emotional deficits are healed , which they find uneasy to accomplish . Clara Ferguson ( Zoe Boyle ) is no longer depressed , and urges Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , who has given her attentive care , to return home . 
 Ferguson 's depression returns again , when Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) informs her that she has an infection that requires surgery . She rejects the surgery , and is further disappointed when Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) tells her that the worst @-@ case scenario is that she will need an <unk> <unk> system . Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) ' s chronic pain patient , Andy Michaelson ( Zack Shada ) and his mother Pam ( Martha Plimpton ) enter the emergency room , so Robbins and resident Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) order a 3D MRI , which is denied by the chief of surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) . 
 On his way to a meeting , Webber goes through a red light , and collides with another vehicle , resulting in him becoming T @-@ boned . Webber is taken to the neighboring Mercy West Hospital , where he is treated by former colleague Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , and subsequently discharged . Ferguson finally agrees to the surgery , after constant pleads from Lexie , and makes a start to physical therapy . Lexie returns home to see her sister Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) and her new husband Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) having sex in the kitchen . Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) is at home , begging her husband Karev to spend time with her , but he dismisses her . At Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) ' s apartment , his girlfriend Lexie has moved in , and his bisexual ex @-@ girlfriend Torres walks in on Sloan in the shower . Lexie expresses her concern to Torres about doing this , and she apologizes . Robbins confronts Shepherd , the hospital 's chief of neurosurgery , and asks him to run an expensive test to see if Andy has <unk> spinal cord syndrome , which reveals that he has it , and it is reversed through surgery . Stevens notices the girl Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) saved , Amanda ( Shannon Lucio ) , sitting outside the hospital , and tells her to go get a life , because O 'Malley did not save her so she could be miserable . At the conclusion of the episode , Stevens unites with Karev , and Webber announces that Seattle Grace will be merging with Mercy West . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Goodbye " was written by Krista Vernoff and directed by Bill D 'Elia . Joe <unk> edited the episode and Donald Lee Harris served as production designer . Featured music includes <unk> 's " Ghosts " , Katie Herzig 's " Hologram " , Lucy Schwartz 's " Gravity " , and Emilíana Torrini 's " Today Has Been OK " . " Today Has Been OK " played while Shepherd ( Dempsey ) was consoling Bailey ( Wilson ) about O 'Malley ( Knight ) ' s death , in the elevator . This song was originally played in the season two episode " Into You Like a Train " , when Bailey was consoling Shepherd . This is the only time the series has reused a song . " Goodbye " is the second hour of the season six premiere . It was the first premiere not to feature Knight 's character , O 'Malley . Knight was released from his contract at the conclusion of season five , following a disagreement with series creator Shonda Rhimes over lack of screen time for his character . When asked to make a ' flashback ' appearance in season six , Knight declined . 
 The scene in which Yang ( Oh ) and Hunt ( McKidd ) were partaking in couples therapy , was originally planned to be a comical moment . Vernoff commented on this : " I handed them that scene 20 <unk> BEFORE <unk> <unk> . It was actually a funny scene right up until the last minute . Sandra and Kevin had smart questions – and what became crystal clear to me instantly is that this storyline could not be resolved in a humorous way . It had earned weight . Indeed , it required weight . " In the episode , Meredith ( Pompeo ) grieves her pain through constant sex with Shepherd . Vernoff explained she loves the fact that Meredith is healthy enough to realize what she is doing . At the conclusion of " Goodbye " , Yang finally came to terms with the death of O 'Malley . Vernoff offered her insight : 
 " Cristina , who as a young child , held her father ’ s heart in her hands as it stopped beating , is perhaps the least " processed " of our core group , the least " healthy , " the least able to handle the impact of George ’ s sudden death . Mer is using sex , Cristina is using her frustration around her lack of sex . So when she finally gets in bed with Owen and she finally has the tension release that comes with that kind of , um … tension release … She can ’ t hold the truth off anymore . That ’ s the thing about the five stages of grief . They truly are different for everyone . Cristina clung to the Denial stage for 40 days . And then she let in the fact that George died . And as much as Mer ’ s tears got to me , that intake of breath from Cristina got to me even more . The sudden realization that George really did … die . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 " Goodbye " was originally broadcast on September 24 , 2009 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States , following the first part of the season six premiere " Good Mourning " . It was viewed by a total of 17 @.@ 04 million Americans , across its two @-@ hour 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot . The episode was the series ' second least @-@ viewed season premiere , up to that point , just ahead of the season one premiere — " A Hard Day 's Night " . In comparison to the previous episode , " Goodbye " made a 0 @.@ 08 % decrease in terms of viewership . However , the episode 's viewership ranked first in both its time @-@ slot and the entire night , beating out CBS 's CSI . In addition to being a success in viewership , the episode also did well in ratings . " Goodbye " ' s 6 @.@ 7 / 17 Nielsen rating ranked first in its time @-@ slot and the entire night , for both the rating and share percentages of the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode also received a rating of 10 @.@ 9 / 18 in the 18 @-@ 34 demographic , beating out CBS 's The Mentalist , and ranking first in the ratings and shares for the demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode opened to mixed feedback , and aired back @-@ to @-@ back with " Good Mourning " , as a two @-@ hour season premiere special . Alan Sepinwall of NJ.com commented on the two episodes being conjoined into one week : " I keep going back and forth on whether it was a good idea to do that , or if we 'd have been better off spacing out the tearful speeches over two weeks . That isn 't to say that there shouldn 't have been tears , or speeches . George 's death , no matter how marginal he had become last season , is and should be a huge event in the lives of these characters . Had the show raced through Elizabeth Kubler @-@ Ross 's famous five stages of grief , it would have rang false , as if everyone making the show was in a hurry to move past the events of the wildly uneven fifth season . My problem is , when you put two episodes back @-@ to @-@ back , those rhythms - the pace at which the acts build to emotional crescendos and then briefly recede - start to become too predictable , and it sucks some of the life and emotion away . " Sepinwall also praised Wilson 's , Ramirez 's , and Chamber 's performances . 
 The Huffington Post 's Michael Pascua praised Dempsey 's character , in comparison to his performance in " Good Mourning " , writing : " Derek was set up as a real character in the second half , not just a one @-@ sided McDreamy . First , Arizona and Derek finally fix the problem with Andy , then the two had some genuine interaction . Derek confronted Alex about his problems with Izzie . He took a moment to talk to Mark about the hospital 's situation and ended the episode by confronting a very edgy Bailey . Miraculously , he had the time to have a lot of sex with Meredith . " Pascua also enjoyed Leigh 's performance , commenting : " Lexie continued to evolve . I loved the anxiety that Lexie had with Callie . She wasn 't really a doctor in any sense in this episode , just a friend to lean on . " Though he was impressed with the majority of the episode , Pascua had mixed feelings on the character of Stevens , attributing it to his dislike of Heigl . 
 = Henry Timberlake = 
 Henry Timberlake ( 1730 or 1735 – September 30 , 1765 ) was a colonial Anglo @-@ American officer , journalist , and cartographer . He was born in Virginia and died in England . He is best known for his work as an emissary from the British colonies to the Overhill Cherokee during the 1761 – 1762 Timberlake Expedition . 
 Timberlake 's account of his journeys to the Cherokee , published as his memoirs in 1765 , became a primary source for later studies of their eighteenth @-@ century culture . His detailed descriptions of Cherokee villages , townhouses , weapons , and tools have helped historians and anthropologists identify Cherokee structures and cultural objects uncovered at modern archaeological excavation sites throughout the southern Appalachian region . During the Tellico Archaeological Project , which included a series of salvage excavations conducted in the Little Tennessee River basin in the 1970s , archaeologists used Timberlake 's Draught of the Cherokee Country to help locate important Overhill village sites . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Henry Timberlake was born in Hanover County , Virginia to Francis and Sarah Austin Timberlake . The Dictionary of American Biography states that Timberlake was born in 1730 , though Timberlake 's age on his marriage license implies that he was born in 1735 . Timberlake was a third @-@ generation American ; his grandfather had emigrated from England . Although he inherited a small fortune when his father died , Timberlake still had to support himself , and sought a military career . In 1756 , at the outset of the French and Indian War , he joined a Virginia militia company known as the " Patriot Blues . " It had embarked on a campaign to expel French and Native American raiders from the western part of the colony . Shortly thereafter , he applied for a commission in the Virginia regiment — then commanded by George Washington — but was denied due to a lack of vacancies . 
 In 1758 , Timberlake successfully applied for a commission in Colonel William Byrd 's recently formed 2nd Virginia Regiment . Commissioned as an Ensign , Timberlake accompanied the regiment on its march to Fort Duquesne , but illness kept him from proceeding . In 1759 , he took part in several minor operations in the present @-@ day Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania area , mostly overseeing the construction of defensive works . 
 In 1760 , British relations with the Cherokee , which had been moderately friendly for several decades , grew sour after several Cherokee chiefs were imprisoned and killed in South Carolina . In early 1760 , the Cherokee laid siege to Fort Loudoun , a remote outpost in what is now Tennessee . The garrison held out until August of that year , but was forced to surrender due to lack of provisions . A relief column under Archibald Montgomerie failed to reach the fort after burning the Cherokee Lower Towns and being stopped at the Battle of <unk> . In spite of the garrison leaving the fort under a flag of truce , the Cherokee killed 22 of its members on their march home in retaliation for the colonists ' earlier killing of 22 Cherokee held as prisoners at Fort Prince George . 
 In 1761 , Jeffrey Amherst , the British commander in North America , responded with a larger invasion force , sending James Grant against the Middle Towns and sending Byrd to threaten the Overhill towns . 
 While Byrd proceeded to destroy the Cherokee Middle towns in North Carolina , he dispatched Colonel Adam Stephen into the Holston River valley to attack the Overhill towns . Timberlake accompanied Stephen to Long Island of the Holston ( in modern @-@ day Sullivan County , Tennessee ) , where they began building a base known as " Fort Robinson " , and made preparations for a march south . 
 = = Journey to the Overhill country = = 
 On November 19 , 1761 , as Fort Robinson was nearing completion , a 400 @-@ man Cherokee force led by Chief <unk> ( or " Old Hop " ) arrived at the camp and asked for peace , which was immediately granted by Col. Stephen . <unk> asked for an officer to accompany him to the Overhill towns as proof that hostilities had ended . Stephen was reluctant to allow it , but granted the request when Timberlake volunteered . Timberlake was accompanied by Sergeant Thomas Sumter , an interpreter named John McCormack , and an unnamed servant . The group purchased a canoe and ten days ' worth of provisions with money Sumter had borrowed . The plan was to follow the Holston River to its confluence with the French Broad River , and then proceed to the Little Tennessee River , where the Overhill towns were situated . 
 Timberlake 's party left Long Island on November 28 , 1761 . The Holston River 's unusually low water levels almost immediately stalled the journey , as the party was forced to drag their canoe over exposed shoals and sandbars . The party ran out of provisions after several days , but McCormack managed to shoot a bear , supplying them with several days ' worth of meat . Around December 7 , the party explored a stalactite @-@ filled cave situated approximately 50 feet above the river . Timberlake described an incident in which Sumter swam nearly a half @-@ mile in the near @-@ freezing river waters to retrieve their canoe , which had somehow drifted away while they were exploring the cave . 
 On December 13 , the expedition reached a series of treacherous cascades that Timberlake called " Great Falls . " The party spent a whole day carefully maneuvering their way down the cascades only to find the Holston frozen over immediately downstream . The ice slowed the expedition 's progress , but rains on the night of December 14 thawed the ice , and the party passed through the mouth of the Holston ( in modern Knoxville ) into what is now the Tennessee River on December 15 . 
 = = = The Overhill country = = = 
 The deeper waters of the Tennessee River allowed the Timberlake expedition to proceed much more quickly . A hunting party led by the Cherokee chief Slave Catcher met the Timberlake expedition near the mouth of the Little Tennessee River , and supplied the weary expedition with provisions of " dried venison , <unk> , and boiled corn . " The following day , Slave Catcher guided the expedition by canoe up the Little Tennessee , although the Timberlake party struggled to keep up . Timberlake recalled , " my hands were so galled , that the blood trickled from them , and when we set out the next morning I was scarce able to handle a pole . " The Timberlake party arrived in the Overhill town of Tomotley on December 20 , where they were greeted by the town 's head man , Chief Ostenaco . 
 After spending several days in Tomotley as guests of Ostenaco , Timberlake and McCormack proceeded to the Overhill mother town of Chota , where a number of chiefs had gathered in the town 's large councilhouse . Ostenaco gave a speech and ceremoniously buried a hatchet in the ground , symbolizing a state of peace between the English and the Cherokee . Afterward , Timberlake partook in a peace ceremony in which he smoked several ceremonial pipes with the gathered chiefs , a practice Timberlake personally found " very disagreeable , " but participated in without openly complaining . 
 Timberlake and Ostenaco continued southward to Citico , where Timberlake was greeted by a ceremonial dance involving some 400 Cherokee . Timberlake recalled that the dancers were " painted all over in a hideous manner " and that they " danced in a very uncommon figure . " The town 's chief , <unk> , presented Timberlake with a string of beads and held another pipe @-@ smoking ceremony . The non @-@ stop pipe smoking made Timberlake so sick that he " could not stir for several hours . " The following day , Timberlake and Ostenaco traveled to Chilhowee , the second southernmost of the Overhill towns on Timberlake 's map , where the town 's chief , <unk> , held a peace procession similar to that at Citico . 
 = = = Return to Virginia = = = 
 His assignment largely completed , Timberlake returned to Tomotley with Ostenaco on January 2 , 1762 . He spent the next few weeks studying Cherokee habits and making notes for his map of the Overhill country . At the end of January , rumors began trickling in from Cherokee scouts of renewed hostilities with rival tribes to the north . Although the rumors turned out to be based on a misunderstanding , Timberlake grew anxious and begged Ostenaco to guide him back to Virginia . Ostenaco reluctantly agreed , and the party set out on March 10 , 1762 . Just before departure , Timberlake witnessed the ceremonial return of a war party led by Chief <unk> . The party sang " the war @-@ song " and planted a scalp @-@ filled pole next to the councilhouse door . 
 The Timberlake party had decided to make the return trip overland , having purchased horses from the Cherokee . Ostenaco , accompanied by several hundred Cherokee warriors , guided the Timberlake group northward across what is now known as the Great Indian Warpath , which follows the western base of the Appalachian Mountains . On March 11 , the party arrived at the abandoned village of <unk> along Little River in what is now <unk> , Tennessee , and crossed the French Broad River the following day . A week later , they reached Fort Robinson , which the Stephen garrison had abandoned but stashed a large supply of flour . The expedition left Long Island on March 22 , continuing northward to an army camp where Timberlake had left some belongings . He was deeply disappointed to find the trunk had been looted and most of his goods had been stolen . The party finally reached Williamsburg , Virginia in early April . 
 = = Visits to London = = 
 While in Williamsburg , Timberlake and Ostenaco attended a dinner party at William & Mary College ; that evening Ostenaco said he would like to meet the king of England . Although he feared the trip would break him financially , Timberlake agreed to arrange such a trip and meeting for him . In May 1762 , Timberlake , Sumter , and three distinguished Cherokee leaders , including Ostenaco , departed for London . 
 Arriving in early June , the Cherokee chiefs were an immediate attraction , drawing crowds all over the city . The poet Oliver Goldsmith waited for three hours to meet the Cherokee , and offered a gift to Ostenaco . They sat for Sir Joshua Reynolds to paint their portraits , and they met personally with King George III . The Cherokee completed their return voyage to North America with Sergeant Sumter on about August 25 , 1762 . Timberlake remained in England dealing with some financial difficulties . He was appointed by Jeffrey Amherst , promoted to Crown Governor of Virginia , as a Lieutenant in the " 42nd or Royal Highland Regiment of foot . " His increased pay from this commission enabled Timberlake to pay for his return voyage to Virginia in March 1763 . 
 Having reached Virginia , Timberlake set out for New York to meet with Amherst to receive his commission . Not long afterward , he received notice that he was among a number of officers to be reduced to half pay . Having learned this , he left the militia and returned home to Virginia to petition the General Assembly to compensate him for his expenses for the journey , but was denied . 
 In the summer of 1764 , five Cherokee visited Timberlake , seeking an audience with the governor of Virginia and requesting passage to London . The Cherokee wished to appeal to King George to enforce the Proclamation Line of 1763 , which restricted colonists to east of the Appalachians , due to continuing encroachment by white settlers on Cherokee land . The governor denied their request , but Timberlake agreed to help them . He accompanied three Cherokee to London in the fall of 1764 . Not long after their arrival , the benefactor of the trip fell ill and died . Lord Halifax refused to grant the Cherokee an audience , as the trip was unauthorized . Timberlake was accused of attempting to profit off the public attention given to the Cherokee . The government sent the Cherokee back to North America in March 1765 . Shortly after their departure , Timberlake was arrested for failing to pay the debt for the last bill for lodging of himself and the Cherokee . He likely wrote his Memoirs while incarcerated . 
 = = Family = = 
 Timberlake had one child , a son , Richard Timberlake , by one of Ostenaco 's daughters , <unk> . In his old age , Timberlake 's friend Ostenaco lived in retirement with his grandson , Richard . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Timberlake 's primary legacy is the journal he kept while living with the Cherokee . The volume was published in 1765 , likely following Timberlake 's death in September of that year . The journal is of importance both as an ethnological study , as it contains detailed descriptions of various facets of Cherokee society , and as a historical account , as it gives insight into Cherokee political decision @-@ making and the tribe 's early reactions to the encroaching European colonists . 
 Along with Cherokee methods of warfare , Timberlake described their agricultural and hunting customs , religious beliefs , birth and death rites , and marital habits . He described Cherokee government as a " mixed aristocracy and democracy , " with chiefs chosen on the basis of <unk> he also described Cherokee methods for building canoes and dwellings , and the general size and form of Cherokee summer and winter houses . Timberlake 's description of the Cherokee councilhouse ( the central structure in a typical Cherokee village ) has aided archaeologists in the location of such structures at modern excavation sites . 
 Timberlake 's map , entitled A Draught of the Cherokee Country , accompanied the journal . On it he located all the Cherokee villages on the lower Little Tennessee River and provided important demographic information about village sizes , populations , and leaders . Modern studies have generally confirmed that Timberlake 's map was remarkably accurate . The journal , simply entitled Memoirs , and his map of the Overhill Cherokee country have been reprinted several times . Timberlake 's Memoirs remains one of the best contemporary accounts of the 18th @-@ century Cherokee . 
 = 1920 – 21 Burnley F.C. season = 
 The 1920 – 21 season was the 33rd season of competitive football played by Burnley Football Club . Burnley began the season confidently , despite not having played a match for almost four months before their first league fixture of the season . After losing their first three games , Burnley embarked on a 30 @-@ match unbeaten league run from 4 September 1920 until 26 March 1921 , winning the Football League First Division and becoming English champions for the first time in their history . Burnley 's unbeaten run stood as a Football League record for over 80 years , until it was bettered by Arsenal in the 2003 – 04 season . Burnley ended the 1920 – 21 season on 59 points , having won 23 games , drawn 13 , and lost 6 . 
 The team reached the third round of the FA Cup , defeating Leicester City away and Queens Park Rangers at home , before unexpectedly losing away to Second Division side Hull City . Burnley won the East Lancashire Charity Cup , beating Blackburn Rovers 8 – 2 over two legs , but fared poorly in the Lancashire Senior Cup , losing to Manchester City . As league champions , Burnley qualified for the Charity Shield , in which they were beaten 0 – 2 by FA Cup winners Tottenham Hotspur . Burnley also played two friendly matches during the season . The first , against Blackburn Rovers , marked the opening of Accrington Stanley 's new stadium ; the other was a benefit match for Patsy Gallacher , against a representative team from the Scottish Football League . 
 Burnley used 23 different players during the season and had nine different goalscorers . Their top scorer was Scottish forward Joe Anderson , with 31 competitive goals , including 25 in the league . Eight new players were signed by Burnley during the course of the season , and nine were released . Match attendances were the highest they had ever been at Turf Moor , with an average gate of over 30 @,@ 000 . The highest attendance of the campaign was a crowd of 42 @,@ 653 , who saw Burnley beat Bolton Wanderers 3 – 1 on 26 February 1921 ; the lowest was 22 @,@ 000 , for the match against Sunderland on the final day of the season . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 The 1920 – 21 campaign was the second season of competitive football in England after the First World War . Burnley 's chairman , Harry Windle , had been elected to the position in 1909 , and manager John Haworth was marking his 11th consecutive year in charge . After finishing as runners @-@ up to West Bromwich Albion in the Football League First Division the previous season , there was a sense of eager anticipation within the club before the season began . Team captain Tommy Boyle claimed that his side was capable of building on its success of the previous season and winning the league championship , despite Burnley not having won a trophy since their FA Cup victory in 1914 . 
 Burnley did not play any pre @-@ season friendly games other than a practice match between the first team and the reserves , which was watched by a crowd of around 10 @,@ 000 at Turf Moor . The team 's last competitive match had ended in a 0 – 2 defeat against Manchester United in the Lancashire Senior Cup on 8 May 1920 , almost four months earlier . The strip for 1920 – 21 was very little changed from that of the previous season ; the claret jersey with light blue sleeves and a light blue stripe around the collar was kept along with the white shorts , but the claret socks were replaced by black . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 The nucleus of the Burnley team remained unchanged from the previous campaign . Eight new players signed for the club , and eleven left during the season . New signings included goalkeeper Frank Birchenough from West Ham United and defender Bob McGrory from Dumbarton . Also brought in were George Richardson from non @-@ league side Horden Athletic and Tom Brophy from St Helens Town . West Bromwich Albion 's Len <unk> was also signed in October 1920 to provide further goalkeeping backup . Attackers Richard Cragg , Billy Clarkson and Patrick Norris were among those who left the club in pre @-@ season . Defender Tom Bamford , who had not played a match for Burnley since before the First World War thanks to the emergence of Len Smelt , also left the club and joined Rochdale in September 1920 . 
 Transfer activity continued after the season began . Inside forward Jack Lane was brought in from Cradley Heath in December 1920 , followed by defender John Pearson from the same club two months later . Winger George Douglas was signed from Leicester City in February 1921 . Thomas Jackson , who had made only one first @-@ team appearance for Burnley , left the club in January 1921 to sign for Scottish side Dundee . Two players who had been signed at the beginning of the season left Burnley in April 1921 ; Bob McGrory moved to Stoke City on a free transfer and Frank Birchenough was released after playing two league matches . Bert Freeman left Burnley at the end of the season after nine years service , by which time he had become the club 's all @-@ time leading goalscorer . 
 = = League campaign = = 
 Burnley 's league campaign began on 28 August 1920 with a home match against Bradford City , who had finished 15th in the league in 1919 – 20 . The season began inauspiciously for Burnley , beaten 1 – 4 , but the match did see eventual top scorer Joe Anderson score the first of his 25 league goals of the campaign . Two further away defeats followed , 0 – 1 at Huddersfield Town and 0 – 2 at Bradford City , leaving Burnley at the bottom of the league table . This run of defeats was Burnley 's worst start to a league season since 1906 – 07 , when they also lost their opening three matches . Manager Haworth subsequently made several changes to the team ; goalkeeper Jerry Dawson and defender Tommy Boyle were reinstated , while Bert Freeman and James Lindsay were dropped in favour of Billy Nesbitt and Benny Cross respectively . Burnley picked up their first win on 6 September 1920 , beating Huddersfield Town 3 – 0 at Turf Moor ; the goalscorers were Bob Kelly , Tommy Boyle , and Billy Nesbitt . They went on to defeat Middlesbrough 2 – 1 at home , and to draw with them 0 – 0 at Ayresome Park . On 25 September 1920 , four players scored in a 4 – 0 victory against a weakened Chelsea team , giving Burnley their third successive home win . 
 October began with a 1 – 1 draw with Chelsea at Stamford Bridge , after which the team recorded four straight wins throughout the remainder of the month . Burnley achieved home and away victories against Bradford ( Park Avenue ) , before repeating the feat in the next two matches against Tottenham Hotspur . Burnley beat Tottenham 2 – 1 on 23 October 1920 , then achieved a 2 – 0 victory the following week , the first time in the season that any team had been able to prevent Tottenham from scoring in a league match . The team 's performance at White Hart Lane was met with disapproval from the correspondent from the Daily Mail , who wrote that Burnley set out to stifle their opponents and in doing so " spoilt the match " . Burnley carried on their winning streak into November , with goals from Bob Kelly , Tommy Boyle and Benny Cross helping the side to defeat Newcastle United 3 – 1 at home and 2 – 1 away to lift them to second place in the league . The home fixture was marred by tragedy when a charabanc transporting supporters from Grassington overturned , killing five people . After the next game , a 2 – 2 draw with Oldham Athletic at Boundary Park on 20 November 1920 , Burnley moved to the top of the table on goal average , 11 weeks after having been at the bottom . In the return match at Turf Moor a week later , Oldham were comfortably beaten 7 – 1 ; Bob Kelly scored four goals , and the others were added by Tommy Boyle and Benny Cross . 
 A win and a draw against Liverpool , followed by a 2 – 0 victory over Preston North End , took Burnley into the Christmas period three points clear at the top of the league . The convincing 6 – 0 win over Sheffield United on Christmas Day , in which forward Joe Anderson scored four times , set a new club record unbeaten streak of 17 games , beating the record set during the 1897 – 98 campaign . Burnley continued their good form into 1921 , beating Preston North End away before achieving two victories against local rivals Blackburn Rovers . The first of these wins , a 4 – 1 success , was watched by 41 @,@ 534 spectators , the biggest home crowd of the season until then . The victory was followed by a 3 – 1 away win a week later . On 5 February 1921 , Anderson scored five goals in a " brilliant " performance against Aston Villa as Burnley recorded their second 7 – 1 win of the season . The result saw Burnley equal the Football League record of 22 matches unbeaten , held by Sheffield United and Preston North End . A new league unbeaten record was set with a 0 – 0 draw with Aston Villa four days later . Despite losing George Halley to an illness which forced him to miss the remainder of the season , Burnley secured a late home win over Derby County in the following game , sending Derby to the bottom of the league table . February ended with a 3 – 1 victory against Bolton Wanderers in front of a crowd of 42 @,@ 653 , the largest attendance ever at Turf Moor at the time . The team took four points from the next three matches . Burnley firstly drew 1 – 1 away against a Bolton Wanderers team who were unbeaten at home , before a then @-@ record crowd of 54 @,@ 609 at Burnden Park , before beating Arsenal at Turf Moor . The following week Burnley secured an away draw at Arsenal , despite their opponents attacking for much of the game . 
 A late Benny Cross goal gave Burnley a 1 – 0 win over Manchester United at Turf Moor , extending the team 's unbeaten record to 30 matches . In the next match , Burnley lost a league fixture for the first time since 4 September 1920 when they were beaten 0 – 3 by Manchester City at Hyde Road . City were also challenging for the league title and eventually finished as runners @-@ up . More than 37 @,@ 000 spectators attended the match and several people were injured as the stadium became overcrowded . Burnley followed up the setback with successive wins over Manchester City and Manchester United to take the total number of league wins in the season to 23 . The team suffered its fifth league defeat of the campaign on 9 April 1921 , losing 0 – 2 away at West Bromwich Albion . 
 Burnley played West Bromwich Albion again seven days later , drawing 1 – 1 . The team went into the match against Everton on 23 April 1921 needing a draw to clinch the league championship . Everton took the lead 15 minutes into the game , but Benny Cross scored the equalising goal three minutes later , and Burnley held on to become English champions for the first time in their history . Local newspapers were effusive in their praise of the Burnley side , calling them " the greatest team that ever was " . The draw with Everton was succeeded by another 1 – 1 stalemate against the same team at Turf Moor . In the penultimate game , Burnley were beaten 0 – 1 away at Sunderland , their sixth and final league defeat of the season . The campaign ended with a 2 – 2 draw against Sunderland on 7 May 1921 in front of a season @-@ lowest crowd of 22 @,@ 000 . The draw took Burnley to a tally of 59 points , five points clear of second @-@ placed Manchester City , and one short of West Bromwich Albion 's then @-@ record total of 60 points set in 1919 – 20 . 
 At half time during the final match of the season , the championship trophy was paraded around the Turf Moor pitch accompanied by a marching band . After the full @-@ time whistle was blown , supporters swarmed the pitch to celebrate the team 's success . The Football League president , John McKenna , made the official presentation of the trophy to the Burnley captain Boyle and congratulated the side on their achievement , particularly praising " their splendid training and their beautiful football " . Medals were awarded to the manager John Haworth , the club trainer Charlie Bates and the eleven players who had featured in the match against Sunderland . Three more medals were later awarded to Mosscrop , Taylor and <unk> . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 Key 
 Results 
 = = = Final league position = = = 
 = = Other first team matches = = 
 Burnley 's first match outside the league in the 1920 – 21 season was a friendly on 22 September 1920 against a Blackburn Rovers XI to mark the opening of Accrington Stanley 's new stadium at Peel Park . Burnley won the game 10 – 1 with seven goals from Joe Anderson in addition to strikes from James Lindsay , Walter Weaver and Thomas Jackson . Burnley 's opening game in the FA Cup was an away tie at Leicester City on 8 January 1921 . Bob Kelly scored for the fourth game in succession and Joe Anderson scored four goals as Burnley won the match 7 – 3 , the first time the team had scored seven goals in a competitive match away from home . After the match , the Athletic News described Burnley as the best team in the country . 
 Following the win over Leicester City , Burnley were drawn against Queens Park Rangers at Turf Moor in the Second Round . Despite a good performance by their opponents , Burnley progressed to the Third Round with a 4 – 2 win , in which Bob Kelly struck twice in the first half and Joe Anderson scored either side of half time . In the Third Round , Burnley were handed an away tie at Hull City , who at the time were struggling in the Football League Second Division and had won only two matches in the previous five months . Despite being without first @-@ team regulars George Halley and Joe Anderson through injury , Burnley were expected to win comfortably , not having lost since 4 September 1920 . Hull City played above all expectations and Burnley suffered a 0 – 3 defeat after being 0 – 1 behind at half time . 
 In April 1921 , Burnley won the East Lancs Charity Cup for the second consecutive season , beating Blackburn Rovers 8 – 2 on aggregate over two legs . The first leg was won 6 – 2 at Turf Moor thanks to goals from Eddie Mosscrop , Joe Anderson , Benny Cross and a hat @-@ trick from Bob Kelly , before strikes from Joe Anderson and James Lindsay gave Burnley a 2 – 0 win at Ewood Park . This success was followed by a 2 – 1 friendly victory over a Scottish Football League XI in a benefit match for Celtic winger Patsy Gallacher . Burnley also participated in the Lancashire Senior Cup ; the league matches against Blackburn Rovers and Preston North End also counted as group stage matches in the competition . The team won all four of these games to qualify for the semi @-@ finals , where they were drawn against Manchester City . The game on 9 May 1921 ended in a 0 – 2 defeat for Burnley , and their opponents went on to win the trophy that year . 
 As champions of the Football League , Burnley qualified for the Charity Shield , then known as the Dewar Shield . Burnley 's opponents were Tottenham Hotspur , who had finished sixth in the First Division and beaten Wolverhampton Wanderers in the FA Cup final . In what was the last match of the 1920 – 21 campaign , Burnley fell to a 0 – 2 loss at White Hart Lane on 16 May 1921 . The match was not without controversy , as the Burnley players claimed that the second goal should have been disallowed despite the Tottenham goalscorer being onside , maintaining that the whistle had already been blown by the referee . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 Key 
 Results 
 = = Player details = = 
 Burnley manager John Haworth used 23 different players during the 1920 – 21 season , and there were nine different goalscorers . The team played in a 2 – 3 – 5 formation throughout the campaign , with two fullbacks , three halfbacks , two outside forwards , two inside forwards and a centre forward . Billy Watson played the highest number of games , appearing in all 45 First Division and FA Cup matches . Billy Nesbitt and Joe Anderson each played 43 times . Anderson was the top goalscorer for Burnley in the campaign with 31 competitive goals , including 25 in the league , the highest total since Bert Freeman 's 36 goals in 1912 – 13 . With a tally of 23 goals , Bob Kelly was the second @-@ highest scorer , followed by Benny Cross with 15 , including the goal that won the title for Burnley . Club captain Tommy Boyle was the highest @-@ scoring defender , with seven goals in 38 league appearances . Winger Billy Nesbitt scored five times during the season . 
 England international goalkeeper Jerry Dawson missed three games , two because of an injury sustained in the opening match . Centre forward Bert Freeman , who had become the first ever Burnley player to score 100 league goals , and held the club record for most goals in a season , played only four matches . His final appearance for Burnley came in the FA Cup Third Round defeat to Hull City . Several players made bit @-@ part contributions to the campaign ; Tom Brophy and Bob McGrory each made just three first @-@ team appearances and Frank Birchenough , George Douglas , Jack Lane , Len <unk> and Bill Taylor played in two matches or fewer . George Richardson and John Pearson , both new signings in the 1920 – 21 season , failed to make a first @-@ team appearance for Burnley during the campaign . Thomas Jackson was a squad member until January 1921 , but he did not play any games for Burnley in the 1920 – 21 campaign . 
 = = = Player statistics = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Burnley board had planned a tour of Spain to take place during the summer of 1921 after the culmination of the league campaign . However , the trip had to be cancelled when the club received notice from the Spanish Football Federation that one of their intended opponents , Barcelona , had been suspended from all matches . Further tours of Norway and France were then arranged , but these also had to be abandoned after the Football Association refused to grant permission . At the end of the season five players were given free transfers by the club ; Len Smelt and Frank Birchenough , who had both played for Burnley during the campaign , and three reserve players . Moreover , two players – Bert Freeman and George Thompson – were placed on the transfer list by the manager . 
 Burnley 's 30 @-@ game unbeaten streak during the 1920 – 21 season stood as a Football League record for 83 years until it was surpassed by Arsenal , who completed the entire season without losing in the 2003 – 04 campaign . After the defeat to Bradford City on 28 August 1920 , Burnley did not lose another match at Turf Moor until 11 February 1922 , when they were beaten 1 – 2 by Blackburn Rovers . In the same match , the halfback line of Tommy Boyle , George Halley and Billy Watson — used in 25 first @-@ team games during 1920 – 21 — was seen for the final time , having played together for the first time in September 1913 . The majority of the championship @-@ winning team remained intact going into the 1921 – 22 season , although players such as David Taylor and Walter Weaver found themselves less involved in first @-@ team matches . 
 = Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons = 
 Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons is a three @-@ part episodic side @-@ scrolling platform video game developed by Ideas from the Deep ( a precursor to id Software ) and published by Apogee Software in 1990 for MS @-@ DOS . It is the first set of episodes of the Commander Keen series . The game follows the titular Commander Keen , an eight @-@ year @-@ old child genius , as he retrieves the stolen parts of his spaceship from the cities of Mars , prevents an alien mothership that arrived while he was delayed from destroying landmarks on Earth , and hunts down the leader of the aliens , the Grand Intellect , on the alien home planet . The three episodes feature Keen running , jumping , and shooting through various levels while opposed by aliens , robots , and other hazards . 
 In September 1990 , John Carmack , while working at programming studio Softdisk , developed a way to implement side @-@ scrolling video games on a personal computers ( PCs ) , which at the time was the province of dedicated home video game consoles . After a demo of a PC version of Super Mario Bros. 3 developed by Carmack and his coworkers John Romero and Tom Hall , along with Jay Wilbur and Lane Roathe , failed to convince Nintendo to invest in a PC port of their game , they were approached by Scott Miller of Apogee Software to develop an original game to be published through the Apogee shareware model . Hall designed the three @-@ part game , Carmack and Romero programmed it , Wilbur managed the team , and artist Adrian Carmack helped later in development . The team worked continuously for almost three months on the game , working late into the night at the office at Softdisk and taking their work computers to John Carmack 's home to continue developing the game . 
 Released by Apogee on December 14 , 1990 , the trilogy of episodes was an immediate success ; Apogee , whose monthly sales had been around US $ 7 @,@ 000 , made US $ 30 @,@ 000 on Commander Keen alone in the first two weeks and US $ 60 @,@ 000 per month by June , while the first royalty check convinced the development team , then known as Ideas from the Deep , to quit their jobs at Softdisk . The team founded id Software shortly thereafter , and went on to produce another four episodes of the Commander Keen series over the next year . The trilogy was lauded by reviewers due to the graphical achievement and humorous style , and id Software went on to develop other successful games , including early successes Wolfenstein 3D ( 1992 ) and Doom ( 1993 ) . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The three episodes of Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons make up one side @-@ scrolling platform video game : most of the game features the player @-@ controlled Commander Keen viewed from the side while moving on a two @-@ dimensional plane . The player can move left and right and can jump ; after finding a pogo stick in the first episode , they can also bounce continuously and jump higher than they can normally with the correct timing . The levels are composed of platforms on which Keen can stand , and some platforms allow Keen to jump up through them from below . The second episode introduces moving platforms as well as switches which extend bridges over gaps in the floor . Once entered , the only way to exit a level is to reach the end , and the player cannot save and return to the middle of a level . In between levels the player travels on a two @-@ dimensional map , viewed from above ; from the map the player can enter levels by approaching the entrance or save their progress in the game . Some levels are optional and can be bypassed , while others are secret and can only be reached by following specific procedures . 
 Each of the three episodes contain a different set of enemies in their levels , which the player must kill or avoid . The first episode includes alien Martians , the second largely uses robots , and the third more species of aliens . All three episodes also include Vorticons , large blue canine @-@ like aliens . Levels can also include hazards , such as electricity or spikes ; touching a hazard or most enemies causes Keen to lose a life , and the game is ended if all of Keen 's lives are lost . After finding a <unk> in the first episode , Keen can shoot at enemies using ammo found throughout the game ; different enemies take differing numbers of shots to kill , or in some cases are immune . Some enemies can also be stunned if they are jumped on , such as the one @-@ eyed <unk> , which block Keen 's path but do not harm him . The player can also find food items throughout the levels which grant points , with an extra life awarded every 20 @,@ 000 points . There are also colored <unk> which grant access to locked parts of levels , and in the third episode on rare occasions an ankh , which gives Keen temporary invulnerability . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game is broken up into three episodes : " Marooned on Mars " , " The Earth Explodes " , and " Keen Must Die ! " . In the first episode , eight @-@ year @-@ old Billy Blaze , a child genius , builds a spaceship and puts on his older brother 's football helmet to become Commander Keen . One night while his parents are out of the house he flies to Mars to explore ; while away from the ship the Vorticons steal four vital components and hide them in Martian cities . Keen journeys through Martian cities and outposts to find the components , despite the efforts of Martians and robots ; the final component is guarded by a Vorticon . Keen returns to Earth — discovering a Vorticon mothership in orbit — and beats his parents home , though they discover that he now has a pet <unk> . 
 In the second episode , the Vorticon mothership has locked its " X @-@ 14 Tantalus Ray cannons " on eight of Earth 's landmarks , and Keen journeys to the ship to find and deactivate each of the cannons . Keen does so , fighting more varied enemies and hazards , and a Vorticon at each cannon 's control . At the end of the episode he discovers that the Vorticons are being mind @-@ controlled by the mysterious Grand Intellect , who is actually behind the attack on Earth . In the third episode , Keen journeys to the Vorticon homeworld of Vorticon VI to find the Grand Intellect . He travels through Vorticon cities and outposts to gain access to the Grand Intellect 's lair , fighting mostly against the Vorticons themselves . Upon reaching the lair he discovers that the Grand Intellect is actually his school rival Mortimer <unk> , whose IQ is " a single point higher " than Keen 's . Keen defeats Mortimer and his " <unk> Machine " , and frees the Vorticons ; the Vorticon king and " the other Vorticons you haven 't slaughtered " then award him a medal for saving them . 
 = = Development = = 
 In September 1990 , John Carmack , a game programmer for the Gamer 's Edge video game subscription service at Softdisk in Shreveport , Louisiana , developed a way to create graphics which could smoothly scroll in any direction in a computer game . At the time , IBM @-@ compatible general @-@ purpose computers were not able to replicate the common feat of video game consoles such as the Nintendo Entertainment System , which were capable of redrawing the entire screen fast enough for a side @-@ scrolling video game due to their specialized hardware . Carmack , rejecting the " clever little shortcuts " that other programmers had attempted to solve the problem , created adaptive tile refresh : a way to slide the majority of the visible screen to the side both horizontally and vertically when the player moved as if it had not changed , and only redraw the newly @-@ visible portions of the screen . Other games had previously redrawn the whole screen in chunks , or like Carmack 's earlier games were limited to scrolling in one direction . He discussed the idea with coworker Tom Hall , who encouraged him to demonstrate it by recreating the first level of the recent Super Mario Bros. 3 on a computer . The pair did so in a single overnight session , with Hall recreating the graphics of the game — replacing the player character of Mario with Dangerous Dave , a character from an eponymous previous Gamer 's Edge game — while Carmack optimized the code . The next morning on September 20 , the resulting game , Dangerous Dave in Copyright Infringement , was shown to their other coworker John Romero . Romero recognized Carmack 's idea as a major accomplishment : Nintendo was one of the most successful companies in Japan , largely due to the success of their Mario franchise , and the ability to replicate the gameplay of the series on a computer could have large implications . The scrolling technique did not meet Softdisk 's coding guidelines , however , as it needed at least a 16 @-@ color EGA graphics processor , and the programmers in the office who did not work on games were not as impressed as Romero . 
 Romero felt that the potential of Carmack 's idea should not be " wasted " on Softdisk ; while the other members of the Gamer 's Edge team more or less agreed , he especially felt that their talents in general were wasted on the company , which needed the money their games brought in but in his opinion neither understood nor appreciated video game design as distinct from general software programming . The manager of the team and fellow programmer , Jay Wilbur , recommended that they take the demo to Nintendo itself , to position themselves as capable of building a PC version of Super Mario Bros. for the company . The group — composed of Carmack , Romero , Hall , and Wilbur , along with Lane Roathe , the editor for Gamer 's Edge , decided to build a full demo game for their idea to send to Nintendo . As they lacked the computers to build the project at home , and could not work on it at Softdisk , they " borrowed " their work computers over the weekend , taking them in their cars to a house shared by Carmack , Wilbur , and Roathe . The group then spent the next 72 hours working non @-@ stop on the demo , which copied Super Mario Bros. 3 with some shortcuts taken in the artwork , sound , and level design , and a title screen which credited the game to the programmers under the name Ideas from the Deep . The response from Nintendo a few weeks later was not as hoped for , however ; while Nintendo was impressed with their efforts , they wanted the Mario series to remain exclusive to Nintendo consoles . 
 Around the same time as the group was rejected by Nintendo , Romero was receiving fan mail about some of the games he had developed for Gamer 's Edge . Upon realizing that , despite the different names used , all of the letters came from the same address — that of Scott Miller of Apogee Software — he wrote back an angry reply , only to receive a phone call from Miller soon after . Miller explained that he was trying to get in contact with Romero unofficially in order to convince him to publish more levels for his previous Pyramids of Egypt — an adventure game where the player navigates mazes while avoiding Egyptian @-@ themed traps and monsters — through Apogee 's shareware model . Miller was pioneering a model of game publishing where part of a game would be released for free , with the remainder of the game available for purchase from Apogee . Romero said the he could not , as Pyramids of Egypt was owned by Softdisk , but that it did not matter as the game he was now working on was much better , and sent Miller the Mario demo . Miller was impressed , and the two agreed that Ideas from the Deep would create a new game for Apogee . Miller sent the group a US $ 2 @,@ 000 advance in return for an agreement that they would create a game before Christmas of 1990 , only a few months away . The game was planned to be split into three parts to match Apogee 's shareware model of giving away the first part for free to attract interest in the whole . 
 Ideas from the Deep convened to come up with the design for the game , and Hall suggested a console @-@ style platformer in the vein of Super Mario Bros. , as they had the technology made for it ; he further recommended a science fiction theme . John Carmack added the idea of a genius child protagonist saving the world , and Hall quickly created a short summary for the game : a dramatic introduction about eight @-@ year @-@ old genius Billy Blaze , defending the Earth with his spaceship . When he read out the summary in an over @-@ dramatic voice to the group , they laughed and applauded , and the group agreed to begin work on Commander Keen in the Invasion of the Vorticons . 
 Billy Blaze , eight year @-@ old genius , working diligently in his backyard clubhouse has created an interstellar starship from old soup cans , rubber cement and plastic tubing . While his folks are out on the town and the babysitter has fallen asleep , Billy travels into his backyard workshop , dons his brother 's football helmet , and transforms into ... 
 <unk> <unk> of Earth ! 
 In his ship , the Bean @-@ with @-@ Bacon <unk> , Keen dispenses galactic justice with an iron hand ! 
 The Ideas from the Deep team , who referred to themselves as the " <unk> guys " , could not afford to leave their jobs to work on the game full @-@ time , so they continued to work at Softdisk , spending their time on the Gamer 's Edge games during the day and on Commander Keen at night . They also continued to take home their work computers to Carmack 's house on the weekends , putting them in their cars at night and bringing them back in the morning before anyone else arrived ; they even began to request upgrades to the computers from Softdisk , nominally for their work . The group split into different roles : Hall became the game designer and creative director , John Carmack and Romero were the programmers , and Wilbur the manager . They invited artist Adrian Carmack from Softdisk to join them late in development , while Roathe was soon kicked out of the group ; Romero , the self @-@ appointed leader of the team , liked him but felt that his work ethic did not match well with the rest of the team , and pushed for his removal . Ideas from the Deep spent nearly every waking moment when they were not working at Softdisk from October through December 1990 working on Commander Keen , with Wilbur forcing them to eat and take breaks . Several members of the team have mentioned in interviews as an example of the team 's commitment a night during development when a heavy storm flooded the path to get to the house , preventing them from working , and John Romero waded through a flooding river to make it to the house anyways . 
 The game 's design was largely driven by Tom Hall : Romero and especially John Carmack were focused almost exclusively on the programming ; Wilbur was not involved in the game 's design ; and Adrian Carmack joined late in development and found the project 's " cute " art style , till then mostly created by Hall , far @-@ removed from his preferred , darker , style . Consequently , he did not try to implement his own design ideas . Hall 's personal experiences and philosophies , therefore , strongly impacted the game : Keen 's red shoes and Green Bay Packers football helmet were items Hall wore as a child , dead enemies left behind corpses due to his belief that child players should be taught that death had permanent consequences , and enemies were based loosely on his reading of Sigmund Freud 's psychological theories , such as that of the id . Other influences on Hall for the game were Duck Dodgers in the 24 ½ th Century and other Chuck Jones cartoons , and " The Available Data on the <unk> Reaction " , a short story about a child constructing a spaceship . Keen 's " Bean @-@ with @-@ Bacon " spaceship was taken from a George Carlin skit about using bay leaves as deodorant so as to smell like soup . Keen was intended to be a reflection of Hall as he had wanted to be as a child . The team separated the game from its Super Mario Bros. roots by adding non @-@ linear exploration and additional mechanics like the pogo stick . A suggestion from Miller that part of the popularity of Super Mario Bros was the presence of secrets and hidden areas in the game led Hall to add several secrets , such as an entire hidden level in the first episode , and a " Galactic Alphabet " in which signs in the game were written , which if deciphered by the players revealed hidden messages , jokes , and instructions . 
 As the game neared completion , Miller began to market the game to players . Strongly encouraged by the updates the team was sending him , he began heavily advertising the game in all of the bulletin board systems ( BBS ) and game magazines he had access to , as well as sending the team US $ 100 checks every week labelled " pizza bonus " after one of the game 's food items to keep them motivated . The game was completed in early December 1990 , and on the afternoon of December 14 Miller began uploading the completed first episode to <unk> , with the other two episodes listed as available for purchase as a mailed plastic bag with floppy disks for US $ 30 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Commander Keen was an immediate hit for Apogee : the company 's previous sales levels had been around US $ 7 @,@ 000 per month , but by Christmas Keen already had sales of almost US $ 30 @,@ 000 . Miller described the game as " a little atom bomb " to magazine editors and BBS controllers when asked about it , and recruited his mother and hired his first employee to handle sales and phone calls from interested players . By June 1991 , the game was bringing in over US $ 60 @,@ 000 per month . Chris Parker of PC Magazine later in 1991 referred to the game 's release as a " tremendous success " . 
 A contemporary review by Barry Simon of PC Magazine praised the game 's graphical capabilities as having a " Nintendo feel " , though he termed the graphics as " well drawn " but " not spectacular " in terms of resolution . He noted that the game was very much an arcade game that players would not purchase for " its scintillating plot or ground @-@ breaking originality " , but said that all three episodes were very fun to play and that the scrolling graphics set it apart from similar games . A short summary of the trilogy in 1992 by PC World termed it " one of the most spectacular games available " and praised the " superb " sound and graphics , and a similar summary in CQ Amateur Radio described it as " Nintendo comes to the PC " and the " best action / adventure game " the reviewer had ever seen . In October 1992 , the <unk> Industry Awards gave the Commander Keen series the " Best Entertainment Software and Best Overall " award . A review of the entire Commander Keen series in 1993 by Sandy Petersen in the first " Eye of the Monitor " column for Dragon described the series as action games with " hilarious graphics " . Acknowledging its debt to Super Mario Bros. , he called it , including the Vorticon trilogy , " one of the best games of its type " and praised it for not being " mindlessly hard " , instead requiring some thought to play through , and especially for the humor in the graphics and gameplay . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ideas from the Deep 's first royalty check from Apogee in January 1991 for US $ 10 @,@ 500 convinced them that they no longer needed their day jobs at Softdisk but could devote themselves full @-@ time to their own ideas . Hall and Wilbur were concerned about the risk of being sued if they did not break the news gently to Softdisk , but Romero and John Carmack were dismissive of the possibility , especially as they felt they had no assets for which they could be sued . Shortly thereafter , John Carmack was confronted by their boss and owner of Softdisk , Al Vekovius , who had become suspicious of the group 's increasingly erratic , disinterested , and surly behavior at work , as well as their multiple requests for computer upgrades . Vekovius had been told by another employee that the group were making their own games , and felt that Carmack was generally incapable of lying ; Carmack in turn bluntly admitted that they had made Keen with Softdisk computers , that they felt no remorse for their actions , and that they were all planning on leaving . Vekovius felt that the company was reliant on the Gamer 's Edge subscriptions , and tried to convince the group to instead form a new company in partnership with Softdisk ; when Ideas from the Deep made no secret of the offer in the office , however , the other employees threatened to all quit if the team was " rewarded " for stealing from the company . After several weeks of negotiation , the Ideas team agreed to produce a series of games for Softdisk , one every two months , and on February 1 , 1991 , founded id Software . 
 In the summer of 1991 , id hosted a seminar for game developers with the intention of licensing the Commander Keen engine ; they did so , forming the spiritual predecessor to both QuakeCon and id 's standard of licensing their game engines . Id Software also produced several more games in the Commander Keen series ; the first of these , Commander Keen in Keen Dreams , was published in 1991 through their agreement with Softdisk . Commander Keen in Goodbye , Galaxy , composed of the episodes " Secret of the Oracle " and " The Armageddon Machine " , was published through Apogee in December 1991 , and the final id @-@ developed Keen game , Commander Keen in Aliens Ate My Babysitter , was published through <unk> around the same time . Another trilogy of episodes , titled The Universe Is Toast ! , was planned for December 1992 , but was cancelled after the success of id 's Wolfenstein 3D and development focus on Doom . A final Keen game , Commander Keen , was developed for the Game Boy Color in 2001 by David A. Palmer Productions in association with id Software , and published by Activision . The original trilogy has been released as part of several collections since its first release : the id Anthology compilation in 1996 , a compilation release by Apogee in 1998 of Invasion of the Vorticons and Goodbye , Galaxy , and the 3D Realms Anthology in 2014 . They have also been released for modern computers through a DOS emulator , and sold through Steam since 2007 as a part of the Commander Keen Complete Pack . According to Steam Spy , as of June 2016 approximately 200 @,@ 000 copies have been sold through Steam . 
 = Today Is Your Day = 
 " Today Is Your Day " is a song performed by Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Shania Twain . It was self @-@ penned by Twain and co @-@ produced by the singer alongside David Foster and Nathan Chapman . The song was released on June 12 , 2011 by Mercury Nashville Records , as a promotional single to accompany the documentary television series Why Not ? with Shania Twain ( 2011 ) . The song marked Twain 's first song release in over six years . Twain wrote the track for self @-@ inspiration , during the development of Why Not ? with Shania Twain . To her , " Today Is Your Day " became the theme song for the series , expressing the purpose behind it via music . Despite feeling apprehensive , Twain decided to record the track , which induced her to create her forthcoming fifth studio album . The track is midtempo ballad in the country pop genre . Lyrically , " Today Is Your Day " regards personal upliftment . " Today Is Your Day " is Twain 's first piece of music to have had no involvement with now ex @-@ husband Robert John " Mutt " Lange in 18 years . 
 " Today Is Your Day " has received mixed reviews from music critics and mild commercial performance in Canada and the United States . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the song peaked at number 16 , while , in the US Billboard Hot 100 , it peaked at number 66 . It became Twain 's first effort to enter the main @-@ genre chart since " Party for Two " ( 2004 ) . Despite not receiving an official music video , a promotional music video was gathered from footage from Why Not ? with Shania Twain . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1993 , prior to success , Twain released her eponymous debut studio album , which caught the attention of record producer Robert John " Mutt " Lange . The two collaborated on songwriting via phone calls for six months , and later established a romantic relationship . Soon after , they wedded in December 1993 and Twain 's second studio album The Woman in Me ( 1995 ) established Twain as a superstar , selling over 12 million copies in the United States . Twain and Lange continued to collaborate on her subsequent albums Come on Over ( 1997 ) and Up ! ( 2002 ) ; the prior went on to sell over 40 million copies worldwide and became the best @-@ selling album by a female artist . After selling a total of over 75 million records worldwide , making her the top @-@ selling female artist in country music history , Twain decided to take a musical hiatus in 2005 . In 2008 , it was announced that after 14 years of marriage , Twain and Lange were in the process of divorcing . The singer had discovered her husband was infidel with her best friend Marie Anne Thiebaud , although Lange and Thiebaud never admitted to it . The divorce was finalized on June 9 , 2010 . 
 According to Twain , she became depressed and lost her desire to live following the divorce . As a distraction from it , Twain commenced to write her memoir From This Moment On ( titled after the 1998 song of the same name ) . She then began to re @-@ evaluate her life and noted a pattern of attempting to withhold emotions , which affected her voice ( for both speaking and singing ) . She explained the loss of her voice was attributed to a cumulative stress that began with domestic violence in her childhood , continued with the death of her parents and the stress from her musical career , and finally exploded with the divorce . As a result , the singer developed dysphonia , an impairment in the ability to produce voice sounds using the vocal organs as a result of tightened muscles enveloping her voice box . In order to recover her voice and heal wounds caused by the divorce , Twain embarked on a documented journey with the series Why Not ? with Shania Twain . The goal was executed via Twain performing acts out her comfort zone to once again be able to perform , while inspiring viewers to be proactive about their dilemmas . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 After repeating to herself , ' Today is your day ! You can do it ! ' , Twain decided to compose a song for self @-@ inspiration . Twain described the decision to write the song as crucial because it was her first since her separation from Lange . She had to " find [ herself ] as a songwriter again " and become independent once again . " I was petrified of writing a new song without Mutt . A whole new world for me . It had been many , many years since I had written by myself so that was new and scary " , Twain said . For Twain , the music was simple to write , only occupying approximately two lines of sheet music . Then , the lyrics began to flow as Why Not ? with Shania Twain progressed . " Today Is Your Day " <unk> her ; consequently , she contemplated sharing it with the series. a concept that frightened her : " Sharing that song with other people , exposing , and basically allowing myself to be vulnerable the and judged , it scared the heck out of me . " She believed it ultimately became " the natural theme song of the series " . She explained the song 's relevance to the television series : " From the inception of documenting the journey , the song was also created at that moment . And it has evolved with it all along the way . " 
 As part of Why Not ? with Shania Twain , she then arranged an appointment with music producer David Foster , hoping to collaborate on " Today Is Your Day " . In order to prepare with her session with Foster , Twain visited vocal coach Eric Vetro to prepare , although feeling skeptical . Twain and Vetro executed several vocal exercises to loosen her up from the tension and tightness she experienced . " The goal is to free up , to let go . She has to take all of that tension and tightness that she 's been feeling for so long , and transform it to free herself from it . And to start singing from her heart again , the way she did when she was a little girl , when she started " , Vetro stated . He also expressed his belief that Twain was prepared enough to once again record and perform music . Twain felt she learned divergent techniques that were beneficial to her voice and appreciated Vetro 's understanding of her psyche as a performer . 
 Nevertheless , Twain was apprehensive about collaborating with Foster and frightened that he would dislike the song or her voice . To ease the process , she approached it as if she were introducing " Today Is Your Day " to the producer as a songwriter , rather than a singer . Twain and Foster recorded the demo of " Today Is Your Day " at Foster 's home studio in Los Angeles , California , creating the musical arrangement as the recording prolonged . Background vocals were provided by Twain and her sister , Carrie Ann Twain , using a handheld microphone . Foster then suggested for Twain to record lead vocals in his home 's vocal booth . After agreeing , Twain commenced it nervously , but then enjoyed it . She considered it a " landmark moment in [ her ] journey " through Why Not ? with Shania Twain and described it as second nature and very natural , as if she never put her musical career to a halt . Twain later recorded the studio version of " Today Is Your Day " and co @-@ produced it along Foster and Nathan Chapman . The song " set [ Twain ] off " , allowing her to feel comfortable anew recording music , and triggering her to create her forthcoming fifth studio album . 
 = = Release = = 
 The song premiered on OWN : Oprah Winfrey Network on June 12 , 2011 , immediately after the broadcast premiere of Why Not ? with Shania Twain 's final episode , " Endless Love " at 11 P.M. EST . Subsequently on the same night , " Today Was Your Day " was released to country radio and digital retailers in Canada and the United States , with an international release the next day . It became her first song release since " Shoes " ( 2005 ) from the Desperate Housewives soundtrack , and her first self @-@ penned song released since " Leaving Is the Only Way Out " from The Woman in Me ( 1995 ) ; the two are her only self @-@ penned tracks released . It is also Twain 's first promotional single . An official music video for " Today Is Your Day " was not filmed ; instead , the song was given a promotional music video compiled from highlights from Why Not ? with Shania Twain . It premiered on Vevo on June 23 , 2011 , and was released to the iTunes Store on June 28 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Today Is Your Day " is a song with a length of three minutes and 12 seconds . The song is a slow mid @-@ tempo ballad of the country pop genre . Nonetheless , several critics , such as Nicholas Köhler and Ken MacQueen Maclean 's , have described the track to be a piece of pop music , rather than country music . It commences with a sole piano accompanying Twain 's voice , and later progresses to an assortment of banjo , string instruments , and other instrumentation . However , the production is maintained sparse , leaving Twain 's vocals at center . The lyrics are written in second person and discuss optimism and personal upliftment . In the bridge , she sings , " Brush yourself off no regrets / This is as good as it gets / Don ’ t expect more or less / Just go out and give it your best " , meaning one must be able to disregard dreaming for a better day because " today is all you ’ ve got " . Melinda Newman of HitFix presumed , considering Twain 's back story , that Twain wrote " Today Is Your Day " as message for herself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics . Melinda Newman of HitFix said it was " a bit <unk> " , however complementing Twain 's reasonably strong vocals . Newman added , " She ’ s not pushing or belting in any way , but she ’ s upfront and center . However , her delivery is hardly the peppy rallying call that the lyrics call for and if a song ever demanded to be uptempo , this would be it . " Sean Daly of the St. Petersburg Times called the song " a shocking <unk> every which way . " Daly criticized Twain 's vocal delivery , noting she sounded as though she sang through the side of her mouth much like James Cagney , and said the track reinforced the skeptics who insisted Lange was the reason for Twain 's success . He concluded , " If ' Today Is Your Day ' is a sign of things to come , you might want to hold your breath on that comeback . " Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV was disappointed with " Today Is Your Day " , but said she would " take it " following the singer 's long absence from music . Rubenstein commented that the song was undoubtedly saccharine , yet Twain 's lush and rich voice prevailed . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending July 2 , 2011 , " Today Is Your Day " debuted at number 14 on the Canadian Hot 100 . The following week , it descended to number 45 . Since , the song has spent six weeks on the Canadian Hot 100 . On the week ending July 2 , 2011 , " Today Is Your Day " also entered on the US Billboard Hot 100 , at number 66 with 46 @,@ 000 digital downloads ( its sole week on the chart ) . This marked Twain 's first entry on the Billboard Hot 100 chart since " Party for Two " ( 2004 ) spent its last week on the chart in February 2005 . On the same week , " Today Is Your Day " entered at number 40 on the US Hot Country Songs chart , ranking Twain 's fourth @-@ highest debut . Two weeks later , on the week ending July 16 , 2011 , the track reached its peak at number 36 , and spent a total of six weeks on the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital Download 
 " Today Is Your Day " – 3 : 14 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Etchmiadzin Cathedral = 
 Etchmiadzin Cathedral ( Armenian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> Mayr <unk> ) is the mother church of the Armenian Apostolic Church , located in the city of Vagharshapat ( Etchmiadzin ) , Armenia . According to scholars it was the first cathedral ( but not the first church ) built in ancient Armenia , and is considered the oldest cathedral in the world . 
 The original church was built in the early fourth century — between 301 and 303 according to tradition — by Armenia 's patron saint Gregory the Illuminator , following the adoption of Christianity as a state religion by King Tiridates III . It replaced a preexisting temple , symbolizing the conversion from paganism to Christianity . The core of the current building was built in 483 / 4 by Vahan Mamikonian after the cathedral was severely damaged in a Persian invasion . From its foundation until the second half of the fifth century , Etchmiadzin was the seat of the Catholicos , the supreme head of the Armenian Church . 
 Although never losing its significance , the cathedral subsequently suffered centuries of virtual neglect . In 1441 it was restored as <unk> and remains as such to this day . Since then the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin has been the administrative headquarters of the Armenian Church . Etchmiadzin was plundered by Shah Abbas I of Persia in 1604 , when relics and stones were taken out of the cathedral in an effort to undermine Armenians ' attachment to their land . Since then the cathedral has undergone a number of renovations . <unk> were added in the latter half of the seventeenth century and in 1868 a sacristy was constructed at the cathedral 's east end . Today , it incorporates styles of different periods of Armenian architecture . Diminished during the early Soviet period , Etchmiadzin revived again in the second half of the twentieth century , and under independent Armenia . 
 As the main shrine of religious Christian Armenians worldwide , Etchmiadzin has been an important location in Armenia not only religiously , but also politically and culturally . A major pilgrimage site , it is one of the most visited places in the country . Along with several important early medieval churches located nearby , the cathedral was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2000 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and etymology = = = 
 According to tradition , the cathedral was built between 301 and 303 near the royal palace in then Armenian capital city of Vagharshapat , on the location of a pagan temple . The Kingdom of Armenia under Tiridates III became the first country in the world to adopt Christianity as a state religion in 301 . According to History of the Armenians ( c . 460 ) by <unk> , Armenia 's patron saint Gregory the Illuminator had a vision of Jesus Christ descending from heaven and striking the earth with a golden hammer to show where the cathedral should be built . Hence , the patriarch gave the church the name of Etchmiadzin ( <unk> <unk> " descent " + <unk> mi " only " + <unk> -a- ( linking element ) + <unk> <unk> " begotten " ) , which translates to " the Descent of the Only @-@ Begotten [ Son of God ] . " However , the name Etchmiadzin did not come into use until the 15th century , while earlier sources call it " Cathedral of Vagharshapat " ( <unk> Կաթողիկե եկեղեցի <unk> Kat <unk> <unk> ) or simply Kat <unk> ( Կաթողիկե , literally " Cathedral " ) . The Feast of the Cathedral of Holy Etchmiadzin ( <unk> Կաթողիկե <unk> . <unk> ) is celebrated by the Armenian Church 64 days after Easter , during which " a special hymn is sung , written by the 8th century Catholicos Sahak III of <unk> , telling of St. Gregory 's vision and the Cathedral 's construction . " 
 During archaeological excavations at the cathedral in 1955 – 56 and 1959 , led by architectural historian Alexander Sahinian , remains of the original 4th @-@ century building were discovered — including two levels of pillar bases below the current ones and a narrower altar apse under the present one . Based on these findings , Sahinian asserted that the original church had been a three @-@ naved vaulted basilica , similar to the basilicas of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( <unk> ) . However , other scholars , have rejected Sahinian 's view . Among them , Suren <unk> and Armen <unk> held that the original church had been in the form of a rectangle with a dome supported by four pillars . Stepan <unk> suggested that the original building had been a " canopy erected on a cross [ plan ] , " while architecture researcher Vahagn Grigoryan suggests an " extreme view , " according to which the cathedral has been essentially in the same form as it is today . 
 = = = Reconstruction and decline = = = 
 According to Faustus of Byzantium , the cathedral and the city of Vagharshapat were almost completely destroyed during the invasion of Persian King Shapur II in the <unk> ( circa 363 ) . Due to Armenia 's bad economic conditions , the cathedral was renovated by <unk> Nerses the Great ( r . 353 – 373 ) and Sahak <unk> ( r . 387 – 439 ) only urgently and partially . 
 In 387 , Armenia was partitioned between the Roman Empire and the Sasanian Empire . The eastern part of Armenia where Etchmiadzin was located remained under the rule of Armenian vassal kings subject to Persia until 428 , when the Armenian Kingdom was dissolved . In 450 , in an attempt to impose Zoroastrianism on Armenians , Sasanian King Yazdegerd II built a fire temple inside the cathedral . The pyre of the fire temple was unearthed under the altar of the east apse during the excavations in the 1950s . 
 By the last quarter of the 5th century the cathedral was dilapidated . According to <unk> <unk> , it was rebuilt from the foundations by <unk> ( governor ) of Persian Armenia Vahan Mamikonian in 483 / 4 , when the country was relatively stable , following the struggle for religious freedom against Persia . Most researchers have concluded that , thus , the church was converted into cruciform church and mostly took its current form . The new church was very different from the original one and " consisted of quadric @-@ apsidal hall built of dull , grey stone containing four free @-@ standing cross @-@ shaped pillars disdained to support a stone cupola . " The new cathedral was " in the form of a square enclosing a Greek cross and contains two chapels , one on either side of the east apse . " According to Robert H. Hewsen , the design of the new church was a mixture of the design of a Zoroastrian fire temple and a mausoleum of classical antiquity . 
 Although the seat of the Catholicos was transferred to Dvin sometime in the 460s – 470s or 484 , the cathedral never lost its significance and remained " one of the greatest shrines of the Armenian Church . " The last known renovations until the 15th century were made by Catholicos Komitas in 618 ( according to <unk> ) and Catholicos Nerses III ( r . 640 – 661 ) . In 982 the cross of the cathedral was reportedly removed by an Arab emir . 
 During these centuries of neglect , the cathedral 's " condition deteriorated so badly " that it prompted the prominent archbishop Stepanos Orbelian to write one of his most notable poems , " Lament on Behalf of the Cathedral " ( « <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> » <unk> i <unk> <unk> ) in 1300 . In the poem , which tells about the consequences of the Mongol and Mamluk invasions of Armenia and Cilicia , Orbelian portrays Etchmiadzin Cathedral " as a woman in mourning , contemplating her former splendor and exhorting her children to return to their homeland [ ... ] and restore its glory . " 
 = = = From revival to plunder = = = 
 Following the fall of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia in 1375 , the See of Sis experienced decline and disarray . The <unk> of Aghtamar and the locally influential Syunik bishops enhanced the importance of the region around Etchmiadzin . In 1441 a general council of several hundred religious figures met in Etchmiadzin and voted to reestablish a <unk> there . The cathedral was restored by Catholicos Kirakos ( Cyriacus ) between 1441 and 1443 . At that time Etchmiadzin was under the control of the Turkic Kara Koyunlu , but in 1502 , Safavid Iran gained control of parts of Armenia , including Etchmiadzin , and granted the Armenian Church some privileges . 
 During the 16th and 17th centuries , Armenia suffered from its location between Persia and Ottoman Turkey , and the conflicts between those two empires . Concurrently with the deportation of up to 350 @,@ 000 Armenians into Persia by Shah Abbas I as part of the scorched earth policy during the war with the Ottoman Empire , Etchmiadzin was plundered in 1604 . The Shah wanted to " dispel Armenian hopes of returning to their homeland " by moving the religious center of the Armenians to Iran in order to provide Persia with a strong Armenian presence . He wanted to destroy the cathedral and have its remains brought to Isfahan . In the event , only some important stones — the altar , the stone where Jesus Christ descended according to tradition , and Armenian Church 's holiest relic , the Right Arm of Gregory the Illuminator — were moved to New Julfa , Isfahan in central Iran . They were incorporated in the local Armenian St. Georg Church when it was built in 1611 . Shah Abbas even offered the cathedral to the Pope . 
 = = = 17th – 18th centuries = = = 
 Since 1627 , the cathedral underwent major renovation under Catholicos Movses ( Moses ) , when the dome , ceiling , roof , foundations and paving were repaired . At this time , cells for monks , a guesthouse and other structures were built around the cathedral . Additionally , a wall was built around the cathedral , making it a fort @-@ like complex . Eli Smith wrote in 1833 : " The whole of the premises are surrounded by a high wall flanked with circular towers , and have externally the appearance of a fortress . Within , is a city in miniature . " Douglas <unk> wrote in 1869 that " convent and cathedral are within a large fortified enclosure " and claimed that it " has in its time resisted many attacks from the infidels . " 
 The renovation works were interrupted by the Ottoman @-@ Safavid War of 1635 – 36 , during which the cathedral remained intact . The renovations resumed under Catholicos <unk> ( 1632 – 55 ) , who built new cells for monks and renovated the roof . During this century , belfries were added to many Armenian churches . In 1653 / 4 , he started the construction of the belfry in the western wing of Etchmiadzin Cathedral . It was completed in 1658 by Catholicos Hakob IV <unk> . According to Hewsen the bell is of <unk> origin with a Buddhist inscription , " probably the long @-@ forgotten gift of some Mongol or Ilkhanid khan . " Decades later , in 1682 , Catholicos <unk> constructed smaller bell towers with red tufa turrets on the southern , eastern , and northern wings . 
 The renovations of Etchmiadzin continued during the 18th century . In 1720 , Catholicos <unk> and then , in 1777 – 83 Simeon I of Yerevan took actions in preserving the cathedral . In 1770 , Simeon I established a publishing house near Etchmiadzin , the first in Armenia . During Simeon 's reign , the monastery was completely walled and separated from the city of Vagharshapat . Catholicos <unk> ( Lukas ) continued the renovations in 1784 – 86 . 
 = = = Russian takeover = = = 
 The Russian influence gradually penetrated into the region by the early 19th century . The Erivan Khanate , in which Etchmiadzin was located , became an arena for rivalry between the Russian and Persian empires . During the Russo @-@ Persian War ( 1804 – 13 ) , Etchmiadzin was twice captured by the Russian troops led by General Pavel Tsitsianov , first in 1804 and then again in 1806 . However , Russia returned it to Persia by the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan . On 13 April 1827 , during the Russo @-@ Persian War ( 1826 – 28 ) , Etchmiadzin was captured by the Russian General Ivan Paskevich 's troops without fight and was formally annexed by Russia , with the Persian @-@ controlled parts of Armenia , roughly corresponding to the territory of the modern Republic of Armenia ( also known as Eastern Armenia ) , according to the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay . 
 The cathedral prospered under Russian rule , despite the suspicions that the Imperial Russian government had about Etchmiadzin becoming a " possible center of the Armenian nationalist sentiment . " Formally , Etchmiadzin became the religious center of the Armenians living within the Russian Empire by the 1836 statute or constitution ( <unk> ) . 
 In 1868 , Catholicos Gevorg ( George ) IV made the last major alteration to the cathedral by adding a sacristy to its east end . In 1874 , he established the <unk> Seminary , a theological school @-@ college located on the cathedral 's premises . Catholicos Markar I undertook the restoration of the interior of the cathedral in 1888 . 
 = = = 20th century and on = = = 
 In 1903 , the Russian government issued an edict to confiscate the properties of the Armenian Church , including the treasures of Etchmiadzin . Russian policemen and soldiers entered and occupied the cathedral . Due to popular resistance and the personal defiance of Catholicos Mkrtich Khrimian , the edict was canceled in 1905 . 
 During the Armenian Genocide , the cathedral of Etchmiadzin and its surrounding became a major center for the Turkish Armenian refugees . At the end of 1918 , there were about 70 @,@ 000 refugees in the Etchmiadzin district . A hospital and an orphanage within the cathedral 's grounds were established and maintained by the U.S.-based Armenian Near East Relief by 1919 . 
 In the spring of 1918 the cathedral was in danger of an attack by the Turks . Prior to the May 1918 Battle of Sardarabad , which took place just miles away from the cathedral , the civilian and military leadership of Armenia suggested Catholicos Gevorg ( George ) V to leave for <unk> for security purposes , but he refused . The Armenian forces eventually repelled the Turkish offensive and set the foundation of the First Republic of Armenia . 
 = = = = Soviet suppression = = = = 
 After two years of independence , Armenia was <unk> in December 1920 . During the 1921 February Uprising Etchmiadzin was briefly ( until April ) taken over by the nationalist Armenian Revolutionary Federation , which had dominated the pre @-@ Soviet Armenian government between 1918 and 1920 . 
 In December 1923 , the southern apse of the cathedral collapsed . It was restored under Toros <unk> 's supervision in what was the first case of restoration of an architectural monument in Soviet Armenia . 
 During the Great Purge and the radical state atheist policies in the late 1930s , the cathedral was a " besieged institution as the campaign was underway to eradicate religion . " The repressions climaxed in 1938 when Catholicos Khoren I was murdered in April by the NKVD . In August of that year , the Armenian Communist Party decided to close down the cathedral , but the central Soviet government seemingly did not approve of such a measure . Isolated from the outside world , the cathedral barely continued to function and its administrators were reduced to some twenty people . It was reportedly the only church in Soviet Armenia not to have been seized by the Communist government . The dissident anti @-@ Soviet Armenian diocese in the US wrote that " the great cathedral became a hollow monument . " 
 The religious importance of Etchmiadzin slowly recovered during the Second World War . The Holy See 's official magazine resumed publication in 1944 , while the seminary was reopened in September 1945 . In 1945 Catholicos Gevorg VI was elected after the seven @-@ year vacancy of the position . The number of baptisms conducted at Etchmiadzin rose greatly : from 200 in 1949 to around 1 @,@ 700 in 1951 . Nevertheless , the cathedral 's role was downplayed by the Communist official circles . " For them the ecclesiastical Echmiadzin belongs irrevocably to the past , and even if the monastery and the cathedral are occasionally the scene of impressive ceremonies including the election of a new <unk> , this has little importance from the communist point of view , " wrote Walter <unk> in 1961 . 
 = = = = Revival = = = = 
 Etchmiadzin revived under Catholicos Vasken I since the period known as the Khrushchev Thaw in the mid @-@ 1950s , following Stalin 's death . Archaeological excavations were held in 1955 – 56 and in 1959 ; the cathedral underwent a major renovation during this period . Wealthy diaspora benefactors , such as Calouste Gulbenkian and Alex Manoogian , financially assisted the renovation of the cathedral . Gulbenkian alone provided $ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2000 Etchmiadzin underwent a renovation prior to the celebrations of the 1700th anniversary of the Christianization of Armenia in 2001 . In 2003 the 1700th anniversary of the consecration of the cathedral was celebrated by the Armenian Church . Catholicos Karekin II issued a pontifical encyclical ( <unk> ) on January 30 . On February 3 he declared 2003 the Year of Holy Etchmiadzin . In September of that year an academic conference was held at the Pontifical Residence . 
 The latest renovation of the cathedral began in 2012 , with a focus on strengthening and restoring the dome and the roof . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Today , Etchmiadzin " has a cruciform plan with a central cupola , four free @-@ standing piers , and four projecting apses which are semicircular on the interior and polygonal on the exterior . The central piers , cruciform in section , divide the interior space into nine equal square compartments . " 
 = = = Exterior design = = = 
 The cathedral 's external appearance has been described as " austere " , " ascetic " , " unostentatious " , and as " a massive cube surmounted by a faceted cone on a simple cylinder . " Robert H. Hewsen writes that it is " neither the largest nor the most beautiful of Armenian churches " , nevertheless , " the overall impression presented by the ensemble is inspiring , and Armenians hold the building in great reverence . " James Bryce wrote that the cathedral is " small , that is to say , compared with its fame or importance " . Paul Bloomfield , writing for The Times , expressed a similar view : " [ the ] cathedral , though diminutive by European standards , is immensely important . " Herbert <unk> wrote in a 1976 New York Times article : " Like all ancient Armenian churches , the cathedral is characterized by a disarmingly naive , <unk> steeple . With a minimum of ornament , the building [ ... ] is a solid stone construction , its arches sober romanesque curves . " 
 Alexander Sahinian declared that Etchmiadzin holds a unique position in Armenian ( and non @-@ Armenian ) architecture history because it reproduces features of different periods of Armenian architecture . Despite the fact that the cathedral was renovated many times through the centuries and some alterations were made in the 17th and 19th centuries , it retains the form of the building constructed in 483 / 4 . The 5th @-@ century building is the core of the cathedral , while the stone cupola , turrets , belfry , and rear extension are all later additions . Engraved on the exterior of the edifice are decorative geometric and floral patterns as well as blind arcades and medallions depicting saints . Portions of the northern and eastern walls of the original building have survived . 
 = = = = Reliefs = = = = 
 Greek reliefs 
 The northern wall of the cathedral contains two reliefs which depict Paul the Apostle and Saint Thecla and a cross with all arms of equal length with Greek inscriptions . Paul and Thecla are represented in conversation , Paul is shown seated on cross @-@ legged stool . These reliefs have been dated by various authors between the first and sixth centuries . <unk> and <unk> Alishan suggested that these reliefs were created before the invention of the Armenian alphabet in 405 . Art historian <unk> Der <unk> believed that they are from the fifth or sixth century . In his 2012 analysis , Grigoryan wrote that " we can insist that the three reliefs of the Echmiadzin Cathedral were created from the very beginning , in 302 – 325 . " According to Hasratyan they are the earliest reliefs on the cathedral 's walls and among the earliest items of Christian Armenian sculpture art . 
 reliefs and ornaments on the western ( main ) belfry 
 = = = Interior design = = = 
 The early frescoes inside the cathedral were restored in the 18th century . Stepanos <unk> ( Stephen of Poland ) illustrated the belfry in 1664 . In the 18th and 19th centuries , Armenian painters created frescoes of scenes from the old testament and Armenian saints . <unk> <unk> painted parts of the interior between 1712 and 1721 . His paintings on the dome and the painting of the Mother of God under the altar have survived to this day . Other members of the prominent <unk> family ( Hakob , <unk> and <unk> ) created paintings throughout the 18th century . Their work was continued by the succeeding generations of the same family ( <unk> and Hakob ) in the 19th century . 
 The wooden doors of the cathedral were carved in Tiflis in 1889 . The paintings were moved out of the cathedral by the order of Catholicos Mkrtich Khrimian in 1891 and are now kept in various museums in Armenia , including the National Gallery of Armenia . The frescoes inside the cathedral were restored by Lydia <unk> in 1956 and in 1981 – 82 under the directorship of <unk> <unk> . 
 In the 1950s , the stone floor was replaced with one of marble . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 = = = = On Armenian architecture = = = = 
 The design of Etchmiadzin Cathedral — classified as " a four @-@ <unk> square with ciborium , " and called <unk> <unk> " Etchmiadzin @-@ type " in Armenian architectural historiography — was not common in Armenia in the early Medieval period . The now @-@ destroyed St. Theodore Church of Bagaran , dating from 624 – 631 , was the only known church with a significantly similar plan and structure from that period . In the 19th century , during an architectural revival that looked back to Armenia 's past , the plan of Etchmiadzin Cathedral began to be directly copied in new Armenian churches . Some notable examples from this period include the narthex of the St. Thaddeus Monastery in northern Iran , dating from 1811 or 1819 – 30 , and the <unk> Cathedral in Shusha , dating from 1868 . 
 = = = = On European architecture = = = = 
 Art historian Josef Strzygowski , who was the first European to thoroughly study Armenian architecture , and who placed Armenia in the center of European architecture , suggested in his 1918 two @-@ volume book titled Die Baukunst der <unk> und Europa ( The Architecture of the Armenians and of Europe ) that several churches and chapels in Western Europe have been influenced by the cathedrals of Etchmiadzin and Bagaran due to similarities found within their plans . According to Strzygowski , some examples of churches influenced by Etchmiadzin and Bagaran are the 9th @-@ century church of <unk> @-@ des @-@ Prés in France ( built by Odo of Metz , probably an Armenian ) and San <unk> of Milan , Italy . This view was later supported by Alexander Sahinian and <unk> Harutyunyan . Sahinian suggested that the Armenian church architecture was spread in Western Europe in the 8th – 9th centuries by Paulicians , who migrated from Armenia en <unk> after being suppressed by the Byzantine government during the Iconoclasm period . Sahinian added many other medieval churches in Europe , such as the Palatine Chapel of Aachen in Germany , to the list of churches to have been influenced by the cathedrals of Etchmiadzin and Bagaran and by Byzantine decorative arts . According to Murad Hasratyan , Etchmiadzin 's design was spread to Europe via the Byzantine Empire and served as a model — besides <unk> @-@ des @-@ Prés and San <unk> — for the Nea Ekklesia church in Constantinople and the churches of Mount Athos in Greece . 
 = = Significance = = 
 For many centuries , Etchmiadzin was the national and political center of the stateless Armenian people . The locus of Etchmiadzin is considered " a sanctified soil " in a way similar to Temple Mount ( for Jews ) and <unk> Sahib ( for Sikhs ) . The cathedral complex has been called " Armenian Vatican " or " Armenian Mecca " as it is a major pilgrimage site for religious Armenians worldwide . Because the cathedral has been so important to the development of Armenians ' sense of identity , a pilgrimage to Etchmiadzin is " as much as ethnic as a religious experience . " American journalist and historian Francis Whiting Halsey described the cathedral as " the most treasured possession of the Armenian nation " and " the source of that strength which has held them together through centuries of persecution , warfare and massacre . " Royal Navy Captain James Creagh highlighted its immense role for the Armenian people in his 1880 book , writing that " The monastery and cathedral of Echmiadzin may , without any exaggeration , be described as the heart of the Armenian nation . " 
 Before the foundation of the First Republic of Armenia and the official designation of Yerevan as its capital in 1918 , Western sources emphasized Etchmiadzin 's political significance . A 1920 book prepared by the Historical Section of the British Foreign Office acknowledged that Etchmiadzin " was regarded as the national capital of the Armenians . " " Deprived of a political head and even a political capital the [ Armenian ] people have , for at least five hundred years , looked to Etchmiadzin as the home of their people , the centre to which they looked for guidance , unfailing sympathy , and practical aid , " wrote Welsh journalist and politician W. Llewelyn Williams in his 1916 book about Armenia . 
 Italian historian and traveler Luigi Villari wrote about the cathedral in 1906 : 
 During every critical phase of their history , the Armenians have looked at Etchmiadzin for guidance , to the Church for close on sixteen hundred years has been their beacon and their hope . A visit to Etchmiadzin enables us to understand the tenacity of this people and their devotion to their faith better than a whole library of books . 
 Mabel Evelyn Elliott , the Medical Director of Near East Relief , wrote about the cathedral 's longevity in 1924 : 
 Changes in temporal affairs have beaten against the walls of Etchmiadzin for sixteen centuries like little waves against a granite cliff . Now the Tsar has fallen , the Soviets have come . The Soviets may endure for a few years or for a few centuries ; it is all one to Etchmiadzin . Some day the Soviets will go , as all temporal governments do , but Etchmiadzin will stand . 
 = = Notable visitors = = 
 Early European visitors to Etchmiadzin who gave <unk> of the cathedral included Jean @-@ Baptiste Tavernier ( before 1668 ) , Jean Chardin ( 1673 ) , Joseph Pitton de Tournefort ( c . 1700 ) , James Morier ( 1810 – 16 ) , Robert Ker Porter ( 1817 – 20 ) , Friedrich Parrot ( 1829 ) , August von <unk> ( 1843 ) , Moritz Wagner ( 1843 ) , James Bryce ( 1876 ) , H. F. B. Lynch ( 1893 ) . 
