 The Ottomans prepared to repel a landing on either side of the Straits , with the Ottoman Fifth Army . The force , which initially consisted of five divisions with another en route , was a conscript force , commanded by Otto Liman von Sanders , a German officer who had been head of the Military Mission sent to Turkey as advisors . Many of the senior officers in the Fifth Army were also German . Ottoman commanders and senior German officers debated the best means of defending the peninsula . All agreed that the most effective form of defence was to hold the high ground on the ridges of the peninsula . There was disagreement as to where the enemy would land and hence where to concentrate their forces . Mustafa Kemal , a 34 @-@ year @-@ old lieutenant colonel familiar with the Gallipoli peninsula , from his operations against Bulgaria in the Balkan War , believed Cape Helles ( the southern tip of the peninsula ) and Gaba Tepe would be the two most likely areas for landing . In the case of the former , Kemal believed that the British would use their navy to command the land from every side , which the tip of the peninsula would allow ; at Gaba Tepe , the short distance to the eastern coast meant forces could easily reach the Narrows . 
 Liman von Sanders considered <unk> Bay on the Asiatic coast to be the most vulnerable to invasion , since Allied forces would benefit from more accessible terrain and could attack the most important Ottoman batteries guarding the straits . Sanders placed two divisions , one third of the Fifth Army , in this area . Two divisions were concentrated at Bulair at the north end of the Gallipoli peninsula , to protect supply and communication lines to the defences further along the peninsula . 
 The 19th Division , under the command of Mustafa Kemal and the 9th Division were placed along the Aegean coast and at Cape Helles on the tip of the peninsula . The bulk of the forces , under Sanders , were to be held inland , leaving a minimum of troops guarding the coast . After the 3rd Division and a cavalry brigade arrived from Constantinople in early April , the front line strength of the Ottoman forces on the Bosporus was 60 @,@ 000 – 62 @,@ 077 , which Sanders concentrated in three groups . He ordered the greatest possible effort to improve land and sea communications so that reinforcements could be moved swiftly to danger points ; troops were moved at night to avoid detection by Allied aircraft . Sanders ' strategy was opposed by Ottoman commanders , including Mustafa Kemal , who believed Ottoman forces were too widely dispersed to drive the attackers back into the sea as soon as their invasion began . Sanders was certain that a rigid system of defence would fail and that the only hope of success lay in the mobility of the three groups , particularly Kemal 's 19th Division , which was concentrated near <unk> as a general reserve , ready to move to Bulair , Gaba Tepe or the Asiatic shore . 
 The delay of the landings by the British allowed Sanders and other German officers such as Colonel Hans Kannengiesser , supported by III Corps commander Esat Pasha , time to prepare their defences . Sanders later noted , " the British allowed us four good weeks of respite for all this work before their great disembarkation ... This respite just sufficed for the most indispensable measures to be taken . " Roads were constructed , small boats assembled to carry troops and equipment across the narrows , beaches were wired and improvised mines were constructed from torpedo warheads . Trenches and gun emplacements were dug along the beaches , while troops went on route marches to avoid lethargy . Kemal , whose 19th Division was vital to the defensive scheme , observed the beaches and awaited signs of an invasion from his post at <unk> , near Maidos . The Ottomans created a small air force with German assistance and had four aircraft operating around Çanakkale in February , conducting reconnaissance and army co @-@ operation sorties and by early April they had established an airfield near Gallipoli . 
 = = Land campaign = = 
 = = = Landings = = = 
 The Allies planned to land and secure the northern shore , capturing the Ottoman forts and artillery batteries there so that a naval force could advance through the Narrows and the Sea of Marmara towards Constantinople . Scheduled for 23 April but postponed until 25 April due to bad weather , landings were to be made at six beaches on the peninsula . The 29th Division was to land at Helles on the tip of the peninsula and then advance upon the forts at Kilitbahir . The Anzacs , with the 3rd Infantry Brigade spearheading the assault , were to land north of Gaba Tepe on the Aegean coast , from where they could advance across the peninsula , cutting off the Ottoman troops in Kilitbahir . The small cove in and around which they landed became known as " Anzac Cove " . This sector of the Gallipoli Peninsula became known as " Anzac " ; the area held by the British and French became known as the " Helles sector " or simply " Helles " . The French made a diversionary landing at Kum Kale on the Asian shore , before re @-@ embarking to hold the eastern area of the Helles sector . There was a diversion by the Royal Naval Division , including a solo effort by New Zealander Bernard Freyberg at Bulair , for which he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order . 
 The Helles landing was made by the 29th Division , under the command of Major General Aylmer Hunter @-@ Weston . The division landed on five beaches in an arc about the tip of the peninsula , named from east to west as ' S ' , ' V ' , ' W ' , ' X ' and ' Y ' Beaches . On 1 May , the 29th Indian Brigade ( including the 1 / 6th Gurkha Rifles ) landed , took and secured Sari Bair above the landing beaches , and were later joined by two other Gurkha battalions , the 1st / 5th and the 2nd / 10th ; the Zion Mule Corps landed at Helles on 27 April . At ' Y ' Beach , during the first engagement around the village of Krithia ( First Battle of Krithia ) , the Allies were able to land unopposed and advance inland . There were only a small number of defenders in the village , but lacking orders to exploit the position , the ' Y ' Beach commander withdrew his force to the beach . It was as close as they came to capturing the village throughout the rest of the campaign as the Ottomans brought up a battalion of the 25th Regiment , checking any further movement . 
 The main landings were made at ' V ' Beach , beneath the old Seddülbahir fortress and at ' W ' Beach , a short distance to the west on the other side of the Helles headland . The covering force from the Royal Munster Fusiliers and Hampshires landed from a converted collier , SS River Clyde , which was run aground beneath the fortress so that the troops could disembark via ramps to the shore . The Royal Dublin Fusiliers landed at ' V ' Beach from open boats . At ' W ' Beach , the Lancashire Fusiliers also landed in open boats , on a shore overlooked by dunes and obstructed with barbed wire . On both beaches the Ottoman defenders occupied good defensive positions and inflicted many casualties on the British infantry as they landed . Troops emerging one by one from sally ports on the River Clyde were shot by machine @-@ gunners at the Seddülbahir fort . Of the first 200 soldiers to disembark , only 21 men reached the beach . 
 As at Anzac , the Ottoman defenders were too few to defeat the landing but inflicted many casualties and contained the attack close to the shore . By the morning of 25 April 1915 , out of ammunition and left with nothing but bayonets to meet the attackers on the slopes leading up from the beach to the heights of Chunuk Bair , the 57th Infantry Regiment received orders from Kemal , commanding the 19th Division : " I do not order you to fight , I order you to die . In the time which passes until we die , other troops and commanders can come forward and take our places " . Every man of the regiment was either killed in action or wounded . As a sign of respect , the 57th Regiment no longer exists in the Turkish Army . 
 At ' W ' Beach , thereafter known as Lancashire Landing , the Lancashires were able to overwhelm the defences despite the loss of 600 casualties from 1 @,@ 000 men . The battalions which landed at ' V ' Beach suffered about 70 percent casualties . Six awards of the Victoria Cross were made among the Lancashires at ' W ' Beach . A further six Victoria Crosses were awarded among the infantry and sailors at the ' V ' Beach landing and three more were awarded the following day as they fought their way off the beach . Five squads of Ottoman infantry led by Sergeant Yahya distinguished themselves by repulsing several attacks on their hilltop position , the defenders eventually disengaging under cover of darkness . After the landings , so few remained from the Dublin and Munster Fusiliers that they were amalgamated into " The <unk> " . Only one Dubliner officer survived the landing , while of the 1 @,@ 012 Dubliners who landed , just 11 survived the Gallipoli campaign unscathed . 
 After the landings , little was done by the Allies to exploit the situation , and apart from a few limited advances inland by small groups of men , most troops stayed on or close to the beaches . The Allied attack lost momentum and the Ottomans had time to bring up reinforcements and rally the small number of defending troops . Lord Kitchener had ruled that air requirements must be met by the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) and the Allies employed a small force of seaplanes and other aircraft from No. 3 Squadron , RNAS which arrived at Tenedos at the end of March . Under Commander Charles Samson , the aircraft were initially unopposed by the small Ottoman air force and during the planning stages the force had been used to provide aerial reconnaissance , although this ultimately proved inadequate to meet the Allies ' intelligence needs and make up for the lack of adequate maps . Following the landings , Allied aircraft conducted photographic reconnaissance , observed naval gunfire , reported on Ottoman troop movements , and conducted a small number of offensive bombing raids . 
 The Australian submarine HMAS AE2 under the command of Lieutenant Commander Henry Stoker succeeded in getting through the Straits on the night of 24 / 25 April . As the army began landing soldiers at Cape Helles and Anzac Cove at dawn on the 25th , by 06 : 00 , AE2 reached Chanak and torpedoed a Turkish gunboat believed to be a Peyk @-@ i Şevket @-@ class cruiser while evading a destroyer . The submarine ran aground beneath a Turkish fort but the fort 's guns could not bear and AE2 was manoeuvred free . Shortly after refloating , the submarine 's periscope was sighted by a Turkish battleship , which was firing over the peninsula at Allied landing sites ; the ship ceased fire and withdrew . AE2 advanced toward the Sea of Marmara ; at 08 : 30 Stoker decided to rest the boat on the seabed and wait until nightfall before continuing . At around 21 : 00 , AE2 surfaced to recharge her batteries and sent a wireless report to the fleet . Although the landing at Cape Helles was going well , the landing at Anzac Cove was not as successful and the commander of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps , Lieutenant General Sir William Birdwood contemplated the re @-@ embarkation of his troops . The news of the Australian submarine 's success was one of the factors that led to Birdwood 's reconsideration and was relayed to the soldiers ashore to improve morale . Stoker was ordered to " generally run amok " and with no enemies in sight , he sailed into the Sea of Marmara . AE2 cruised the Sea of Marmara for five days to give the impression of greater numbers and made several attacks against Turkish ships , which failed because of mechanical problems with the torpedoes . 
 = = = Early battles = = = 
 On the afternoon of 27 April 1915 , the 12 battalions of Mustafa Kemal 's 19th Division , reinforced by six battalions from the 5th Division , launched an attack to drive the six Allied brigades at Anzac back to the beach . With the support of naval gunfire , the Allies held back the Ottomans throughout the night . The following day the British , with the support of French troops , who had been transported north across the Dardanelles from Kum Kale on the Asiatic shore to the right of the line near ' S ' Beach at Morto Bay , attempted to capture Krithia , in what became known as the First Battle of Krithia . The plan for the attack which was formulated by Hunter @-@ Weston , proved overly complex and was poorly communicated to the commanders in the field . The troops of the 29th Division were still exhausted and unnerved by the battles for the beaches and for Seddülbahir village , which was captured after much fighting on 26 April . The Ottoman defenders stopped the Allied advance halfway between the Helles headland and Krithia village , at around 6 : 00 p.m. having inflicted 3 @,@ 000 casualties . As Ottoman reinforcements arrived , the possibility of a swift Allied victory on the peninsula disappeared and the fighting at Helles and Anzac , became a battle of attrition . On 30 April , the Royal Naval Division , under Major General Archibald Paris landed . 
 The same day , Kemal , believing that the Allies were on the verge of defeat , began moving troops forward through " Wire Gulley " , near the " 400 Plateau " and " Lone Pine " . The following afternoon , as eight battalions of reserves were dispatched from Constantinople , Ottoman troops launched strong counterattacks at Helles and Anzac . Although these briefly broke through in the French sector , the attacks were repulsed by massed Allied machine @-@ gun fire , which inflicted heavy casualties on the attackers . The following night , the ANZAC commander , Lieutenant General William Birdwood , ordered the New Zealand and Australian Division under Major General Alexander Godley , to attack from " Russell 's Top " and " Quinn 's Post " towards " Baby 700 " . Colonel John Monash 's Australian 4th Infantry Brigade , the New Zealand Infantry Brigade and marines from the Chatham Battalion took part in the attack . The troops advanced a short distance during the night , under a combined naval and artillery barrage but in the dark became separated and after coming under heavy fire from their exposed left flank , were eventually forced to withdraw , having suffered about 1 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 At sea , on 30 April , AE2 began to rise uncontrollably and surfaced near the Ottoman torpedo boat <unk> , then dropped precipitously , below her safe diving depth , then broke the surface again at the stern . <unk> immediately fired on the submarine , puncturing the pressure hull . Stoker ordered the boat 's company to abandon ship and scuttled the submarine before the crew was captured . AE2 's achievements showed that it was possible to force the Straits and soon Ottoman communications were badly disrupted by British and French submarine operations . On 27 April , HMS E14 , commanded by Lieutenant Commander Edward Boyle , entered the Sea of Marmara on a three @-@ week patrol in one of the most successful Allied naval actions of the campaign , sinking four ships including the transport Gul Djemal which was carrying 6 @,@ 000 troops and a field battery to Gallipoli . While the quantity and value of the shipping sunk was minor , the effect on Ottoman communications and morale was significant . On his return , Boyle was immediately awarded the Victoria Cross . Following the success of AE2 and E14 , the French submarine Joule attempted the passage on 1 May but struck a mine and was lost with all hands . ( Several weeks earlier another French boat , Saphir , had run aground near Nagara Point and had also been lost . ) 
 = = = Operations : May 1915 = = = 
 On 5 May , the 42nd ( East Lancashire ) Division was dispatched from Egypt . Believing Anzac to be secure , Hamilton moved the Australian 2nd Infantry Brigade and the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , along with 20 Australian field artillery pieces , to the Helles front as reserves for the Second Battle of Krithia . Involving a force of 20 @,@ 000 men , it was the first general attack at Helles and was planned as a daylight attack . French troops were to capture <unk> Dere , and the British , Australians and New Zealanders were assigned Krithia and Achi Baba . After 30 minutes of artillery preparation , the assault began at mid @-@ morning on 6 May . The British and French advanced along four spurs dubbed " Gully " , " Fir Tree " , " Krithia " and " <unk> " which were separated by deep gullies and fortified by the Ottoman forces . As the attackers reached the Ottoman defences , the Allied units became separated as they attempted to outflank Ottoman strongpoints and found themselves in unfamiliar terrain . Under heavy artillery and then machine @-@ gun fire from Ottoman outposts that had remained hidden from British aerial reconnaissance , the advance stopped ; the next day , it was resumed by reinforcements . 
 The attack continued on 7 May , but the success of the Ottoman defences continued . Four battalions of New Zealanders attacked up Krithia Spur the following day and with the 29th Division they managed to reach a position just south of the village . Late in the afternoon , the Australian 2nd Brigade advanced quickly over open ground to the British front line . Amidst heavy small arms and shell fire , the brigade charged towards Krithia and gained 600 metres ( 660 yd ) , about 400 metres ( 440 yd ) short of the objective , with 1 @,@ 000 casualties . Near Fir Tree Spur , the New Zealanders managed to get forward and link up with the Australians , although the British were held up and the French were exhausted , despite having occupied a point overlooking their objective . The attack was suspended and the Allies dug in , having failed to take Krithia or Achi Baba . 
 A brief period of consolidation followed . Allied stocks of ammunition were almost expended , particularly for artillery , and both sides paused to bring in replenishments and expand their trench systems . The Ottomans relieved troops opposite the Australian line , which was reinforced by the Australian Light Horse operating as infantry . Sporadic fighting continued , with sniping , grenade attacks and raids , with opposing trenches separated in places by only a few metres . The Australians lost a number of officers to sniping , including the commander of the 1st Division , Major General William Bridges , who was wounded while inspecting the 1st Light Horse Regiment 's position near " Steele 's Post " and died of his injuries on the hospital ship HMHS Gascon on 18 May . 
 = = = Ottoman counter @-@ offensive : 19 May = = = 
 On 19 May , 42 @,@ 000 Turks launched an attack at Anzac in an effort to push 17 @,@ 000 Australians and New Zealanders " back into the sea " . Lacking sufficient artillery and ammunition , the Turks relied on surprise and weight of numbers for success but their preparations were seen on 18 May by a flight of British aircraft and the defenders forewarned . The Turks had c . 13 @,@ 000 casualties , of which 3 @,@ 000 men were killed ; Australian and New Zealand casualties were 160 killed and 468 wounded . The dead included a stretcher bearer , John Simpson Kirkpatrick , whose efforts to evacuate wounded men on a donkey while under fire , became legendary amongst the Australians at Anzac and later resulted in his story becoming part of the Australian narrative of the campaign . Ottoman losses were so severe that a truce was organised by Aubrey Herbert and others on 24 May , to bury the dead lying in no man 's land , which led to a camaraderie between the armies , much like the Christmas truce of 1914 on the Western Front . The truce was not repeated formally . 
 The British advantage in ship @-@ to @-@ shore bombardment had diminished by the torpedoing of the battleship HMS Goliath on 13 May by the Ottoman destroyer <unk> @-@ i <unk> . A German submarine , U @-@ 21 , sank HMS Triumph on 25 May and HMS Majestic on 27 May . Samson 's aircraft flew more patrols around Gallipoli and U @-@ 21 was forced to leave the area . Unaware of this , the Allies withdrew most of their warships to Imbros , where they were " protectively tethered " between brief sorties ; this greatly reduced the amount of Allied naval fire support , particularly in the Helles sector . Meanwhile , HMS E11 , commanded by Lieutenant Commander Martin Nasmith ( who was awarded a Victoria Cross ) passed through the Dardanelles on 18 May and sank or disabled 11 ships , including three on 23 May , before entering Constantinople harbour , firing on a transport alongside the arsenal , sinking a gunboat and damaging the wharf . 
 The Ottoman Turkish forces lacked artillery ammunition and Ottoman field batteries were only able to fire c . 18 @,@ 000 shells between early May and the first week of June . After the defeat of the counterattack at Anzac in mid @-@ May , the Ottoman forces ceased frontal assaults . Late in the month the Ottomans began tunnelling around " Quinn 's Post " in the Anzac sector and early in the morning of 29 May , despite Australian counter @-@ mining , the Ottomans detonated a mine and attacked with a battalion from the 14th Regiment . The Australian 15th Battalion was forced back but counterattacked and recaptured the ground later in the day , before being relieved by New Zealand troops . Operations at Anzac in early June returned to consolidation , minor engagements and skirmishing with grenades and sniper @-@ fire . 
 = = = Operations : June – July 1915 = = = 
 In the Helles sector , which had been extensively entrenched by both sides , the Allies attacked Krithia and Achi Baba again , in the Third Battle of Krithia on 4 June , with the 29th Division , Royal Naval Division , 42nd Division and two French divisions . After its failure , the possibility of a decisive breakthrough was gone and trench warfare resumed , with objectives being measured in hundreds of yards . Casualties were approximately 25 percent on both sides ; the British lost 4 @,@ 500 from 20 @,@ 000 men and the French 2 @,@ 000 casualties from 10 @,@ 000 troops . Ottoman losses were 9 @,@ 000 casualties according to the Turkish Official History and 10 @,@ 000 according to another account . 
 In June , a seaplane carrier HMS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree arrived , and the Allied air force was expanded from one squadron to a full wing designated " No. 3 Wing RNAS " . The 52nd ( Lowland ) Division also landed at Helles in preparation for the Battle of " Gully Ravine " , which was launched on 28 June . This battle advanced the British line along the left ( Aegean ) flank of the battlefield , a limited victory for the Allies . Liman von Sanders credited the defence to two Ottoman officers , <unk> Pasa and Albay Refet . On 30 June , the French commander , Henri Gouraud who had earlier replaced Albert d <unk> , was wounded and replaced by his divisional commander , Maurice <unk> . Between 1 and 5 July the Ottomans counterattacked the new British line several times but failed to regain the lost ground . Ottoman casualties for the period were estimated at 14 @,@ 000 men . A British action took place at Helles on 12 July , before the Allied main effort was shifted north to Anzac . Two fresh brigades from the 52nd Division attacked at the centre of the line along Achi Baba <unk> ( " Bloody Valley " ) , gained very little ground and lost 2 @,@ 500 casualties out of 7 @,@ 500 men ; the Royal Naval Division lost 600 and French losses were 800 men . Turkish losses were about 9 @,@ 000 casualties and 600 prisoners . 
 Meanwhile , the submarine campaign continued . Boyle and E14 made two subsequent tours of the Marmara . His third tour began on 21 July , when he passed through the straits despite the newly installed anti @-@ submarine net near the Narrows . The next attempt was made by Mariotte on 27 July . However , Mariotte failed to negotiate the net that E14 had eluded and was forced to the surface . After being shelled from the shore batteries , Mariotte was scuttled . On 8 August , during a subsequent tour of the Marmara , E11 torpedoed the Ottoman battleship Barbaros Hayreddin resulting in the loss of 253 men . During the tour E11 also sank a gunboat , seven transports and 23 sailing vessels . 
 = = = August offensive = = = 
 The failure of the Allies to capture Krithia , or make any progress on the Helles front , led Hamilton to pursue a new plan to secure the Sari Bair Range and capture high ground on Hill 971 and Chunuk Bair . Both sides had been reinforced , with Hamilton 's original five divisions increased to 15 , while the six original Ottoman divisions had grown to 16 . Commanded by Godley , the Allies planned to land two fresh infantry divisions from IX Corps , at Suvla , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Anzac , followed by an advance on Sari Bair from the northwest . At Anzac an offensive would be made against the Sari Bair range by advancing through rough and thinly defended terrain , north of the Anzac perimeter . This would be achieved by an attack on " Baby 700 " from the Nek by dismounted Australian light horsemen from the 3rd Light Horse Brigade , in concert with an attack on Chunuk Bair summit by New Zealanders from the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , who would traverse " Rhododendron Ridge " , the " Apex " and the " Farm " . Hill 971 would be attacked by a combined force drawn from the Gurkhas of the 29th Indian Brigade and the Australians of the 4th Infantry Brigade . The Allies had 40 aircraft , mainly of No. 3 Wing , RNAS at Imbros , which had replaced its original Voisin aircraft , with Farmans and Nieuport Xs . A French squadron , Escadrille <unk> , had also been established at Tenedos . Against this the Ottomans had 20 aircraft , of which eight were stationed at Çanakkale . Throughout the offensive the Allied aircraft made reconnaissance flights , spotted for naval gunfire support , and conducted low @-@ level bombing of Ottoman reserves as they were brought up to the battlefield ; they also undertook anti @-@ shipping operations in the Gulf of Saros where a seaplane from HMS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree sank an Ottoman tug with an air @-@ launched torpedo . 
 The landing at Suvla Bay took place on the night of 6 August against light opposition ; but the British commander , Lieutenant General Frederick Stopford , had limited his early objectives and then failed to forcefully push his demands for an advance inland , and little more ground than the beach was seized . The Ottomans were able to occupy the Anafarta Hills , preventing the British from penetrating inland , which reduced the Suvla front to static trench warfare . The offensive was preceded on the evening of 6 August by diversions at Helles and Anzac . At Helles , the diversion at Krithia Vineyard became another costly stalemate . At Anzac an attack on the Ottoman trenches at " Lone Pine " , led by the 1st Infantry Brigade , captured the main Ottoman trench line in a diversion to draw Ottoman forces away from the main assaults at the peaks of Chunuk Bair and Hill 971 , both of which failed nonetheless . 
 The New Zealand Infantry Brigade came within 500 metres ( 550 yd ) of the near peak of Chunuk Bair by dawn on 7 August but was not able to seize the summit until the following morning . This delay had fatal consequences for another supporting attack on the morning of 7 August , by the Australian 3rd Light Horse Brigade at the Nek , which was to coincide with the New Zealander attack from Chunuk Bair against the rear of the Ottoman defences . The attack went ahead regardless , ending in a costly failure , after the opening artillery barrage lifted seven minutes early , leaving the assaulting troops to attack alerted Ottoman defenders on a narrow front . An attack on Hill 971 never took place after the Australian 4th Infantry Brigade and an Indian brigade lost direction during the night . Attempts to resume the attack were easily repulsed by the Ottoman defenders , at great cost to the Allies . 
 The New Zealanders held out on Chunuk Bair for two days before relief was provided by two New Army battalions from the Wiltshire and Loyal North Lancashire Regiments . An Ottoman counterattack on 10 August , led by Mustafa Kemal , swept these two battalions from the heights . Of 760 men in the New Zealand Wellington Battalion who reached the summit 711 became casualties . With the Turkish forces having recaptured the vital ground the Allies ' best chance of victory was lost . 
 The Suvla landing was reinforced by the arrival of the 10th ( Irish ) Division on 7 August , the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , which began landing on 8 August , the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division arriving late on 10 August , and the dismounted yeomanry of the 2nd Mounted Division on 18 August . On 12 August the 54th Division attacked Kavak Tepe and <unk> Tepe , crossing the Anafarta Plain . The attack failed and Hamilton 's staff briefly considered the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac . The events of the day later gained significance due to the loss of a company of the Norfolk Regiment . Having been recruited from men who worked on King George V 's Sandringham estate they were dubbed the " Sandringham Company " . After being isolated and destroyed during the 12 August attack it was rumoured that they had advanced into a mist and " simply disappeared " . This gave rise to legends that they had been executed or that they had been taken by some supernatural force , but some members were later found to have been taken prisoner . 
 Elements of the newly formed Australian 2nd Division began arriving at Anzac from Egypt with the 5th Infantry Brigade landing on 19 – 20 August ; the 6th and 7th arrived in early September . The 29th Division was also shifted from Helles to Suvla . The final British attempt to resuscitate the offensive came on 21 August with attacks at Scimitar Hill and Hill 60 . Control of the hills would have united the Anzac and Suvla fronts but both attacks failed . During the fighting at Hill 60 , which ended on 29 August , Hamilton had requested another 95 @,@ 000 troops on 17 August and on 16 August the French had announced plans to Kitchener for an autumn offensive in France . A meeting of the Dardanelles Committee on 20 August determined that the French offensive would be supported with all the forces at Britain 's disposal , which left only about 25 @,@ 000 reinforcements for the Dardanelles . On 23 August , after news of the failure at Scimitar Hill , Hamilton felt compelled to assume a defensive strategy as Bulgaria 's entry into the war , which would allow the Germans to rearm the Turkish army , was imminent and left little opportunity for the resumption of offensive operations . On 20 September 1915 , the Newfoundland Regiment was deployed at Suvla Bay with the 29th Division in support of the campaign . On 25 September Kitchener demanded three divisions — two British and one French — for service in Salonika in Greece , and this marked the beginning of the end of the Allied campaign at Gallipoli . 
 Alan Moorehead records that during the stalemate one old Ottoman batman was regularly permitted to hang his platoon 's washing on the barbed wire without attracting fire and that there was a " constant traffic " of gifts being thrown across no @-@ man 's land : dates and sweets from the Ottoman side and cans of beef and cigarettes from the Allied side . Conditions at Gallipoli grew worse for the soldiers on both sides , and summer heat and poor sanitation resulted in an explosion in the fly population . Eating became extremely difficult as unburied corpses became bloated and putrid . The precarious Allied bases were poorly situated , which caused supply and shelter problems . A dysentery epidemic spread through the Allied trenches at Anzac and Helles , while the Ottomans also suffered heavily from disease which resulted in many deaths . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 The defeat of Serbia during the autumn 1915 phase of the Serbian Campaign prompted France and Britain to transfer troops from the Gallipoli Campaign to Greek Macedonia . The Macedonian Front was thus established in an effort to support the remnants of the Serbian army to conquer Vardar Macedonia . 
 Following the failure of the August Offensive , the Gallipoli campaign drifted . Ottoman success began to affect public opinion in the United Kingdom , with news discrediting Hamilton 's performance being smuggled out by journalists like Keith Murdoch and Ellis <unk> @-@ Bartlett . Disaffected senior officers such as General Stopford also contributed to the overall air of gloom . The prospect of evacuation was raised on 11 October 1915 but Hamilton resisted the suggestion , fearing the damage to British prestige . He was dismissed as commander shortly afterwards and replaced by Lieutenant General Sir Charles Monro . Autumn and winter brought relief from the heat but also led to gales , blizzards and flooding , resulting in men drowning and freezing to death , while thousands suffered frostbite . 
 Meanwhile , on 4 September , the same anti @-@ submarine net that caught Mariotte also trapped E7 as it attempted to commence another tour . Despite such reverses , by mid @-@ September the Allies had succeeded in sealing off the eastern entrance to the Dardanelles to German U @-@ boats using a series of nets and mines , with U @-@ 21 finding the way blocked when it attempted to traverse the strait on its way to Constantinople on 13 September . The first French submarine to enter the Sea of Marmara was Turquoise . However , it was forced to turn back and , on 30 October , when attempting to pass back through the straits , ran aground beneath a fort and was captured intact . The crew of 25 were taken prisoner and documents detailing planned Allied operations were discovered . This included a scheduled rendezvous with HMS E20 on 6 November . However , the rendezvous was kept by the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 14 instead , which torpedoed and sank E20 , killing all but nine of the crew . 
 The situation at Gallipoli was complicated by the entry of Bulgaria into the war on the side of the Central Powers . In early October 1915 the British and French opened a second Mediterranean front at Salonika , by moving three divisions from Gallipoli , and reducing the flow of reinforcements . A land route between Germany and the Ottoman Empire through Bulgaria was opened , enabling Germany to supply heavy artillery to devastate the Allied trench network , especially on the confined front at Anzac , as well as modern aircraft and experienced crews . In late November an Ottoman crew in a German Albatros <unk> shot down a French aircraft over Gaba Tepe and two Austro @-@ Hungarian artillery units , the 36 . <unk> and 9 . <unk> arrived , providing a substantial reinforcement of the Ottoman artillery . Monro recommended evacuation to Kitchener who in early November visited the eastern Mediterranean . After consulting with the commanders of VIII Corps at Helles , IX Corps at Suvla , and Anzac , Kitchener agreed with Monro and passed his recommendation to the British Cabinet , who confirmed the decision to evacuate in early December . 
 Due to the proximity of Ottoman forces and the harsh winter weather , many casualties were anticipated during the embarkation . The untenable nature of the Allied position was made apparent when a heavy rainstorm struck on 26 November 1915 . It lasted three days and was followed by a blizzard at Suvla in early December . Rain flooded trenches , drowned soldiers and washed unburied corpses into the lines ; the following snow killed still more men from exposure . 
 The evacuation was the best @-@ executed segment of the entire Allied campaign . Suvla and Anzac were to be evacuated in late December , the last troops leaving before dawn on 20 December 1915 . Troop numbers had been slowly reduced since 7 December 1915 and ruses , such as William Scurry 's self @-@ firing rifle , which had been rigged to fire by water dripped into a pan attached to the trigger , were used to disguise the Allied departure . At Anzac Cove troops maintained silence for an hour or more , until curious Ottoman troops ventured to inspect the trenches , whereupon the Anzacs opened fire . A mine was detonated at the Nek which killed 70 Ottoman soldiers . The Allied force was embarked , with the Australians suffering no casualties on the final night , but large quantities of supplies and stores fell into Ottoman hands . 
 Helles was retained for a period but a decision to evacuate the garrison was made on 28 December . Unlike the evacuation from Anzac Cove , Ottoman forces were looking for signs of withdrawal . Having used the intervening time to bring up reinforcements and supplies , Liman von Sanders mounted an attack on the British at " Gully Spur " on 7 January 1916 with infantry and artillery ; the attack failed and heavy casualties were inflicted . Mines were laid with time fuzes and that night and on the night of 7 / 8 January , under the cover of a naval bombardment , the British troops began to fall back 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from their lines to the beaches , where makeshift piers were used to board boats . The final British troops departed from Lancashire Landing around 04 : 00 on 8 January 1916 . The Newfoundland Regiment was chosen to be a part of the rearguard , finally withdrawing from Gallipoli on 9 January 1916 . Among the first to land , remnants of The Plymouth Battalion , Royal Marine Light Infantry were the last to leave the Peninsula . Despite predictions of up to 30 @,@ 000 casualties , 35 @,@ 268 troops , 3 @,@ 689 horses and mules , 127 guns , 328 vehicles and 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of equipment were removed . 508 mules which could not be embarked were killed so as not to fall into Turkish hands , and 1 @,@ 590 vehicles were left behind with destroyed wheels . As at Anzac , large amounts of supplies ( including 15 damaged British and six French artillery pieces which were destroyed ) , gun carriages and ammunition were left behind ; hundreds of horses were also slaughtered , again to prevent them from being utilised by the Ottomans . One sailor was killed by <unk> from a magazine that exploded prematurely , and a lighter and a picket boat were lost . Shortly after dawn , the Ottoman forces retook Helles . In the final days of the campaign , the Ottoman air defences had been increased by a German @-@ Ottoman fighter squadron which began operations over the peninsula and inflicted the first British flying losses a couple of days after the evacuation of Helles , when three Fokker <unk> shot down two RNAS aircraft . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Military repercussions = = = 
 Historians are divided about how they summarise the campaign 's result . Broadbent describes the campaign as " a close @-@ fought affair " that was a defeat for the Allies , while Carlyon views the overall result as a stalemate . Peter Hart disagrees , arguing that the Ottoman forces " held the Allies back from their real objectives with relative ease " , while <unk> calls it a " disaster for the Allies " . The campaign did cause " enormous damage to ... [ Ottoman ] national resources " , and at that stage of the war the Allies were in a better position to replace their losses than the Ottomans , but ultimately the Allied attempt at securing a passage through the Dardanelles proved unsuccessful . While it diverted Ottoman forces away from other areas of conflict in the Middle East the campaign also consumed resources the Allies could have employed on the Western Front , and also resulted in heavy losses on the Allied side . 
 The Allied campaign was plagued by ill @-@ defined goals , poor planning , insufficient artillery , inexperienced troops , inaccurate maps and intelligence , overconfidence , inadequate equipment and logistics , and tactical deficiencies at all levels . Geography also proved a significant factor . While the Allied forces possessed inaccurate maps and intelligence and proved unable to exploit the terrain to their advantage , the Ottoman commanders were able to utilise the high ground around the Allied landing beaches to position well @-@ sited defences that limited the Allied forces ' ability to penetrate inland , confining them to narrow beaches . The campaign 's necessity remains the subject of debate , and the recriminations that followed were significant , highlighting the schism that had developed between military strategists who felt the Allies should focus on fighting on the Western Front and those that favoured trying to end the war by attacking Germany 's " soft underbelly " , its allies in the east . 
 British and French submarine operations in the Sea of Marmara were the one significant area of success of the Gallipoli Campaign , forcing the Ottomans to abandon the sea as a transport route . Between April and December 1915 , a total of nine British and four French submarines had carried out 15 patrols , sinking one battleship , one destroyer , five gunboats , 11 troop transports , 44 supply ships , and 148 sailing vessels at a cost of eight Allied submarines which were sunk in the strait or in the Sea of Marmara . During the campaign there was always one British submarine in the Sea of Marmara , sometimes two ; in October 1915 , there were four Allied submarines in the region . E2 left the Sea of Marmara on 2 January 1916 , the last British submarine in the region . Meanwhile , four E @-@ class and five B @-@ class submarines remained in the Mediterranean Sea following the evacuation of Helles . By this time the Ottoman navy had been all but forced to cease operations in the area , while merchant shipping had also been significantly curtailed . The official German naval historian , Admiral Eberhard von <unk> , later concluded that had the sea lanes of communication been completely severed the Ottoman 5th Army would likely have faced catastrophe . As it was these operations were a source of significant anxiety , posing a constant threat to shipping and causing heavy losses , effectively dislocating Ottoman attempts to reinforce their forces at Gallipoli , and shelling troop concentrations and railways . 
 Gallipoli marked the end for Hamilton and Stopford but Hunter @-@ Weston went on to lead VIII Corps on the first day of the Battle of the Somme . The competence of Australian brigade commanders , John Monash ( 4th Infantry Brigade ) and Harry Chauvel ( 1st Light Horse Brigade , New Zealand and Australian Division ) , was recognised by promotion to divisional and corps command . The influence of Kitchener waned after the coalition government was formed in May 1915 , partly because of the growing sense of failure in the Dardanelles and culminated in Kitchener being overruled on support for the French at Salonika in early December 1915 , when his influence on the Cabinet was at its lowest . The campaign gave confidence to the Ottomans in their ability to defeat the Allies . In Mesopotamia , the Turks surrounded a British expedition at Kut Al Amara , forcing their surrender in April 1916 . Ottoman forces in southern Palestine were poised to launch an attack against the Suez Canal and Egypt . Defeat at the Battle of Romani and lack of materials to complete the military railway , necessary for such an operation , marked the end of that ambition . The optimism which came from the victory at Gallipoli was replaced by a gathering sense of despair and the British remained on the offensive in the Middle East for the rest of the war . 
 The lessons of the campaign had a significant impact upon the development of amphibious operational planning , and have since been studied by military planners prior to operations such as the Normandy Landings in 1944 and during the Falklands War in 1982 . The campaign also influenced US Marine Corps amphibious operations during the Pacific War , and continues to influence US amphibious doctrine . 
 According to authors such as Theodore Gatchel , during the interwar period the campaign " became a focal point for the study of amphibious warfare " in the United Kingdom and United States , because , as Glenn Wahlert points out , it involved " all four types of amphibious operations : the raid , demonstration , assault and withdrawal " . Russell <unk> has written that analysis of the campaign before World War II led to " a belief among most of the armed forces of the world " that amphibious assaults could not succeed against modern defences and that arguably this perception continued until the Normandy Landings in June 1944 despite some successful examples of amphibious operations earlier in the war , such as those in Italy , and at Tarawa and in the Gilbert Islands in the Pacific . Hart supports <unk> 's supposition , writing that although this negative perception prevailed amongst Allied planners in the interwar years , the war situation after 1940 meant that such operations had to be considered . He also argues that despite early successes in North Africa and Italy , it was not until Normandy that the belief that opposed landings could not succeed was completely excised . 
 The memory of Gallipoli also weighed heavily upon the Australians during the planning stages of the Huon Peninsula campaign in late 1943 . In September 1943 , Australian forces carried out their first opposed amphibious landing since Gallipoli , when they landed at Finschhafen in New Guinea . The landing was hampered by navigational errors and troops came ashore on the wrong beaches but they had been trained with the lessons of Gallipoli in mind , specifically the need to maintain momentum , and they quickly reorganised and pushed inland . 
 = = = Political effects = = = 
 The failure of the landings had significant political repercussions in Britain , which began during the battle . Fisher resigned in May after bitter conflict with Churchill over the campaign . The crisis that followed after the Conservatives learned that Churchill would be staying , forced the Prime Minister H. H. Asquith , to end his Liberal Government and form a Coalition Government with the Conservative Party . The Asquith government responded to the disappointment and outrage over Gallipoli and Kut by establishing commissions of inquiry into both episodes which had done much to " destroy its faltering reputation for competence " . The Dardanelles Commission was set up to investigate the failure of the expedition , the first report being issued in 1917 , with the final report published in 1919 . Following the failure of the Dardanelles expedition , Sir Ian Hamilton , commander of the MEF , was recalled to London in October 1915 , ending his military career . Churchill was demoted from First Lord of the Admiralty as a prerequisite for Conservative entry to the coalition but remained in the Cabinet in the sinecure of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , before resigning in November 1915 and departing for the Western Front , where he commanded an infantry battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers early in 1916 . 
 Asquith was partly blamed for Gallipoli and other disasters and was overthrown in December 1916 when David Lloyd George proposed a war council under his authority , which led the Conservatives in the coalition to threaten to resign . Lloyd George and then Asquith resigned followed by Lloyd George becoming Prime Minister . Lloyd George formed a new government , in which Churchill , active again in the House of Commons from June 1916 , was given the non @-@ cabinet post of Minister of Munitions despite Conservative opposition . In this role he was later responsible for implementing a number of innovations , including the development of the tank . The Commission 's final report was issued in 1919 , concluding that with the forces available , success was dependent on the government giving priority to the expedition and leaving the British Expeditionary Force in France to make do . The Commissioners found that Hamilton had been over @-@ optimistic from the beginning and had added to Stopford 's difficulties on 8 August 1915 ; but he emerged from the investigation more favourably than perhaps was justified , partly because he made devious attempts to gain collusion from witnesses and obtain leaks from the Commission 's deliberations ; Hamilton was never given another army appointment . 
 The enormous Gallipoli casualties among Irish soldiers who had volunteered to fight in the British Army was a causal factor in the Irish War of Independence ; as balladeers sang , " Twas better to die ' neath an Irish sky than in Suvla or Sedd el Bahr " . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Casualty figures for the campaign vary between sources , but it is believed that by the time the Gallipoli Campaign ended over 100 @,@ 000 men were dead , including 56 @,@ 000 – 68 @,@ 000 Turkish and around 53 @,@ 000 British and French soldiers . Carlyon gives 43 @,@ 000 British killed or missing , including 8 @,@ 709 Australians . Among the dead were 2 @,@ 721 New Zealanders , about a quarter of those who had initially landed on the peninsula . In total there were nearly half a million casualties during the campaign , with the British Official History listing total losses , including sick , as 205 @,@ 000 British , 47 @,@ 000 French and 251 @,@ 000 Turkish . Yet Turkish casualties have been disputed and were likely higher , with another source listing 2 @,@ 160 officers and 287 @,@ 000 other ranks . Included among this may be as many as 87 @,@ 000 killed . Many soldiers became sick due to the unsanitary conditions , especially from typhoid , dysentery and diarrhoea . It is estimated that at least 145 @,@ 000 British soldiers became ill during the campaign . Turkish sick are given as 64 @,@ 000 . 
 In November 1918 , the Canterbury Mounted Rifles and the 7th Light Horse Regiments , from the Anzac Mounted Division , were sent from Rafa to Gallipoli to " monitor Turkish compliance with the terms of the Armistice " . The 900 troopers , sailed from Kantara in the transport ship <unk> to Chanak , camping at <unk> near Kilid Bahr during three winter months when they reconnoitred the Peninsula , identifying graves and inspecting the Ottoman positions . The troopers returned to Egypt on 19 January 1919 less 11 who had died and 110 who were sick in hospital . Author Lindsay <unk> later wrote that it was " a sad mistake to take worn @-@ out men there in such a season " . 
 There were allegations that Allied forces had attacked or bombarded Ottoman hospitals and hospital ships on several occasions between the start of the campaign and September 1915 . By July 1915 , there were 25 Ottoman hospitals with a total of 10 @,@ 700 beds and three hospital ships in the area . The French Government disputed these complaints through the Red Cross and the British response was that if it happened then it was accidental . Russia in turn claimed that the Ottomans had attacked two of their hospital ships , the Portugal and the <unk> , but the Ottoman Government responded that the vessels had been the victims of mines . No chemical weapons were used at Gallipoli , although the Allies debated their use throughout the campaign and transported quantities of gas to the theatre , which were used against Ottoman troops in the Middle Eastern theatre two years later , during the second and third battles of Gaza in 1917 . 
 The Commonwealth War Graves Commission ( CWGC ) is responsible for developing and maintaining permanent cemeteries for all Commonwealth forces — United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , India , Newfoundland and others . There are 31 CWGC cemeteries on the Gallipoli peninsula : six at Helles ( plus the only solitary grave , that of Lieutenant Colonel Charles Doughty @-@ Wylie VC , Royal Welch Fusiliers ) , four at Suvla and 21 at Anzac . For many of those killed , and those who died on hospital ships and were buried at sea , there is no known grave . These men 's names are recorded on one of five " memorials to the missing " ; the Lone Pine Memorial commemorates Australians killed in the Anzac sector , as well as New Zealanders with no known grave or who were buried at sea , while the Lone Pine , Hill 60 , and Chunuk Bair Memorials commemorate New Zealanders killed at Anzac . The Twelve Tree Copse Memorial commemorates the New Zealanders killed in the Helles sector , while British , Indian and Australian troops who died there are commemorated on the Helles Memorial at Cape Helles . British naval casualties who were lost or buried at sea are not recorded on these memorials but are listed on memorials in the United Kingdom . There are two more CWGC cemeteries on the Greek island of Limnos , the first in the town of Moudros and the second in the village of <unk> . Limnos was the hospital base for the Allied forces and most of the buried were among the men who died of their wounds . There is only one French cemetery on the Gallipoli Peninsula , located at <unk> . 
 There are no large Turkish military cemeteries on the peninsula but there are numerous memorials , the main ones being the Çanakkale Martyrs ' Memorial at Morto Bay , Cape Helles ( near ' S ' Beach ) , the Turkish Soldier 's Memorial on Chunuk Bair and the memorial and open @-@ air mosque for the 57th Regiment near Quinn 's Post ( Bomba <unk> ) . There are a number of Turkish memorials and cemeteries on the Asian shore of the Dardanelles , demonstrating the greater emphasis that Turkish historians place on the victory of 18 March over the subsequent fighting on the peninsula . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Allied troops were withdrawn to Lemnos and then to Egypt . French forces ( renamed the " Corps <unk> des Dardanelles " in late October ) were subsumed into the Army of the Orient and later employed at Salonika . In Egypt , the British Imperial and Dominion troops from the Dardanelles along with fresh divisions from the United Kingdom and those at Salonika , became the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force ( MEF ) , commanded by Lieutenant General Sir Archibald Murray . They joined the Force in Egypt to become the strategic reserve for the British Empire , consisting of 13 infantry and mounted divisions with 400 @,@ 000 men . In March 1916 , Murray took command of both these forces , forming them into the new Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) , and reorganising the units for service in Europe , Egypt and elsewhere in the Middle East . While the ANZAC was disbanded , the AIF was expanded with three new Australian divisions being raised , and a New Zealand Division was also formed . These units moved to the Western Front in mid @-@ 1916 . 
 The British yeomanry units that had fought dismounted at Gallipoli were reinforced and reorganised , forming the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division and a portion of the 75th Division . Along with the Australian Light Horsemen and New Zealand Mounted Rifles remounted and reorganised into the Anzac Mounted Division , infantry from the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , 42nd ( East Lancashire ) Division , 53rd ( Welsh ) Division and 54th ( East Anglian ) Division , later joined by additional remounted Australian Light Horsemen and British yeomanry from the Australian Mounted Division , participated in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . The Egyptian Sinai was reoccupied in 1916 , while Palestine and the northern Levant were captured from the Ottoman Empire during 1917 and 1918 , before the Armistice of Mudros ended hostilities in the Middle Eastern theatre on 31 October . The Allies subsequently occupied Gallipoli and Constantinople and partitioned the Ottoman Empire . The occupation ended in 1923 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The significance of the Gallipoli Campaign is felt strongly in both New Zealand and Australia , despite their being a small minority of the Allied forces ; the campaign is regarded in both nations as a " baptism of fire " and had been linked to their emergence as independent states . Approximately 50 @,@ 000 Australians served at Gallipoli and from 14 @,@ 000 to 17 @,@ 000 New Zealanders . It has been argued that the campaign proved significant in the emergence of a unique Australian identity following the war , which has been closely linked to popular <unk> of the qualities of the soldiers that fought during the campaign , which became embodied in the notion of an " Anzac spirit " . 
 The landing on 25 April is commemorated every year in both countries as " Anzac Day " . The first iteration was celebrated unofficially in 1916 , at churches in Melbourne , Brisbane and London , before being officially recognised as a public holiday in all Australian states in 1923 . The day also became a national holiday in New Zealand in the 1920s . Organised marches by veterans began in 1925 , in the same year a service was held on the beach at Gallipoli ; two years later the first official dawn service took place at the Sydney Cenotaph . During the 1980s it became popular for Australian and New Zealand tourists to visit Gallipoli to attend the dawn service there and since then thousands have attended . Over 10 @,@ 000 people attended the 75th anniversary along with political leaders from Turkey , New Zealand , Britain and Australia . Dawn services are also held in Australia ; in New Zealand , dawn services are the most popular form of observance of this day . Anzac Day remains the most significant commemoration of military casualties and veterans in Australia and New Zealand , surpassing Remembrance Day ( Armistice Day ) . 
 In Turkey the battle is thought of as a significant event in the state 's emergence , although it is primarily remembered for the fighting that took place around the port of Çanakkale , where the Royal Navy was repulsed in March 1915 . For the Turks , 18 March has a similar significance as 25 April to Australians and New Zealanders , it is not a public holiday but is commemorated with special ceremonies . The campaign 's main significance to the Turkish people lies in the role it played in the emergence of Mustafa Kemal , who became the first president of the Republic of Turkey after the war . " Çanakkale <unk> " ( Çanakkale is impassable ) became a common phrase to express the state 's pride at repulsing the attack and the song " Çanakkale <unk> " ( A Ballad for <unk> ) commemorates the Turkish youth who fell during the battle . 
 = Doug Ring = 
 Douglas Thomas Ring ( 14 October 1918 – 23 June 2003 ) was an Australian cricketer who played for Victoria and Australia in 13 Tests from 1948 to 1953 . In 129 first @-@ class cricket matches , he took 426 wickets bowling leg spin , and he had a top score of 145 runs , which was the only century of his career . 
 Ring made his Test debut against India in the 1947 – 48 season and was picked for Australia 's tour of England in 1948 , the so @-@ called " Invincibles " side , but played in only one Test match on the tour . He had greater success against West Indies in 1951 – 52 , and South Africa the following season and made a second less successful tour of England in 1953 . Following cricket , Ring held positions in industry administration in Victoria , and became a cricket radio commentator and later host of Australia 's World of Sport . 
 = = Early years and cricket career = = 
 Born in Hobart , Ring moved to Victoria as a child , and attended Melbourne High School . After playing schoolboy cricket , he played the final matches of the 1935 – 36 season with the first grade side at Prahran . He batted right @-@ handed and bowled right @-@ arm leg breaks . He topped the Victorian Cricket Association 's second @-@ grade bowling averages and joined the Richmond first grade team . 
 = = = First @-@ class cricket = = = 
 In 1938 , after five matches with Richmond , he was selected for Victoria . In his first match , in December 1938 , he took four New South Wales wickets , including Sid Barnes , bowling alongside Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith . In the following game , batting at No 9 , he put on 112 for the eighth wicket with Lindsay Hassett , making 51 runs himself . He did not appear in Victoria 's other Sheffield Shield matches that 1938 – 39 season , but later , playing against Western Australia in Perth in a first @-@ class non @-@ Shield match – Western Australia did not join the Sheffield Shield until after the Second World War – he took six wickets for 97 runs in Western Australia 's first innings . 
 In the 1939 – 40 season , Ring played in all of Victoria 's Sheffield Shield matches , and though he did not improve on either his best bowling or best batting figures , he took over as the side 's principal spin bowler from Fleetwood @-@ Smith , with 28 wickets in the six matches against the senior player 's 17 . At the end of the season , he was picked for " The Rest " team , composed of the best players from the other states , for the match against the Shield winners , New South Wales , though he was upstaged by the 48 @-@ year @-@ old Clarrie Grimmett , who took 10 wickets to Ring 's one in the match . Wisden noted in a brief report on the 1939 – 40 Sheffield Shield in its 1940 edition that Bill O 'Reilly , Grimmett and Ring " carried off chief bowling honours in the competition " . Prior to the Second World War , the Australian captain Don Bradman said of Ring : " If I were picking an Australian XI to go to England now , one of the first men on my list would be Doug Ring " . 
 In the first @-@ class season of 1940 – 41 , with the proposed England tour and the Sheffield Shield competition both cancelled because of the war , Ring played half a dozen first @-@ class matches for Victoria , achieving little with his bowling , but making 72 when promoted to No 3 batsman as a nightwatchman against South Australia at Adelaide and following that up with 60 against Queensland at Brisbane . 
 The war then interrupted Ring 's first @-@ class career . Ring joined the Australian Army and served with an anti @-@ aircraft regiment in New Guinea . During his military service he injured his back , displacing a disc . The injury flared up from time to time , especially in cold weather , and this affected his ability to bowl to a consistent length . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Ring 's war service in the Far East meant that he did not appear in the Australian Services XI that made such an impact in England . He resumed his state cricket career in 1946 – 47 , and made the only century of his career , 145 , against Queensland at Melbourne , sharing a sixth wicket partnership of 288 runs with Sam Loxton , who made 232 . The batting success was offset by less effective bowling : he took just 18 Sheffield Shield wickets , barely half the number ( 33 ) achieved by Victoria 's left @-@ arm spinner George Tribe , who was picked for three Tests against England that season , but then turned his back on Australian cricket and moved to England . 
 Victoria in the 1947 – 48 season was a weak team and finished bottom of the Sheffield Shield table . Ring took 23 wickets , the highest of any Victoria bowler , in Shield matches but at the high average of 33 runs apiece . His best bowling of the season came in a match against Tasmania where he improved his career @-@ best bowling figures by taking six for 84 in the first innings and followed that with five for 59 in the second innings for his first 10 @-@ wicket match haul ( 11 @-@ 143 ) . 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 It was a good time to make an eye @-@ catching performance : the next match at the MCG was the fifth and final Test against India and Ring was selected , replacing Colin McCool , who had taken only four wickets in three matches of the five @-@ Test series , and making his Test debut . After Australia made 575 for eight declared , with Ring making 11 when batting at No 10 , Ring bowled 36 eight @-@ ball overs , taking three for 103 as India reached 331 , and then took three further wickets for just 17 in a second @-@ innings capitulation for just 67 . With match figures of six for 120 in his first game , Ring was picked for the 1948 tour of England , the tour led by Donald Bradman that became known , through its unbeaten record , as " The Invincibles " . 
 Though the 1948 tour of England was a triumph for the Australians , Ring was not prominent in the success . The faster bowlers , headed by Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller , dominated the bowling attack , and with a new ball allowed after just 55 overs of play , spin bowlers made little impact in the big matches . Ring , said Wisden in its summary of the tour , " was never a trump card in the pack " . Such was the strength of the Australian bowling that Ring 's 60 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 21 @.@ 81 on the tour was the highest bowling average of the regular bowlers . The strength of the batting side also meant that he batted only 14 times in his 19 first @-@ class matches on the tour , and he passed 50 only once . He played in one Test match — the last of the five @-@ match series , at The Oval . He did not bowl in the first innings as England were dismissed for just 52 , and took one wicket — that of Allan Watkins — in 28 economical overs in the second innings as Bradman 's final Test ended in an innings victory . 
 Ring and fellow fringe members of the squad , Ron Hamence and Colin McCool , would refer themselves as the " ground @-@ staff " as it was unlikely that the tour selectors would include them in the Test team on the 1948 tour . 
 Over the next three Australian seasons , Ring played regularly for Victoria and appeared also in some lesser representative matches . He figured in both the Donald Bradman Testimonial Match and the Alan Kippax @-@ Bert Oldfield Testimonial , which were the big set @-@ piece matches of the 1948 – 49 season , the latter being used as a " Test trial " for the 1949 – 50 tour of South Africa , for which Ring was not picked . Instead , in early 1950 he went on a non @-@ Test playing tour of New Zealand where , in the three @-@ day match between New Zealand and the touring side , he took seven for 88 in the home side 's first innings , which remained the best figures of his first @-@ class career . By the 1950 – 51 season , when Ring had one of his worst batting but better bowling seasons for Victoria , he had been overtaken in the Test match pecking order by his Victoria team @-@ mate , Jack Iverson , whose quirky all @-@ sorts of spin bowling was used in all five Tests . 
 = = = Test regular = = = 
 Iverson 's career turned out to be meteoric on the downward trajectory as well as the upward , and when the West Indies arrived for their 1951 – 52 tour in November 1951 in what was billed as a " cricket championship of the world " , the Australian Test selectors turned to Ring for the spin option to the pace of Lindwall , Miller and Bill Johnston for the first match at Brisbane . With the famous spin twins of Sonny Ramadhin and Alf Valentine in the opposition , Ring was the least experienced main line bowler at this level on either side – but he proved to be the matchwinner . Having taken two wickets in West Indies ' first innings , he took six for 80 runs in the second , and his dismissal of Frank Worrell and captain John Goddard with the last two balls of the second day swung the advantage towards Australia . In the second innings , Wisden reported , West Indies ' batsmen were " guilty of rash strokes against the high @-@ flighted leg @-@ breaks of Ring , whose bowling contained abundant guile " . Ring was also at the wicket when the match was won , by three wickets , though his own contribution was just six runs . 
 Ring 's main contribution to the second Test , at Sydney , which Australia won by seven wickets , came with bat rather than ball . He took only one wicket in a match made controversial by liberal use of the bumper by the faster Australian bowlers . But batting at No 9 and joining Lindwall at 372 for seven , just 10 ahead of the West Indies ' first innings total , his 65 in 102 minutes helped add 113 before he was ninth out . 
 In the third Test , too , Ring 's batting made more impact than his bowling . A wet pitch led to 22 wickets falling on the first day , and temporary Australian captain Arthur Morris <unk> his batting order at the end of the day , opening the second innings with Ian Johnson and Gil Langley , sending Geff Noblet in when Johnson was out and then Ring as a second nightwatchman when Noblet was out . Ring lasted into the second day when conditions were easier , and top @-@ scored for the Australian team with 67 , which remained his best score in Tests . He took three of the four wickets that fell as West Indies successfully chased a target of 233 on Christmas Day . 
 It was the fourth Test at Melbourne that cemented Ring 's place as part of Australian cricket folklore . Again , his bowling was little used , and he failed to take a wicket . But his batting this time proved decisive . Chasing 260 to win , Australia had reached 218 for seven when Ring came in at No 9 . Century @-@ maker Lindsay Hassett departed with no further runs added , and Langley was out at 222 , so when last batsman Bill Johnston joined Ring , 38 were still needed to win . In Wisden 's words , " no one regards Johnston as other than a ' rabbit ' with the bat " . But the West Indies pushed the fielders in nearer the bat , allowing Ring to reach the boundary by clearing the fielders . Wisden reported : " Johnston played a comparatively passive role while Ring hit vigorously , gaining a series of boundaries by lofty drives which may have resulted in catches had the field been set deep enough for this known hitter . " Ring made an unbeaten 32 , and " earned most of the credit " , Wisden said , though Johnston hit the winning run , which also won the series for Australia . 
 The fifth Test , which saw the debut of Richie Benaud alongside Ring , was an anticlimax , and Ring contributed little with either bat or ball to a large Australian victory . In the series as a whole , among the regular players , Ring finished behind only Hassett and Miller as a batsman , with 197 runs at an average of 28 @.@ 14 , and he took 13 wickets for exactly 30 apiece . 
 In 1952 – 53 , the South Africans were the visitors to Australia , and Ring got an early sight of the team by captaining Victoria against them , top @-@ scoring in the state 's first innings with 56 . In the first Test at Brisbane , he repeated his performance of a year earlier by taking six wickets , this time for 72 runs , his best Test bowling performance , in South Africa 's first innings . The South Africans " survived Australia 's pace bowling well enough , but few met the leg @-@ breaks of Ring with assurance , " Wisden reported . " His varied flight and pace worried batsmen attempting too often to play him from the crease . " He was unsuccessful in South Africa 's second innings . 
 Across the rest of the five @-@ match Test series against South Africa , Ring took only seven more wickets , and he tended to be expensive in terms of the number of runs conceded from his bowling . In the second match , which the South Africans won , he took three wickets for 187 , and , batting at No 10 , contributed a quick @-@ fire 53 out of the last 74 runs when the match had already effectively been lost . Two weeks later , in the third match , he took just one wicket in a crushing Australian victory , but contributed 58 out of 75 in just 68 minutes from the unusually lofty batting position of No 8 . The fourth and fifth Tests brought him few runs or wickets . In the series as a whole , Ring scored 184 runs at an average of 23 runs per innings and took 13 wickets at the high average of 48 . 
 As a proven Test player and the senior spin bowler , Ring was chosen for his second tour of England in 1953 , this time under the captaincy of Hassett . It proved not much happier than his 1948 experience , though in a less strong side his eventual wicket tally , 68 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 19 @.@ 89 , placed him third among the regular bowlers . 
 Ring was , though , just one of three leg @-@ spin bowlers , alongside Benaud and Ring 's Victoria colleague Jack Hill , and , said Wisden , " none of the three ... was seen to advantage in the Tests " . Indeed , Wisden added , " there was an appreciable weakness due to the absence of top @-@ class spin to support the thrust of Lindwall , Miller and Johnston " . 
 In the event , Ring played in only one Test , the second of the five @-@ match series , played at Lord 's . He took two wickets , the same number as Benaud , on a pitch allegedly susceptible to spin and scored 18 and 7 as the match ended in a tight draw . 
 Outside the Tests in England , Ring took five wickets in an innings five times and , though mostly fairly ineffective with the bat , hit 88 against Lancashire , his second highest first @-@ class score . At the end of the England tour , he retired from both first @-@ class and Test cricket . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Outside cricket , Ring was employed by the Victorian Department of Primary Industries from 1946 to 1982 where his supervisor was Les Menzies , brother of Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies . In 1958 , he entered the media as a cricket commentator on Melbourne radio station <unk> . In 1961 , he moved to television where he was a popular presenter of the HSV @-@ 7 program World of Sport . Ring had three children with his wife Lesley . He died in Melbourne on 23 June 2003 . 
 = = Style = = 
 Ring was a large man , 6 feet ( 183 cm ) tall , and with his large hands he was able to impart plenty of spin on the ball , although he was not eager to flight the ball especially in English conditions . As a batsman , he was good enough to be considered a genuine all @-@ rounder however his habit playing the ball in the air prevented him from scoring more runs . Ring never brought himself a bat , choosing to rely on a bat he borrowed from the Victorian Cricket Association practice kit . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 = Mario Vargas Llosa = 
 Jorge Mario Pedro Vargas Llosa , 1st Marquis of Vargas Llosa ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born March 28 , 1936 ) , more commonly known as Mario Vargas Llosa ( Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , is a Peruvian writer , politician , journalist , essayist , college professor , and recipient of the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature . Vargas Llosa is one of Latin America 's most significant novelists and essayists , and one of the leading writers of his generation . Some critics consider him to have had a larger international impact and worldwide audience than any other writer of the Latin American Boom . Upon announcing the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature , the Swedish Academy said it had been given to Vargas Llosa " for his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images of the individual 's resistance , revolt , and defeat " . 
 Vargas Llosa rose to fame in the 1960s with novels such as The Time of the Hero ( La ciudad y los perros , literally The City and the Dogs , 1963 / 1966 ) , The Green House ( La casa verde , 1965 / 1968 ) , and the monumental Conversation in the Cathedral ( Conversación en la catedral , 1969 / 1975 ) . He writes prolifically across an array of literary genres , including literary criticism and journalism . His novels include comedies , murder mysteries , historical novels , and political thrillers . Several , such as Captain Pantoja and the Special Service ( 1973 / 1978 ) and Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter ( 1977 / 1982 ) , have been adapted as feature films . 
 Many of Vargas Llosa 's works are influenced by the writer 's perception of Peruvian society and his own experiences as a native Peruvian . <unk> <unk> he has expanded his range , and tackled themes that arise from other parts of the world . In his essays , Vargas Llosa has made many criticisms of nationalism in different parts of the world . Another change over the course of his career has been a shift from a style and approach associated with literary modernism , to a sometimes playful postmodernism . 
 Like many Latin American writers , Vargas Llosa has been politically active throughout his career ; over the course of his life , he has gradually moved from the political left towards liberalism . While he initially supported the Cuban revolutionary government of Fidel Castro , Vargas Llosa later became disenchanted with his policies . He ran for the Peruvian presidency in 1990 with the center @-@ right Frente Democrático coalition , advocating classical liberal reforms , but lost the election to Alberto Fujimori . He is the person who , in 1990 , " coined the phrase that circled the globe " , declaring on Mexican television , " Mexico is the perfect dictatorship " , a statement which became an adage during the following decade . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Mario Vargas Llosa was born to a middle @-@ class family on March 28 , 1936 , in the Peruvian provincial city of Arequipa . He was the only child of Ernesto Vargas Maldonado and Dora Llosa <unk> ( the former a radio operator in an aviation company , the latter the daughter of an old criollo family ) , who separated a few months before his birth . Shortly after Mario 's birth , his father revealed that he was having an affair with a German woman ; consequently , Mario has two younger half @-@ brothers : Enrique and Ernesto Vargas . 
 Vargas Llosa lived with his maternal family in Arequipa until a year after his parents ' divorce , when his maternal grandfather was named honorary consul for Peru in Bolivia . With his mother and her family , Vargas Llosa then moved to Cochabamba , Bolivia , where he spent the early years of his childhood . His maternal family , the <unk> , were sustained by his grandfather , who managed a cotton farm . As a child , Vargas Llosa was led to believe that his father had died — his mother and her family did not want to explain that his parents had separated . During the government of Peruvian President José Bustamante y Rivero , Vargas Llosa 's maternal grandfather obtained a diplomatic post in the Peruvian coastal city of Piura and the entire family returned to Peru . While in Piura , Vargas Llosa attended elementary school at the religious academy Colegio <unk> . In 1946 , at the age of ten , he moved to Lima and met his father for the first time . His parents re @-@ established their relationship and lived in Magdalena del Mar , a middle @-@ class Lima suburb , during his teenage years . While in Lima , he studied at the Colegio La Salle , a Christian middle school , from 1947 to 1949 . 
 When Vargas Llosa was fourteen , his father sent him to the Leoncio Prado Military Academy in Lima . At the age of 16 , before his graduation , Vargas Llosa began working as an amateur journalist for local newspapers . He withdrew from the military academy and finished his studies in Piura , where he worked for the local newspaper , La Industria , and witnessed the theatrical performance of his first dramatic work , La <unk> del Inca . 
 In 1953 , during the government of Manuel A. Odría , Vargas Llosa enrolled in Lima 's National University of San Marcos , to study law and literature . He married Julia <unk> , his maternal uncle 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , in 1955 at the age of 19 ; she was 10 years older . Vargas Llosa began his literary career in earnest in 1957 with the publication of his first short stories , " The Leaders " ( " Los <unk> " ) and " The Grandfather " ( " El <unk> " ) , while working for two Peruvian newspapers . Upon his graduation from the National University of San Marcos in 1958 , he received a scholarship to study at the Complutense University of Madrid in Spain . In 1960 , after his scholarship in Madrid had expired , Vargas Llosa moved to France under the impression that he would receive a scholarship to study there ; however , upon arriving in Paris , he learned that his scholarship request was denied . Despite Mario and Julia 's unexpected financial status , the couple decided to remain in Paris where he began to write prolifically . Their marriage lasted only a few more years , ending in divorce in 1964 . A year later , Vargas Llosa married his first cousin , Patricia Llosa , with whom he had three children : Álvaro Vargas Llosa ( born 1966 ) , a writer and editor ; Gonzalo ( born 1967 ) , a businessman ; and Morgana ( born 1974 ) , a photographer . As of 2015 , he is in a relationship with Filipina Spanish socialite and TV personality Isabel Preysler and seeking a divorce from Patricia Llosa . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 = = = Beginning and first major works = = = 
 Vargas Llosa 's first novel , The Time of the Hero ( La ciudad y los perros ) , was published in 1963 . The book is set among a community of cadets in a Lima military school , and the plot is based on the author 's own experiences at Lima 's Leoncio Prado Military Academy . This early piece gained wide public attention and immediate success . Its vitality and adept use of sophisticated literary techniques immediately impressed critics , and it won the Premio de la <unk> Española award . Nevertheless , its sharp criticism of the Peruvian military establishment led to controversy in Peru . Several Peruvian generals attacked the novel , claiming that it was the work of a " degenerate mind " and stating that Vargas Llosa was " paid by Ecuador " to undermine the prestige of the Peruvian Army . 
 In 1965 , Vargas Llosa published his second novel , The Green House ( La casa verde ) , about a brothel called " The Green House " and how its quasi @-@ mythical presence affects the lives of the characters . The main plot follows <unk> , a girl who is about to receive the vows of the church , and her transformation into la <unk> , the best @-@ known prostitute of " The Green House " . The novel was immediately acclaimed , confirming Vargas Llosa as an important voice of Latin American narrative . The Green House won the first edition of the Rómulo Gallegos International Novel Prize in 1967 , contending with works by veteran Uruguayan writer Juan Carlos Onetti and by Gabriel García Márquez . This novel alone accumulated enough awards to place the author among the leading figures of the Latin American Boom . Some critics still consider The Green House to be Vargas Llosa 's finest and most important achievement . Indeed , Latin American literary critic Gerald Martin suggests that The Green House is " one of the greatest novels to have emerged from Latin America " . 
 Vargas Llosa 's third novel , Conversation in the Cathedral ( Conversación en la catedral ) , was published in 1969 , when he was 33 . This ambitious narrative is the story of Santiago Zavala , the son of a government minister , and Ambrosio , his chauffeur . A random meeting at a dog pound leads the pair to a riveting conversation at a nearby bar known as " The Cathedral " . During the encounter , Zavala searches for the truth about his father 's role in the murder of a notorious Peruvian underworld figure , shedding light on the workings of a dictatorship along the way . Unfortunately for Zavala , his quest results in a dead end with no answers and no sign of a better future . The novel attacks the dictatorial government of Odría by showing how a dictatorship controls and destroys lives . The persistent theme of hopelessness makes Conversation in the Cathedral Vargas Llosa 's most bitter novel . 
 He lectured Spanish American Literature at King 's College London from 1969 to 1970 . 
 = = = 1970s and the " discovery of humor " = = = 
 In 1971 , Vargas Llosa published García Márquez : Story of a Deicide ( García Márquez : historia de un <unk> ) , which was his doctoral thesis for the Complutense University of Madrid . Although Vargas Llosa wrote this book @-@ length study about his then friend , the Colombian Nobel laureate writer Gabriel García Márquez , they did not speak to each other again . In 1976 , Vargas Llosa punched García Márquez in the face in Mexico City at the Palacio de Bellas Artes , ending the friendship . Neither writer had publicly stated the underlying reasons for the quarrel . A photograph of García Márquez sporting a black eye was published in 2007 , reigniting public interest in the feud . Despite the decades of silence , in 2007 , Vargas Llosa agreed to allow part of his book to be used as the introduction to a 40th @-@ anniversary edition of García Márquez 's One Hundred Years of Solitude , which was re @-@ released in Spain and throughout Latin America that year . Historia de un <unk> was also reissued in that year , as part of Vargas Llosa 's complete works . 
 Following the monumental work Conversation in the Cathedral , Vargas Llosa 's output shifted away from more serious themes such as politics and problems with society . Latin American literary scholar Raymond L. Williams describes this phase in his writing career as " the discovery of humor " . His first attempt at a satirical novel was Captain Pantoja and the Special Service ( <unk> y las <unk> ) , published in 1973 . This short , comic novel offers vignettes of dialogues and documents about the Peruvian armed forces and a corps of prostitutes assigned to visit military outposts in remote jungle areas . These plot elements are similar to Vargas Llosa 's earlier novel The Green House , but in a different form . As such , Captain Pantoja and the Special Service is essentially a parody of both The Green House and the literary approach that novel represents . Vargas Llosa 's motivation to write the novel came from actually witnessing prostitutes being hired by the Peruvian Army and brought to serve soldiers in the jungle . 
 From 1974 to 1987 , Vargas Llosa focused on his writing , but also took the time to pursue other endeavors . In 1975 , he co @-@ directed an unsuccessful motion @-@ picture adaptation of his novel , Captain Pantoja and the Secret Service . In 1976 he was elected President of PEN International , the worldwide association of writers and oldest human rights organisation , a position he held until 1979 . During this time , Vargas Llosa constantly traveled to speak at conferences organized by internationally renowned institutions , such as the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the University of Cambridge , where he was Simón Bolívar Professor and an Overseas Fellow of Churchill College in 1977 – 78 . 
 In 1977 , Vargas Llosa was elected as a member of the Peruvian Academy of Language , a membership he still holds today . That year , he also published Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter ( La <unk> Julia y el <unk> ) , based in part on his marriage to his first wife , Julia <unk> , to whom he dedicated the novel . She later wrote a memoir , Lo que <unk> no dijo ( What Little Vargas Didn 't Say ) , in which she gives her personal account of their relationship . She states that Vargas Llosa 's account exaggerates many negative points in their courtship and marriage while minimizing her role of assisting his literary career . Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter is considered one of the most striking examples of how the language and imagery of popular culture can be used in literature . The novel was adapted in 1990 into a Hollywood feature film , Tune in Tomorrow . 
 = = = Later novels = = = 
 Vargas Llosa 's fourth major novel , The War of the End of the World ( La guerra del fin del mundo ) , was published in 1981 and was his first attempt at a historical novel . This work initiated a radical change in Vargas Llosa 's style towards themes such as <unk> and irrational human behaviour . It recreates the War of Canudos , an incident in 19th @-@ century Brazil in which an armed millenarian cult held off a siege by the national army for months . As in Vargas Llosa 's earliest work , this novel carries a sober and serious theme , and its tone is dark . Vargas Llosa 's bold exploration of humanity 's propensity to idealize violence , and his account of a man @-@ made catastrophe brought on by fanaticism on all sides , earned the novel substantial recognition . Because of the book 's ambition and execution , critics have argued that this is one of Vargas Llosa 's greatest literary pieces . Even though the novel has been acclaimed in Brazil , it was initially poorly received because a foreigner was writing about a Brazilian theme . The book was also criticized as revolutionary and anti @-@ socialist . Vargas Llosa says that this book is his favorite and was his most difficult accomplishment . 
 After completing The War of the End of the World , Vargas Llosa began to write novels that were significantly shorter than many of his earlier books . In 1983 , he finished The Real Life of Alejandro Mayta ( Historia de Mayta , 1984 ) . The novel focuses on a leftist insurrection that took place on May 29 , 1962 in the Andean city of <unk> . Later the same year , during the <unk> Luminoso uprising , Vargas Llosa was asked by the Peruvian President Fernando Belaúnde Terry to join the Investigatory Commission , a task force to inquire into the massacre of eight journalists at the hands of the villagers of Uchuraccay . The Commission 's main purpose was to investigate the murders in order to provide information regarding the incident to the public . Following his involvement with the Investigatory Commission , Vargas Llosa published a series of articles to defend his position in the affair . In 1986 , he completed his next novel , Who Killed Palomino Molero ( ¿ Quién <unk> a Palomino Molero ? ) , which he began writing shortly after the end of the Uchuraccay investigation . Though the plot of this mystery novel is similar to the tragic events at Uchuraccay , literary critic Roy Boland points out that it was not an attempt to reconstruct the murders , but rather a " literary exorcism " of Vargas Llosa 's own experiences during the commission . The experience also inspired one of Vargas Llosa 's later novels , Death in the Andes ( <unk> en los Andes ) , originally published in 1993 in Barcelona . 
 It would be almost 20 years before Vargas Llosa wrote another major work : The Feast of the Goat ( La fiesta del chivo ) , a political thriller , was published in 2000 ( and in English in 2001 ) . According to Williams , it is Vargas Llosa 's most complete and most ambitious novel since The War of the End of the World . Critic Sabine <unk> sees it in the line of his earlier novels such as " Conversación en la catedral " depicting the effects of authoritarianism , violence and the abuse of power on the individual . Based on the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo , who governed the Dominican Republic from 1930 until his assassination in 1961 , the novel has three main strands : one concerns Urania Cabral , the daughter of a former politician and Trujillo loyalist , who returns for the first time since leaving the Dominican Republic after Trujillo 's assassination 30 years earlier ; the second concentrates on the assassination itself , the conspirators who carry it out , and its consequences ; and the third and final strand deals with Trujillo himself in scenes from the end of his regime . The book quickly received positive reviews in Spain and Latin America , and has had a significant impact in Latin America , being regarded as one of Vargas Llosa 's best works . 
 In 2003 he wrote The Way to Paradise where he studies Flora Tristan and Paul Gauguin . 
 In 2006 , Vargas Llosa wrote The Bad Girl ( <unk> de la niña mala ) , which journalist Kathryn Harrison argues is a rewrite ( rather than simply a recycling ) of Gustave Flaubert 's Madame Bovary ( 1856 ) . In Vargas Llosa 's version , the plot relates the decades @-@ long obsession of its narrator , a Peruvian expatriate in Paris , with a woman with whom he first fell in love when both were teenagers . 
 = = Later life and political involvement = = 
 Like many other Latin American intellectuals , Vargas Llosa was initially a supporter of the Cuban revolutionary government of Fidel Castro . He studied Marxism in depth as a university student and was later persuaded by communist ideals after the success of the Cuban Revolution . Gradually , Vargas Llosa came to believe that Cuban socialism was incompatible with what he considered to be general liberties and freedoms . The official rupture between the writer and the policies of the Cuban government occurred with the so @-@ called ' Padilla Affair ' , when the Castro regime imprisoned the poet Heberto Padilla for a month in 1971 . Vargas Llosa , along with other intellectuals of the time , wrote to Castro protesting the Cuban political system and its imprisonment of the artist . Vargas Llosa has identified himself with liberalism rather than extreme left @-@ wing political ideologies ever since . Since he relinquished his earlier leftism , he has opposed both left- and right @-@ wing authoritarian regimes . 
 With his appointment to the Investigatory Commission on the Uchuraccay massacre in 1983 , he experienced what literary critic Jean Franco calls " the most uncomfortable event in [ his ] political career " . Unfortunately for Vargas Llosa , his involvement with the Investigatory Commission led to immediate negative reactions and defamation from the Peruvian press ; many suggested that the massacre was a conspiracy to keep the journalists from reporting the presence of government paramilitary forces in Uchuraccay . The commission concluded that it was the indigenous villagers who had been responsible for the killings ; for Vargas Llosa the incident showed " how vulnerable democracy is in Latin America and how easily it dies under dictatorships of the right and left " . These conclusions , and Vargas Llosa personally , came under intense criticism : anthropologist Enrique Mayer , for instance , accused him of " paternalism " , while fellow anthropologist Carlos Iván <unk> criticized him for his ignorance of the Andean world . Vargas Llosa was accused of actively colluding in a government cover @-@ up of army involvement in the massacre . US Latin American literature scholar Misha <unk> summarizes that the novelist was charged with seeing " indigenous cultures as a ' primitive ' obstacle to the full realization of his Western model of modernity " . Shocked both by the atrocity itself and then by the reaction his report had provoked , Vargas Llosa responded that his critics were apparently more concerned with his report than with the hundreds of peasants who would later die at the hands of the <unk> Luminoso guerrilla organization . 
 Over the course of the decade , Vargas Llosa became known as a " neoliberal " , although he personally dislikes the term and considers it " pure nonsense " and only used for derision . In 1987 , he helped form and soon became a leader of the Movimiento Libertad . The following year his party entered a coalition with the parties of Peru 's two principal conservative politicians at the time , ex @-@ president Fernando Belaúnde Terry ( of the Popular Action party ) and Luis Bedoya Reyes ( of the Partido Popular Cristiano ) , to form the tripartite center @-@ right coalition known as Frente Democrático ( <unk> ) . He ran for the presidency of Peru in 1990 as the candidate of the <unk> coalition . He proposed a drastic economic austerity program that frightened most of the country 's poor ; this program emphasized the need for privatization , a market economy , free trade , and most importantly , the dissemination of private property . Although he won the first round with 34 % of the vote , Vargas Llosa was defeated by a then @-@ unknown agricultural engineer , Alberto Fujimori , in the subsequent run @-@ off . Vargas Llosa included an account of his run for the presidency in the memoir A Fish in the Water ( El <unk> en el agua , 1993 ) . Since his political defeat , he has focused mainly on his writing , with only occasional political involvement . 
 A month after losing the election , at the invitation of Octavio Paz , Vargas Llosa attended a conference in Mexico entitled , " The 20th Century : The Experience of Freedom " . Focused on the collapse of communist rule in central and eastern Europe , it was broadcast on Mexican television from 27 August to 2 September . Addressing the conference on 30 August 1990 , Vargas Llosa embarrassed his hosts by condemning the Mexican system of power based on the rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party ( PRI ) , which had been in power for 61 years . Criticizing the PRI by name , he commented , " I don 't believe that there has been in Latin America any case of a system of dictatorship which has so efficiently recruited the intellectual milieu , bribing it with great subtlety . " He declared , " Mexico is the perfect dictatorship . The perfect dictatorship is not communism , not the USSR , not Fidel Castro ; the perfect dictatorship is Mexico . Because it is a camouflaged dictatorship . " The statement , " Mexico is the perfect dictatorship " became a cliché in Mexico and internationally , until the PRI fell from power in 2000 . 
 Vargas Llosa has mainly lived in Madrid since the 1990s , but spends roughly three months of the year in Peru with his extended family . He also frequently visits London where he occasionally spends long periods . Vargas Llosa acquired Spanish citizenship in 1993 , though he still holds Peruvian nationality . The writer often reiterates his love for both countries . In his Nobel speech he observed : " I carry Peru deep inside me because that is where I was born , grew up , was formed , and lived those experiences of childhood and youth that shaped my personality and forged my calling " . He then added : " I love Spain as much as Peru , and my debt to her is as great as my gratitude . If not for Spain , I never would have reached this podium or become a known writer " . 
 In 1994 he was elected a member of the Real Academia Española ( Royal Spanish Academy ) , he took up seat L on 15 January 1996 . He has been involved in the country 's political arena . In February 2008 he stopped supporting the People 's Party in favor of the recently created Union , Progress and Democracy , claiming that certain conservative views held by the former party are at odds with his classical liberal beliefs . His political ideologies appear in the book <unk> <unk> , written with Fernando <unk> , Rosa Díez , Álvaro Pombo , Albert <unk> and Carlos Martínez Gorriarán . He continues to write , both journalism and fiction , and to travel extensively . He has also taught as a visiting professor at a number of prominent universities . 
 On November 18 , 2010 , Vargas Llosa received the honorary degree Degree of Letters from the City College of New York of the City University of New York , where he also delivered the President 's Lecture . 
 On 4 February 2011 , Vargas Llosa was raised into the Spanish nobility by King Juan Carlos I with the hereditary title of Marqués de Vargas Llosa ( English : Marquis of Vargas Llosa ) . 
 In April 2011 , the writer took part in the Peruvian general election , 2011 by saying he was going to vote for Alejandro Toledo ( Peruvian former president 2001 – 2006 ) . After casting his vote , he said his country should stay in the path of legality and freedom . 
 As for hobbies , Vargas Llosa is very fond of association football , and is a renowned supporter of Universitario de Deportes . The writer himself has confessed in his book A Fish in the Water since childhood he has been a fan of the ' cream colored ' team from Peru , which was first seen in the field one day in 1946 when he was only 10 years old . In February 2011 , Vargas Llosa was awarded with an honorary life membership of this football club , in a ceremony which took place in the Monumental Stadium of Lima . 
 He was named in the Panama Papers released by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists on 10 May 2016 . 
 = = Style of writing = = 
 = = = Plot , setting , and major themes = = = 
 Vargas Llosa 's style encompasses historical material as well as his own personal experiences . For example , in his first novel , The Time of the Hero , his own experiences at the Leoncio Prado military school informed his depiction of the corrupt social institution which mocked the moral standards it was supposed to uphold . Furthermore , the corruption of the book 's school is a reflection of the corruption of Peruvian society at the time the novel was written . Vargas Llosa frequently uses his writing to challenge the inadequacies of society , such as demoralization and oppression by those in political power towards those who challenge this power . One of the main themes he has explored in his writing is the individual 's struggle for freedom within an oppressive reality . For example , his two @-@ volume novel Conversation in the Cathedral is based on the tyrannical dictatorship of Peruvian President Manuel A. Odría . The protagonist , Santiago , rebels against the suffocating dictatorship by participating in the subversive activities of leftist political groups . In addition to themes such as corruption and oppression , Vargas Llosa 's second novel , The Green House , explores " a denunciation of Peru 's basic institutions " , dealing with issues of abuse and exploitation of the workers in the brothel by corrupt military officers . 
 Many of Vargas Llosa 's earlier novels were set in Peru , while in more recent work he has expanded to other regions of Latin America , such as Brazil and the Dominican Republic . His responsibilities as a writer and lecturer have allowed him to travel frequently and led to settings for his novels in regions outside of Peru . The War of the End of the World was his first major work set outside Peru . Though the plot deals with historical events of the Canudos revolt against the Brazilian government , the novel is not based directly on historical fact ; rather , its main inspiration is the non @-@ fiction account of those events published by Brazilian writer <unk> da Cunha in 1902 . The Feast of the Goat , based on the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo , takes place in the Dominican Republic ; in preparation for this novel , Vargas Llosa undertook a comprehensive study of Dominican history . The novel was characteristically realist , and Vargas Llosa underscores that he " respected the basic facts , ... I have not exaggerated " , but at the same time he points out " It 's a novel , not a history book , so I took many , many liberties . " 
 One of Vargas Llosa 's more recent novels , The Way to Paradise ( El <unk> en la otra <unk> ) , is set largely in France and Tahiti . Based on the biography of former social reformer Flora Tristan , it demonstrates how Flora and Paul Gauguin were unable to find paradise , but were still able to inspire followers to keep working towards a socialist utopia . Unfortunately , Vargas Llosa was not as successful in transforming these historical figures into fiction . Some critics , such as Barbara Mujica , argue that The Way to Paradise lacks the " audacity , energy , political vision , and narrative genius " that was present in his previous works . 
 = = = Modernism and postmodernism = = = 
 The works of Mario Vargas Llosa are viewed as both modernist and postmodernist novels . Though there is still much debate over the differences between modernist and postmodernist literature , literary scholar M. Keith Booker claims that the difficulty and technical complexity of Vargas Llosa 's early works , such as The Green House and Conversation in the Cathedral , are clearly elements of the modern novel . Furthermore , these earlier novels all carry a certain seriousness of attitude — another important defining aspect of modernist art . By contrast , his later novels such as Captain Pantoja and the Special Service , Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter , The Real Life of Alejandro Mayta , and The Storyteller ( El <unk> ) appear to follow a postmodernist mode of writing . These novels have a much lighter , farcical , and comic tone , characteristics of postmodernism . Comparing two of Vargas Llosa 's novels , The Green House and Captain Pantoja and the Special Service , Booker discusses the contrast between modernism and postmodernism found in the writer 's works : while both novels explore the theme of prostitution as well as the workings of the Peruvian military , Booker points out that the former is gravely serious whereas the latter is ridiculously comic . 
 = = = <unk> dialogues = = = 
 Literary scholar M. Keith Booker argues that Vargas Llosa perfects the technique of interlacing dialogues in his novel The Green House . By combining two conversations that occur at different times , he creates the illusion of a flashback . Vargas Llosa also sometimes uses this technique as a means of shifting location by weaving together two concurrent conversations happening in different places . This technique is a staple of his repertoire , which he began using near the end of his first novel , The Time of the Hero . However , he does not use interlacing dialogues in the same way in all of his novels . For example , in The Green House the technique is used in a serious fashion to achieve a sober tone and to focus on the interrelatedness of important events separated in time or space . In contrast , Captain Pantoja and the Special Service employs this strategy for comic effects and uses simpler spatial shifts . This device is similar to both Virginia Woolf 's mixing of different characters ' soliloquies and Gustave Flaubert 's counterpoint technique in which he blends together conversation with other events , such as speeches . 
 = = = Literary influences = = = 
 Vargas Llosa 's first literary influences were relatively obscure Peruvian writers such as Martín <unk> , Carlos Oquendo de <unk> , and César Moro . As a young writer , he looked to these revolutionary novelists in search of new narrative structures and techniques in order to delineate a more contemporary , multifaceted experience of urban Peru . He was looking for a style different from the traditional descriptions of land and rural life made famous by Peru 's foremost novelist at the time , José María Arguedas . Vargas Llosa wrote of Arguedas 's work that it was " an example of old @-@ fashioned regionalism that had already exhausted its imaginary possibilities " . Although he did not share Arguedas 's passion for indigenous reality , Vargas Llosa admired and respected the novelist for his contributions to Peruvian literature . Indeed , he has published a book @-@ length study on his work , La <unk> <unk> ( 1996 ) . 
 Rather than restrict himself to Peruvian literature , Vargas Llosa also looked abroad for literary inspiration . Two French figures , existentialist Jean @-@ Paul Sartre and novelist Gustave Flaubert , influenced both his technique and style . Sartre 's influence is most prevalent in Vargas Llosa 's extensive use of conversation . The epigraph of The Time of the Hero , his first novel , is also taken directly from Sartre 's work . Flaubert 's artistic independence — his novels ' disregard of reality and morals — has always been admired by Vargas Llosa , who wrote a book @-@ length study of Flaubert 's aesthetics , The Perpetual Orgy . In his analysis of Flaubert , Vargas Llosa questions the revolutionary power of literature in a political setting ; this is in contrast to his earlier view that " literature is an act of rebellion " , thus marking a transition in Vargas Llosa 's aesthetic beliefs . Other critics such as Sabine <unk> argue that his belief in the transforming power of literature is one of the great continuities that characterize his fictional and non @-@ fictional work , and link his early statement that ' Literature is Fire ' with his Nobel Prize Speech ' In Praise of Reading and Writing ' . 
 One of Vargas Llosa 's favourite novelists , and arguably the most influential on his writing career , is the American William Faulkner . Vargas Llosa considers Faulkner " the writer who perfected the methods of the modern novel " . Both writers ' styles include intricate changes in time and narration . In The Time of the Hero , for example , aspects of Vargas Llosa 's plot , his main character 's development and his use of narrative time are influenced by his favourite Faulkner novel , Light in August . 
 In addition to the studies of Arguedas and Flaubert , Vargas Llosa has written literary criticisms of other authors that he has admired , such as Gabriel García Márquez , Albert Camus , Ernest Hemingway , and Jean @-@ Paul Sartre . The main goals of his non @-@ fiction works are to acknowledge the influence of these authors on his writing , and to recognize a connection between himself and the other writers ; critic Sara Castro @-@ <unk> argues that he offers little systematic analysis of these authors ' literary techniques . In The Perpetual Orgy , for example , he discusses the relationship between his own aesthetics and Flaubert 's , rather than focusing on Flaubert 's alone . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Mario Vargas Llosa is considered a major Latin American writer , alongside other authors such as Octavio Paz , Julio Cortázar , Jorge Luis Borges , Gabriel García Márquez and Carlos Fuentes . In his book The New Novel in Latin America ( La Nueva <unk> ) , Fuentes offers an in @-@ depth literary criticism of the positive influence Vargas Llosa 's work has had on Latin American literature . Indeed , for the literary critic Gerald Martin , writing in 1987 , Vargas Llosa was " perhaps the most successful ... certainly the most controversial Latin American novelist of the past twenty @-@ five years " . 
 Most of Vargas Llosa 's narratives have been translated into multiple languages , marking his international critical success . Vargas Llosa is also noted for his substantial contribution to journalism , an accomplishment characteristic of few other Latin American writers . He is recognized among those who have most consciously promoted literature in general , and more specifically the novel itself , as avenues for meaningful commentary about life . During his career , he has written more than a dozen novels and many other books and stories , and , for decades , he has been a voice for Latin American literature . He has won numerous awards for his writing , from the 1959 Premio Leopoldo Alas and the 1962 Premio Biblioteca Breve to the 1993 Premio Planeta ( for Death in the Andes ) and the Jerusalem Prize in 1995 . The literary critic Harold Bloom has included his novel The War of the End of the World in his list of essential literary works in the Western Canon . An important distinction he has received is the 1994 Miguel de Cervantes Prize , considered the most important accolade in Spanish @-@ language literature and awarded to authors whose " work has contributed to enrich , in a notable way , the literary patrimony of the Spanish language " . In 2002 , Vargas was the recipient of the PEN / Nabokov Award . Vargas Llosa also received the 2005 Irving Kristol Award from the American Enterprise Institute and was the 2008 recipient of the Harold and Ethel L. <unk> Visiting Scholar and Writers Award at Dickinson College . 
 A number of Vargas Llosa 's works have been adapted for the screen , including The Time of the Hero and Captain Pantoja and the Special Service ( both by the Peruvian director Francisco Lombardi ) and The Feast of the Goat ( by Vargas Llosa 's cousin , Luis Llosa ) . Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter was turned into the English @-@ language film , Tune in Tomorrow . The Feast of the Goat has also been adapted as a theatrical play by Jorge Alí Triana , a Colombian playwright and director . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 1967 – Rómulo Gallegos Prize 
 1986 – <unk> Cavour Prize for Fiction foreign 
 1986 – Prince of Asturias Award for Literature 
 1993 – Planeta Prize for Death in the Andes , a thriller starring one of the characters in Who Killed Palomino Molero ? 
 1994 – Miguel de Cervantes Prize , after taking Spanish citizenship 
 1996 – Peace Prize of the German Book Trade 
 1999 – Menéndez Pelayo International Prize 
 2004 – Independent Foreign Fiction Prize 
 2004 – <unk> Cavour Prize 
 2006 – Maria Moors Cabot prize 
 2010 – Nobel Prize for Literature 
 2010 – International Award Viareggio @-@ <unk> 
 2011 - St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates 
 2012 – " 10 Most Influential Ibero American Intellectuals " of the year – Foreign Policy magazine [ 1 ] 
 2012 Carlos Fuentes International Prize for Literary Creation in the Spanish Language 
 2016 Pedro <unk> <unk> International Prize 
 Grand Cross with Diamonds of the Order of the Sun ( Peru ) 
 Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art , 1st class 
 Chevalier of the Legion of Honour ( France ) 
 Officer of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( France ) 
 Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres ( France ) 
 Commander of the Order of the Aztec Eagle ( Mexico ) 
 Grand Cross with Silver Star of the Order of Ruben Dario ( Nicaragua ) 
 Grand Cross with Silver Star of the Order of Christopher Columbus ( Dominican Republic ) 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Vargas Llosa 's essays and journalism have been collected as Contra viento y marea , issued in three volumes ( 1983 , 1986 , and 1990 ) . A selection has been edited by John King and translated and published as Making Waves . 2003 – " The Language of Passion " 
 = Len Ford = 
 Leonard Guy Ford , Jr . ( February 18 , 1926 – March 14 , 1972 ) was an American football player from 1944 to 1958 . He played college football for the University of Michigan and professional football for the Los Angeles Dons , Cleveland Browns and Green Bay Packers . He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1976 and the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1996 . 
 Ford was an all @-@ city athlete at his high school in Washington , D.C. , and attended Morgan State University after graduating in 1944 . After a brief stint in the U.S. Navy the following year , he transferred to Michigan , where he played on the Michigan Wolverines football team as an offensive and defensive end . He played for Michigan from 1945 to 1947 and was a member of the undefeated 1947 team that has been selected as the best team in the history of Michigan football . 
 Ford was passed over in all 32 rounds of the 1948 NFL Draft , but was selected by the Los Angeles Dons of the rival All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , where he played for two seasons as an offensive and defensive end . After the AAFC dissolved in 1949 , Ford played eight seasons as a defensive end for the Cleveland Browns . During those eight seasons , the Browns advanced to the NFL championship game seven times , won three championships , and allowed the fewest points in the NFL six times . Ford was one of the dominant defensive players of his era , having a rare combination of size and speed that helped him disrupt opposing offenses and force fumbles . He was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ NFL player five times and played in four Pro Bowls . 
 Ford was traded to the Packers in 1958 , but played there just one season before retiring . He worked for the Detroit recreation department from 1963 to 1972 . He suffered a heart attack and died in 1972 at age 46 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Ford was born in Washington , D.C. , in 1926 . His father , Leonard G. Ford , Sr. , was a Virginia native who was employed as a " skilled laborer " by the federal government in 1920 and as a printing operator at the Government Printing Office in 1940 . His mother , Jeraldine , was also a Virginia native who worked as a social worker in a settlement house in 1940 . Ford had an older sister , Anita , and a younger brother , Claude . 
 As a teenager , Ford attended Armstrong Technical High School , where he played football , basketball and baseball . As a high school athlete , he aspired to play fullback in football , but he later recalled , " I started to grow , and I grew right out of the backfield . " He was chosen by local sportswriters as an all @-@ city athlete in all three sports in his senior year , and he served as captain of all three teams for one season each . 
 After he graduated in 1944 , Theodore McIntyre , Ford 's high school football coach , suggested he attend Morgan State University , a historically black college in Baltimore , Maryland . Ford played for the Morgan State Bears football team for one year under head coach Edward P. Hurt , while also starring as the center on the school 's basketball team . The basketball team won its league 's championship in 1944 . Ford left Morgan State and joined the U.S. Navy in 1945 , but stayed in the service only briefly as World War II came to an end . 
 = = University of Michigan = = 
 After the war , Ford transferred to the University of Michigan to play football in a bigger program than Morgan State 's . He wanted to " get a shot at playing in the Rose Bowl one day " , he later said . While attending Michigan , he was a member of Omega Psi Phi , an all @-@ black fraternity whose membership also included Bob Mann , another Michigan end who went on to play in the NFL . 
 = = = 1945 and 1946 seasons = = = 
 In 1945 , Ford was Michigan 's tallest player at 6 feet 5 inches ( 196 cm ) and 190 pounds . Ford played as a backup at the left end for the 1945 Michigan football team that compiled a 7 – 3 win – loss record under head coach Fritz Crisler . When Ford caught a pass from Wally <unk> in Michigan 's 26 @-@ 0 victory over Minnesota in early November 1945 , The New York Times took note and referred to Ford as " a six @-@ foot , five @-@ inch giant . " 
 As a junior in 1946 , Ford had gained 16 pounds and weighed 206 pounds . That year , he shared the left end position with his fraternity brother Bob Mann , with Ford starting four games and Mann two . With Ford and Mann at the end position , the 1946 Michigan team finished with a 6 – 2 – 1 record . During the 1946 season , Ford established himself as a tenacious tackler on defense and was also a receiving threat as an end on offense . In the first game of the 1946 season , a 21 @-@ 0 victory over Indiana , Ford recovered an Indiana fumble and then scored the game 's second touchdown on a 17 @-@ yard pass from Pete Elliott . Later in the season , he scored a touchdown against Wisconsin on an end @-@ around , a play Michigan employed frequently with Ford . 
 = = = 1947 season = = = 
 By 1947 , Ford had grown to 215 pounds , 25 pounds heavier than he had weighed in 1945 . Led by All @-@ American halfbacks Bob Chappuis and Bump Elliott , the undefeated 1947 Michigan team has been selected as the best team in the history of Michigan football . Nicknamed the " Mad Magicians " , the Michigan squad finished with a 10 – 0 record , capped by a 49 – 0 victory in the Rose Bowl over USC on New Year 's Day . Ford started only one game in 1947 , as Bob Mann was the starting left end in eight of Michigan 's 10 games . Even with reduced playing time , Ford caught a 35 @-@ yard touchdown pass in the first game of the season and had two receptions for 82 yards in the 55 – 0 win over Michigan State . He scored again in a game against Pitt . Ford 's defensive performance was credited with shutting down Ohio State in the final game of the 1947 season . After the Wolverines ' 21 @-@ 0 victory over the Buckeyes , The Michigan Daily wrote : 
 " For the defense it was big Len Ford , who sparked a forward wall that never let the Bucks threaten . His end was practically impregnable . He smashed Ohio interference time and again , he continually harassed Dick <unk> and <unk> <unk> , the Ohio passers , and he made life miserable for Pete Perini , blocking one punt and rushing the Buckeye punter on nearly all of his kicks . " 
 Michigan finished first in the AP Poll and won the 1947 college football national championship , sharing the honor with Notre Dame , which had been first in the polls before the Rose Bowl . After the 1947 season , the Associated Press ( AP ) selected Ford as a third @-@ team All @-@ American end and named teammate Bob Mann as a second @-@ team All @-@ American end . The AP also named Ford a second @-@ team all @-@ Big Nine Conference end . In the summer of 1948 , he accepted an invitation to play for the college team in the College All @-@ Star Game , a now @-@ defunct annual matchup between the champion of the professional National Football League ( NFL ) and a selection of the country 's best college players . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Los Angeles Dons ( AAFC ) = = = 
 Despite his accomplishments in college , Ford was passed over in all 32 rounds of the 1948 NFL Draft during a time when most professional teams did not employ African @-@ Americans . ( The following year , George Taliaferro became the first African @-@ American to be selected in an NFL draft . ) He was selected , however , by the Los Angeles Dons of the rival All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) in the third round of its 1948 draft . He signed with the Dons in April 1948 . 
 Playing as a right end opposite Joe Aguirre , Ford had 31 catches for 598 yards and seven touchdowns in 1948 . As was the case at Michigan , Ford also worked on defense and was one of the AAFC 's most successful pass @-@ rushers . The Dons , meanwhile , finished the regular season with a 7 – 7 record , good for third place in the AAFC West . Ford played basketball in the off @-@ season for the New York Renaissance , an all @-@ black professional team in the National Basketball League . He did not play basketball at Michigan , the Big Ten Conference having maintained racial segregation of basketball until 1950 . 
 Ford had 36 catches for 577 yards and one touchdown in 1949 , while the Dons fell to 4 – 8 . The AAFC struggled financially during Ford 's time with the Dons . Its teams competed with NFL franchises for fans ' attention and player talent – the Dons shared a city with the NFL 's Los Angeles Rams . By late 1949 , team owners came to an agreement under which the Cleveland Browns , San Francisco 49ers and Baltimore Colts joined the NFL and the rest of the league 's teams , including the Dons , folded . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns = = = 
 = = = = 1950 season = = = = 
 After the AAFC disbanded , the Browns selected Ford in the second round of the 1950 AAFC dispersal draft , created to reallocate former Dons , Buffalo Bills and Chicago Hornets players . Ford signed with the Browns in July 1950 . 
 Cleveland head coach Paul Brown converted Ford into solely a defensive end as two @-@ platoon systems gained popularity after 1950 . Ford bulked up to 260 pounds and quickly became a fixture of Cleveland 's defense alongside linebacker Bill Willis and defensive back Warren Lahr . He was one of five black players for Cleveland – the others were Willis , punter Horace Gillom and fullbacks Emerson Cole and Marion Motley – at a time when many other teams had never signed a black player . The Browns , in fact , had roughly a third of the black players in the NFL on their roster . Cleveland sports writer Chuck Heaton later recalled that Ford was " a leader , particularly with the black players on the squad . " 
 Led by an offense that featured Motley , quarterback Otto Graham and ends Mac Speedie and Dante Lavelli , the 1950 Browns finished the regular season with a 10 – 2 record and won the 1950 NFL Championship Game over the Los Angeles Rams . 
 In a mid @-@ October game against the Chicago Cardinals , an elbow by Pat Harder broke Ford 's nose , cheekbone , and maxilla ( upper jaw ) , knocked out two teeth , loosened several teeth and chipped another . Ford , who had been fighting with Harder throughout the game , punched him following the play , resulting in a penalty , his ejection from the game and a $ 50 ( $ 492 in 2016 dollars ) fine . NFL commissioner Bert Bell withdrew the fine when the damage to Ford 's face was revealed . Ford 's facial injuries were so severe that a plastic surgery was required , " virtually rebuilding the big end 's face . " The Browns ' long @-@ time team doctor , Vic Ippolito , described Ford 's injuries as " a sickening sight . " 
 Because of the injury , Ford started only four regular season games in 1950 . However , he asked to be reinstated for the 1950 NFL Championship Game . Head coach Paul Brown agreed to allow Ford to suit up after receiving approval from the team doctor and arranging for a special mask to be built to protect Ford from further injury . Ford had been on a liquid diet until late November and dropped from 240 to 215 pound , though he was back up to 223 pounds shortly before the championship game . As the championship game got underway , Ford sat on the bench as the Rams moved the ball 82 yards down the field for a touchdown . Browns head coach Paul Brown knew the defense had to tighten , and he called on Ford to enter the game . The Cleveland Plain Dealer later called this " one of Len Ford 's great moments . " Paul Brown stated that Ford " showed me that day he really was a man . " Brown later recalled that Ford was the team 's " only real hope of plugging a hole " and recalled one sequence as a defining moment in the game : 
 I 'll always remember one three @-@ play sequence where he threw Vitamin Smith for a 14 @-@ yard loss on a reverse , sacked [ Bob ] Waterfield for another big loss and finally smothered Glenn Davis on an end run . That turned the game around for us . 
 The Browns ' defense held the Rams scoreless in the fourth quarter , and the Browns won the championship game by a 30 @-@ 28 score in their first season in the league . 
 = = = = 1951 season = = = = 
 Ford continued to excel as a pass @-@ rusher in 1951 , when the Browns again advanced to the NFL Championship Game but lost to the Rams . He recovered four fumbles during the season and was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by both the Associated Press ( AP ) and the United Press International ( UPI ) . He was also named to the Pro Bowl , the NFL 's all @-@ star game . Ford 's dominating play allowed Brown to assign him to two offensive linemen , giving Cleveland the latitude to put four men on the line and use three linebackers in what is now known as the 4 – 3 defense . Cleveland 's defensive coach Blanton Collier later recalled the thinking behind moving Ford : " We knew we had to get him in closer where his talents as a pass rusher could best be utilized . So we moved both tackles in and dropped the linebackers off the outside . It may have been the beginning of today 's 4 – 3 defense . " Collier also noted that " Len was very aggressive and had that touch of meanness in him that you find in most defensive players . " 
 = = = = 1952 season = = = = 
 The 1952 Browns had eight regular @-@ season wins and won the NFL 's East Division , but lost to the Detroit Lions in the 1952 NFL Championship Game . Ford , meanwhile , extended his run of dominance against opposing offenses in an era before the quarterback sack was a recorded statistic . For the second consecutive year , he was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by both the AP and UPI and was selected for the Pro Bowl . 
 = = = = 1953 season = = = = 
 The 1953 Browns compiled an 11 @-@ 1 record and again advanced to the NFL Championship Game , losing to the Detroit Lions . For the third consecutive year , Ford was named a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by both the AP and UPI and was selected for the Pro Bowl . 
 = = = = 1954 season = = = = 
 Willis and Motley retired after the 1953 season , but Ford and Don Colo continued to anchor the defense alongside Lahr in the secondary . The 1954 Browns lost two of their first three games , but finished the season with a 9 – 3 record and returned to win the 1954 NFL Championship Game over the Lions . Ford had two interceptions in the Browns ' 56 – 10 win over the Lions , including one which he returned 45 yards to set a new NFL playoff record . Ford recovered a career @-@ high five fumbles in 1954 , and he was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by the AP and UPI for the fourth year in a row . He was also selected to play in his fourth consecutive Pro Bowl . 
 = = = = 1955 season = = = = 
 The 1955 Browns compiled a 9 – 2 – 1 record in 1955 and won the 1955 NFL Championship Game against the Los Angeles Rams , helped by a strong defensive effort and six interceptions of quarterback Norm Van Brocklin . Ford was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ Pro by the UPI , The Newspaper Enterprise Association ( NEA ) and the New York Daily News . He was named a second @-@ team All @-@ Pro by the AP . 
 = = = = 1956 and 1957 seasons = = = = 
 Graham and many of the players that had helped propel the Browns to a series of championship game appearances retired before the 1956 season . The 1956 team finished 5 – 7 that year , its first @-@ ever losing record . 
 By 1957 , there was speculation that Ford , then age 31 , might not make the Browns ' roster . Ford arrived at training camp well above his playing weight , and rookie Bob <unk> was given Ford 's spot in August . When <unk> withdrew from the team , the spot was awarded to another rookie , Paul Wiggin . Ford worked to shed pounds during training camp and worked to train the young defensive players , including Wiggin and Bill Quinlan . Rookie running back Jim Brown recalled that Ford pulled him aside during the 1957 training camp and gave him advice on dealing with the Browns ' head coach Paul Brown . Ford advised the rookie to keep his mouth shut and do as the coach set during practice and waiting until game day : " Run it your way in the game and hope it works , and if it does , don 't say anything . Just make your yardage and act like it was a mistake . " 
 Brown was slowed for several weeks during the 1957 season by a severely bruised shoulder , but the Browns , led by Jim Brown , reached the 1957 NFL Championship Game , losing to the Lions . Cleveland 's defense allowed the fewest points in the NFL in six of Ford 's eight seasons with the team . 
 = = = Green Bay Packers = = = 
 In May 1958 , the Browns traded Ford to the Green Bay Packers in exchange for a draft choice . Green Bay coach Ray McLean said at the time that he acquired Ford for his talent at putting pressure on the quarterback and noted that " he 's one of the toughest guys in the league to block because of his speed , size and agility . " The 1958 Green Bay team won just one game in Ford 's lone season there . Ford suffered multiple broken fingers before the last game of the 1958 season , and , because he was unable to play , the Packers refused to pay Ford the final $ 916 @.@ 66 due on his contract . In 1961 , Ford sued the Packers in Wayne County Circuit Court in Detroit to collect the $ 916 @.@ 66 plus $ 10 @,@ 000 for alleged damage to his reputation caused by the Packers ' releasing him . 
 = = = Career statistics and legacy = = = 
 Ford had 20 career fumble recoveries at the time of his retirement . Ford was successful in part because of his combination of quickness and size . Few players of his era who were as tall and big as he was could move as fast ; only Larry Brink of the Rams was close to him in proportions . 
 = = Family and later years = = 
 In 1951 , Ford married Geraldine Bledsoe Ford ( 1926 – 2003 ) , who was a lawyer in the 1950s , and in the mid @-@ 1960s became the first African @-@ American woman to serve as a judge in Michigan . They had two daughters , Anita and Deborah , and divorced in 1959 . 
 While playing in the NFL , Ford worked during the off @-@ season in a Detroit real estate office . He developed a reputation for being " cagey with the dollar " and told Jet magazine in 1955 : " In what other sport can a boy just graduated from college make $ 5 @,@ 000 in his first six months , then have a half @-@ year left to make more money ? " After retiring from football , Ford attended the Detroit College of Law for a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , but never received a law degree . From 1963 until at least December 1970 , Ford worked as the assistant director at Considine Recreation Center , the largest recreation center in Detroit . At the time of his death 16 months later , he was described in obituaries as the assistant recreation director for the City of Detroit . 
 Sports writer Chuck Heaton wrote that Ford 's life was " pretty much down hill " after he retired from professional football . Heaton recalled that , in his later years , Ford seemed in poor physical condition , " only a shadow of the mighty end he once was . " Ford still aspired to obtain his law license , but , according to Heaton , " appeared to have lost the drive which made him such a great football player . " Don Newcombe , who became good friends with Ford , was more blunt . Interviewed in 1980 , Newcombe said that Ford 's life was " decimated " because of alcohol . Newcombe added : " He became a wino , stumbling around in alleys . He gave up his life for alcohol . " 
 Ford suffered a heart attack in early March 1972 and died the following week in a Detroit hospital . He was age 46 at the time of his death . He was posthumously inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1976 and into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor in 1996 . 
 = Rembrandt = 
 Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; Dutch : [ <unk> <unk> ( n ) <unk> vɑn <unk> ] ; 15 July 1606 – 4 October 1669 ) was a Dutch painter and etcher . He is generally considered one of the greatest painters and printmakers in European art and the most important in Dutch history . His contributions to art came in a period of great wealth and cultural achievement that historians call the Dutch Golden Age when Dutch Golden Age painting , although in many ways antithetical to the Baroque style that dominated Europe , was extremely prolific and innovative , and gave rise to important new genres in painting . 
 Having achieved youthful success as a portrait painter , Rembrandt 's later years were marked by personal tragedy and financial hardships . Yet his etchings and paintings were popular throughout his lifetime , his reputation as an artist remained high , and for twenty years he taught many important Dutch painters . Rembrandt 's greatest creative triumphs are exemplified most notably in his portraits of his contemporaries , self @-@ portraits and illustrations of scenes from the Bible . His self @-@ portraits form a unique and intimate biography , in which the artist surveyed himself without vanity and with the utmost sincerity . 
 In his paintings and prints he exhibited knowledge of classical iconography , which he molded to fit the requirements of his own experience ; thus , the depiction of a biblical scene was informed by Rembrandt 's knowledge of the specific text , his assimilation of classical composition , and his observations of Amsterdam 's Jewish population . Because of his empathy for the human condition , he has been called " one of the great prophets of civilization . " 
 = = Life = = 
 Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn was born on 15 July 1606 in Leiden , in the Dutch Republic , now the Netherlands . He was the ninth child born to Harmen <unk> van Rijn and <unk> <unk> van <unk> . His family was quite well @-@ to @-@ do ; his father was a miller and his mother was a baker 's daughter . Religion is a central theme in Rembrandt 's paintings and the religiously fraught period in which he lived makes his faith a matter of interest . His mother was Roman Catholic , and his father belonged to the Dutch Reformed Church . While his work reveals deep Christian faith , there is no evidence that Rembrandt formally belonged to any church , although he had five of his children christened in Dutch Reformed churches in Amsterdam : four in the Oude Kerk ( Old Church ) and one , Titus , in the <unk> ( Southern Church ) . 
 As a boy he attended Latin school and was enrolled at the University of Leiden , although according to a contemporary he had a greater inclination towards painting ; he was soon apprenticed to a Leiden history painter , Jacob van <unk> , with whom he spent three years . After a brief but important apprenticeship of six months with the painter Pieter Lastman in Amsterdam , Rembrandt stayed a few months with Jacob <unk> and then started his own workshop , though Simon van Leeuwen claimed that Joris van <unk> taught Rembrandt in Leiden . Rembrandt opened a studio in Leiden in 1624 or 1625 , which he shared with friend and colleague Jan <unk> . In 1627 , Rembrandt began to accept students , among them Gerrit Dou . 
 In 1629 Rembrandt was discovered by the statesman Constantijn Huygens ( father of the Dutch mathematician and physicist Christiaan Huygens ) , who procured for Rembrandt important commissions from the court of The Hague . As a result of this connection , Prince Frederik Hendrik continued to purchase paintings from Rembrandt until 1646 . 
 At the end of 1631 Rembrandt moved to Amsterdam , then rapidly expanding as the new business capital of the Netherlands , and began to practice as a professional portraitist for the first time , with great success . He initially stayed with an art dealer , Hendrick van Uylenburgh , and in 1634 , married Hendrick 's cousin , Saskia van Uylenburgh . Saskia came from a good family : her father had been a lawyer and the <unk> ( mayor ) of Leeuwarden . When Saskia , as the youngest daughter , became an orphan , she lived with an older sister in Het Bildt . Rembrandt and Saskia were married in the local church of St. <unk> without the presence of Rembrandt 's relatives . In the same year , Rembrandt became a burgess of Amsterdam and a member of the local guild of painters . He also acquired a number of students , among them Ferdinand Bol and Govert Flinck . 
 In 1635 Rembrandt and Saskia moved into their own house , renting in fashionable Nieuwe <unk> . In 1639 they moved to a prominent newly built house ( now the Rembrandt House Museum ) in the upscale ' <unk> ' ( eng . : ' Broadway ' ) , today known as <unk> ( <unk> 4 @,@ 1011 NK Amsterdam @-@ now ) in what was becoming the Jewish quarter ; then a young upcoming neighborhood . The mortgage to finance the 13 @,@ 000 guilder purchase would be a primary cause for later financial difficulties . Rembrandt should easily have been able to pay the house off with his large income , but it appears his spending always kept pace with his income , and he may have made some unsuccessful investments . It was there that Rembrandt frequently sought his Jewish neighbors to model for his Old Testament scenes . Although they were by now affluent , the couple suffered several personal setbacks ; their son <unk> died two months after his birth in 1635 and their daughter Cornelia died at just three weeks of age in 1638 . In 1640 , they had a second daughter , also named Cornelia , who died after living barely over a month . Only their fourth child , Titus , who was born in 1641 , survived into adulthood . Saskia died in 1642 soon after Titus 's birth , probably from tuberculosis . Rembrandt 's drawings of her on her sick and death bed are among his most moving works . 
 During Saskia 's illness , <unk> <unk> was hired as Titus ' caretaker and nurse and also became Rembrandt 's lover . She would later charge Rembrandt with breach of promise ( a euphemism for seduction under [ breached ] promise to marry ) and was awarded alimony of 200 guilders a year . Rembrandt worked to have her committed for twelve years to an asylum or poorhouse ( called a " bridewell " ) at Gouda , after learning she had pawned jewelry that had once belonged to Saskia and that he had given to her . 
 In the late 1640s Rembrandt began a relationship with the much younger Hendrickje <unk> , who had initially been his maid . In 1654 they had a daughter , Cornelia , bringing Hendrickje a summons from the Reformed Church to answer the charge " that she had committed the acts of a whore with Rembrandt the painter " . She admitted this and was banned from receiving communion . Rembrandt was not summoned to appear for the Church council because he was not a member of the Reformed Church . The two were considered legally wed under common law , but Rembrandt had not married Hendrickje . Had he remarried he would have lost access to a trust set up for Titus in Saskia 's will . 
 Rembrandt lived beyond his means , buying art ( including bidding up his own work ) , prints ( often used in his paintings ) and rarities , which probably caused a court arrangement to avoid his bankruptcy in 1656 , by selling most of his paintings and large collection of antiquities . The sale list survives and gives us a good insight into Rembrandt 's collections , which , apart from Old Master paintings and drawings , included busts of the Roman Emperors , suits of Japanese armor among many objects from Asia , and collections of natural history and minerals . But the prices realized in the sales in 1657 and 1658 were disappointing . Rembrandt was forced to sell his house and his printing @-@ press and move to more modest accommodation on the <unk> in 1660 . The authorities and his creditors were generally accommodating to him , except for the Amsterdam painters ' guild , which introduced a new rule that no one in Rembrandt 's circumstances could trade as a painter . To get around this , Hendrickje and Titus set up a business as art dealers in 1660 , with Rembrandt as an employee . 
 In 1661 Rembrandt ( or rather the new business ) was contracted to complete work for the newly built city hall , but only after Govert Flinck , the artist previously commissioned , died without beginning to paint . The resulting work , The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis , was rejected and returned to the painter ; the surviving fragment is only a fraction of the whole work . It was around this time that Rembrandt took on his last apprentice , Aert de Gelder . In 1662 he was still fulfilling major commissions for portraits and other works . When Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany came to Amsterdam in 1667 , he visited Rembrandt at his house . 
 Rembrandt outlived both Hendrickje , who died in 1663 , and Titus , who died in 1668 , leaving a baby daughter . He died within a year of his son , on 4 October 1669 in Amsterdam , and was buried as a poor <unk> in an unknown grave in the <unk> . It was in a numbered ' <unk> ' ( grave owned by the church ) somewhere under a tombstone in the church . After twenty years , his remains were taken away and destroyed , as was customary with the remains of poor people at that time . 
 = = Works = = 
 In a letter to Huygens , Rembrandt offered the only surviving explanation of what he sought to achieve through his art : the greatest and most natural movement , translated from de <unk> en de <unk> <unk> . The word " <unk> " is also argued to mean " emotion " or " motive . " Whether this refers to objectives , material or otherwise , is open to interpretation ; either way , critics have drawn particular attention to the way Rembrandt seamlessly melded the earthly and spiritual . 
 Earlier 20th century connoisseurs claimed Rembrandt had produced over 600 paintings , nearly 400 etchings and 2 @,@ 000 drawings . More recent scholarship , from the 1960s to the present day ( led by the Rembrandt Research Project ) , often controversially , has winnowed his oeuvre to nearer 300 paintings . His prints , traditionally all called etchings , although many are produced in whole or part by engraving and sometimes drypoint , have a much more stable total of slightly under 300 . It is likely Rembrandt made many more drawings in his lifetime than 2 @,@ 000 , but those extant are more rare than presumed . Two experts claim that the number of drawings whose autograph status can be regarded as effectively " certain " is no higher than about 75 , although this is disputed . The list was to be unveiled at a scholarly meeting in February 2010 . 
 At one time about ninety paintings were counted as Rembrandt self @-@ portraits , but it is now known that he had his students copy his own self @-@ portraits as part of their training . Modern scholarship has reduced the autograph count to over forty paintings , as well as a few drawings and thirty @-@ one etchings , which include many of the most remarkable images of the group . Some show him posing in quasi @-@ historical fancy dress , or pulling faces at himself . His oil paintings trace the progress from an uncertain young man , through the dapper and very successful portrait @-@ painter of the 1630s , to the troubled but massively powerful portraits of his old age . Together they give a remarkably clear picture of the man , his appearance and his psychological make @-@ up , as revealed by his richly weathered face . 
 In his portraits and self @-@ portraits , he angles the sitter 's face in such a way that the ridge of the nose nearly always forms the line of demarcation between brightly illuminated and shadowy areas . A Rembrandt face is a face partially eclipsed ; and the nose , bright and obvious , thrusting into the riddle of <unk> , serves to focus the viewer 's attention upon , and to dramatize , the division between a flood of light — an overwhelming clarity — and a brooding <unk> . 
 In a number of biblical works , including The Raising of the Cross , Joseph Telling His Dreams and The Stoning of Saint Stephen , Rembrandt painted himself as a character in the crowd . Durham suggests that this was because the Bible was for Rembrandt " a kind of diary , an account of moments in his own life . " 
 Among the more prominent characteristics of Rembrandt 's work are his use of chiaroscuro , the theatrical employment of light and shadow derived from Caravaggio , or , more likely , from the Dutch <unk> , but adapted for very personal means . Also notable are his dramatic and lively presentation of subjects , devoid of the rigid formality that his contemporaries often displayed , and a deeply felt compassion for mankind , irrespective of wealth and age . His immediate family — his wife Saskia , his son Titus and his common @-@ law wife Hendrickje — often figured prominently in his paintings , many of which had mythical , biblical or historical themes . 
 = = = Periods , themes and styles = = = 
 Throughout his career Rembrandt took as his primary subjects the themes of portraiture , landscape and narrative painting . For the last , he was especially praised by his contemporaries , who extolled him as a masterly interpreter of biblical stories for his skill in representing emotions and attention to detail . Stylistically , his paintings progressed from the early " smooth " manner , characterized by fine technique in the portrayal of illusionistic form , to the late " rough " treatment of richly variegated paint surfaces , which allowed for an illusionism of form suggested by the tactile quality of the paint itself . 
 A parallel development may be seen in Rembrandt 's skill as a printmaker . In the etchings of his maturity , particularly from the late 1640s onward , the freedom and breadth of his drawings and paintings found expression in the print medium as well . The works encompass a wide range of subject matter and technique , sometimes leaving large areas of white paper to suggest space , at other times employing complex webs of line to produce rich dark tones . 
 It was during Rembrandt 's Leiden period ( 1625 – 1631 ) that Lastman 's influence was most prominent . It is also likely that at this time <unk> had a strong impact on his work as well . Paintings were rather small , but rich in details ( for example , in costumes and jewelry ) . Religious and allegorical themes were favored , as were <unk> . In 1626 Rembrandt produced his first etchings , the wide dissemination of which would largely account for his international fame . In 1629 he completed Judas <unk> , Returning the Pieces of Silver and The Artist in His Studio , works that evidence his interest in the handling of light and variety of paint application , and constitute the first major progress in his development as a painter . 
 During his early years in Amsterdam ( 1632 – 1636 ) , Rembrandt began to paint dramatic biblical and mythological scenes in high contrast and of large format ( The Blinding of Samson , 1636 , Belshazzar 's Feast , c . 1635 Danaë , 1636 ) , seeking to emulate the baroque style of Rubens . With the occasional help of assistants in Uylenburgh 's workshop , he painted numerous portrait commissions both small ( Jacob de <unk> III ) and large ( Portrait of the <unk> Jan <unk> and his Wife , 1633 , Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp , 1632 ) . 
 By the late 1630s Rembrandt had produced a few paintings and many etchings of landscapes . Often these landscapes highlighted natural drama , featuring uprooted trees and ominous skies ( Cottages before a Stormy Sky , c . 1641 ; The Three Trees , 1643 ) . From 1640 his work became less exuberant and more sober in tone , possibly reflecting personal tragedy . Biblical scenes were now derived more often from the New Testament than the Old Testament , as had been the case before . In 1642 he painted The Night Watch , the most substantial of the important group portrait commissions which he received in this period , and through which he sought to find solutions to compositional and narrative problems that had been attempted in previous works . 
 In the decade following the Night Watch , Rembrandt 's paintings varied greatly in size , subject , and style . The previous tendency to create dramatic effects primarily by strong contrasts of light and shadow gave way to the use of frontal lighting and larger and more saturated areas of color . Simultaneously , figures came to be placed parallel to the picture plane . These changes can be seen as a move toward a classical mode of composition and , considering the more expressive use of brushwork as well , may indicate a familiarity with Venetian art ( Susanna and the Elders , 1637 – 47 ) . At the same time , there was a marked decrease in painted works in favor of etchings and drawings of landscapes . In these graphic works natural drama eventually made way for quiet Dutch rural scenes . 
 In the 1650s , Rembrandt 's style changed again . Colors became richer and brush strokes more pronounced . With these changes , Rembrandt distanced himself from earlier work and current fashion , which increasingly inclined toward fine , detailed works . His use of light becomes more jagged and harsh , and shine becomes almost nonexistent . His singular approach to paint application may have been suggested in part by familiarity with the work of Titian , and could be seen in the context of the then current discussion of ' finish ' and surface quality of paintings . Contemporary accounts sometimes remark disapprovingly of the coarseness of Rembrandt 's brushwork , and the artist himself was said to have dissuaded visitors from looking too closely at his paintings . The tactile manipulation of paint may hearken to medieval procedures , when mimetic effects of rendering informed a painting 's surface . The end result is a richly varied handling of paint , deeply layered and often apparently haphazard , which suggests form and space in both an illusory and highly individual manner . 
 In later years biblical themes were still depicted often , but emphasis shifted from dramatic group scenes to intimate portrait @-@ like figures ( James the Apostle , 1661 ) . In his last years , Rembrandt painted his most deeply reflective self @-@ portraits ( from 1652 to 1669 he painted fifteen ) , and several moving images of both men and women ( The Jewish Bride , c . 1666 ) — in love , in life , and before God . 
 = = = Etchings = = = 
 Rembrandt produced etchings for most of his career , from 1626 to 1660 , when he was forced to sell his printing @-@ press and practically abandoned etching . Only the troubled year of 1649 produced no dated work . He took easily to etching and , though he also learned to use a burin and partly engraved many plates , the freedom of etching technique was fundamental to his work . He was very closely involved in the whole process of printmaking , and must have printed at least early examples of his etchings himself . At first he used a style based on drawing , but soon moved to one based on painting , using a mass of lines and numerous <unk> with the acid to achieve different strengths of line . Towards the end of the 1630s , he reacted against this manner and moved to a simpler style , with fewer <unk> . He worked on the so @-@ called Hundred <unk> Print in stages throughout the 1640s , and it was the " critical work in the middle of his career " , from which his final etching style began to emerge . Although the print only survives in two states , the first very rare , evidence of much reworking can be seen underneath the final print and many drawings survive for elements of it . 
 In the mature works of the 1650s , Rembrandt was more ready to improvise on the plate and large prints typically survive in several states , up to eleven , often radically changed . He now uses hatching to create his dark areas , which often take up much of the plate . He also experimented with the effects of printing on different kinds of paper , including Japanese paper , which he used frequently , and on vellum . He began to use " surface tone , " leaving a thin film of ink on parts of the plate instead of wiping it completely clean to print each impression . He made more use of drypoint , exploiting , especially in landscapes , the rich fuzzy burr that this technique gives to the first few impressions . 
 His prints have similar subjects to his paintings , although the twenty @-@ seven self @-@ portraits are relatively more common , and portraits of other people less so . There are forty @-@ six landscapes , mostly small , which largely set the course for the graphic treatment of landscape until the end of the 19th century . One third of his etchings are of religious subjects , many treated with a homely simplicity , whilst others are his most monumental prints . A few erotic , or just obscene , compositions have no equivalent in his paintings . He owned , until forced to sell it , a magnificent collection of prints by other artists , and many borrowings and influences in his work can be traced to artists as diverse as Mantegna , Raphael , Hercules Seghers , and Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione . 
 = = = The Night Watch = = = 
 Rembrandt painted the large painting The Militia Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq between 1640 and 1642 . This picture was called De <unk> by the Dutch and The Night Watch by Sir Joshua Reynolds because by the 18th century the picture was so dimmed and defaced that it was almost indistinguishable , and it looked quite like a night scene . After it was cleaned , it was discovered to represent broad day — a party of musketeers stepping from a gloomy courtyard into the blinding sunlight . 
 The piece was commissioned for the new hall of the <unk> , the musketeer branch of the civic militia . Rembrandt departed from convention , which ordered that such genre pieces should be stately and formal , rather a line @-@ up than an action scene . Instead he showed the militia readying themselves to embark on a mission ( what kind of mission , an ordinary patrol or some special event , is a matter of debate ) . 
 Contrary to what is often said , the work was hailed as a success from the beginning . Parts of the canvas were cut off ( approximately 20 % from the left hand side was removed ) to make the painting fit its new position when it was moved to Amsterdam town hall in 1715 ; the Rijksmuseum has a smaller copy of what is thought to be the full original composition ; the four figures in the front are at the centre of the canvas . The painting is now in the Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam . 
 = = Expert assessments = = 
 In 1968 the Rembrandt Research Project began under the sponsorship of the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Scientific Research ; it was initially expected to last a highly optimistic ten years . Art historians teamed up with experts from other fields to reassess the authenticity of works attributed to Rembrandt , using all methods available , including state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art technical diagnostics , and to compile a complete new catalogue raisonné of his paintings . As a result of their findings , many paintings that were previously attributed to Rembrandt have been removed from their list , although others have been added back . Many of those removed are now thought to be the work of his students . 
 One example of activity is The Polish Rider , in New York 's Frick Collection . Rembrandt 's authorship had been questioned by at least one scholar , Alfred von <unk> , at the beginning of the twentieth century , but for many decades later most scholars , including the foremost authority writing in English , Julius S. Held , agreed that it was indeed by the master . In the 1980s , however , Dr. <unk> Bruyn of the Foundation Rembrandt Research Project cautiously and tentatively attributed the painting to one of Rembrandt 's closest and most talented pupils , Willem Drost , about whom little is known . But Bruyn 's remained a minority opinion , the suggestion of Drost 's authorship is now generally rejected , and the Frick itself never changed its own attribution , the label still reading " Rembrandt " and not " attributed to " or " school of " . More recent opinion has shifted even more decisively in favor of the Frick , with Simon Schama ( in his 1999 book Rembrandt 's Eyes ) and the Rembrandt Project scholar Ernst van de Wetering ( Melbourne Symposium , 1997 ) both arguing for attribution to the master . Those few scholars who still question Rembrandt 's authorship feel that the execution is uneven , and favour different attributions for different parts of the work . 
 A similar issue was raised by Simon Schama in his book Rembrandt 's Eyes concerning the verification of titles associated with the subject matter depicted in Rembrandt 's works . For example , the exact subject being portrayed in Aristotle with a Bust of Homer ( recently retitled by curators at the Metropolitan Museum ) has been directly challenged by Schama applying the scholarship of Paul Crenshaw . Schama presents a substantial argument that it was the famous ancient Greek painter Apelles who is depicted in contemplation by Rembrandt and not Aristotle . 
 Another painting , Pilate Washing His Hands , is also of questionable attribution . Critical opinion of this picture has varied since 1905 , when Wilhelm von Bode described it as " a somewhat abnormal work " by Rembrandt . Scholars have since dated the painting to the 1660s and assigned it to an anonymous pupil , possibly Aert de Gelder . The composition bears superficial resemblance to mature works by Rembrandt but lacks the master 's command of illumination and modeling . 
 The attribution and re @-@ attribution work is ongoing . In 2005 four oil paintings previously attributed to Rembrandt 's students were reclassified as the work of Rembrandt himself : Study of an Old Man in Profile and Study of an Old Man with a Beard from a US private collection , Study of a Weeping Woman , owned by the Detroit Institute of Arts , and Portrait of an Elderly Woman in a White Bonnet , painted in <unk> Old Man Sitting in a Chair is a further example : in 2014 , Professor Ernst van de Wetering offered his view to The Guardian that the demotion of the 1652 painting Old Man Sitting in a Chair " was a vast mistake ... it is a most important painting . The painting needs to be seen in terms of Rembrandt ’ s experimentation ” . This was highlighted much earlier by Nigel Konstam who has studied Rembrandt throughout his career . 
 Rembrandt 's own studio practice is a major factor in the difficulty of attribution , since , like many masters before him , he encouraged his students to copy his paintings , sometimes finishing or retouching them to be sold as originals , and sometimes selling them as authorized copies . Additionally , his style proved easy enough for his most talented students to emulate . Further complicating matters is the uneven quality of some of Rembrandt 's own work , and his frequent stylistic evolutions and experiments . As well , there were later imitations of his work , and restorations which so seriously damaged the original works that they are no longer recognizable . It is highly likely that there will never be universal agreement as to what does and what does not constitute a genuine Rembrandt . 
 = = Painting materials = = 
 Technical investigation of Rembrandt 's paintings in the possession of the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister and in the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister ( Kassel ) has been conducted by Hermann Kühn in 1977 . The pigment analyses of some thirty paintings have shown that Rembrandt 's palette consisted of the following pigments : lead white , various ochres , Vandyke brown , bone black , charcoal black , lamp black , vermilion , madder lake , azurite , ultramarine , yellow lake and lead @-@ tin @-@ yellow . One painting ( Saskia van Uylenburgh as Flora ) reportedly contains <unk> . Rembrandt very rarely used pure blue or green colors , the most pronounced exception being Belshazzar 's Feast in the National Gallery in London . The book by <unk> ( above reference ) describes more recent technical investigations and pigment analyses of Rembrandt 's paintings predominantly in the National Gallery in London . The best source for technical information on Rembrandt 's paintings on the web is the Rembrandt Database containing all works of Rembrandt with detailed investigative reports , infrared and radiography images and other scientific details . 
 = = Name and signature = = 
 " Rembrandt " is a modification of the spelling of the artist 's first name that he introduced in 1633 . Roughly speaking , his earliest signatures ( ca . 1625 ) consisted of an initial " R " , or the monogram " RH " ( for Rembrant Harmenszoon ; i.e. " Rembrant , the son of Harmen " ) , and starting in 1629 , " RHL " ( the " L " stood , presumably , for Leiden ) . In 1632 , he used this monogram early in the year , then added his family name to it , " RHL @-@ van Rijn " , but replaced this form in that same year and began using his first name alone with its original spelling , " Rembrant " . In 1633 he added a " d " , and maintained this form consistently from then on , proving that this minor change had a meaning for him ( whatever it might have been ) . This change is purely visual ; it does not change the way his name is pronounced . Curiously enough , despite the large number of paintings and etchings signed with this modified first name , most of their documents that mentioned him during his lifetime retained the original " Rembrant " spelling . ( Note : the rough chronology of signature forms above applies to the paintings , and to a lesser degree to the etchings ; from 1632 , presumably , there is only one etching signed " RHL @-@ v. Rijn , " the large @-@ format " Raising of Lazarus , " B 73 ) . His practice of signing his work with his first name , later followed by Vincent van Gogh , was probably inspired by Raphael , Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo who , then as now , were referred to by their first names alone . 
 = = Workshop = = 
 Rembrandt ran a large workshop and had many pupils . The list of Rembrandt pupils from his period in Leiden as well as his time in Amsterdam is quite long , mostly because his influence on painters around him was so great that it is difficult to tell whether someone worked for him in his studio or just copied his style for patrons eager to acquire a Rembrandt . A partial list should include Ferdinand Bol , Adriaen Brouwer , Gerrit Dou , Willem Drost , <unk> <unk> , Gerbrand van den <unk> , Carel Fabritius , Govert Flinck , Hendrick <unk> , Aert de Gelder , Samuel <unk> van Hoogstraten , Abraham Janssens , Godfrey Kneller , Philip de <unk> , Jacob <unk> , Nicolaes Maes , Jürgen Ovens , Christopher <unk> , Willem de <unk> , Jan Victors , and Willem van der Vliet . 
 = = Museum collections = = 
 The most notable collections of Rembrandt 's work are at Amsterdam 's Rijksmuseum , including The Night Watch and The Jewish Bride , the Mauritshuis in The Hague , the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg , the National Gallery in London , Gemäldegalerie in Berlin , Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden , The Louvre , Nationalmuseum , Stockholm , and Schloss <unk> in Kassel . The Royal Castle in Warsaw displays two paintings by Rembrandt from Lanckoroński collection in a separate , dedicated room of Renaissance Courtier Lodgings . 
 Notable collections of Rembrandt 's paintings in the USA are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Frick Collection in New York City , and the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. 
 The Rembrandt House Museum in central Amsterdam in the house he bought at the height of his success has furnishings that are mostly not original , but period pieces comparable to those Rembrandt might have had , and paintings reflecting Rembrandt 's use of the house for art dealing . His printmaking studio has been set up with a printing press , where replica prints are printed . The museum has a few Rembrandt paintings , many loaned , but an important collection of his prints , a good selection of which are on rotating display . All major print rooms have large collections of Rembrandt prints , although as some exist in only a single impression , no collection is complete . The degree to which these collections are displayed to the public , or can easily be viewed by them in the print room , varies greatly . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 The Stoning of Saint Stephen ( 1625 ) – Musée des Beaux @-@ Arts , Lyon 
 Andromeda Chained to the Rocks ( 1630 ) – Mauritshuis , The Hague 
 Jacob de <unk> III ( 1632 ) – Dulwich Picture Gallery , London 
 Philosopher in Meditation ( 1632 ) – The Louvre , Paris 
 The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp ( 1632 ) – Mauritshuis , The Hague 
 Artemisia ( 1634 ) – Oil on canvas , 142 × 152 cm , Museo del Prado , Madrid 
 Descent from the Cross ( 1634 ) – Oil on canvas , 158 × 117 cm , looted from the Landgrave of Hesse @-@ Kassel ( or Hesse @-@ Cassel ) , Germany in 1806 , currently Hermitage Museum , St. Petersburg 
 Belshazzar 's Feast ( 1635 ) – National Gallery , London 
 The Prodigal Son in the Tavern ( c . 1635 ) – Oil on canvas , 161 × 131 cm Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister , Dresden 
 Danaë ( 1636 – 1643 ) – Hermitage Museum , St. Petersburg 
 The Night Watch , formally The Militia Company of Captain Frans Banning Cocq ( 1642 ) – Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam 
 Christ Healing the Sick ( etching c . 1643 , also known as the Hundred <unk> Print ) , nicknamed for the huge sum paid for it 
 Boaz and Ruth ( 1643 ) aka The Old Rabbi Old Man – Woburn Abbey / <unk> , Berlin 
 The Mill ( 1645 / 48 ) – National Gallery of Art , Washington , D.C. 
 Old Man with a Gold Chain ( " Old Man with a Black Hat and <unk> " ) ( c . 1631 ) Art Institute of Chicago 
 Susanna and the Elders ( 1647 ) – Oil on panel , 76 × 91 cm , Gemäldegalerie , Berlin 
 Aristotle Contemplating a Bust of Homer ( 1653 ) – Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York 
 Bathsheba at Her Bath ( 1654 ) – The Louvre , Paris 
 Christ Presented to the People ( Ecce Homo ) ( 1655 ) – <unk> , Birmingham Museum of Art 
 <unk> ( 1658 ) – Frick Collection , New York 
 The Three Crosses ( 1660 ) Etching , fourth state 
 <unk> and Haman at the Feast of Esther ( 1660 ) – Pushkin Museum , Moscow 
 The Conspiracy of Claudius Civilis ( 1661 ) – Nationalmuseum , Stockholm ( Claudius Civilis led a Dutch revolt against the Romans ) ( most of the cut up painting is lost , only the central part still exists ) 
 Portrait of Dirck van Os ( 1662 ) - Joslyn Art Museum , Omaha , Nebraska 
 <unk> of the Drapers ' Guild ( Dutch De <unk> , 1662 ) – Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam 
 The Jewish Bride ( 1665 ) – Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam 
 " The Entombment Sketch " ( c . 1639 and reworked c . 1654 ) oil on oak panel Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery , Glasgow 
 Saul and David ( ca . 1660 @-@ 1665 ) – Mauritshuis , The Hague 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Feb 12 , 2015 - May 17 , 2015 : Late Rembrandt , The Rijksmuseum , Amsterdam . 
 Oct 15 , 2014 - Jan 18 , 2015 : Rembrandt : The Late Works , The National Gallery , London . 
 Oct 19 , 2014 - Jan 4 , 2015 : Rembrandt , Rubens , Gainsborough and the Golden Age of Painting in Europe , Jule Collins Smith Museum of Art . 
 May 19 , 2014 - Jun 27 , 2014 : From Rembrandt to Rosenquist : Works on Paper from the NAC 's Permanent Collection , National Arts Club . 
 Sep 16 , 2013 - Nov 14 , 2013 : Rembrandt : The <unk> <unk> , Syracuse University Art Galleries . 
 Apr 21 , 2011 - Jul 18 , 2011 : Rembrandt and the Face of Jesus , Musée du Louvre . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Self @-@ portraits = = = 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 = = = = Drawings and etchings = = = = 
 = Champion of the Raj = 
 Champion of the Raj is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed by Level 9 Computing and published by Personal Software Services . It was released exclusively in the United Kingdom for the Amiga , Atari ST and systems running DOS in 1991 . It is the thirteenth and final instalment to the Strategic <unk> series . The game revolves around European imperialism and colonialism of India , in which six factions : British , French , Mogul , Sikhs , Gurkhas and Marathas fight to gain overall control of India . 
 The game contains elements of combat and arcade sequences , including traditional elephant racing and big @-@ game hunting . The core of the gameplay is focused on strategy , in which the player must conquer all territories of India through diplomatic or offensive means . Champion of the Raj received mixed reviews upon release . Critics praised its colourful graphics and storyline ; however strong criticism was directed at the game 's constant use of disk swapping and long loading times . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and revolves around colonialism of India . Before starting the game , the player must pick a player @-@ character and the respective faction they wish to side with . The choices include a viceroy of the British East India Company , a consul of the French East India Company , a Mogul emperor , a Maharajah of the <unk> , chief of the Gurkhas or a Maharajah of the Sikhs . At the beginning of the game , the player @-@ character is kidnapped by an assassin and is imprisoned inside a prison cell . A woman soon frees the player @-@ character , and informs them of their task to either conquer India or persuade rival political factions to unite through diplomacy . The game begins in 1800 , when the Mogul empire lost control of India . The majority of the game is presented through an in @-@ game headquarters screen which displays a map of India , a book detailing information of individual Indian states , and a group of icons which allows the player to issue commands . 
 If the player wishes to take over a territory through diplomatic means , they must initiate dialogue with the local leader . If the player has a high enough popularity , the local leader may invite them to a sporting event , such as elephant race or a game hunting session , which will give the player an opportunity to unite that territory under their faction . If the player 's popularity is not high enough , they may hold a Durbar festival in an attempt to impress the local leaders . If diplomacy fails , the player has the option to invade any territory by force . Soldiers can be hired through payments of gold ; however , if the player does not have a sufficient amount of gold at the end of the turn , a rebellion may start . Rebellions will sometimes initiate lethal encounters with assassins , in which the player @-@ character must defend themselves through sword combat . Additionally , the player can bring assassins to their side by successfully launching an attack on their temple . The game will end once either all of the territories are united , or if the player @-@ character is assassinated . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in November 1981 . The company was known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismarck and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . The Strategic Wargames series was conceptualised by software designer Alan Steel in 1984 . During development of these titles , Steel would often research the topic of the upcoming game and pass on the findings to other associates in Coventry and London . In 1983 , the company received recognition for being " one of the top software houses " in the United Kingdom , and was a finalist for BBC Radio 4 's New Business Enterprise Award for that year . 
 In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles , such as the ZX Spectrum , lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market by video game journalist Phillipa Irving . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . Gordon Houghton of The One for ST Games disliked the arcade sequences in the game , stating that they are " a waste of disk loading time " , despite acknowledging its way of giving the strategy genre a wider appeal . Ed Ricketts of ST Format stated that despite its simplicity , the game was " enjoyable " to play . Fiona Keating of CU Amiga praised the game 's entertaining storyline and colourful graphics , however she criticised its " shortcoming " sound . Jonathan Davies of Amiga Power criticised the simplicity of the gameplay , stating that despite the " impressive " graphics , the game " was not meant for a few minutes of playtime " . Gary White of Advanced Computer Entertainment heavily criticised the visuals , stating that it had an " appalling " presentation and poor sound quality . 
 The disk loading time was the most criticised aspect from reviewers . Houghton found the loading times " hefty " and recommended that the player use two disk drives instead of one , as constant disk swapping was required in the game . Ricketts similarly found the swapping of " half a dozen " floppy disks a " nightmare " on the Atari ST . Keating found the " huge " amount of disk swapping to be the game 's largest drawback , as well as the long loading times that accompanied it . Davies stated that scrolling times were " painfully slow " due to the excessive disk accessing . White stated that the game had a disk access routine " so bad " that it was almost impossible to access icons during gameplay , as the cursor movement was always a second behind actual mouse movements . 
 = Fleiss ' kappa = 
 Fleiss ' kappa ( named after Joseph L. Fleiss ) is a statistical measure for assessing the reliability of agreement between a fixed number of raters when assigning categorical ratings to a number of items or classifying items . This contrasts with other <unk> such as Cohen 's kappa , which only work when assessing the agreement between two raters . The measure calculates the degree of agreement in classification over that which would be expected by chance . There is no generally agreed @-@ upon measure of significance , although guidelines have been given . 
 Fleiss ' kappa can be used only with binary or nominal @-@ scale ratings . No version is available for ordered @-@ categorical ratings . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 Fleiss ' kappa is a generalisation of Scott 's pi statistic , [ 1 ] a statistical measure of inter @-@ <unk> reliability . [ 2 ] It is also related to Cohen 's kappa statistic and <unk> 's J statistic which may be more appropriate in certain instances [ 3 ] [ 4 ] . Whereas Scott 's pi and Cohen 's kappa work for only two raters , Fleiss ' kappa works for any number of raters giving categorical ratings , to a fixed number of items . It can be interpreted as expressing the extent to which the observed amount of agreement among raters exceeds what would be expected if all raters made their ratings completely randomly . It is important to note that whereas Cohen 's kappa assumes the same two raters have rated a set of items , Fleiss ' kappa specifically allows that although there are a fixed number of raters ( e.g. , three ) , different items may be rated by different individuals ( Fleiss , 1971 , <unk> ) . That is , Item 1 is rated by Raters A , B , and C ; but Item 2 could be rated by Raters D , E , and F. 
 Agreement can be thought of as follows , if a fixed number of people assign numerical ratings to a number of items then the kappa will give a measure for how consistent the ratings are . The kappa , <formula> , can be defined as , 
 ( 1 ) 
 <formula> 
 The factor <formula> gives the degree of agreement that is attainable above chance , and , <formula> gives the degree of agreement actually achieved above chance . If the raters are in complete agreement then <formula> . If there is no agreement among the raters ( other than what would be expected by chance ) then <formula> . 
 An example of the use of Fleiss ' kappa may be the following : Consider fourteen psychiatrists are asked to look at ten patients . Each psychiatrist gives one of possibly five diagnoses to each patient . These are compiled into a matrix , and Fleiss ' kappa can be computed from this matrix ( see example below ) to show the degree of agreement between the psychiatrists above the level of agreement expected by chance . 
 = = Equations = = 
 Let N be the total number of subjects , let n be the number of ratings per subject , and let k be the number of categories into which assignments are made . The subjects are indexed by i 
 = 1 , ... N and the categories are indexed by j = 
 1 , ... k . Let <unk> represent the number of raters who assigned the i @-@ th subject to the j @-@ th category . 
 First calculate <unk> , the proportion of all assignments which were to the j @-@ th category : 
 ( 2 ) 
 <formula> 
 Now calculate <formula> , the extent to which raters agree for the i @-@ th subject ( i.e. , compute how many <unk> pairs are in agreement , relative to the number of all possible <unk> pairs ) : 
 ( 3 ) 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Now compute <formula> , the mean of the <formula> ' s , and <formula> which go into the formula for <formula> : 
 ( 4 ) 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 ( 5 ) 
 <formula> 
 = = Worked example = = 
 In the following example , fourteen raters ( <formula> ) assign ten " subjects " ( <formula> ) to a total of five categories ( <formula> ) . The categories are presented in the columns , while the subjects are presented in the rows . Each cell lists the number of raters who assigned the indicated ( row ) subject to the indicated ( column ) category . 
 = = = Data = = = 
 See table to the right . 
 <formula> 
 = 10 , <formula> = 
 14 , <formula> 
 = 5 
 Sum of all cells = 
 140 
 Sum of <formula> = 3 @.@ 780 
 = = = Calculations = = = 
 The value <formula> is the proportion of all assignments ( <formula> , here <formula> ) that were made to the <formula> th category . For example , taking the first column , 
 <formula> 
 And taking the second row , 
 <formula> 
 In order to calculate <formula> , we need to know the sum of <formula> , 
 <formula> 
 Over the whole sheet , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Landis and Koch ( 1977 ) gave the following table for interpreting <formula> values . [ 5 ] This table is however by no means universally accepted . They supplied no evidence to support it , basing it instead on personal opinion . It has been noted that these guidelines may be more harmful than helpful , [ 6 ] as the number of categories and subjects will affect the magnitude of the value . The kappa will be higher when there are fewer categories . [ 7 ] 
 = Oslac of York = 
 Oslac ( fl . 966 – 975 ) is regarded as the first ealdorman ( or earl ) of York and its dependent territories . These included but may not have been limited to the southern half of Northumbria . His background is obscure because of poor source documentation . The latter has facilitated disagreement amongst historians regarding his family and ethnicity . 
 It is believed that he took over the position of ealdorman of York in 966 , holding the position until his downfall in 975 . He may have been the first ealdorman of southern — as opposed to a united — Northumbria , though an alternative tradition puts the division of Northumbria into two <unk> after his death . Little is known of his career as ealdorman , except for a legend that he escorted the Scottish king Kenneth II to the English royal court , and that he was expelled from England in 975 . His life is unattested after this . He had one known son , but it is not clear if that son ever succeeded him . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Oslac 's origins are unclear and no specific relationship with any previous known figure can be established from available sources . Oslac 's name suggests to some historians that he was a Norseman . Susan Whitelock points out that the name Oslac is often an anglicisation of the Old Scandinavian name <unk> , while the writers of the Biographical Dictionary of Dark Age Britain entry on Oslac comment that the name suggests an origin in the Danelaw , a suggestion supported by the fact that Thored , Oslac 's son , held lands in Cambridgeshire . 
 On the other hand Oslac is also a genuine English name , and the common Os element Oslac 's name shared with the name of Osulf of Bamburgh , previous ealdorman of York , points to a connection with the Bamburgh family of the English far north . 
 = = Accession = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recorded for the year 966 that Thored , son of Gunnar , raided Westmorland and that Oslac " took the <unk> " . Some historians take this to mean that Oslac became the " senior ealdorman of all Northumbria , including the territory of the high @-@ reeves of Bamburgh . " 
 Records exist of Oslac witnessing charters as early as 963 ; this may mean he was ealdorman by 963 , and would imply the death or deposition of his predecessor Osulf . Some of these charters are problematic as source documents , having been recorded only in later <unk> ; there is thus a possibility of interference in their transmission . Moreover , a charter dated 966 of a grant by dux Thored is witnessed by Oslac minister ( i.e. " thegn " ) , suggesting that Oslac had not acceded to the <unk> of York before 966 . 
 = = Division of Northumbria = = 
 De primo Saxonum <unk> , an 11th- or 12th @-@ century compilation from earlier sources , claims that after the death of Osulf Northumbria was divided into two parts : Eadulf Evil @-@ child receiving the lands between the Firth of Forth and the River Tees and Oslac receiving the lands between the Humber Estuary and the Tees . 
 According to John of Wallingford , King Edgar made this division during a council at York , in order to prevent the whole area becoming the inheritance of one man . The Historia Regum claims that such a division took place not in Oslac 's time but Osulf 's , and that the division line was the River Tyne rather than Tees ; historian Dorothy Whitelock considered this to be apocryphal . 
 = = Career = = 
 Oslac frequently attested charters of King Edgar the Peaceable , indicating that Oslac enjoyed some position of trust at court . 
 De primo Saxonum <unk> claims that Oslac , along with Eadulf of Bamburgh and Ælfsige Bishop of Chester @-@ le @-@ Street , escorted the Scottish king Kenneth II to the Wessex @-@ based Edgar : 
 The two earls [ Oslac and Eadwulf ] along with Ælfsige , who was bishop of St Cuthbert [ 968 — 90 ] , conducted <unk> to king Edgar . And when he had done homage to him , king Edgar gave him Lothian ; and with great honour sent him back to his own . 
 This must have occurred — if it happened at all — between 968 and 975 , i.e. between Ælfsige becoming bishop and Edgar dying . Richard Fletcher dated it to 973 . 
 The historian Geoffrey Barrow believed this to mark the beginning of Scottish control over all the lands between the River Tweed and Firth of Forth ( defining " Lothian " in this manner ) , though another historian , Alex Woolf , has suggested that the part about Lothian may have been fabricated later to give credence to the claim that the Scottish kings owed homage for lands in Lothian . 
 = = Downfall and legacy = = 
 In 975 , not long after the death of King Edgar , Oslac was banished from England . No reason is given by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle 's report of his expulsion . Version C of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle describes the events thus : 
 The valiant Oslac was driven from the country , over the tossing waves , the gannet 's bath , the tumult of the waters , the homeland of the whale ; a grey @-@ haired man , wise and skilled in speech , he was bereft of his lands 
 The historian Richard Fletcher guesses that Oslac 's downfall may have been the result of opposing the succession of Edward the Martyr . 
 Oslac is said by the Historia Eliensis to have had a son named Thorth , that is , Thored . His successor was indeed a man named Thored , but it is not clear whether this was Thored Oslac 's son or Thored son of Gunner ; historians tend to favour the idea that Thored the successor was son of Gunner . 
 The Gesta <unk> tells us that his great @-@ great granddaughter , <unk> ( Edith ) , was Hereward 's mother . 
 = Chibi @-@ Robo ! = 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! ( <unk> ！ , lit . " Mini @-@ Robo ! " ) , fully titled Chibi @-@ Robo ! Plug Into Adventure ! , is a platform @-@ adventure video game for the Nintendo GameCube developed by Skip Ltd. and published by Nintendo . The game was first released in Japan in 2005 , and then released in North America and Europe the following year . Originally conceived as a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game , it was put on developmental hold until Nintendo producer Shigeru Miyamoto gained interest in the title and overhauled its production . 
 The player takes on the role of the eponymous character , Chibi @-@ Robo , a 10 @-@ centimeter @-@ tall robot owned by the Sanderson family . Gameplay revolves around navigating a household and collecting " Happy Points " . These points are accumulated by completing various tasks from housework to helping solve the dilemmas of the Sanderson family and the numerous living toys that inhabit their household . Every action by the game 's battery @-@ powered protagonist consumes energy , requiring the player to recharge using the home 's electrical outlets . 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! was generally well received by critics , with praise directed towards the premise , charming storyline , and sound design . However , some gameplay mechanics and the quality of the graphics drew some criticism . Sales of Chibi @-@ Robo ! were modest , but it did spawn several sequels . For the Nintendo DS , Chibi @-@ Robo ! : Park Patrol was released in 2007 and Okaeri ! Chibi @-@ Robo ! Happy Richie <unk> ! was released in 2009 , the latter being a Japan @-@ exclusive . For the Nintendo 3DS , Chibi @-@ Robo ! Photo Finder was released in Japan in 2013 and in North America in 2014 , and Chibi @-@ Robo ! Zip Lash was released in 2015 . The original Chibi @-@ Robo ! also saw a Japanese re @-@ release in 2009 for the Wii as part of the New Play Control ! series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of Chibi @-@ Robo ! takes place in a 1960s @-@ style American home and revolves around a tiny , highly advanced robot of the same name . He is given as a birthday gift to a socially withdrawn eight @-@ year @-@ old named Jenny Sanderson by her father . This is much to the dismay of Jenny 's mother , a homemaker who is constantly stressed over how much money her husband spends on toys despite his unemployment . Chibi @-@ Robo is packaged with a small " Chibi @-@ House " and an assistant named Telly Vision , who speaks on Chibi @-@ Robo 's behalf . Each of the one million Chibi @-@ Robos in the world is supposed to collect " Happy Points " by doing good deeds for their owners , and must occasionally charge their batteries at electrical outlets . During the night or when humans are not around in the Sandersons ' house , several toys come to life . This cast includes the superhero action figure Drake <unk> , a group of egg @-@ shaped army men called the Free Rangers , a wooden pirate named <unk> , and others . Chibi @-@ Robo eventually finds a large robot in the basement called Giga @-@ Robo , who was once a companion of the Sandersons ' , but had to be deactivated due to its high electricity consumption . Chibi @-@ Robo attempts to bring Giga @-@ Robo back to life by fully charging its massive battery and makes it a goal to find Giga @-@ Robo 's missing leg . At this time , Chibi @-@ Robo is attacked by spider @-@ like robots called Spydorz . 
 When Mr. Sanderson purchases yet another toy , his wife locks herself in her room and tells him that she wants a divorce , prompting the rest of the family to do the housework . Meanwhile , Chibi @-@ Robo finds a strange pattern in the backyard and uses his radar to contact an alien species . Once the aliens land and greet him , Chibi @-@ Robo uses a time machine made by the visitors to go into the past to find a code to a safe in the master bedroom containing Giga Robo 's leg . He returns to the present to open the safe , but several larger Spydorz are also released from it and capture the Sandersons . It is revealed that Mr. Sanderson originally created the Spydorz to be friends with the Chibi @-@ Robos , but his toy company reprogrammed them to be hostile , causing Mr. Sanderson to quit his job . Mr. Sanderson upgrades Chibi @-@ Robo 's blaster weapon , allowing the small robot to defeat the Queen <unk> , recover Giga @-@ Robo 's missing leg , and rescue the Sandersons . Chibi @-@ Robo reactivates Giga @-@ Robo , and the aliens meet them in the backyard . The aliens explain that the toys are able to walk and talk due to a request from Giga @-@ Robo to the aliens to give them life , and to give all Giga @-@ Robos infinite battery power to prevent their energy consumption . The aliens could not do the latter at the time , and returned to their own planet to obtain the item necessary to grant Giga @-@ Robo 's wish . They then give Giga @-@ Robo this ability , who shares it with Chibi @-@ Robo and the rest of the robots in the world as well , eliminating the energy problem . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! is a platform @-@ adventure game that puts the player in direct control of a tiny , battery @-@ powered robot that does housework for humans . The objective of the game is to become the top @-@ ranked " Super Chibi @-@ Robo " in the world by accumulating Happy Points , a collectible that is gained by doing good deeds for the family and for various toys within the Sandersons ' home . In order to do this , the player must control the 10 centimeter @-@ tall protagonist and explore the Sandersons ' humble , human @-@ scaled home . During exploration , Chibi @-@ Robo can find a wide variety of things to collect , including " Moolah " , the currency of Chibi @-@ Robo ! . An important task of Chibi @-@ Robo 's in gaining Happy Points is to clean up messes around the house , such as disposing of trash or scrubbing dirty footprints . The player can also interact with and help with the personal problems of the Sandersons and the toys . This ranges from solving a plot @-@ driving crisis or completing a <unk> of simply locating a lost object as a favor . With Chibi @-@ Robo 's assistant Telly Vision as his speaker , the player is often prompted to give either a positive or negative response to each question or request . The player loses battery power with every step and action . If his battery is not charged before it empties , Chibi @-@ Robo will collapse and re @-@ emerge in the Chibi @-@ House , having lost half of his Moolah . Throughout the house are electrical outlets , which the player can plug into to recharge his battery or save his progress . The player 's exploration is limited by a timer representing a full day or full night . Once the timer expires , Chibi @-@ Robo automatically returns to the Chibi @-@ House . 
 At the start of both day and night , the player always begins in the Chibi @-@ House . Within it , the player can charge Chibi @-@ Robo 's battery and save at the electrical outlet . The player can also connect to the Citrusoft " Chibi @-@ PC " to purchase a variety of items and power @-@ ups with Moolah , as well as use scrap metal to build " <unk> " , robotic helpers that ease the navigation of the Sandersons ' home . The gear available from Citrusoft includes the " Chibi @-@ Copter " , used to reach far @-@ off points or to fly down from a high place safely ; the " Chibi @-@ Blaster " , used to eliminate obstacles and fend off the hostile Spydorz ; and the " Chibi @-@ Radar " , used to detect hidden objects . There are several other items of the Sandersons ' that Chibi @-@ Robo can find and use . These include the toothbrush , used to clean up stains ; the coffee mug , used for protection ; the spoon , used to dig holes ; and the <unk> , used to hold fluids and squirt them . Chibi @-@ Robo can also gain special costumes throughout the game , each of which has its own unique function . For instance , if the player poses for Mr. Sanderson while wearing The Drake <unk> costume , he will give Chibi @-@ Robo Happy Points . As more Happy Points are acquired , the player 's rank increases among all the Chibi @-@ Robos in the world . At certain ranks , Citrusoft will send the player bonus batteries , allowing Chibi @-@ Robo to roam longer without having to recharge . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! was developed by skip Ltd . , the creators of the Japan @-@ exclusive <unk> for the Nintendo GameCube . Chibi @-@ Robo ! was first announced in early 2003 with publishing rights held by Bandai . Its original projected release date was June 2003 in Japan and spring 2004 in North America . Unlike the released version of Chibi @-@ Robo ! , the beta version entailed the player training Chibi @-@ Robo to defend the home of his inventor from a pair of burglars . The gameplay was different as well ; instead of a platform @-@ adventure game , it played like a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure title , where the player was not in direct control of Chibi @-@ Robo , but was rather conveying commands to him clicking a cursor around the area . The protagonist was also to learn and develop depending on the choices the player made for him . However , this incarnation of Chibi @-@ Robo ! was ultimately put on " indefinite hold " and disappeared from the media . Shigeru Miyamoto was eventually introduced to the game by fellow Nintendo producer Kensuke Tanabe . Miyamoto took a personal interest in the character of Chibi @-@ Robo and signed on as the game 's senior producer . The development of Chibi @-@ Robo ! was revamped with Nintendo acting as its new publisher . Chibi @-@ Robo ! was in development for four years from start to finish . 
 Director Kenichi Nishi has previous development credits such as Chrono Trigger , Moon : Remix RPG Adventure and Incredible Crisis . Nishi 's approach to game design , even with Chibi @-@ Robo ! , was to always take a standard , orthodox method and " crash it , twist it , or create a totally different direction " . The reason Nishi chose to make the majority of the cast toys is because humans are " too big to interact with [ Chibi @-@ Robo ] and create all the drama " and that it added a sense of fantasy to the experience . The family dog Tao had appeared in Nishi 's previous games : Moon : Remix RPG Adventure and <unk> : Lack of Love . The director based the dog on his own pet because he felt that the " black @-@ and @-@ white color is very simple and universal " . Despite the game 's overall happy attitude , the game designers put some emphasis on serious topics such as divorce , loneliness , pollution , and loss . " If we only concentrate on cheerful fun , we 'll lose depth , " Nishi explained . " There 's nothing surprising for people if the game looks cheerful and the experience is cheerful . There are no surprises or unexpected things . " Still , rather than use these topics as major themes for the player , Nishi felt it would be more effective to bring them in as " ordinary things to enhance the adventure of daily life " . 
 All the music and sound in Chibi @-@ Robo ! was composed by Hirofumi Taniguchi . He wanted to make unique sound patterns and motifs for each character , and even used human voices to create the system sounds , such as on the menu selections . All of the noises made by Chibi @-@ Robo 's actions were phrased . Taniguchi used both woodwind and electronic instruments for the character 's actions , the former because " Chibi 's actions are not ordinary robotlike actions " and the latter because he did not want to totally eliminate his mechanical characteristics . Different background music is played for the day and night cycles , but they lack melody because Chibi @-@ Robo 's footsteps create a melody at random . The tempo of his footsteps was designed to match the background music ; if he picks up his plug to walk faster , the music speeds up . All of the game 's music was compiled on the Chibi @-@ Robo ! Limited Soundtrack , a CD released alongside an official 142 @-@ page guidebook and published by Shogakukan in Japan in August 2005 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! has enjoyed a mostly favorable critical reception . The GameCube version currently holds an aggregate score of 79 @.@ 33 % based on 43 reviews on GameRankings . Official Nintendo Magazine ranked it the 88th best game available on Nintendo platforms . The staff felt that it was the GameCube 's " last classic . " Critics Greg Mueller of GameSpot , Mathew Kumar of Eurogamer , Bryn Williams of GameSpy , Shane Satterfield of G4 , and Matt Casamassina of IGN all applauded the game 's charming setting , compelling storyline , and complex characters . Casamassina found that the fashion in which the main plot and objectives are sewn together is part of the reason the game is enjoyable . Mueller , Kumar , and Satterfield noted endearing , charismatic qualities among the various toy characters . Kumar heeded Chibi @-@ Robo ! as " honestly one of the most touching games I 've played in ages " in which the player often becomes engrossed in " events that pan out like miniature plays , with love triangles ( nay , love <unk> ) between toys , and some scenes with a real pathos behind them " . Considering the joyous atmosphere of Chibi @-@ Robo ! , Satterfield was pleasantly surprised at its inclusion of controversial topics like divorce and its possible distortion of a target audience . This attribute was criticized by <unk> <unk> , a columnist for USA Today , who thought that the interpersonal issues negate the game 's overall charm and render it inappropriate for younger children . Writers for Computer Games Magazine praised Chibi @-@ Robo by interpreting deep , symbolic meaning in its more subtle aspects . The publication found the game to use " overarching narrative arcs " and " stock melodramatic devices " among the Sandersons ' dysfunctional interactions , " emotional crisis points , downtime , and rhythms and cycles of action " between its day and night events , and " evocative music " as a way for characters to communicate their feelings . 
 Opinions on the gameplay of Chibi @-@ Robo ! have been mixed . Among the more positive reactions , Casamassina assessed the cleaning mechanics as " very fun and very rewarding " , while Kumar compared the game to the Story of Seasons series due to both entities convert seemingly boring tasks into something fun . James Mielke of 1UP.com similarly enjoyed the " near @-@ constant sense of discovery " and the tiny details included by Skip with earning Happy Points and Moolah . Casamassina , Mielke , and Williamson were satisfied that they had to frequently recharge Chibi @-@ Robo , but Mueller was dismayed to have to stop one 's current task in order to find an outlet . The GameSpot contributor was also aggravated with the mere five @-@ minute intervals for the day and night cycles , which he considered a major interruption of the game 's pacing . Contrarily , Kumar felt the pacing was appropriate and Williamson viewed the feature as a " flexible difficulty level setting " . Satterfield proclaimed that although the gameplay is somewhat varied , most of it is constituted by the tedious location and collection of objects for the non @-@ player characters . Jeremy Zoss of Game Informer was displeased with the game as whole and wrote that it was " not a platformer , but more of a 3D adventure game composed entirely of fetch @-@ quests and repetitive menial labor " . 
 The audio design of Chibi @-@ Robo ! , particularly its integration of different instrumental tones for the hero 's various actions , was lauded by the press . Kumar felt that its utilization of sound could be " the seed of a new way of using music in games " . Casamassina commented , " Few developers would be brave enough to create a title whose main character generates varying musical notes whenever he takes a step , but this is exactly what Chibi does - and it 's actually very whimsical and cute . " Although many critics appreciated the bright and colorful features of the accompanying aesthetics , they also judged the graphical presentation as dated . Casamassina encountered low @-@ polygon 3D models and a below @-@ average frame rate ; Satterfield stated the game operated at " Dreamcast level " . Other portions of Chibi @-@ Robo ! were assessed as unpolished as well . Several sources noted the game 's default camera system to be unwieldy , <unk> , or frustrating at times . However , Mueller noted that switching to the top @-@ down or first @-@ person viewpoints and the ability to center the camera behind Chibi @-@ Robo alleviates most of its problems . Satterfield and Casamassina regarded the cutscenes as awkward and repetitive ; the former of the two claimed that they " amount to ugly characters recycling the same animation routine over and over while gibberish comes from their gaping maws " . Kumar perceived the game 's combat to be " messy " , " uninteresting " , and " entirely unnecessary " . 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! was not a significant commercial success . According to Media Create , the GameCube version was the fourth best @-@ selling game in Japan for its week ending June 26 , 2005 with nearly 29 @,@ 000 copies sold . The game managed to sell 97 @,@ 879 units in Japan alone by the end of 2005 . The Wii port of the game did not fare as well ; it only sold 11 @,@ 000 copies in Japan for the week ending June 14 , 2009 and a total of 38 @,@ 573 copies throughout the remainder of that year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Chibi @-@ Robo ! received a sequel in 2007 for the Nintendo DS called Chibi @-@ Robo ! : Park Patrol , which follows a different Chibi @-@ Robo as it attempts to revitalize a park . Nintendo established a deal with Wal @-@ Mart for the exclusive rights to sell it in the United States . A second sequel for the DS , titled Okaeri ! Chibi @-@ Robo ! Happy Richie <unk> ! , saw a Japanese release in 2009 . It involves yet another Chibi @-@ Robo vacuuming dirt for money within the home of an adult Jenny . The original Chibi @-@ Robo ! was re @-@ released as part of New Play Control ! , a selection of Wii remakes of GameCube games . The remake features special Wii Remote controls for the game 's tools . Aiming the remote allows the player to change perspective , while pointing it at interactive objects with will be identified with a sound . The remake was released in Japan on June 11 , 2009 , but Nintendo of America did not permit an English release . A fourth game in the series , Chibi @-@ Robo ! Photo Finder , was released in 2013 for the Nintendo 3DS . The fifth game in the series , titled Chibi @-@ Robo ! Zip Lash was announced on May 31 , 2015 and released in October 2015 for the Nintendo 3DS . 
 = Igman Olympic Jumps = 
 Igman Olympic Jumps , also known as Malo Polje , is a ski jumping hill on the mountain of Igman in Ilidža , Sarajevo , Bosnia and Herzegovina . It consists of a large hill with a construction point ( K @-@ point ) of 112 meters ( 367 ft ) and a normal hill with a K @-@ point of 90 meters ( 295 ft ) . Construction started in 1980 and the venue opened in 1982 to host ski jumping and Nordic combined at the 1984 Winter Olympics . The large hill event saw Finland 's Matti Nykänen set the hill record of 116 @.@ 0 meters ( 381 ft ) in front of 90 @,@ 000 spectators . No other International Ski Federation ( FIS ) sanctioned competitions have taken place at the hills . During the Siege of Sarajevo , the hills became a battleground and have since not been used . However , there are plans to rebuild the in @-@ run , expand the large hill and build new spectator stands and visitor facilities . 
 = = History = = 
 The Malo Polje area of Igman has traditionally been used for recreational cross @-@ country skiing . During Sarajevo 's Olympic bid , the two ski jumps were proposed as separate venues . However , after the games were awarded , the plans changed in favor of a single venue , which would allow better post @-@ Olympic use . The area plan for the jumps were presented by the Organizing Committee 's executive board on 30 April 1979 and was passed by Sarajevo City Council in September 1979 . The design of the ski jump was approved by FIS on 18 October 1979 . Work on auxiliary infrastructure started in mid @-@ 1979 , including a new road from the city to Igman . 
 Construction of the hill and judge 's tower started on 1 July 1980 and was completed on 1 December 1982 . Construction of the ski lift started on 1 October 1982 and was completed on 30 October 1983 . The jumps were inaugurated in 1983 . After the Olympics , Sarajevo experienced a boom in recreational skiing among locals , including ski jumping . 
 During the Siege of Sarajevo , Igman became part of the buffer zone between the belligerents of the Bosnian government and the Army of Republika Srpska . The area around the ski jumping hill saw heavy fighting during the civil war and was also used for executions by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) . Since , the structures have been littered with bullet holes . With the war , the hills were no longer able to be used . 
 In 2010 , the Olympic legacy company <unk> ' 84 , which owns the hills , launched plans to renovate the venue . Estimated to cost between € 7 million and € 10 million , the in @-@ runs would have been completely rebuilt , as they are in too poor condition to be renovated . The large hill would be expanded to give a K @-@ point of 120 meters ( 390 ft ) . Designs have been made by Austrian architect firm <unk> @-@ Ritter and financing is planned through European Union or Austrian grants . The project includes natural stands on the sides of the landing slope and a combination of permanent and temporary stands around the out @-@ run . At a later date , part of stands could be covered with a roof . A panorama restaurant has been proposed for the top of the in @-@ runs . The new venue was scheduled to open in 2013 ; however , no work was done and the site is mostly derelict . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The large hill has a construction point ( K @-@ point ) of 112 meters ( 367 ft ) and the normal hill of 90 meters ( 295 ft ) . During the Olympics , 45 @,@ 000 people attended the normal hill event while 90 @,@ 000 spectated the large hill event . The large hill record jump of 116 @.@ 0 meters ( 381 ft ) was set by Matti Nykänen during the Olympics . The normal hill record of 95 @.@ 0 meters ( 312 ft ) was set by Yugoslavia 's <unk> Ulaga in 1983 . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Men = = = 
 The only FIS @-@ sanctioned event to take place at Igman was ski jumping and Nordic combined at the 1984 Winter Olympics . The ski jumping competitions doubled as a part of the FIS Ski Jumping World Cup . The normal hill event was won by East Germany 's Jens Weißflog ahead of Nykänen . The two reversed top places in the large hill event . The Nordic combined event was won by Norway 's Tom Sandberg ahead of Finland 's <unk> <unk> and Jukka <unk> . 
 Igman was included in the Sarajevo bid for the 2010 Winter Olympics . Despite Sarajevo being the only previous host city to bid , it was largely regarded as the weakest bid , primarily due to its lack of infrastructure after the war . 
 = Washington Park ( Chicago park ) = 
 Washington Park ( formerly Western Division of South Park , also Park No. 21 ) is a 372 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 5 km2 ) park between Cottage Grove Avenue and Martin Luther King Drive , ( originally known as " Grand Boulevard " ) located at <unk> S. Martin Luther King Dr. in the Washington Park community area on the South Side of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois . It was named for President George Washington in 1880 . Washington Park is the largest of four Chicago Park District parks named after persons surnamed Washington ( the others are Dinah Washington Park , Harold Washington Park and Washington Square Park , Chicago ) . This park was the proposed site of the Olympic Stadium and the Olympic swimming venue for Chicago 's bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics . Washington Park was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 20 , 2004 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Washington Park was conceived by Paul Cornell , a Chicago real estate magnate who had founded the adjoining town of Hyde Park . Cornell had lobbied the Illinois General Assembly to establish the South Park Commission . After his efforts succeeded in 1869 , the South Park Board of Commissioners identified more than 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) south of Chicago for a large park and boulevards that would connect it with downtown and the extant West Park System . Originally called South Park , the property was composed of eastern and western divisions , now bearing the names Jackson and Washington Parks and the Midway Plaisance . Cornell hired Frederick Law Olmsted and his partner , Calvert Vaux , to lay out the park in the 1870s . Their blueprints were destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 . 
 When Olmsted first examined the property , he saw a field filled with bare trees and decided to maintain its character by creating a meadow surrounded by trees . His plan for the park called for sheep to graze as a means of keeping the grass short . Cornell convinced Olmsted to include sporting areas , although Olmsted wanted a more natural feel to the park , which included a 13 @-@ acre ( 53 @,@ 000 m2 ) lake . The Western division was renamed Washington Park in 1881 . 
 Olmsted designed the park to have two broad boulevards cutting through it , making it part of Chicago 's boulevard system . From Washington Park , one can take the Midway east to Jackson Park , Garfield Boulevard west to Chicago Midway International Airport , or Drexel Boulevard north to the central city . 
 Horace William Shaler Cleveland executed the plans within the limitations of the financial setbacks from the fire ( including the loss of tax rolls ) and the 1873 depression . Olmsted 's vision for Washington Park was generally realized . However , since spending for the park was diverted after the Great Chicago Fire in 1871 . The loss of financial backing and difficulty in levying taxes after the fire meant that a water park could not be built on the property . From 1897 until the 1930s the park housed an impressive conservatory and ornate sunken garden designed by D. H. Burnham & Co. at 56th Street and Cottage Grove . The Washington Park Conservatory , like those of other city parks such as Humboldt and Douglas Parks , was torn down in the 1930s due to limited resources as a result of the Great Depression . This left Lincoln Park and Garfield Park as Chicago 's main Conservatories . One of the earliest improvements was the " South Open Green , " a pastoral meadow with grazing sheep , also used as a ball field . Architect Daniel H. Burnham 's firm designed the 1880 limestone round stables , the 1881 refectory , and the 1910 administrative headquarters for the South Park Commission . Other early attractions to the park included riding stables , cricket grounds , baseball fields , a toboggan slide , archery ranges , a golf course , bicycle paths , row boats , horseshoe pits , greenhouses , a rose garden , a bandstand , a small zoo featuring six alligators , and a lily pond . The lily pond ( pictured left ) was a particularly enticing attraction because few had seen such a site . Today , the administrative building houses DuSable Museum of African American History . The park has retained its environmental appeal with continuing visionary support of the Burnham Plan which supported the maintenance of a park system . 
 = = History = = 
 On December 6 , 1879 , former U.S. President Ulysses Grant took part in a tree planting ceremony in the park . A memorial boulder with a plaque ( both of which have been removed from the park , along with the tree ) commemorated the event . In the 1920s black semiprofessional baseball teams played at Washington Park . George Lott began playing tennis at the park . 
 Washington Park was a site of tension and conflict arising from the demographic changes resulting from the African American expansion into the neighborhood in the period following the First World War . The park has since 1961 hosted the DuSable Museum of African American History , a leader in the promotion of the history , art and culture of African American heritage . 
 = = Today = = 
 Washington Park is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as a United States Registered Historic District . Its National Register of Historic Places Multiple Property Submission consisted of 3 @,@ 670 acres ( 14 @.@ 9 km2 ) containing 15 contributing buildings , 28 contributing structures , and 8 contributing objects . Interesting sights in the Park include the DuSable Museum of African American History and its sculpture garden , the Lorado Taft sculpture Fountain of Time , and an architecturally distinctive National Guard armory . Washington Park is a social center of the South Side and hosts many festivals in the summer , including Chicago 's best organized cricket league and the terminus of the Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic . The largest 16 " softball league in Chicago is played there on Sundays ( called " Sunday 's Best Softball League " ) . There are 34 teams who play on 13 diamonds . There is also a weekday evening league . 
 = = 2016 Olympic bid = = 
 On September 21 , 2006 , Mayor Richard M. Daley announced that an Olympic Stadium was being proposed for Washington Park as part of Chicago 's bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics ( The International Olympic Committee requires cities have a dome with a seating capacity of at least 80 @,@ 000 in order to be considered as summer Olympics hosts ) . The stadium would have seated 95 @,@ 000 initially for the games , and would have been converted to a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ seat below @-@ ground arena for track @-@ and @-@ field and cultural events after the Olympics . The cost was estimated to be at least $ 300 – 400 million ( USD ) . The plan replaced the initial dual stadium opening ceremony facility . 
 Additional details about the plan included new permanent hockey fields , use of Jones Armory , and new pedestrian juncture between the two halves of the park by tunneling part of Morgan Drive ( 55th ) . A later December 2008 plan added the olympic swimming venue to the park . The plan faced opposition from those holding the view that Washington Park 's listing on the National Register of Historic Places could not have survived the execution of this Olympic plan . In addition to the opposition , the plan faced constraints because of the park 's landmark status , which precluded federal money from being used to build a temporary stadium in the park . The decision , in October 2009 , to award the 2016 Summer Games to Rio de Janeiro halted these plans . 
 = Tenjho Tenge = 
 Tenjho Tenge ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Tenjō Tenge , lit . " Heaven and Earth " ) , also written as Tenjo Tenge , is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Oh ! great . The story primarily focuses on the members of the Juken Club and their opposition , the Executive Council , which is the ruling student body of a high school that educates its students in the art of combat . As the story unfolds , both groups become increasingly involved with an ongoing battle that has been left unresolved for four hundred years . 
 Tenjho Tenge was serialized in the magazine Ultra Jump from 1998 to 2010 , and collected into 22 volumes by Shūeisha . It was adapted into a twenty @-@ four episode anime series and aired on TV Asahi between April 1 , 2004 to September 16 , 2004 . A two @-@ episode original video animation was also made and aired on March 16 , 2005 . Both versions of the series have been licensed for release in the English language by two different companies . The manga was licensed and released by CMX beginning in 2005 , which came under criticism by fans for editing its sexual content . When CMX closed down in 2010 , after releasing 18 volumes , Viz Media picked up the rights and completed their own uncut release of the series in 2013 . The anime was licensed and released by Geneon Entertainment , also beginning in 2005 , however , it is now licensed by Discotek Media . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Japanese phrase Tenjho Tenge ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Tenjō Tenge , lit . " Heaven and Earth " ) also is part of the full phrase Tenjō Tenge Yui Ga Doku Son ( Japanese : <unk> ) which can be translated literally as " There is no equal to me in this entire world ( i.e. below the heaven and on this earth ) " , and in daily parlance now , the shortened form ( <unk> ga <unk> ) coming to mean a heavy @-@ handed egotism . Traditionally the phrase is attributed to the Buddha Sakyamuni , purported to have said this whilst taking seven steps immediately after being born , supposed to assert his unparalleled status . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot begins with Souichiro Nagi and his friend Bob Makihara going to their first day of high school at <unk> Academy . They had intended to rule the school by beating up anybody that got in their way , as they had done at their previous schools . They soon learn that <unk> is no ordinary high school , but rather a school that was founded to teach and integrate different fighting styles . Its students are skilled in the various arts of combat with some students possessing supernatural abilities , such as pyrokinesis , precognition , and superhuman strength based on the abilities to use their " spirit " or " ki " in Japanese . After an altercation with the Executive Council , Souichiro and Bob join the only surviving club that opposes them , the Juken club . As the storyline develops , both groups find they are becoming increasingly involved in a long enduring conflict that was left unresolved from the Japanese Feudal era by some of the characters ' ancestors . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Maya Natsume ( <unk> <unk> , Natsume Maya ) 
 A third year student and the current leader of the Juken Club . She is very skilled in various martial arts , but does not possess the Dragon 's Eye like her siblings . For this reason her father entrusted her with the cursed sword <unk> . Early in the series , she would use a body manipulation technique to revert herself into her childhood form to conserve her ki . She also has an argument to settle with Mitsuomi Takayanagi . 
 Masataka Takayanagi ( <unk> <unk> , Takayanagi Masataka ) 
 A second year student and Mitsuomi 's younger brother . Most of the time he has an easy going personality and is somewhat shy , but his demeanor changes when he becomes angered or serious . When this happens , he becomes a very formidable combatant . 
 Aya Natsume ( <unk> <unk> , Natsume Aya ) 
 A first year student and the youngest of the Natsume family . In the manga she has brown ankle @-@ length hair , although her hair is ginger for the anime . Like her brother Shin , she has the power of the Dragon 's Eye . Although she has problems consciously activating it , she seems to have better control of the power than her brother . She also is in love with Souichiro , she constantly tries to win his heart . She is mostly seen fighting with swords whenever possible . 
 Souichiro Nagi ( 凪 <unk> , Nagi <unk> ) 
 A first year student and self proclaimed hoodlum . He always wear a black long coat . He is very resilient and manages to surprise watchers by battling against the odds . He is the heir of the Demon Exorcist family . His family 's supernatural power is called the Dragon 's Fist , which gives them the ability to take supernatural powers from others and use it as their own . This power is often feared and misunderstood by others which caused Souichiro to be socially rejected . He is actually stronger than Bob . 
 Bob Makihara ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> Makihara ) 
 A first year student of African descent . He has been friends with Souichiro since elementary school . He is athletic and practices the Afro @-@ Brazilian martial art of Capoeira . He often has a cool head and always looks after his girlfriend Chiaki . Chiaki is the most important person for him . 
 Mitsuomi Takayanagi ( <unk> <unk> , Takayanagi Mitsuomi ) 
 The current president of the Executive Council and of the head of the Takayanagi family . He is a third year student and the top ranked fighter of the whole school . He is a highly skilled and dedicated martial artist . Because of an incident with Shin and the Dragon 's Eye , he is only able to use his formidable abilities for about three minutes at a time . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Tenjho Tenge was serialized in the Japanese monthly manga magazine Ultra Jump from 1997 to 2010 . It was author and illustrator Oh ! great 's first crossover mainstream manga from writing and illustrating pornographic series . About twice a year , its publisher Shueisha compiled five of the chapters into tankōbon volumes , with the first released on May 19 , 1998 and the twenty @-@ second and final volume on November 19 , 2010 . 
 Tenjho Tenge was licensed for an English language publication by CMX , an imprint of DC Comics , as one of their launch titles in 2004 . Their version of the manga is heavily edited / censored in order for them to give it a Teen " rating " " ... to give it the widest possible distribution in the United States " . According to CMX , these changes were made in conjunction with Shueisha and Tenjho Tenge creator Oh ! great , who examines each of their changes . This censorship however garnered quite a bit of controversy , see Controversy section for more info . CMX released eighteen volumes in North America before the company was shut down in July 2010 . 
 In November 2010 , Viz Media acquired the rights to the Tenjho Tenge manga , stating that their version would be 100 % uncut and faithful to the original Japanese . From June 21 , 2011 to February 5 , 2013 , they released the series bi @-@ monthly in eleven 2 @-@ in @-@ 1 volumes , which collects two individual volumes into a single large one . Viz 's releases also includes omake , color pages from the series ' original run in Ultra Jump , and since each release will cover two volumes , the second cover will be printed in as a color page . The manga is also published in many other countries , such as in Taiwan by Sharp Point Press , in France and Germany by Panini Comics , in Mexico by Grupo Editorial Vid , in Brazil by Editora JBC , and in Spain by Norma Editorial . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The Tenjho Tenge anime was directed by <unk> Kawase , animated by Madhouse , and produced by TV Asahi and Avex Mode , the animation division of the Avex group of companies . The twenty @-@ four episodes were originally aired weekly on TV Asahi in Japan on Thursdays from April 1 , 2004 to September 16 , 2004 . These episodes were made into eight @-@ volume DVD box sets . Two additional episodes were broadcast by TV Asahi in Japan on March 16 , 2005 and released in the form of an original video animation named Tenjho Tenge : Ultimate Fight . The anime follows closely to its source material up to the manga 's eighth volume with the exception of the sexual content which was toned down . The anime has been dubbed into English , French , German and the Tagalog language . The anime series has been licensed for the English language by Geneon Entertainment , and has released all episodes except the DVD special named Tenjho Tenge : The Past Chapter , which is the back @-@ story told through flashbacks in the second half of the anime TV series condensed into the size of four episodes . The series was broadcast in North America by the cable channel Fuse TV . 
 Although not mentioned on the Geneon Entertainment 's website , or the Tenjho Tenge mini @-@ site , the OVA is available on the last volume , sometimes listed as Episodes 25 and 26 . In Australia and the UK , the series was released over seven volumes , and include the OVA on the seventh disc . Almost 5 years after the closure of Geneon USA , Discotek Media re @-@ licensed the series for a DVD release in 2013 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The anime 's music , including the background music and theme songs , were composed and performed by various artists , such as <unk> and Aiko Kayo who provided the opening and closing themes songs of the anime . In 2004 , Avex record label released the Tenjho Tenge soundtrack and a single . In 2005 , Avex released two character collection albums . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The Tenjho Tenge manga is described by Chris Beveridge of <unk> as an " ... engaging mix of action and comedy together while wrapping it all up in a large plot that 's fairly dark and really violent at times " . Its creator , Oh ! great , is known to flavor his works with wanton sex and violence . Oh ! great uses sex as an important aspect of the storyline by using it as a powerful motivator both negatively and positively . He often has his characters contemplate the significance and importance of fighting as well as the meaning of strength . This conscious deliberation of subjective reasoning and objective truth between characters is the most imperative aspect of story and is considered to be rare in manga . Dani Moure of <unk> said readers may find that Oh ! great 's narrative is occasionally hard to follow and at times the plot moves slowly . Oh ! great is known for his characters to have unrealistic body proportions , and Tenjho Tenge is no different . The majority of the female characters have " ... ultra large breasts ... " and the males characters are extraordinarily muscular , but this facilitates the characters personalities to come through in their distinctive features . Overall , the Tenjho Tenge manga is well received having sold over 10 @.@ 7 million copies , and its volumes regularly being in the top twenty best @-@ selling manga for Japanese Tohan charts and North American Diamond Comic Distributors charts . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The Tenjho Tenge anime is described as a significantly toned down version of the Japanese manga , but still retains most of the spirit of its predecessor . Much of the nudity was removed by the animators , but was made up in the way of sexual innuendos , gratuitous cleavage , and panty shots . Since the anime is a close adaptation to the manga , critique of the plot is comparable to the manga 's . Some reviewers felt that the anime was handled in a frantic and ill planned manner that made the conclusion not satisfactory even with the original video animation . The animation done by Madhouse is considered to be well done . They used bright vibrant colors , solid backgrounds and plenty of visible detail with very little pixelation or jagged movement , but at times used repeated character shots and animations . The animation done during the fight scenes is done in real time and is done as close to reality as possible while still bending , and often violating , the laws of physics . The early fight scenes are thought to be the " ... most intense seen in recent anime " by Kevin <unk> of DVD Times . Carlo Santos of Anime News Network affirmed the quality of animation in these scenes does drop somewhat over time , but the action still looks better than the average fighting anime . Both the Japanese and English voice acting are considered to be good , but the English dub at times can be a little uneven . The English dub on occasion has poor dialogue , according to Anime News Network 's Patrick King , which causes it to lose much of the anime 's sincerity . Overall , the anime is considered to be above average , but suffers from a lack of a good ending , mainly because the anime only covered the first arc of the story . 
 The series ' original soundtrack is considered to be average . Most of the music does well with setting the tone within the anime , although some reviewers found it to be somewhat repetitive . Some found the drama tracks to be unsatisfactory , even though they were " well executed " . For many , the highlight of the soundtrack is <unk> 's " Bomb A Head ! " , which was used as the anime 's opening song . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 CMX came under a great deal of criticism for its edits from readers . These edits included the length and breadth of the book , censoring out anything they felt was questionable for a teen audience such as covering up or removing nudity , fanservice , and sexual innuendo as well as a removal of an omake chapter . This was done by a brand whose promotional material asserts that it offers " pure manga — 100 % the way the original Japanese creators want you to see it . " One of grievances made against CMX is that the edits are not only severe , but very noticeable . One review states it is " possibly the most heavily censored title in the history of the North American manga industry . " 
 In response , protesters boycott the edited version and even started up their own website . Immediately following the controversy , Jake Tarbox , group editor of CMX , resigned from the company . " Tarbox was widely blamed by the fan community for the censoring of Tenjho Tenge , although inside sources suggest that Tarbox was not responsible for the decision to censor the manga . " In the face of complaints , CMX had internal discussions about the possibility of publishing an unedited version of Tenjho Tenge , but decided to complete the current version . At the 2007 Anime Expo , CMX announced that they planned to change Tenjho Tenge 's rating to Mature beginning with volume fifteen , but warned that it still would be edited , but more lightly . Jason Thompson declared CMX 's censorship of the series one of " The Greatest Censorship Fails " in manga . 
 = Game 39 = 
 " Game 39 " or the international round was a proposed extra round of matches in the Premier League to be played at neutral venues outside England . The top football league in England , the Premier League is currently played on a double round robin basis , with each team playing the other 19 home and away , giving a total of 38 games . The international round was proposed at a meeting of the 20 Premier League clubs on 7 February 2008 , with a view to being introduced for the 2010 – 11 season , when a new television broadcasting rights contract would be in place . The proposed start date was later put back to 2013 – 14 . The proposal was reportedly endorsed by the chairmen of a number of Premier League clubs . 
 Game 39 resulted in opposition from several club managers . The proposal also met with strong condemnation from supporters ' organisations , who saw it as solely motivated by money to the detriment of fans . Sepp Blatter , president of the sport 's global governing body at that time , expressed a negative opinion of the proposal and stated that it could affect England 's bid to host the 2018 World Cup , and the football authorities in a number of the areas suggested as possible venues for the matches were also opposed . In May 2010 , the Premier League said that it was no longer actively considering game 39 , but in October 2014 it was said to be re @-@ considering the idea . 
 = = Proposal = = 
 The Premier League , the top @-@ level football league in England , contains 20 member clubs , with each playing the others once at home and once away for a total of 38 games per season . The proposal envisaged each team playing one further match , a total of ten extra matches , over one weekend in January . Two matches would be played in each of five cities , one each on Saturday and Sunday . Cities would bid for the right to stage matches , but would not be able to specify which teams would be involved . The matches would be held at staggered start times , with venues in different <unk> , making it possible in theory to watch live television coverage of all ten . There are conflicting reports about whether the draw for the extra fixtures would be seeded or not . 
 The week prior to the international round would be free of matches , to allow for travel and acclimatisation . The week after the international round would see each team face one of the teams which had played at the same foreign venue , to avoid any disadvantage for teams with a longer round @-@ trip . Possible venues suggested for international @-@ round matches were Australia , East Asia , Southeast Asia , the Gulf States , and North America . All are wealthy regions where interest in English football is strong relative to the level of the domestic game . Venues would have warm , predictable weather , unlike England in January . 
 Premier League chief executive Richard Scudamore initially said there would not be more than one international round per season , stating " I stress that on my watch , there will be no 40th game . The value [ of a 39th game ] is in its uniqueness , in that festival weekend , so there 's no point in diluting it " . Subsequently he suggested the initial plan would last six to ten years and might be altered . 
 = = Development = = 
 Foreshadowing the plan were the Premier League Asia Trophy , started in 2003 , and the NFL International Series American football game played at Wembley Stadium in London in 2007 . Rod Eddington pitched the idea of an international round to the Premier League in autumn 2007 . Eddington was chairman of Victorian Major Events Company and a friend of Rupert Murdoch , owner of Sky Sports and other networks with broadcasting rights to the Premier League . He suggested his home city of Melbourne as an inaugural host city . A presentation to the Premier League 's audit @-@ and @-@ remuneration committee was made two weeks before the public announcement . An initial business plan predicted extra earnings from the international round of between £ 40 million and £ 80 million per year . 
 The Premier League put in place a working party to negotiate with the various concerned parties . It initially stated that , to proceed with the plan , it needed the support only of the Football Association ( FA ) and the football governing bodies of the countries of the host cities . It attempted to secure the support of the FA for the proposal by promising to rearrange club fixtures for better convenience to players called up to the England team . Scudamore planned to meet officials from the sport 's global governing body , the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ) , before its executive committee meeting in Zurich on 14 March 2008 . On 27 February , after several weeks of mostly negative reaction , Scudamore agreed with Jérôme Valcke , general secretary of FIFA , that the meeting would be postponed indefinitely . The Premier League presented this as an opportunity to rethink its proposals , and said that it would not proceed without FIFA approval . 
 In May 2008 , Scudamore told BBC Radio 5 Live that the proposal was " not over " , but that the League would " come up with something that ticks more boxes " by January 2009 . In August 2008 , Scudamore said that the League had " a whole host of ideas , some more radical than others , but none quite as radical as the original concept " . In October 2008 , he said Game 39 was still a possibility , although the timing of TV contracts meant it would be in the 2013 – 14 season at the earliest . An agreement in December 2008 between the Premier League and the Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) was linked to Game 39 by the media . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = In England = = = 
 Richard Scudamore defended the plan as consolidating the Premier League 's global reputation , saying " if we didn 't do it , another sport will come and do it to us " . Scudamore said that the chairmen of all 20 Premier League clubs supported the proposal , and disputed claims by the Daily Mail that Randy Lerner of Aston Villa and Dave Whelan of Wigan Athletic were opposed . David Gold , chairman of Birmingham City , endorsed the plan in part because the larger clubs have in any case already been exploiting foreign markets , with pre @-@ season and even mid @-@ season tours ; Game 39 would distribute its revenue among all the clubs . On 15 February , Liverpool F.C. chief executive Rick Parry stated that the proposal had " never been on Liverpool 's club agenda " and acknowledged the concern of the club 's fans and manager . Paul Hayward , writing in The Guardian , said that the proposal would destroy the balance of the home @-@ and @-@ away round @-@ robin league . The Football Supporters ' Federation ( FSF ) condemned the proposal as being motivated by money , and dubbed it Gam £ 39 . It launched a petition , with the support of the Daily Mail , to oppose the " outrageous desecration of the national game " . In March 2008 , the campaign was ended as the FSF declared the proposal " effectively dead " . Many die @-@ hard fans who pride themselves on travelling to all their teams ' away matches would have been unable to travel abroad for " Game 39 " . On the other hand , exotic foreign venues would potentially be more appealing destinations for fans than a mundane English city . Managers of Premier League clubs reported to be opposed to or sceptical of the plans included Steve Bruce , Roy Hodgson , Gareth Southgate , and Rafael Benítez . Alex Ferguson criticised the club owners for lack of consultation with managers . Arsène Wenger , Roy Keane , Kevin Keegan , and Avram Grant supported the proposal . ' Game 39 ' was also defended as a move to head off plans for a World League involving only elite clubs such as those formerly in the G @-@ 14 group . 
 Andy Burnham , the Secretary of State for Culture , Media and Sport , cautioned that football should " not forget its roots " . Gordon Taylor of the Professional Footballers ' Association expressed concern about increased pressure on players . The FA on 15 February expressed " serious reservations " that the proposal might damage England 's bid to host the 2018 World Cup . An FA board meeting on 21 February concluded that the plan was " unsustainable in its current format " . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The proposal was condemned by Sepp Blatter , president of FIFA , who said it brought the game into disrepute and would adversely affect England 's bid for the 2018 World Cup . He also said " Football cannot be like the Harlem Globetrotters or a circus " . Michel Platini of the sport 's European governing body , UEFA , called it a " nonsense idea " . Strong reservations were expressed by the Korean FA , and the Japanese FA opposed the plan . Middle @-@ eastern FAs were reportedly more positive . In February 2008 AFC president Mohammed Bin Hammam said he would " vote strongly against " the proposal ; in June he was prepared to reconsider if the plan had FA support ; in October he said he would welcome it if the League shared revenue with the AFC . The Hong Kong FA said it was " very interested " in hosting games . Football Federation Australia said it would oppose it if it impacted its own A @-@ League . Ivan Gazidis , deputy commissioner of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) in the United States , said that MLS would welcome the plan if it had FIFA approval . Sunil Gulati , the president of the US Soccer Federation , said the USSF would be guided by FIFA about approving any matches . 
 = HMS Engadine ( 1911 ) = 
 HMS Engadine was a seaplane tender which served in the Royal Navy ( RN ) during World War I. Converted from the cross @-@ Channel packet ship SS Engadine , she was initially fitted with temporary hangars for three seaplanes for aerial reconnaissance and bombing missions in the North Sea . She participated in the unsuccessful Cuxhaven Raid in late 1914 before she began a more thorough conversion in 1915 that increased her capacity to four aircraft . Engadine was transferred to the Battlecruiser Fleet in late 1915 and participated in the Battle of Jutland in 1916 when one of her aircraft flew the first heavier @-@ than @-@ air reconnaissance mission during a naval battle . She was transferred to the Mediterranean in 1918 . 
 She was sold back to her original owners in 1919 and resumed her prewar role . Engadine was sold in 1933 to a Philippine company and renamed SS Corregidor . She was sunk with heavy loss of life by a mine in December 1941 during the invasion of the Philippines at the beginning of the Pacific War . 
 = = Description = = 
 Engadine had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 41 feet ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) , and a mean draught of 13 feet 8 inches ( 4 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 550 long tons ( 2 @,@ 590 t ) at deep load and was rated at 1 @,@ 676 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Each of the ship 's three sets of direct @-@ drive steam turbines drove one propeller shaft . The ship 's six boilers generated enough steam to produce 13 @,@ 800 shaft horsepower ( 10 @,@ 300 kW ) from the turbines , enough for a designed speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . Engadine carried 400 tonnes ( 390 long tons ) of coal , enough to give her a range of 1 @,@ 250 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 320 km ; 1 @,@ 440 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 SS Engadine was laid down by William Denny and Brothers at their Dumbarton , Scotland shipyard as a fast packet for the South East and Chatham Railway 's Folkestone @-@ Boulogne run . The ship was launched on 23 September 1911 and completed later that year . She was requisitioned for service by the Admiralty on 11 August 1914 , and was commissioned on 1 September after she was modified to handle seaplanes by Chatham Dockyard . Three canvas hangars were installed , one forward and two aft , and there was no flight deck , the aircraft being lowered onto the sea for takeoff and recovered again from the sea after landing by newly installed derricks . In 1918 her crew numbered 197 officers and enlisted men , including 53 aviation personnel . 
 Upon completion of the modifications on 1 September , Engadine was assigned to the Harwich Force along with the seaplane tenders Empress and Riviera . On Christmas Day 1914 , nine aircraft from all three ships took part in the Cuxhaven Raid on hangars housing Zeppelin airships . Seven of the nine seaplanes successfully took off for the attack , but they inflicted little damage . Only three of the aircraft returned to be recovered , but the crews of the other three ditched safely and were recovered by a British submarine and the Dutch trawler Marta van Hattem . A notable member of her crew was Robert Erskine Childers who served an instructor in coastal navigation to newly trained pilots . He managed to extend his duties to include flying as a navigator and observer and participated in the raid , for which he was mentioned in despatches . 
 Engadine was purchased in February 1915 by the Admiralty and she was modified by Cunard at Liverpool from 10 February to 23 March 1915 with a permanent , four @-@ aircraft , hangar in the rear superstructure and a pair of cranes were mounted at the rear of the hangar to hoist the seaplanes in and out of the water . Four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns , each with 130 rounds , and two Vickers QF 3 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft guns , each with 65 rounds , were fitted for self @-@ defence . She also carried a pigeon loft that housed carrier pigeons to be used by her aircraft if their wireless was broken . 
 Upon completion of the conversion , she rejoined the Harwich Force ; on 3 July , Engadine and Riviera attempted to launch aircraft to reconnoitre the River Ems and lure out a Zeppelin so that it could be attacked . Of Engadine 's three Sopwith Schneider floatplanes that she attempted to launch , two wrecked on take off and the third was badly damaged . She was transferred to Vice Admiral David Beatty 's Battlecruiser Fleet ( BCF ) , based at Rosyth in October . Later that month Engadine carried out trials on high @-@ speed towing of kite balloons for gunnery observations , although she generally served as a base ship for the fleet 's seaplanes . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 On 30 May 1916 , Engadine was attached to the 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron , commanded by Rear Admiral <unk> Napier , and carried two Short Type 184 and two Sopwith Baby floatplanes aboard . The two @-@ seat Type 184s were intended for observation and were fitted with a low @-@ power wireless while the Babys were intended to shoot down Zeppelins . Engadine accompanied the cruisers when the Battlecruiser Fleet sortied from Rosyth that evening to intercept the German High Seas Fleet . For a time on 31 May she was actually leading the BCF and may have been one of the first ships to spot the oncoming Germans . Her position in the vanguard was dictated by the requirement for smooth water to successfully launch her aircraft ; turbulent water from ships ' wakes was enough to ruin a take off attempt . She would also have to come to a complete stop to hoist her aircraft over the side and prepare it for launch , a process that took at least 20 minutes at anchor . Thus she could launch her floatplane in unruffled water and then fall back among the main body of the fleet . 
 Beatty ordered Engadine to make a search to the north @-@ northeast at 14 : 40 and she sailed through the BCF before turning north @-@ east to find calmer water . At 15 : 07 Lieutenant Frederick Rutland took off in his Type 184 and his observer signalled Engadine that they had spotted three German cruisers and five destroyers at 15 : 30 . These were ships from the II Scouting Group , leading the battlecruisers of Vice Admiral Franz von Hipper . This was the first time that a heavier @-@ than @-@ air aircraft had carried out a reconnaissance of an enemy fleet in action . After a few other spot reports were transmitted , the aircraft 's fuel line ruptured around 15 : 36 and Rutland was forced to put his aircraft down . He was able to repair it and signalled that he was ready to take off again , but he was ordered to taxi to the carrier on the surface . The aircraft reached the ship at 15 : 47 and it was hoisted aboard by 16 : 04 . By this time , a pair of destroyers , Moresby and Onslow , that had been ordered to protect Engadine while she was stationary had reached her . Engadine attempted to relay the spot reports to Beatty 's flagship and the flagship of the 5th Battle Squadron , but was unsuccessful . She trailed Beatty 's force during the " Run to the South " , during which time her two escorts were detached and again when they reversed course during the " Run to the North " . 
 The 14 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 14 @,@ 000 t ) armoured cruiser Warrior had been crippled by numerous hits by German battleships around 18 : 30 and fell in with Engadine 10 minutes later . The former 's rudder had been jammed full over and she continued to turn in tight circles until her steam was exhausted . At 19 : 45 Engadine attempted to take her in tow , but the jammed rudder prevented that until it was trained amidships . By 21 : 30 she was making 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) while her turbines were making revolutions for 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Early the following morning Warrior 's progressive flooding had worsened and she was sinking . Captain Vincent Molteno ordered his ship abandoned after Engadine came alongside to take them off at 08 : 00 . One of Warrior 's guns punctured Engadine 's hull below the waterline as the former ship rolled in the moderate seas , but this was quickly patched . About 675 officers and enlisted men successfully made it to the much smaller Engadine which had to quickly distribute them to prevent her from capsizing . Among these were about 30 seriously wounded men who were transferred across in their stretchers ; one man fell off his stretcher between the ships , but was rescued by Rutland against orders . For his bravery he was awarded the First Class Albert Medal for Lifesaving in gold and briefly became the only living recipient . The transfer was completed before 09 : 00 and Warrior sank shortly afterwards . Engadine remained with the BCF until early 1918 when she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet . She was based out of Malta , conducting anti @-@ submarine patrols , for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = Postwar career = = = 
 She was sold back to her original owners , the South Eastern and Chatham Railway , in December 1919 and resumed her former role as a cross @-@ Channel ferry . Engadine was transferred to the Southern Railway in 1923 when the British railroads were consolidated . Passing through the hands of a ship broker , she was sold to Fernandez Hermanos , Inc. in the Philippines in 1933 and renamed SS Corregidor . 
 = = = = Sinking = = = = 
 At 22 : 00 on 16 December 1941 , Corregidor left its dock in Manila in total darkness , loaded to overcapacity with Filipino civilians seeking to escape to the southern Philippines after the war had started . It has been estimated that between 1 @,@ 200 and 1 @,@ 500 people were on board , including approximately 150 Philippine soldiers , 7 Americans , 5 Philippine legislators , and hundreds of college students who were traveling home after their schools had closed . Also aboard were military supplies as well the entire artillery complement of the Visayan @-@ Mindanao Force of the Philippine Army . The owners of the ship failed to inform the Navy 's Inshore Patrol of the ship 's plan to leave Manila Bay . 
 Although Captain <unk> Calvo of the Corregidor had prior experience navigating the mined entrance to Manila Bay ( the mines had been in place since July ) , the Navy had changed its procedures on that day . Rather than post a gunboat near the safe channel as they had in days previous , lighted buoys were used to guide boats through . As the Corregidor sailed close to the island of Corregidor to pass through the channel at around 01 : 00 , the ship was observed turning toward the electrically @-@ controlled minefield . Some officers posted at the Army 's Seaward Defense Command headquarters on the island recommended that the mines be temporarily disarmed so that the ship could pass through the minefield . A number of accounts state that Seaward Defense Commander Colonel Paul Bunker ordered that the mines be kept active . 
 When the Corregidor entered the minefield , there was a large explosion on the starboard side of the vessel . The overcrowded ship quickly began to sink , with many people trapped below @-@ deck . Survivors stated that the ship sank so quickly that there was no time for large @-@ scale panic to set in . Searchlights from Corregidor Island illuminated the scene which aided the rescue effort . Sailors of MTB Squadron 3 posted at <unk> Cove heard the explosion and left on three PT boats ( PT @-@ 32 , PT @-@ 34 and PT @-@ 35 ) to investigate . When the boats arrived they found survivors in the water and were able to retrieve 282 survivors . Seven of the rescued passengers later died from their injuries . 
 The incident was never investigated due to the Japanese invasion . Later , some Army officers reported that the remote @-@ controllable mines were set to the safety position immediately after the explosion occurred . The total number of victims is unknown . It has been estimated that 900 – 1 @,@ 200 lost their lives . Among the dead were the captain and most of the crew , two of the legislators , and one of the American passengers . At the time , the sinking of the Corregidor was the most significant maritime disaster in Philippine history , and one of the greatest maritime disasters in the world that did not occur as a result of military or naval action . 
 = Basin , Montana = 
 Basin is a census @-@ designated place ( CDP ) in Jefferson County , Montana , United States . It lies about 10 miles ( 16 km ) southeast of the Continental Divide in a high narrow canyon along Interstate 15 about halfway between Butte and Helena . Basin Creek flows roughly north to south through Basin and enters the Boulder River on the settlement 's south side . The population was 255 at the 2000 census . 
 Archaeologists have discovered evidence of human habitation from 10 @,@ 000 years ago at a site near Clancy , 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Basin . From about 2000 BCE through the mid @-@ 19th century , nomadic tribes hunted bison in the grassy valleys that trend east , away from the Rocky Mountains and into the plains . By the time miners found gold in the streams in and near Basin , most of these tribes of Indians had been forced onto reservations by the U.S. government . 
 Basin rests above the Boulder Batholith , the host rock for many valuable mineral ores found in this part of Montana . After the town became a hub of gold and silver mining , Basin 's population peaked at about 1 @,@ 500 in first decade of the 20th century but gradually declined as the mines were depleted . Abandoned mining equipment , closed or barricaded mine portals , and the ruins of a smelter and ore <unk> remain in Basin in the 21st century . 
 Historic buildings from Basin 's heyday form much of the core of the CDP 's small business district , which includes a fire station , a post office , two restaurants , a bar , a commercial gallery , small specialty shops . Basin has a small elementary school , its own water system , and a low @-@ power radio station . Local volunteers and elected trustees provide limited services to the settlement , but it relies on the government of Jefferson County , Montana , for law enforcement and other services . From 1993 through 2011 Basin was home to the Montana Artists Refuge . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Basin , in Jefferson County , is part of the Helena Micropolitan Statistical Area . It lies at an elevation of 5 @,@ 364 feet ( 1 @,@ 635 m ) above sea level along Interstate 15 about 27 miles ( 43 km ) north of Butte and 35 miles ( 56 km ) south of Helena in the narrow canyon of a small river . The community is largely surrounded by the Beaverhead @-@ <unk> National Forest . Basin Creek flows south through the center of Basin to its confluence with a larger stream , the Boulder River , which flows east along the south side of Basin . No paved roads except the interstate highway , which runs along the river canyon , connect Basin to other towns . About 10 miles ( 16 km ) upstream on Basin Creek lies the Continental Divide . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 12 @.@ 8 square miles ( 33 km2 ) , all land . 
 In the late Cretaceous ( roughly 81 to 74 million years ago ) , molten rock ( magma ) rose to the Earth 's surface in and near what later became Jefferson County and eventually formed an intrusive body of granitic rock up to 10 miles ( 16 km ) thick and 100 miles ( 161 km ) in diameter . This body , known as the Boulder Batholith , extends from Helena to Butte , and is the host rock for the many valuable ores mined in the region . As the granite cooled , it cracked , and hot solutions infiltrated the cracks to form mineral veins bearing gold and other metals . Millions of years later , weathering allowed gold in the veins to wash down to the gravels in Basin Creek , Cataract Creek , and the other creeks near Basin , as well as the Boulder River . 
 The Basin area is underlain by the quartz monzonite of the Boulder Batholith . The batholith is overlain by dacite from the Paleogene and Neogene periods ( roughly 66 million to 1 @.@ 8 million years ago ) and andesite from the late Cretaceous . The andesite and monzonite are cut by dikes of dacite and rhyolite . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First peoples = = = 
 Archeologists think it likely that the first people to live in Montana crossed from Asia to North America over the Bering Land Bridge that existed during the last major Ice Age about 12 @,@ 000 years ago . Because the middle of the continent was covered with sheets of ice , people who migrated south did so on trails along the edges of glaciers melted by seasonal warming . One such trail , called the Great North Trail , is thought to have followed the Rocky Mountain Front into Montana , passing close to Helena , 24 miles ( 39 km ) north of Basin , and continuing into the east @-@ central part of the state . Evidence of these early Paleo @-@ Indians or Clovis people has been found at three sites , one of them the <unk> site near Clancy about 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Basin . The age of the Clancy artifacts is estimated to be 10 @,@ 000 years . The Clovis people are thought to have disappeared in about 4 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 BCE when the Montana climate became more dry and would not support the animal populations the Clovis needed to survive . 
 About 2 @,@ 000 years ago , a new prehistoric people known as the Late Hunters appeared in Montana , thriving on a bison ( buffalo ) population living in open grassy areas on the plains and in river valleys . The earliest tribes are thought to have been the Kootenai , who stayed west of the Continental Divide , and the Flathead ( Salish ) , and Pend d <unk> , who ventured east of the mountains into and east of the Three Forks country , 46 miles ( 74 km ) southeast of Basin . In the 17th century , the Crow entered Montana from the east and the Shoshone from the south . Pressed by other tribes retreating west from white European settlers , the Blackfeet moved into Montana around 1730 . Acquiring horses and firearms , and numbering about 15 @,@ 000 , they formed alliances with other incoming tribes , the Assiniboine and the Gros Ventres , and by the mid @-@ 18th century dominated the state . When the white explorers Lewis and Clark traveled up the Missouri River to Three Forks , they found only Blackfeet and Blackfeet allies . Heavily dependent on bison , the nomadic life of the Blackfeet " came to an abrupt end in the early 1880s when the buffalo became almost extinct . " 
 During the 1870s , a few years after the first white miners began looking for gold near Basin , the last large @-@ scale battles between the U.S. government and the Indians took place in Montana . The Marias Massacre ( also known as the Baker Massacre ) , occurred in 1870 about 150 miles ( 241 km ) northeast of Basin . Others , the Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Battle of the Rosebud , were fought in 1876 about 250 miles ( 402 km ) from Basin in the southeastern part of the state . By then , most first peoples had been moved to reservations , which were far from Basin . 
 = = = Camp = = = 
 The town of Basin began as a 19th century mining camp near the confluence of Basin Creek with the Boulder River . Gold deposits at the mouth of Cataract Creek , about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) downstream of Basin were reported as early as 1862 . Prospectors staked claims and built cabins , and within a few years placer mining extended the full lengths of Cataract and Basin Creeks . When a settlement was established in Basin , the buildings at the mouth of Cataract Creek were gradually moved to Basin , and the Cataract camp was abandoned . 
 Searches for the lode veins on both creeks succeeded by the 1870s and eventually led to significant lode mining at the Eva May , Uncle Sam , Grey Eagle , Hattie Ferguson , and Comet mines in the Cataract Creek district and the Bullion , Hope , and Katy mines in the Basin Creek district . By 1880 , the settlement at Basin became the local source of supplies for mines and miners . 
 = = = Boom and bust = = = 
 Two mines , the Katy and the Hope , owned serially by several different companies between the mid @-@ 1890s and the mid @-@ 1920s , contributed to Basin 's prosperity . In 1894 , the Basin and Bay State Mining Company , organized by two brothers named Glass , began expanded operations at these mines . However , flooding and fires caused both mines to close by 1896 ; the Glass brothers lost control of the property , and the mines went idle . Despite the ups and downs of the local mines and despite several disastrous fires in town , Basin prospered . In 1905 , the Basin Reduction Company led by F. Augustus Heinze , who owned mines in Butte , took over the properties left by the Glass brothers and improved them . By then , Basin had a population of 1 @,@ 500 , four rooming houses , a drug store , three hotels , a bath house , three grocery stores , a bank , a newspaper , and 12 saloons . 
 An unpublished manuscript on file with the Montana State Historical Society describes life in Basin between 1906 and 1910 in great detail . Two railroads , the Northern Pacific on the north side of the Boulder River , and the Great Northern on the south side , served the city ; both had depots and warehouses in Basin and carried passengers as well as freight . The Glass brothers ' smelter had been set up on the north side to process concentrated ore delivered by rail from out of town or from the mills on the south side . Infrastructure included a weight scale for ore cars and an overhead tram to carry ore across the river from the reduction mill to the smelter . Although the smelter was a " massive unit " equipped with furnaces , conveyors , and machinery ready for operation , it " never turned a wheel " . 
 While the smelter sat idle , mining activity continued on the south side of the river in the Hope @-@ Katy mine complex , at the Hope Mill , which crushed and separated ore , and at the Basin Reduction Works . <unk> carried water from upstream on Cataract Creek and Basin Creek to a storage reservoir in town and supplied water to the mills as well as the town 's fire hydrants . A separate flume carried water to the mills from upstream on the Boulder River . At the Basin Reduction Works , Corliss steam engines , driven by the coal @-@ fired boilers , provided power to run the mine hoists and the mill machinery , and an electric generator powered by a water wheel made electricity for factory lights and the arc lights at Basin 's street intersections . Surplus tailings were discharged into the river and into a dam built for the purpose downstream of Basin . 
 In addition to homes , Basin structures between 1906 and 1910 included a dance pavilion , a grandstand , a baseball diamond , and a playground near the confluence of Basin Creek with the river . A footbridge connected the playground with a picnic area on the south side of the river . Meeting places included churches , a union hall , and a two @-@ story building shared by the Fraternal Order of Eagles , the Independent Order of Odd Fellows , the Masons , and Eastern Star . Among the town 's businesses were a hardware store , a bakery , livery stables , several " units of harlotry " , a blacksmith shop , a brewery specializing in Basin Beer , a sawmill , and a dairy barn from which " milk was delivered in five @-@ pound buckets " , sometimes with covers . 
 In 1909 , after Heinze abandoned his properties in Basin , the Butte and Superior Mining Company used buildings and machinery at the site of the Basin Reduction Works to treat zinc ore by a new process called froth flotation . Sued for patent infringement , the company shut down its Basin plant in 1912 . Max Atwater , a mining engineer who had worked for Butte and Superior , obtained a license for the process and ran a smaller zinc @-@ extraction plant in Basin from 1914 through 1918 . His wife , Mary Meigs Atwater , described Basin as " a mining camp , subject to recurring periods of boom and bust ... A tiny telephone office and a drugstore died with the end of our era of boom ... Just above the town were the headframe of our mine , and the old mill , and the never @-@ quite @-@ finished skeleton of a projected smelter . " 
 The most extensive and successful mining of the Hope @-@ Katy vein began in 1919 , when the Jib Consolidated Mining Company began work on the property . When this company acquired the mines , they comprised 3 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 067 m ) of workings . Over the next five years , Jib expanded these to more than 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 572 m ) , and in 1924 the company became the largest gold producer in Montana . In that year , the combined Jib mines produced about 33 @,@ 000 ounces ( 940 @,@ 000 g ) of gold , 182 @,@ 000 ounces ( 5 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 g ) of silver , 282 @,@ 000 pounds ( 128 @,@ 000 kg ) of copper , and 199 @,@ 000 pounds ( 90 @,@ 000 kg ) of lead . In 1925 , however , the Jib properties passed from the mining company to trustees for creditors , and production declined . This was the last of Basin 's mining booms . Since then , small @-@ scale mining , reworking of old mine dumps , and placer mining has continued in the region . 
 = = = Since 1960 = = = 
 For about 50 years , the Merry Widow Health Mine in Basin and similar mines nearby have attracted people seeking relief from health problems such as arthritis through limited exposure to radioactive mine water and radon . The practice is controversial because of the " well @-@ documented ill effects of high @-@ dose radiation on the body . " 
 In 1975 , the Basin community formed water and sewer districts and , using federal grants to cover about 60 percent of the costs , built a water delivery , sewage , and waste @-@ handling system . By 1990 , Interstate 15 had replaced the entire length of U.S. Route 91 in the state . The centerline of the Interstate followed the track of the former Great Northern Railway through town . 
 In 1999 , the Environmental Protection Agency added the Basin mining area to the Superfund National Priorities List because of mining @-@ waste problems in and near town . The mining area comprised the watersheds of Basin and Cataract Creek and part of the Boulder River . Contaminants included arsenic , copper , cadmium , lead and other metals . Cleanup of the mining wastes at the Buckeye @-@ Enterprise , Crystal and Bullion mines in the Basin Creek and Cataract watersheds was completed in 2002 , and the removal of mine waste from Basin was completed in 2004 . 
 = = = Individual mines = = = 
 Almost opposite the Hope @-@ Katy complex on the south side of the Boulder River in Basin was the Katy Extension Mine on the north side . It produced ore from part of the Hope @-@ Katy lode that had been displaced about 800 feet ( 240 m ) to the north by faulting . Other mines within 2 miles ( 3 km ) of Basin included the Lotta , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of town along the route of Interstate 15 ; the Basin Bell ( <unk> ) , about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of town along Basin Creek ; the Boulder , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) northeast of Basin on the south slope of Pole Mountain ; the Mantle and South Mantle , about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of town along Cataract Creek ; and the Obelisk , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) east of town near the road that later became Interstate 15 . 
 = = Climate = = 
 July and August are typically the warmest months in Boulder about 9 miles ( 14 km ) east of Basin , while December and January are the coldest . May and June are the wettest months , when a total of about 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of precipitation falls . Weather observations were recorded in Basin from June 1949 to November 1970 , but only contained precipitation and snowfall data . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 255 people , 113 households , and 69 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 19 @.@ 9 people per square mile ( 7 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . There were 146 housing units at an average density of 11 @.@ 4 per square mile ( 4 @.@ 4 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 95 % White , 2 % Native American , < 1 % Asian , and 3 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2 % of the population . 
 There were 113 households out of which 29 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 51 % were married couples living together , 5 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 39 % were non @-@ families . 33 % of all households were made up of individuals and 6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 26 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 93 . 
 In the CDP the population was spread out with 27 % under the age of 18 , 5 % from 18 to 24 , 29 % from 25 to 44 , 31 % from 45 to 64 , and 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 38 years . For every 100 females there were 94 @.@ 7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 92 @.@ 8 males . 
 The median income for a household in the CDP was $ 22 @,@ 500 , and the median income for a family was $ 30 @,@ 000 . Males had a median income of $ 26 @,@ 250 versus $ 15 @,@ 714 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $ 11 @,@ 878 . About 23 % of families and 33 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 56 % of those under the age of 18 and 17 % of those 65 or over . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 In 1993 , a group of professional artists established the Montana Artists Refuge in Basin . The nonprofit organization offered artist residencies in two historic buildings , a former bank and meeting hall and a former dry goods store converted to apartment and studio space . The organization sponsored annual art events including the American Indian Artists Symposium and the Basin City Jazz Art Experience , held in the Basin Community Hall . All types of artists , including potters , painters , musicians , dancers , singers , weavers , and writers , had residencies in Basin . The refuge closed in October 2011 . 
 = = Education , business , and government = = 
 A public elementary school , Basin Grade School , serves 15 to 20 students , pre @-@ kindergarten through sixth grade . Older students attend school in Boulder . 
 The town 's small business district includes a bar , two restaurants , a traveler 's inn , a wellness center , small specialty shops , and a pottery gallery . A low @-@ power radio station , <unk> @-@ LP , 98 @.@ 3 FM , owned by Jefferson County Disaster and Emergency Services , broadcasts from Basin . 
 County , state , and federal agencies provide most of the government services available in Basin . Local residents serve as elected trustees of the Basin Fire District and its volunteer fire department . Elected trustees also oversee the Basin Water and Sewer District . The Jefferson County sheriff 's department provides law enforcement , and other county departments offer trash removal and recycling , emergency management services , and road maintenance . The county health department has a clinic in Boulder , 9 miles ( 14 km ) east of Basin , and the county courthouse , district court , and the nearest branch of the county library are also in Boulder . The United States Postal Service has a post office in Basin . 
 = St. Elmo ( 1910 Thanhouser film ) = 
 St. Elmo is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The scenario was adapted by Lloyd Lonergan from Augusta Jane Evans 's 1866 novel of the same name . Frank H. Crane and Anna Rosemond play the leading roles in the simplified plot that was reliant on inter @-@ titles to tell the story . The film follows St. Elmo who is engaged to his cousin Agnes , being betrayed by his friend Dick Hammond who has an affair with Agnes . St. Elmo challenges and kills Hammond in a duel . A young girl , Edna witnesses the duel and leads Agnes and the sheriff off the trail . St. Elmo disappears and returns five years later to woo Edna . She rejects then accepts his affections only to stop him from committing suicide . The production was met with mixed reviews by critics , but was successful . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot was adapted from Augusta Jane Evans 's 1867 novel St. Elmo . The actual production was greatly shortened for the purposes of conveying the plot of the film . The synopsis in The Moving Picture World states : " St. Elmo , a wealthy young man , is betrothed to his cousin Agnes . Dick Hammond , St. Elmo 's chum , is studying for the ministry . As soon as he is ordained he is to take charge of a church built for him by St. Elmo . Hammond , however , takes St. Elmo 's friendship lightly and makes love to Agnes in secret . The affair is discovered by St. Elmo , who , in a rage at Hammond 's perfidy , challenges him to a duel . The false friend loses his life in the ensuing combat . Edna , the granddaughter of the village blacksmith , strays upon the scene of the duel , an uninvited witness . St. Elmo is forced to flee the country . He is pursued by Agnes and the sheriff . Edna tells her first lie when she deceives St. Elmo 's pursuers as to his direction and leads them completely off the trail . St. Elmo makes good his escape . On the day that Edna witnesses the duel her grandfather dies , leaving her alone in the world . She is adopted by St. Elmo 's mother . Five years later the fugitive returns . Edna recognizes him as the victor of the dual but he does not remember having met her . He discovers that he loves the girl . Edna rejects his suit , declaring that she never would marry a man who had taken a human life . In desperation , St. Elmo attempts suicide , choosing as a spot the grave of Dick Hammond , but is swerved from his purpose by Edna , who relents and promises him her love and sympathy . St. Elmo decides that life is worth living if but for her sake . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as St. Elmo 
 Anna Rosemond as Agnes 
 Gertrude Thanhouser 
 Carey L. Hastings 
 = = Production = = 
 Written in 1866 , Augusta Jane Evans domestic novel St. Elmo became one of the best @-@ selling novels of the 19th century . Its popularity would spur the creation of popular consumer products , parodies and even the names of several towns . Evans was concerned about how the novel 's themes would be portrayed on the stage and did not approve the first script for a St. Elmo play until 1909 . It is also unknown if Evans was aware of any intention to adapt the novel for the screen . Lloyd Lonergan adapted the play for the Thanhouser Company . The Book News Monthly said that Lonergan received a share of interest in the company for his good work in producing the scenario . Lonergan already had a single share of 100 total shares of the company from the initial $ 10 @,@ 000 in capital in 1909 . 
 The director of has both been credited to Barry O 'Neil and / or Lloyd B. Carleton by film historian Q. David Bowers . It is not known for certain who directed or if both them played a directorial a role in the production . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . The confusion between the directing credits stems from the industry practice of not crediting the film directors , even in studio news releases . There is also dispute over the cameraman credit for the film . Bower credits Blair Smith as the cameraman , but the American Film Institute adds that Carl Louis Gregory also could have been the cameraman . Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . Bowers believes that numerous releases were produced with Gregory operating the camera , but the role was uncredited in the 1910 era . Anna Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Rosemond joined in the autumn of 1909 and in their first year of productions . Frank H. Crane was involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company from 1909 . Crane 's was the first leading man of the company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 Bowers notes that St. Elmo was filmed in a mansion built in 1759 , but the name and location of the structure is unknown . The actual date of the filming is unknown . During the weeks leading up to the release , a spy for Thomas Edison 's production company recorded details surrounding Thanhouser 's production , including the filming of Thanhouser 's first release , The Actor 's Children . The spy , W. E. Lowenkamp , had a New York State Detective license . Lowenkamp 's reports suggest the possibility of filming in a house on March 10 , 1910 and the intention to film the following morning , but it is unknown if this was related to St. Elmo 's filming . Lowenkamp would speak to Edwin Thanhouser 's sister in law , Carey L. Hastings , who took him as a real estate salesman was in film . Bower 's reprints the report , " The sister @-@ in @-@ law said the house they were using to take pictures would just suit Mr. Thanhouser , so I called a real estate office and gave them the tip so they will try and sell the house to Mr. Thanhouser and cover me . " The film also included Gertrude Thanhouser , the wife of Edwin Thanhouser . According to family tradition , she only appeared in this one film . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 860 ft , was released on March 22 , 1910 by the Thanhouser Company . The film was shown in Tennessee , Ohio , Washington , and Pennsylvania . An advertisement in Indiana lists " St. Elmo " in apparent reference to a " great Thanhouser film " . Edwin Thanhouser later stated that there were ten copies of the film at first and the films were primarily distributed to the exchanges that had purchased the first work , The Actor 's Children . The desire for St. Elmo resulted in the production of fifteen more copies to meet the demand . 
 Reviews for the film were mixed . The New York Dramatic Mirror provided a positive review which praised the ability of the writer to adapt the work to film , but this was diminished slightly because of the films dependence on title @-@ cards . The review also stated that the acting was excellent , but not expressive enough and concluded that the film was " a notable one among the Independent releases " . The Moving Picture World provided another positive review , praising the adaptation that simplified the plot and found no fault with the production . The Morning Telegraph found no fault with the story , but found fault with the excessive use of inter @-@ titles . The reviewer also noted that the only strong scene in the film is the duel scene , but Edna 's wanderings made her appear to be insane . The edition of April 16 , 1910 of The Moving Picture World provided three testimonials that the film was of excellent quality and one attributed a doubling of patrons because of the film . The film is presumed lost . 
 = WASP @-@ 43 = 
 WASP @-@ 43 is a K @-@ type star in the Sextans constellation . It is about half the size of the Sun , and has approximately half the mass . WASP @-@ 43 has one known planet in orbit , a Hot Jupiter called WASP @-@ 43b . At the time of publishing of WASP @-@ 43b 's discovery on April 15 , 2011 , the planet was the most closely orbiting Hot Jupiter discovered . The small orbit of WASP @-@ 43b is thought to be caused by WASP @-@ 43 's unusually low mass . WASP @-@ 43 was first observed between January and May 2009 by the SuperWASP project , and was found to be cooler and slightly richer in metals than the Sun . WASP @-@ 43 has also been found to be an active star that rotates at a high velocity . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 WASP @-@ 43 was first observed by the WASP @-@ South part of the planet @-@ searching SuperWASP project between January and May 2009 . It was determined from the collected data that WASP @-@ 43 could potentially host a planet that transited , or crossed in front of , its host star as seen from Earth . Later observations by both the WASP @-@ South and SuperWASP @-@ North sections of SuperWASP between January and May 2010 yielded a total of 13 @,@ 768 data points . 
 Scientists interpreted that a 0 @.@ 81 @-@ day orbit of a possible planet from the data , and followed up with observations using the CORALIE spectrograph on the Leonhard Euler Telescope at Chile 's La Silla Observatory . CORALIE provided radial velocity measurements that indicated that WASP @-@ 43 was being transited by a planet that was 1 @.@ 8 times Jupiter 's mass , now dubbed WASP @-@ 43b . Another follow @-@ up using the <unk> telescope further defined the light curve of the body transiting WASP @-@ 43 . 
 WASP @-@ 43b 's discovery was reported on April 15 , 2011 in the journal Astronomy and Astrophysics . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 WASP @-@ 43 is a K @-@ type star with a mass that is 0 @.@ 58 times that of the Sun , and a radius that is 0 @.@ 93 times that of the Sun . In other words , WASP @-@ 43 is far less massive than the Sun , but is approximately the same size . With an effective temperature of 4400 K , WASP @-@ 43 is cooler than the Sun . It also has slightly lower quantities of iron than the Sun , with a measured metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = <unk> ( 89 % of that measured in the Sun ) . However , in general , the star has a slightly larger quantity of metals than the Sun . A notable exception is lithium , which is not present in WASP @-@ 43 's spectrum . However , the star 's spectrum also indicates that WASP @-@ 43 is an active star . WASP @-@ 43 has been found to rotate quickly , although the exact mechanism that causes such speed in this rotation is uncertain , it may be possible that this is caused by tidal interactions between WASP @-@ 43 and its planet . 
 With an apparent magnitude of 12 @.@ 4 , WASP @-@ 43 cannot be seen with the unaided eye . The star is located approximately 80 parsecs ( 260 light years ) away from Earth . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 WASP @-@ 43b is a Hot Jupiter with a mass that is 1 @.@ 78 times the mass of Jupiter and a radius that is 0 @.@ 93 times Jupiter 's radius . WASP @-@ 43b orbits its host star every 0 @.@ <unk> days ( 19 @.@ <unk> hours ) at a distance of 0 @.@ 0142 AU , the closest orbit yet found at the time of WASP @-@ 43b 's discovery . WASP @-@ 43 's unusually low mass accounts for WASP @-@ 43b 's small orbit . Because planets with orbits around stars like WASP @-@ 43 are not usually observed , models either suggest that planets like WASP @-@ 43b are either uncommon or have short lifetimes caused by a decay in their orbits . WASP @-@ 43b has a density of 2 @.@ 20 g / cm3 
 = Washington Irving = 
 Washington Irving ( April 3 , 1783 – November 28 , 1859 ) was an American short story writer , essayist , biographer , historian , and diplomat of the early 19th century . He is best known for his short stories " Rip Van Winkle " ( 1819 ) and " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " ( 1820 ) , both of which appear in his book The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon , Gent . His historical works include biographies of George Washington , Oliver Goldsmith and Muhammad , and several histories of 15th @-@ century Spain dealing with subjects such as Christopher Columbus , the Moors and the Alhambra . Irving served as the U.S. ambassador to Spain from 1842 to 1846 . 
 He made his literary debut in 1802 with a series of observational letters to the Morning Chronicle , written under the pseudonym Jonathan Oldstyle . After moving to England for the family business in 1815 , he achieved international fame with the publication of The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon , <unk> in 1819 – 20 . He continued to publish regularly — and almost always successfully — throughout his life , and just eight months before his death ( at age 76 , in Tarrytown , New York ) , completed a five @-@ volume biography of George Washington . 
 Irving , along with James Fenimore Cooper , was among the first American writers to earn acclaim in Europe , and Irving encouraged American authors such as Nathaniel Hawthorne , Herman Melville , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , and Edgar Allan Poe . Irving was also admired by some European writers , including Walter Scott , Lord Byron , Thomas Campbell , Francis Jeffrey , and Charles Dickens . As America 's first genuine internationally best @-@ selling author , Irving advocated for writing as a legitimate profession , and argued for stronger laws to protect American writers from copyright infringement . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Washington Irving 's parents were William Irving , Sr. , originally of <unk> , Shapinsay , Orkney , and Sarah ( née Sanders ) , Scottish @-@ English immigrants . They married in 1761 while William was serving as a petty officer in the British Navy . They had eleven children , eight of whom survived to adulthood . Their first two sons , each named William , died in infancy , as did their fourth child , John . Their surviving children were : William , Jr . ( 1766 ) , Ann ( 1770 ) , Peter ( 1772 ) , Catherine ( 1774 ) , Ebenezer ( 1776 ) , John Treat ( 1778 ) , Sarah ( 1780 ) and Washington . 
 The Irving family settled in Manhattan , New York City , and was part of the city 's small , vibrant merchant class when Washington Irving was born on April 3 , 1783 , the same week city residents learned of the British ceasefire that ended the American Revolution ; Irving 's mother named him after the hero of the revolution , George Washington . At age six , with the help of a nanny , Irving met his namesake , who was then living in New York after his inauguration as president in 1789 . The president blessed young Irving , an encounter Irving later commemorated in a small watercolor painting , which still hangs in his home today . The <unk> lived at 131 William Street at the time of Washington Irving 's birth . The family later moved across the street to 128 William St. Several of Washington Irving 's older brothers became active New York merchants , and they encouraged their younger brother 's literary aspirations , often supporting him financially as he pursued his writing career . 
 An uninterested student , Irving preferred adventure stories and drama and , by age fourteen , was regularly sneaking out of class in the evenings to attend the theater . The 1798 outbreak of yellow fever in Manhattan prompted his family to send him to healthier climes upriver , and Irving was dispatched to stay with his friend James Kirke Paulding in Tarrytown , New York . It was in Tarrytown that Irving became familiar with the nearby town of Sleepy Hollow , with its quaint Dutch customs and local ghost stories . Irving made several other trips up the Hudson as a teenager , including an extended visit to Johnstown , New York , where he passed through the Catskill mountain region , the setting for " Rip Van Winkle " . " [ O ] f all the scenery of the Hudson " , Irving wrote later , " the <unk> Mountains had the most witching effect on my boyish imagination " . 
 The 19 @-@ year @-@ old Irving began writing letters to the New York Morning Chronicle in 1802 , submitting commentaries on the city 's social and theater scene under the name of Jonathan Oldstyle . The name , which purposely evoked the writer 's Federalist leanings , was the first of many pseudonyms Irving would employ throughout his career . The letters brought Irving some early fame and moderate notoriety . Aaron Burr , a co @-@ publisher of the Chronicle , was impressed enough to send clippings of the Oldstyle pieces to his daughter , Theodosia , while writer Charles Brockden Brown made a trip to New York to recruit Oldstyle for a literary magazine he was editing in Philadelphia . 
 Concerned for his health , Irving 's brothers financed an extended tour of Europe from 1804 to 1806 . Irving bypassed most of the sites and locations considered essential for the development of an upwardly mobile young man , to the dismay of his brother William . William wrote that , though he was pleased his brother 's health was improving , he did not like the choice to " gallop through Italy ... leaving Florence on your left and Venice on your right " . Instead , Irving honed the social and conversational skills that would later make him one of the world 's most in @-@ demand guests . " I endeavor to take things as they come with cheerfulness " , Irving wrote , " and when I cannot get a dinner to suit my taste , I endeavor to get a taste to suit my dinner " . While visiting Rome in 1805 , Irving struck up a friendship with the American painter Washington Allston , and nearly allowed himself to be persuaded into following Allston into a career as a painter . " My lot in life , however " , Irving said later , " was differently cast " . 
 = = = First major writings = = = 
 Irving returned from Europe to study law with his legal mentor , Judge Josiah Ogden Hoffman , in New York City . By his own admission , he was not a good student , and barely passed the bar in 1806 . Irving began actively socializing with a group of literate young men he dubbed " The Lads of Kilkenny " . Collaborating with his brother William and fellow Lad James Kirke Paulding , Irving created the literary magazine Salmagundi in January 1807 . Writing under various pseudonyms , such as William Wizard and Launcelot Langstaff , Irving lampooned New York culture and politics in a manner similar to today 's Mad magazine . Salmagundi was a moderate success , spreading Irving 's name and reputation beyond New York . In its seventeenth issue , dated November 11 , 1807 , Irving affixed the nickname " Gotham " — an Anglo @-@ Saxon word meaning " Goat 's Town " — to New York City . 
 In late 1809 , while mourning the death of his seventeen @-@ year @-@ old fiancée Matilda Hoffman , Irving completed work on his first major book , A History of New @-@ York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty , by Diedrich Knickerbocker ( 1809 ) , a satire on self @-@ important local history and contemporary politics . Prior to its publication , Irving started a hoax akin to today 's viral marketing campaigns ; he placed a series of missing person adverts in New York newspapers seeking information on Diedrich Knickerbocker , a crusty Dutch historian who had allegedly gone missing from his hotel in New York City . As part of the ruse , Irving placed a notice — allegedly from the hotel 's proprietor — informing readers that if Mr. Knickerbocker failed to return to the hotel to pay his bill , he would publish a manuscript Knickerbocker had left behind . 
 <unk> readers followed the story of Knickerbocker and his manuscript with interest , and some New York city officials were concerned enough about the missing historian that they considered offering a reward for his safe return . Riding the wave of public interest he had created with his hoax , Irving — adopting the pseudonym of his Dutch historian — published A History of New York on December 6 , 1809 , to immediate critical and popular success . " It took with the public " , Irving remarked , " and gave me celebrity , as an original work was something remarkable and uncommon in America " . Today , the surname of Diedrich Knickerbocker , the fictional narrator of this and other Irving works , has become a nickname for Manhattan residents in general . 
 After the success of A History of New York , Irving searched for a job and eventually became an editor of <unk> Magazine , where he wrote biographies of naval heroes like James Lawrence and Oliver Perry . He was also among the first magazine editors to reprint Francis Scott Key 's poem " Defense of Fort McHenry " , which would later be immortalized as " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " , the national anthem of the United States . 
 Like many merchants and New Yorkers , Irving originally opposed the War of 1812 , but the British attack on Washington , D.C. in 1814 convinced him to enlist . He served on the staff of Daniel Tompkins , governor of New York and commander of the New York State Militia . Apart from a reconnaissance mission in the Great Lakes region , he saw no real action . The war was disastrous for many American merchants , including Irving 's family , and in mid @-@ 1815 he left for England to attempt to salvage the family trading company . He remained in Europe for the next seventeen years . Irving was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1815 . 
 = = = Life in Europe = = = 
 = = = = The Sketch Book = = = = 
 Irving spent the next two years trying to bail out the family firm financially but eventually had to declare bankruptcy . With no job prospects , Irving continued writing throughout 1817 and 1818 . In the summer of 1817 , he visited Walter Scott , beginning a lifelong personal and professional friendship . Irving continued writing : he composed the short story " Rip Van Winkle " overnight while staying with his sister Sarah and her husband , Henry van Wart in Birmingham , England , a place that also inspired other works . In October 1818 , Irving 's brother William secured for Irving a post as chief clerk to the United States Navy , and urged him to return home . Irving turned the offer down , opting to stay in England to pursue a writing career . 
 In the spring of 1819 , Irving sent to his brother Ebenezer in New York a set of short prose pieces that he asked be published as The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon , Gent . The first installment , containing " Rip Van Winkle " , was an enormous success , and the rest of the work would be equally successful ; it was issued in 1819 – 1820 in seven installments in New York , and in two volumes in London ( " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " would appear in the sixth issue of the New York edition , and the second volume of the London edition ) . 
 Like many successful authors of this era , Irving struggled against literary bootleggers . In England , some of his sketches were reprinted in periodicals without his permission , a legal practice as there was no international copyright law at the time . To prevent further piracy in Britain , Irving paid to have the first four American installments published as a single volume by John Miller in London . Irving appealed to Walter Scott for help procuring a more reputable publisher for the remainder of the book . Scott referred Irving to his own publisher , London powerhouse John Murray , who agreed to take on The Sketch Book . From then on , Irving would publish concurrently in the United States and Britain to protect his copyright , with Murray being his English publisher of choice . 
 Irving 's reputation soared , and for the next two years , he led an active social life in Paris and Britain , where he was often feted as an anomaly of literature : an upstart American who dared to write English well . 
 = = = = Bracebridge Hall and Tales of a Traveller = = = = 
 With both Irving and publisher John Murray eager to follow up on the success of The Sketch Book , Irving spent much of 1821 travelling in Europe in search of new material , reading widely in Dutch and German folk tales . Hampered by writer 's block — and depressed by the death of his brother William — Irving worked slowly , finally delivering a completed manuscript to Murray in March 1822 . The book , Bracebridge Hall , or The <unk> , A Medley ( the location was based loosely on Aston Hall , occupied by members of the Bracebridge family , near his sister 's home in Birmingham ) was published in June 1822 . 
 The format of Bracebridge was similar to that of The Sketch Book , with Irving , as Crayon , narrating a series of more than fifty loosely connected short stories and essays . While some reviewers thought Bracebridge to be a lesser imitation of The Sketch Book , the book was well received by readers and critics . " We have received so much pleasure from this book " , wrote critic Francis Jeffrey in the Edinburgh Review , " that we think ourselves bound in gratitude ... to make a public acknowledgement of it . " Irving was relieved at its reception , which did much to cement his reputation with European readers . 
 Still struggling with writer 's block , Irving traveled to Germany , settling in Dresden in the winter of 1822 . Here he dazzled the royal family and attached himself to Mrs. Amelia Foster , an American living in Dresden with her five children . Irving was particularly attracted to Mrs. Foster 's 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Emily , and vied in frustration for her hand . Emily finally refused his offer of marriage in the spring of 1823 . 
 He returned to Paris and began collaborating with playwright John Howard Payne on translations of French plays for the English stage , with little success . He also learned through Payne that the novelist Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley was romantically interested in him , though Irving never pursued the relationship . 
 In August 1824 , Irving published the collection of essays Tales of a Traveller — including the short story " The Devil and Tom Walker " — under his Geoffrey Crayon persona . " I think there are in it some of the best things I have ever written " , Irving told his sister . But while the book sold respectably , Traveller was dismissed by critics , who panned both Traveller and its author . " The public have been led to expect better things " , wrote the United States Literary Gazette , while the New @-@ York Mirror pronounced Irving " overrated " . Hurt and depressed by the book 's reception , Irving retreated to Paris where he spent the next year worrying about finances and scribbling down ideas for projects that never materialized . 
 = = = = Spanish books = = = = 
 While in Paris , Irving received a letter from Alexander Hill Everett on January 30 , 1826 . Everett , recently the American Minister to Spain , urged Irving to join him in Madrid , noting that a number of manuscripts dealing with the Spanish conquest of the Americas had recently been made public . Irving left for Madrid and enthusiastically began scouring the Spanish archives for colorful material . 
 With full access to the American consul 's massive library of Spanish history , Irving began working on several books at once . The first offspring of this hard work , A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus , was published in January 1828 . The book was popular in the United States and in Europe and would have 175 editions published before the end of the century . It was also the first project of Irving 's to be published with his own name , instead of a pseudonym , on the title page . Irving was invited to stay at the palace of the Duke of Gor , who gave him unfettered access to his library containing many medieval manuscripts . Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada was published a year later , followed by Voyages and Discoveries of the Companions of Columbus in 1831 . 
 Irving 's writings on Columbus are a mixture of history and fiction , a genre now called romantic history . Irving based them on extensive research in the Spanish archives , but also added imaginative elements aimed at sharpening the story . The first of these works is the source of the durable myth that medieval Europeans believed the Earth was flat . ( See Myth of the flat earth . ) According to the popular book , Columbus proved the Earth was round . 
 In 1829 , Irving moved into Granada 's ancient palace Alhambra , " determined to linger here " , he said , " until I get some writings under way connected with the place " . Before he could get any significant writing underway , however , he was notified of his appointment as Secretary to the American Legation in London . Worried he would disappoint friends and family if he refused the position , Irving left Spain for England in July 1829 . 
 = = = = Secretary to the American legation in London = = = = 
 Arriving in London , Irving joined the staff of American Minister Louis McLane . McLane immediately assigned the daily secretary work to another man and tapped Irving to fill the role of aide @-@ de @-@ camp . The two worked over the next year to negotiate a trade agreement between the United States and the British West Indies , finally reaching a deal in August 1830 . That same year , Irving was awarded a medal by the Royal Society of Literature , followed by an honorary doctorate of civil law from Oxford in 1831 . 
 Following McLane 's recall to the United States in 1831 to serve as Secretary of Treasury , Irving stayed on as the legation 's chargé d 'affaires until the arrival of Martin Van Buren , President Andrew Jackson 's nominee for British Minister . With Van Buren in place , Irving resigned his post to concentrate on writing , eventually completing Tales of the Alhambra , which would be published concurrently in the United States and England in 1832 . 
