 Difficulties in distinguishing Australian corvids has hampered understanding of seasonal movements . The Australian raven is thought to be largely sedentary , with most movement of over 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) due to flocks of non @-@ breeding subadult birds . Juvenile birds leave their parents and join flocks when they are four or five months old . Smaller flocks of 8 – 30 birds stay within an area of around 260 square kilometres , while larger flocks of up to 300 birds may travel hundreds of kilometres seeking food . 
 A single breeding pair and their brood can occupy a territory of up to around 120 hectares ( 300 acres ) and remains there year @-@ round , though groups of ravens may enter this area to forage . Australian ravens will defend their territory by chasing , dive @-@ bombing and occasionally striking the backs of birds of prey , foxes or even people . They generally mate for life , though occasionally one male has been found to be mated with two females in adjacent territories . If the female dies , the male Australian raven maintains the territory and finds another mate , while if the male bird is lost , the female abandons the territory . No courtship behaviour has been observed , and species that mate for life often lack elaborate courting displays . Once they begin breeding at three years of age , they live another four to five years on average . During this time they produce two surviving young each year on average . The longest @-@ lived Australian raven recorded is an adult ( of at least 3 years of age ) that was banded and recaptured alive 12 years and 5 months later . 
 Australian ravens generally walk when moving around on the ground , though do hop when hurrying . They preen themselves frequently , particularly when roosting in the middle of the day . They also engage in allopreening , where birds will preen each other 's head and neck . This takes place particularly in autumn , winter and spring , and is important in pair bonding . Either member may initiate it , generally by landing near the other bird , shuffling next to its mate , then bending its head forward and presenting its nape . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The Australian raven is omnivorous , though eats more meat than smaller corvids . Its diet in summer contains a high proportion of insects , while more plant items are eaten in autumn . Flesh makes up over half its diet in winter . Invertebrates commonly eaten include spiders , millipedes , centipedes ( which ravens behead before eating ) , grasshoppers , cicadas and caterpillars ( especially of the family Noctuidae ) , which are important in feeding nestlings . Australian ravens sometimes eat yabbies ( <unk> destructor ) from the edges of dams . Unusually for a ground @-@ feeding omnivore , earthworms are rarely eaten . Australian ravens have been reported killing birds of such size as young galahs ( Eolophus <unk> ) and starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Most mammals are eaten as carrion , as many species are too large for the raven to kill , though young rabbits are a frequent prey item . Australian ravens drink water frequently , up to ten times a day in hot weather . Birds have been observed dunking pieces of meat in water before eating them , as well as doing the same with hard biscuits to make them soggy and soft . 
 Australian ravens are intelligent birds , and like many other corvids have innovative methods of seeking out food . Foraging takes place in the early morning or late afternoon ; birds rest in the hotter part of the day . Food is taken mainly from the ground , birds either finding objects while flying overhead , or by walking along and looking . However , they occasionally feed in trees — Australian ravens forage eucalypt foliage for Christmas beetles ( <unk> ) , and devote a substantial amount of time to look for nests and eggs to eat . They have also been known to take golf balls from fairways , possibly mistaking them for eggs . Ravens use their bill rather than their feet to explore or turn items on the ground ( rocks or sticks ) over , or hold or snatch food while flying . They have also been recorded using fence posts as anvils to bash snails against before eating them . Australian ravens most often eat food where they find it unless taking food back for nestlings . Occasionally they have been observed caching carrion or a killed animal in a hole nearby to store it . They can pack shredded meat in their mouth under their tongue . Australian ravens have adapted well to eating food scraps in urban areas , such as school playgrounds , rubbish tips , bins outside supermarkets or restaurants , <unk> , <unk> and farmyards . In one isolated study , they were observed feeding on nectar from eucalypt flowers . Australian ravens sometimes forage in mixed @-@ species flocks with any of the other four species of Australian corvids . Sometimes they are aggressive with little ravens if both are at a food source and drive them off , though not if the smaller species greatly outnumbers the larger . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Australian ravens begin breeding once they are three years old . Breeding season is from July to September , with no substantial difference in timing across its range around the country despite it inhabiting a range of diverse climates and habitats across 19 degrees of latitude . Rowley has pointed out this is unusual for a bird species with a wide range and has postulated that breeding is initiated by day length . Rarely , breeding can take place in May , June or October . Australian ravens generally nest in tall trees , never near to the ground as some species do . The nest also functions as a lookout post and so tall or emergent trees are selected . The ravens occasionally nest on buildings , telegraph poles , or tall windmills which allow the species to occupy areas lacking in tall trees . Windmills may have assisted the spread of the species in North Queensland and the Northern Territory . The highest recorded corvid nest in Australia was found atop the AWA Tower in Sydney . 
 Nests are generally large and untidy , consisting of a bowl or platform of sticks lined with grasses , barks , and feathers that can be up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . As they are relatively heavy , they are built on larger forks in trees rather than out in the canopy . Building the nest is often time @-@ consuming initially as the birds try ( and often fail ) to wedge sticks , which are 30 – 60 cm ( 12 – 24 in ) long and 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) thick , into the tree fork to make a platform . Thinner sticks and rootlets are used to make the bowl before the bowl is lined with feathers . Both birds build the nest , with the female taking over the lining of the nest while the male brings her material . New nests are built each year generally , as the re @-@ use of old ones might spread disease or parasites — nests become caked with faeces as the nestlings grow and the parents cannot keep up with its removal . Furthermore , old nests often disintegrate within twelve months due to their exposed locations . The female develops a brood patch — a patch of bare skin on the bird 's underparts that reddens and becomes much more extensive from around three weeks before the first egg is laid . The skin itself is <unk> and wrinkled , and does not get re @-@ feathered until December after the breeding season has finished . 
 Their lofty locations makes monitoring of Australian raven nests difficult . A clutch can comprise up to six eggs , though usually four or five are laid , with five being the commonest number . Measuring 45 by 30 mm ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 by 1 1 ⁄ 4 in ) , eggs are pale green or bluish @-@ green and splotched with darker olive , brown and blackish markings . Eggs are quite variable , and thus which Australian corvid laid them cannot be reliably identified . Incubation of the eggs is done solely by the female over roughly 20 days . Incubation is intermittent initially , becoming constant by the time the third or fourth egg is laid . Only one brood is raised per year , though a second clutch may be laid if the first clutch is lost early in the season . Late clutches have poor survival rates , possibly due to chicks getting dehydrated on hot days as the year progresses or being eaten by wedge @-@ tailed eagles . The chicks are altricial and nidicolous ; that is , they are born helpless , naked and blind , and remain in the nest for an extended period . They have pink skin until 5 days of age , when feathers under the skin turn it grey . They lose their egg tooth at the same time . Their eyes begin opening at 5 to 6 days of age and are fully open by 11 to 12 days , by which time their feathers begin emerging . At 14 days , their primary feathers begin emerging , and they are fully feathered by 35 – 36 days old . They leave the nest at 40 – 45 days of age , and stay with the parents for three to four months after that . They follow their parents and beg for food for the first month outside the nest but are feeding themselves by the third month . Young birds are often attacked when they enter neighbouring territories , and melees ensue as their parents try to defend them and herd them back . 
 = = = Parasites and predators = = = 
 A circovirus — given the name raven circovirus or <unk> — was isolated from an Australian raven suffering from feather lesions in 2006 . It has affinities with canary circovirus ( <unk> ) and pigeon circovirus ( <unk> ) . Its clinical significance is unknown . Tick infestation is rare in the Australian raven , with Ixodes <unk> and Amblyomma <unk> recorded . Lice and <unk> flies have been recorded yet little @-@ researched , and an infestation by the fly <unk> <unk> was recorded in one nest . 
 The wedge @-@ tailed eagle ( Aquila audax ) preys on adult , nestling , and fledgling Australian ravens , while the little eagle ( <unk> <unk> ) also takes nestlings , and powerful owl ( Ninox <unk> ) has been recorded killing adults ; other birds of prey are seen as threats , yet there is no evidence they have successfully preyed on the ravens . The introduced red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) competes with the Australian raven for carrion and can drive it off . It may also kill young birds that it catches on the ground . The channel @-@ billed cuckoo ( Scythrops novaehollandiae ) has been recorded as a brood parasite . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Australian ravens die most often by being shot or poisoned — generally by farmers . Despite their fondness for roadkill , fewer ravens are hit by vehicles than Australian magpies . Research in the 1950s and 60s showed that 64 % of Australian ravens perished in their first year of life . Immature birds are most at risk of dying as they are more likely to come into conflict with farmers . The Australian Raven is a peaceful bird , showing no aggression toward humans or other birds without reason . However , the Australian raven is frequently blamed for the loss of young lambs . Scientific observation in the country 's southeast showed that the killing of healthy lambs was rare , but that sick animals were predisposed to being attacked . Australian ravens mostly eat faeces ( often from the lamb 's anus ) , afterbirth or stillborn lambs . Newborn lamb faeces is nutritious , containing around 21 – 44 % protein , 9 – 37 % fat and 10 – 30 % carbohydrate . It has the consistency of treacle and often sticks to the lamb 's hindquarters or tail . The raven bites a sleeping lamb 's tail , holding on and walking behind it when it wakes up . A healthy lamb would respond by running away or butting the bird , but a sick one might not respond and be attacked further as it alerts the bird that it is vulnerable . Wounded lambs can also succumb to Clostridium infection as these bacteria are present on raven bills . Ravens bring some benefits to agricultural areas as they clean away carrion and eat insects that are potentially damaging to crops . In areas of Western Australia , the species is classified as a Declared Pest of Agriculture under the provisions of the Agriculture and Related Resources Protection Act 1976 , meaning that shooting on private land in rural areas is legal , although should be considered only after other options have been exhausted . 
 = = = In indigenous culture = = = 
 In Australian Aboriginal mythology , Crow is a trickster , culture hero and ancestral being . In the Kulin nation in central Victoria he was known as Waa ( also Wahn or <unk> ) and was regarded as one of two moiety ancestors , the other being the more sombre <unk> <unk> . Legends relating to Crow have been observed in various Aboriginal language groups and cultures across Australia . 
 To the Noongar people of southwestern Australia , the Australian raven was <unk> , " the Watcher " and was wily and unpredictable . Noongar people were socially divided into two moieties or <unk> : <unk> @-@ maat and <unk> @-@ maat , or members of the Australian raven and long @-@ billed corella ( Cacatua tenuirostris ) respectively . 
 = Clifton Suspension Bridge = 
 The Clifton Suspension Bridge is a suspension bridge spanning the Avon Gorge and the River Avon , linking Clifton in Bristol to Leigh Woods in North Somerset . Since opening in 1864 , it has been a toll bridge . The income from the tolls continues to provide funds for its maintenance . The bridge is built to a design by William Henry Barlow and John Hawkshaw , based on an earlier design by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , and contributed to by Sarah Guppy . It is a grade I listed building and forms part of the <unk> road . 
 The idea of building a bridge across the Avon Gorge originated in 1753 . Original plans were for a stone bridge and later iterations were for a wrought iron structure . In 1831 , an attempt to build Brunel 's design was halted by the Bristol riots , and the revised version of his designs was built after his death and completed in 1864 . Although similar in size , the bridge towers are not identical in design , the Clifton tower having side cut @-@ outs , the Leigh tower more pointed arches atop a 110 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) red sandstone @-@ clad abutment . Roller @-@ mounted " saddles " at the top of each tower allow movement of the three independent wrought iron chains on each side when loads pass over the bridge . The bridge deck is suspended by 162 vertical wrought @-@ iron rods in 81 matching pairs . 
 The Clifton Bridge Company initially managed the bridge under licence from a charitable trust . The trust subsequently purchased the company shares , completing this in 1949 and took over the running of the bridge using the income from tolls to pay for maintenance . The bridge is a distinctive landmark , used as a symbol of Bristol on postcards , promotional materials , and informational web sites . It was also used as a backdrop to several films and television advertising and programmes . It has also been the venue for significant cultural events such as the first modern bungee jump in 1979 , the last ever Concorde flight in 2003 and a handover of the Olympic Torch relay in 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Plans = = = 
 It is unknown when the first bridge was constructed across the Avon in Bristol , but the first stone bridge , Bristol Bridge , was built in the 13th century . It had houses with <unk> built on it to pay for its maintenance . A 17th @-@ century illustration shows that these bridge houses were five stories high , including the attic rooms , and that they overhung the river much as Tudor houses would overhang the street . In the 1760s a bill to replace the bridge was carried through parliament by the Bristol MP Sir <unk> Smyth . By the early 18th century , increase in traffic and the encroachment of shops on the roadway made the bridge fatally dangerous for many pedestrians . A new bridge , designed by James Bridges and finished by Thomas Paty was built in 1763 and 1768 . Resentment at the tolls exacted to cross the new bridge occasioned the Bristol Bridge Riot of 1793 . Other crossings were considered , but were restricted by Admiralty rules that stipulated that any bridge had to be at least 100 feet ( 30 m ) above the water to allow the passage of tall @-@ masted warships , to Bristol Harbour . To achieve this , any bridge constructed between Bristol Bridge and Avon Gorge , from Hotwells to Ashton Gate , would require massive embankments and viaducts . The alternative was to build across the narrowest point of the Avon Gorge , well above the height required for shipping . 
 In 1753 Bristolian merchant William Vick had left a bequest in his will of £ 1 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 140 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , invested with instructions that when the interest had accumulated to £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 370 @,@ 000 ) , it should be used for the purpose of building a stone bridge between Clifton Down ( which was in Gloucestershire , outside the City of Bristol , until the 1830s ) and Leigh Woods in Somerset . Although there was little development in the area before the late 18th century , as Bristol became more prosperous , Clifton became fashionable and more wealthy merchants moved to the area . In 1793 William Bridges published plans for a stone arch with abutments containing factories , which would pay for the upkeep of the bridge . The French Revolutionary Wars broke out soon after the design was published , affecting trade and commerce , so the plans were shelved . Sarah Guppy patented designs for a suspension bridge across the gorge which she later gave to Brunel . 
 By 1829 , Vick 's bequest had reached £ 8 @,@ 000 , but it was estimated that a stone bridge would cost over ten times that . A competition was held to find a design for the bridge with a prize of 100 guineas . Entries were received from 22 designers , including Samuel Brown , James Meadows Rendel , William Tierney Clark and William Hazledine . Several were for stone bridges and had estimated costs of between £ 30 @,@ 000 and £ 93 @,@ 000 . Brunel submitted four entries . The judging committee rejected 17 of the 22 plans submitted , on the grounds of appearance or cost . They then called in Scottish civil engineer Thomas Telford to make a final selection from the five remaining entries . Telford rejected all the remaining designs , arguing that 577 feet ( 176 m ) was the maximum possible span . Telford was then asked to produce a design himself , which he did , proposing a 110 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 34 m ) suspension bridge , supported on tall Gothic towers , costing £ 52 @,@ 000 . 
 An Act of Parliament was passed to allow a wrought iron suspension bridge to be built instead of stone , and tolls levied to recoup the cost . A company was formed and funds raised during the first few months of 1830 , but the money raised was not sufficient for the construction . Despite this , the act received Royal Assent in May 1830 . Brunel produced a new proposal costing £ 10 @,@ 000 less than Telford 's design and gained support for it in the local press . James Meadows Rendel , William Armstrong and William Hill also submitted new , cheaper proposals , complaining that the committee had not set a budget . In 1831 a second competition was held , with new judges including Davies Gilbert and John Seaward examining the engineering qualities of the proposals . Thirteen designs were submitted ; Telford 's was the only one in which the chains achieved the weight per square inch required by the judges but it was rejected as being too expensive . The winner was declared to be a design by Smith and Hawkes of the Eagle Foundry in Birmingham . Brunel had a personal meeting with Gilbert and persuaded him to change the decision . The committee then declared Brunel the winner and he was awarded a contract as project engineer . The winning design was for a suspension bridge with fashionably Egyptian @-@ influenced towers . In 2010 , newly discovered letters and documents revealed that , in producing his design , Brunel had taken advice from his father , Sir Marc Isambard Brunel . The elder Brunel had recommended including a central support for the bridge , as he did not believe a single @-@ span bridge of such length could be constructed . His son chose to ignore his advice . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 A ceremony to mark the start of the construction works was held on 21 June 1831 . A few days later work was halted by the Bristol riots , which took place after the House of Lords rejected the second Reform Bill , which aimed to eliminate some of the rotten boroughs and give parliamentary seats to Britain 's fast growing industrial towns such as Bristol . Five hundred to six hundred young men were involved in the riots and Brunel was sworn in as a special constable . The riots severely dented commercial confidence in Bristol ; subscriptions to the bridge company ceased , and along with it , further construction of the bridge . 
 After the passing of the Act for the Great Western Railway reestablished financial confidence , work resumed in 1836 , but subsequent investment proved woefully inadequate . Despite the main contractors going bankrupt in 1837 , the towers were built in unfinished stone . To enable the transfer of materials , a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 300 m ) iron bar , which was 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) in diameter , had been drawn by capstan across the gorge . A contract was placed with Dowlais Ironworks to supply 600 tons of bar iron , which was to be transported to the <unk> foundry to be forged into bar chains . By 1843 funds were exhausted and another £ 30 @,@ 000 was needed . As the work had exceeded the time limit stated in the Act , all work stopped . Brunel suggested building a deep water pier at Portbury , which would make the bridge an essential road link , but funds for this scheme were not forthcoming . In 1851 , the ironwork was sold and used to build the Brunel @-@ designed Royal Albert Bridge on the railway between Plymouth and Saltash . The towers remained and during the 1850s intrepid passengers could cross the gorge in a basket slung from the iron bar . 
 Brunel died in 1859 , without seeing the completion of the bridge . His colleagues in the Institution of Civil Engineers felt that completion of the Bridge would be a fitting memorial , and started to raise new funds . In 1860 , Brunel 's Hungerford suspension bridge over the Thames in London was demolished to make way for a new railway bridge to Charing Cross railway station . Its chains were purchased for use at Clifton . 
 A revised design was made by William Henry Barlow and Sir John Hawkshaw , with a wider , higher and sturdier deck than Brunel intended , with triple chains instead of double . 
 It has been argued that the size and technology of these revisions was so great that the credit for its design should go the Barlow and Hawkshaw . The towers remained in rough stone , rather than being finished in the Egyptian style . Work on the bridge was restarted in 1862 . Initially a temporary bridge was created by pulling ropes across the gorge and making a footway of wire ropes with wood planks held together with iron hoops . This was used by the workers to move a " traveller " , consisting of a light frame on wheels , to transport each link individually , which would eventually make up the chains supporting the bridge . The chains are anchored in tapering tunnels , 25 metres ( 82 ft ) long , on either side of the bridge and plugs of Staffordshire blue brick infilled to prevent the chains being pulled out of the narrower tunnel mouth . After completion of the chains , vertical suspension rods were hung from the links in the chains and large girders hung from these . The girders on either side then support the deck , which is 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) higher at the Clifton end than at Leigh Woods so that it gives the impression of being horizontal . The strength of the structure was tested by spreading 500 tons of stone over the bridge . This caused it to sag by 7 inches ( 180 mm ) , but within the expected tolerances . During this time a tunnel was driven through the rocks on the Leigh Woods side beneath the bridge to carry the Bristol Port Railway to Avonmouth . The construction work was completed in 1864 — 111 years after a bridge at the site was first planned . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 On 8 December 1864 , the bridge was lit by magnesium flares for its ceremonial opening parade , but they were blown out by the wind . The custom of lighting the bridge has continued with more recent events , although later thousands of electric light bulbs were attached to the bridge instead of flares . 
 In 1860 the Clifton Bridge Company was set up to oversee the final stages of completion and manage the operation of the bridge . They paid £ 50 each year to the trustees who gradually purchased the shares in the company . The revenues from tolls were minimal initially as there was not much traffic ; however , this increased after 1920 with greater car ownership . In 1949 the trustees purchased all the outstanding shares and debentures . The bridge is managed by a charitable trust , originally formed by the Society of Merchant Venturers following Vick 's bequest . The trust was authorised to manage the bridge and collect tolls by Acts of Parliament in 1952 , 1980 and 1986 . A toll of £ 0 @.@ 50 has been levied on vehicles since 2007 , but the £ 0 @.@ 05 toll that the Act allows for cyclists or pedestrians is not collected . Human toll collectors were replaced by automated machines in 1975 . The tolls are used to pay for the upkeep of the bridge , including the strengthening of the chain anchor points , which was done in 1925 and 1939 , and regular painting and maintenance , which is carried out from a motorised cradle slung beneath the deck . By 2008 over 4 million vehicles crossed the bridge each year . In February 2012 , the bridge trustees applied to the Department for Transport to increase the toll to £ 1 , subsequently implemented on 24 April 2014 . 
 On 1 April 1979 , the first modern bungee jumps were made from the bridge by members of the University of Oxford Dangerous Sports Club . In 2003 and 2004 , the weight of crowds travelling to and from the Ashton Court Festival and Bristol International Balloon Fiesta put such great strain on the bridge that it was decided to close the bridge to all motor traffic and pedestrians during the events . The closure of the bridge for major annual events has continued each year since then . 
 On 26 November 2003 , the last ever Concorde flight ( Concorde 216 ) flew over the bridge before landing at Filton Aerodrome . In April 2006 , the bridge was the centrepiece of the Brunel 200 weekend , celebrating the 200th anniversary of the birth of Isambard Kingdom Brunel . At the climax of the celebration a firework display was launched from the bridge . The celebrations also saw the activation of an LED @-@ based lighting array to illuminate the bridge . 
 On 4 April 2009 , the bridge was shut for one night to allow a crack in one of the support hangers to be repaired . On 23 May 2012 , the London 2012 Olympic Torch relay crossed over the bridge , where two of the torchbearers came together in a " kiss " to exchange the flame in the middle of Brunel 's iconic landmark . The bridge carries four million vehicles per year , along part of the <unk> road . The bridge is a grade I listed building . 
 In November 2011 it was announced that a new visitor centre , costing nearly £ 2 million , was to be built at the Leigh Woods end of the bridge to replace the temporary building currently being used . The new facilities were scheduled to be completed before the 150th anniversary of the opening , which was celebrated on 8 December 2014 . In December 2012 it was announced that the bridge had received £ 595 @,@ 000 of funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund to improve the visitor centre . 
 = = Engineering = = 
 Although similar in size , the bridge towers are not identical in design , the Clifton tower having side cut @-@ outs , the Leigh tower more pointed arches . Brunel 's original plan proposed they be topped with then @-@ fashionable sphinxes , but the ornaments were never constructed . 
 The 85 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 26 m ) Leigh Woods tower stands atop a 110 @-@ foot ( 34 m ) red sandstone @-@ clad abutment . In 2002 it was discovered that this was not a solid structure but contained 12 vaulted chambers up to 35 feet ( 11 m ) high , linked by shafts and tunnels . 
 Roller @-@ mounted " saddles " at the top of each tower allow movement of the chains when loads pass over the bridge . Though their total travel is minuscule , their ability to absorb forces created by chain deflection prevents damage to both tower and chain . 
 The bridge has three independent wrought iron chains per side , from which the bridge deck is suspended by eighty @-@ one matching vertical wrought @-@ iron rods ranging from 65 feet ( 20 m ) at the ends to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) in the centre . Composed of numerous parallel rows of <unk> connected by bolts , the chains are anchored in tunnels in the rocks 60 feet ( 18 m ) below ground level at the sides of the gorge . The deck was originally laid with wooden planking , later covered with asphalt , which was renewed in 2009 . The weight of the bridge , including chains , rods , girders and deck is approximately 1 @,@ 500 tons . 
 = = Dimensions = = 
 Clearance : 245 ft ( 75 m ) above high water level 
 Dip of chains : 70 ft ( 21 @.@ 34 m ) 
 Height of towers : 86 ft ( 26 m ) above deck 
 Overall length : 1 @,@ 352 ft ( 412 m ) 
 Overall width : 31 ft ( 9 @.@ 45 m ) 
 Span : 702 ft 3 in ( 214 @.@ 05 m ) 
 = = Incidents = = 
 Two men were killed during the construction of the bridge . In 1885 , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old woman named Sarah Ann Henley survived a suicide attempt off the bridge when her billowing skirts acted as a parachute ; she subsequently lived into her eighties . 
 The Clifton Suspension Bridge is well known as a suicide bridge and is fitted with plaques that advertise the telephone number of The Samaritans . Between 1974 and 1993 , 127 people fell to their deaths from the bridge . In 1998 barriers were installed on the bridge to prevent people jumping . In the four years after installation this reduced the suicide rate from eight deaths per year to four . Nicolette Powell , the wife of UK rhythm and blues singer Georgie Fame , formerly the Marchioness of Londonderry , committed suicide from the bridge on 13 August 1993 . 
 In 1957 a Filton @-@ based RAF Vampire jet from 501 Squadron piloted by Flying officer John Greenwood flew under the deck while performing a victory roll before crashing in Leigh Woods , killing the pilot . The accident caused a landslip that led to the temporary closure of the nearby Bristol to Portishead railway line . A police helicopter flew under the bridge during a search in 1997 . 
 On 12 February 2014 the bridge was closed to traffic due to wind for the first time in living memory . 
 = Social history of viruses = 
 The social history of viruses describes the influence of viruses and viral infections on human history . Epidemics caused by viruses began when human behaviour changed during the Neolithic period , around 12 @,@ 000 years ago , when humans developed more densely populated agricultural communities . This allowed viruses to spread rapidly and subsequently to become endemic . Viruses of plants and livestock also increased , and as humans became dependent on agriculture and farming , diseases such as <unk> of potatoes and rinderpest of cattle had devastating consequences . 
 Smallpox and measles viruses are among the oldest that infect humans . Having evolved from viruses that infected other animals , they first appeared in humans in Europe and North Africa thousands of years ago . The viruses were later carried to the New World by Europeans during the time of the Spanish Conquests , but the indigenous people had no natural resistance to the viruses and millions of them died during epidemics . Influenza pandemics have been recorded since 1580 , and they have occurred with increasing frequency in subsequent centuries . The pandemic of 1918 – 19 , in which 40 – 50 million died in less than a year , was one of the most devastating in history . 
 Louis Pasteur and Edward Jenner were the first to develop vaccines to protect against viral infections . The nature of viruses remained unknown until the invention of the electron microscope in the 1930s , when the science of virology gained momentum . In the 20th century many diseases both old and new were found to be caused by viruses . There were epidemics of poliomyelitis that were only controlled following the development of a vaccine in the 1950s . HIV is one of the most pathogenic new viruses to have emerged in centuries . Although scientific interest in them arose because of the diseases they cause , most viruses are beneficial . They drive evolution by transferring genes across species , play important roles in ecosystems and are essential to life . 
 = = In prehistory = = 
 Over the past 50 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 years , as modern humans increased in numbers and dispersed throughout the world , new infectious diseases emerged , including those caused by viruses . Earlier , humans lived in small , isolated communities , and most epidemic diseases did not exist . Smallpox , which is the most lethal and devastating viral infection in history , first emerged among agricultural communities in India about 11 @,@ 000 years ago . The virus , which only infected humans , probably descended from the poxviruses of rodents . Humans probably came into contact with these rodents , and some people became infected by the viruses they carried . When viruses cross this so @-@ called " species barrier " , their effects can be severe , and humans may have had little natural resistance . Contemporary humans lived in small communities , and those who succumbed to infection either died or developed immunity . This acquired immunity is only passed down to offspring temporarily , by antibodies in breast milk and other antibodies that cross the placenta from the mother 's blood to the unborn child 's . Therefore , sporadic outbreaks probably occurred in each generation . In about 9000 BC , when many people began to settle on the fertile flood plains of the River Nile , the population became dense enough for the virus to maintain a constant presence because of the high concentration of susceptible people . Other epidemics of viral diseases that depend on large concentrations of people , such as mumps , rubella and polio , also first occurred at this time . 
 The Neolithic age , which began in the Middle East in about 9500 BC , was a time when humans became farmers . This agricultural revolution embraced the development of monoculture and presented an opportunity for the rapid spread of several species of plant viruses . The divergence and spread of <unk> – southern bean mosaic virus – date from this time . The spread of the <unk> of potatoes , and other fruits and vegetables , began about 6 @,@ 600 years ago . 
 About 10 @,@ 000 years ago the humans who inhabited the lands around the Mediterranean basin began to domesticate wild animals . Pigs , cattle , goats , sheep , horses , camels , cats and dogs were all kept and bred in captivity . These animals would have brought their viruses with them . The transmission of viruses from animals to humans can occur , but such zoonotic infections are rare and subsequent human @-@ to @-@ human transmission of animal viruses is even rarer , although there are notable exceptions such as influenza . Most viruses are species @-@ specific and would have posed no threat to humans . The rare epidemics of viral diseases originating in animals would have been short @-@ lived because the viruses were not fully adapted to humans and the human populations were too small to maintain the chains of infection . 
 Other , more ancient , viruses have been less of a threat . Herpes viruses first infected the ancestors of modern humans over 80 million years ago . Humans have developed a tolerance to these viruses , and most are infected with at least one species . Records of these milder virus infections are rare , but it is likely that early hominids suffered from colds , influenza and diarrhoea caused by viruses just as humans do today . More recently evolved viruses cause epidemics and pandemics – and it is these that history records . The influenza virus is one that seems to have crossed the species barrier from pigs to ducks and water fowl and hence to humans . It is possible that a fatal plague in the Middle East at the time of the late 18th Dynasty was associated with this transmission at Amarna . 
 = = In antiquity = = 
 Among the earliest records of a viral infection is an Egyptian stele thought to depict an Egyptian priest from the 18th Dynasty ( 1580 – 1350 BC ) with a foot drop deformity characteristic of a poliovirus infection . The mummy of <unk> – a ruler during the 19th Dynasty – shows signs of poliomyelitis , and that of Ramesses V and some other Egyptian mummies buried over 3000 years ago show evidence of smallpox . There was an epidemic of smallpox in Athens in 430 BC , in which a quarter of the Athenian army and many of the city 's civilians died from the infection . 
 Measles is an old disease , but it was not until the 10th century that the Persian physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al @-@ Razi ( 865 – 925 ) – known as " Rhazes " – first identified it . Rhazes used the Arabic name <unk> for measles . It has had many other names including <unk> from the Latin word <unk> , " red " , and <unk> , " small plague " . The close similarities between measles virus , canine distemper virus and rinderpest virus have given rise to speculation that measles was first transmitted to humans from domesticated dogs or cattle . The measles virus appears to have fully diverged from the then @-@ widespread rinderpest virus by the 12th century . 
 A measles infection confers lifelong immunity . Therefore , the virus requires a high population density to become endemic , and this probably did not occur in the Neolithic age . Following the emergence of the virus in the Middle East , it reached India by 2500 BC . Measles was so common in children at the time that it was not recognised as a disease . In Egyptian hieroglyphs it was described as a normal stage of human development . One of the earliest descriptions of a virus @-@ infected plant can be found in a poem written by the Japanese Empress <unk> ( 718 – 770 ) , in which she describes a plant in summer with yellowing leaves . The plant , later identified as <unk> <unk> , is often infected with tomato yellow leaf curl virus . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 The rapidly growing population of Europe and the rising concentrations of people in its towns and cities became a fertile ground for many infectious and contagious diseases , of which the Black Death – a bacterial infection – is probably the most notorious . Except for smallpox and influenza , documented outbreaks of infections now known to be caused by viruses were rare . Rabies , a disease that had been recognised for over 4000 years , was rife in Europe , and continued to be so until the development of a vaccine by Louis Pasteur in 1886 . The average life expectancy in Europe during the Middle Ages was 35 years ; 60 % of children died before the age of 16 , many of them during their first 6 years of life . Physicians – what few there were – relied as much on astrology as they did on their limited medical knowledge . Some treatments for infections consisted of ointments prepared from cats that had been roasted in hedgehog fat . Among the plethora of diseases that caused childhood death were measles , influenza and smallpox . The Crusades and the Muslim conquests aided the spread of smallpox , which was the cause of frequent epidemics in Europe following its introduction to the continent between the fifth and seventh centuries . 
 Measles was endemic throughout the highly populated countries of Europe , North Africa and the Middle East . In England the disease , then called " <unk> " , was first described in the 13th century , and it was probably one of the 49 plagues that occurred between 526 and 1087 . Rinderpest , which is caused by a virus closely related to measles virus , is a disease of cattle known since Roman times . The disease , which originated in Asia , was first brought to Europe by the invading Huns in 370 . Later invasions of Mongols , led by Genghis Khan and his army , started pandemics in Europe in 1222 , 1233 and 1238 . The infection subsequently reached England following the importation of cattle from the continent . At the time rinderpest was a devastating disease with a mortality rate of 80 – 90 % . The resulting loss of cattle caused famine . 
 = = Early to late modern period = = 
 A short time after Henry Tudor 's victory at the Battle of Bosworth on 22 August 1485 , his army suddenly went down with " the English sweat " , which contemporary observers described as a new disease . The disease , which was unusual in that it mainly affected the affluent , might have originated in France where Henry VII had recruited soldiers for his army . An epidemic hit London in the hot summer of 1508 . Victims died within a day , and there were deaths throughout the city . The streets were deserted apart from carts transporting bodies , and King Henry declared the city off limits except for physicians and apothecaries . The disease spread to Europe , arriving in Hamburg in July 1529 where one to two thousand victims died within the first few weeks . During the following months it wreaked havoc in Prussia , Switzerland , and northern Europe . The last outbreak was in England in 1556 . The disease – which killed tens of thousands of people – was probably influenza or a similar viral infection , but records from the time when medicine was not a science can be unreliable . As medicine became a science , the descriptions of disease became less vague . Although medicine could do little at the time to alleviate the suffering of the victims of infection , measures to control the spread of diseases were used . Restrictions on trade and travel were implemented , stricken families were isolated from their communities , buildings were fumigated and livestock killed . 
 References to influenza infections date from the late 15th and early 16th centuries , but infections almost certainly occurred long before then . In 1173 , an epidemic occurred that was possibly the first in Europe , and in 1493 , an outbreak of what is now thought to be swine influenza , struck Native Americans in Hispaniola . There is some evidence to suggest that source of the infection was pigs on Columbus 's ships . During an influenza epidemic that occurred in England between 1557 and 1559 , five per cent of the population – about 150 @,@ 000 – died from the infection . The mortality rate was nearly five times that of the 1918 – 19 pandemic . The first pandemic that was reliably recorded began in July 1580 and swept across Europe , Africa , and Asia . The mortality rate was high – 8 @,@ 000 died in Rome . The next three pandemics occurred in the 18th century , including that during 1781 – 82 , which was probably the most devastating in history . This began in November 1781 in China and reached Moscow in December . In February 1782 it hit Saint Petersburg , and by May it had reached Denmark . Within six weeks , 75 per cent of the British population were infected and the pandemic soon spread to the Americas . 
 The Americas and Australia remained free of measles and smallpox until the arrival of European colonists between the 15th and 18th centuries . Along with measles and influenza , smallpox was taken to the Americas by the Spanish . Smallpox was endemic in Spain , having been introduced by the Moors from Africa . In 1519 , an epidemic of smallpox broke out in the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan in Mexico . This was started by the army of Pánfilo de Narváez , who followed Hernán Cortés from Cuba and had an African slave suffering from smallpox aboard his ship . When the Spanish finally entered the capital in the summer of 1521 , they saw it strewn with the bodies of smallpox victims . The epidemic , and those that followed during 1545 – 1548 and 1576 – 1581 , eventually killed more than half of the native population . Most of the Spanish were immune ; with his army of fewer than 900 men it would not have been possible for Cortés to defeat the Aztecs and conquer Mexico without the help of smallpox . Many Native American populations were devastated later by the inadvertent spread of diseases introduced by Europeans . In the 150 years that followed Columbus 's arrival in 1492 , the Native American population of North America was reduced by 80 per cent from diseases , including measles , smallpox and influenza . The damage done by these viruses significantly aided European attempts to displace and conquer the native population . 
 By the 18th century , smallpox was endemic in Europe . There were five epidemics in London between 1719 and 1746 , and large outbreaks occurred in other major European cities . By the end of the century about 400 @,@ 000 Europeans were dying from the disease each year . It reached South Africa in 1713 , having been carried by ships from India , and in 1789 the disease struck Australia . In the 19th century , smallpox became the single most important cause of death of the Australian Aborigines . 
 In 1546 Girolamo <unk> ( 1478 – 1553 ) wrote a classic description of measles . He thought the disease was caused by " seeds " ( <unk> ) that were spread from person to person . An epidemic hit London in 1670 , recorded by Thomas Sydenham ( 1624 – 1689 ) , who thought it was caused by toxic vapours emanating from the earth . His theory was wrong but he was a skilled observer and kept meticulous records . 
 Yellow fever is an often lethal disease caused by a flavivirus . The virus is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes ( Aedes aegypti ) and first appeared over 3 @,@ 000 years ago . In 1647 , the first recorded epidemic occurred on Barbados and was called " Barbados distemper " by John Winthrop , who was the governor of the island at the time . He passed quarantine laws to protect the people – the first ever such laws in North America . Further epidemics of the disease occurred in North America in the 17th , 18th and 19th centuries . The first known cases of dengue fever occurred in Indonesia and Egypt in 1779 . Trade ships brought the disease to the US , where an epidemic occurred in Philadelphia in 1780 . 
 Many paintings can be found in the museums of Europe depicting tulips with attractive coloured stripes . Most , such as the still life studies of Johannes <unk> , were painted during the 17th century . These flowers were particularly popular and became sought after by those who could afford them . At the peak of this tulip mania in the 1630s , one bulb could cost as much as a house . It was not known at the time that the stripes were caused by a virus accidentally transferred by humans to tulips from jasmine . Weakened by the virus , the plants turned out to be a poor investment . Only a few bulbs produced flowers with the attractive characteristics of their parent plants . 
 Until the Irish Great Famine of 1845 – 1852 , the commonest cause of disease in potatoes was not the mould that causes blight , it was a virus . The disease , called " curl " , is caused by potato <unk> virus , and it was widespread in England in the 1770s , where it destroyed 75 per cent of the potato crop . At that time , the Irish potato crop remained relatively unscathed . 
 = = Discovery of vaccination = = 
 Lady Mary Wortley Montagu ( 1689 – 1762 ) was an aristocrat , a writer and the wife of a Member of Parliament . In 1716 , her husband , Edward Wortley Montagu , was appointed British Ambassador in Istanbul . She followed him there and two weeks after her arrival discovered the local practice of protection against smallpox by variolation – the injection of pus from smallpox victims into the skin . Her younger brother had died of smallpox , and she too had had the disease . Determined to spare her five @-@ year @-@ old son Edward from similar suffering , she ordered the embassy surgeon Charles Maitland to <unk> him . On her return to London , she asked Maitland to <unk> her four @-@ year @-@ old daughter in the presence of the king 's physicians . Later , Montagu persuaded the Prince and Princess of Wales to sponsor a public demonstration of the procedure . Six prisoners who had been condemned to death and were awaiting execution at Newgate Prison were offered a full pardon for serving as the subjects of the public experiment . They accepted and were <unk> in 1721 . All the prisoners recovered from the procedure . To test its protective effect one of them , a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old woman , was ordered to sleep in the same bed as a ten @-@ year @-@ old smallpox victim for six weeks . She did not contract the disease . 
 The experiment was repeated on eleven orphan children , all of whom survived the ordeal , and by 1722 even King George I 's grandchildren had been inoculated . The practice was not entirely safe and there was a one in fifty chance of death . The procedure was expensive ; some medical practitioners charged between £ 5 and £ 10 and some sold the method to other practitioners for fees between £ 50 to £ 100 , or for half of the profits . <unk> became a lucrative franchise , but it remained beyond the means of many until the late 1770s . At the time nothing was known about viruses or the immune system , and no one knew how the procedure afforded protection . 
 Edward Jenner ( 1749 – 1823 ) , a British rural physician , was <unk> as a boy . He had suffered greatly from the ordeal but survived fully protected from smallpox . Jenner knew of a local belief that dairy workers who had contracted a relatively mild infection called cowpox were immune to smallpox . He decided to test the theory ( although he was probably not the first to do so ) . On 14 May 1796 he selected " a healthy boy , about eight years old for the purpose of inoculation for the Cow Pox " . The boy , James Phipps ( 1788 – 1853 ) , survived the experimental inoculation with cowpox virus and suffered only a mild fever . On 1 July 1796 , Jenner took some " smallpox matter " ( probably infected pus ) and repeatedly inoculated Phipps 's arms with it . Phipps survived and was subsequently inoculated with smallpox more than 20 times without succumbing to the disease . Vaccination – the word is derived from the Latin <unk> meaning " cow " – had been invented . Jenner 's method was soon shown to be safer than variolation , and by 1801 more than 100 @,@ 000 people had been vaccinated . 
 Despite objections from those medical practitioners who still practised variolation , and who foresaw a decline in their income , free vaccination of the poor was introduced in the UK in 1840 . Because of associated deaths , variolation was declared illegal in the same year . Vaccination was made compulsory in England and Wales by the 1853 Vaccination Act , and parents could be fined £ 1 if their children were not vaccinated before they were three months of age . The law was not adequately enforced , and the system for providing vaccinations , unchanged since 1840 , was ineffective . After an early compliance by the population only a small proportion were vaccinated . Compulsory vaccination was not well received and , following protests , the Anti @-@ Vaccination League and the Anti @-@ Compulsory Vaccination League were formed in 1866 . Following the anti @-@ vaccination campaigns there was a severe outbreak of smallpox in Gloucester in 1895 , the city 's first in twenty years ; 434 people died , including 281 children . Despite this , the British government conceded to the protesters and the Vaccination Act of 1898 abolished fines and made provision for a " conscientious objector " clause – the first use of the term – for parents who did not believe in vaccination . During the following year , 250 @,@ 000 objections were granted , and by 1912 less than half of the population of newborns were being vaccinated . By 1948 , smallpox vaccination was no longer compulsory in the UK . 
 = = = Louis Pasteur and rabies = = = 
 Rabies is an often fatal disease caused by the infection of mammals with rabies virus . In the 21st century it is mainly a disease that affects wild mammals such as foxes and bats , but it is one of the oldest known virus diseases : rabies is a Sanskrit word ( <unk> ) that dates from 3000 BC , which means " madness " or " rage " , and the disease has been known for over 4000 years . Descriptions of rabies can be found in Mesopotamian texts , and the ancient Greeks called it " <unk> " or " lytta " , meaning " madness " . References to rabies can be found in the Laws of Eshnunna , which date from 2300 BC . Aristotle ( 384 – 322 BC ) wrote one of the earliest undisputed descriptions of the disease and how it was passed to humans . Celsus , in the first century AD , first recorded the symptom called hydrophobia and suggested that the saliva of infected animals and humans contained a slime or poison – to describe this he invented the word " virus " . Rabies does not cause epidemics , but the infection was greatly feared because of its terrible symptoms , which include insanity , hydrophobia and death . 
 In France during the time of Louis Pasteur ( 1822 – 1895 ) there were only a few hundred rabies infections in humans each year , but cures were desperately sought . Aware of the possible danger , Pasteur began to look for the " microbe " in mad dogs . Pasteur showed that when the dried spinal cords from dogs that had died from rabies were crushed and injected into healthy dogs they did not become infected . He repeated the experiment several times on the same dog with tissue that had been dried for fewer and fewer days , until the dog survived even after injections of fresh rabies @-@ infected spinal tissue . Pasteur had immunised the dog against rabies , as he later did with 50 more . 
 Although Pasteur had little idea how his method worked , he tested it on a boy , Joseph Meister ( 1876 – 1940 ) , who was brought to Pasteur by his mother on 6 July 1885 . He was covered in bites , having been set upon by a mad dog . Meister 's mother begged Pasteur to help her son . Pasteur was a scientist , not a physician , and he was well aware of the consequences for him if things were to go wrong . He nevertheless decided to help the boy and injected him with increasingly virulent rabid rabbit spinal tissue over the following 10 days . Later Pasteur wrote , " as the death of this child appeared inevitable , I decided , not without deep and severe unease ... to try out on Joseph Meister the procedure , which had consistently worked on dogs " . Meister recovered and returned home with his mother on 27 July . Pasteur successfully treated a second boy in October that same year ; Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> ( 1869 – 1923 ) was a 15 @-@ year @-@ old shepherd boy who had been severely bitten as he tried to protect other children from a rabid dog . Pasteur 's method of treatment remained in use for over 50 years . 
 Little was known about the cause of the disease until 1903 when <unk> Negri ( 1876 – 1912 ) first saw microscopic lesions – now called Negri bodies – in the brains of rabid animals . He wrongly thought they were protozoan parasites . Paul Remlinger ( 1871 – 1964 ) soon showed by filtration experiments that they were much smaller than protozoa , and even smaller than bacteria . Thirty years later , Negri bodies were shown to be accumulations of particles 100 – 150 nanometres long , now known to be the size of <unk> particles – the virus that causes rabies . 
 = = 20th and 21st centuries = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , evidence for the existence of viruses was obtained from experiments with filters that had pores too small for bacteria to pass through ; the term " filterable virus " was coined to describe them . Until the 1930s most scientists believed that viruses were small bacteria , but following the invention of the electron microscope in 1931 they were shown to be completely different , to a degree that not all scientists were convinced they were anything other than accumulations of toxic proteins . The situation changed radically when it was discovered that viruses contain genetic material in the form of DNA or RNA . Once they were recognised as distinct biological entities they were soon shown to be the cause of numerous infections of plants , animals and even bacteria . 
 Of the many diseases of humans that were found to be caused by viruses in the 20th century one , smallpox , has been eradicated . The diseases caused by viruses such as HIV and influenza virus have proved to be more difficult to control . Other diseases , such as those caused by arboviruses , are presenting new challenges . 
 As humans have changed their behaviour during history , so have viruses . In ancient times the human population was too small for pandemics to occur and , in the case of some viruses , too small for them to survive . In the 20th and 21st century increasing population densities , revolutionary changes in agriculture and farming methods , and high speed travel have contributed to the spread of new viruses and the re @-@ appearance of old ones . Like smallpox , some viral diseases might be conquered , but new ones , such as severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) , will continue to emerge . Although vaccines are still the most powerful weapon against viruses , in recent decades antiviral drugs have been developed to specifically target viruses as they replicate in their hosts . The 2009 influenza pandemic showed how rapidly new strains of viruses continue to spread around the world , despite efforts to contain them . 
 Advances in virus discovery and control continue to be made . Human <unk> , which is a cause of respiratory infections including pneumonia , was discovered in 2001 . A vaccine for the papillomaviruses that cause cervical cancer was developed between 2002 and 2006 . In 2005 , human T lymphotropic viruses 3 and 4 were discovered . In 2008 the WHO Global Polio Eradication Initiative was re @-@ launched with a plan to eradicate poliomyelitis by 2015 . In 2010 , the largest virus , Megavirus chilensis was discovered to infect amoebae . These giant viruses have renewed interest in the role viruses play in evolution and their position in the tree of life . 
 = = = Smallpox eradication = = = 
 Smallpox virus was a major cause of death in the 20th century , killing about 300 million people . It has probably killed more humans than any other virus . In 1966 an agreement was reached by the World Health Assembly ( the decision @-@ making body of the World Health Organisation ) to start an " intensified smallpox eradication programme " and attempt to eradicate the disease within ten years . At the time , smallpox was still endemic in 31 countries including Brazil , the whole of the Indian sub @-@ continent , Indonesia and sub @-@ Saharan Africa . This ambitious goal was considered achievable for several reasons : the vaccine afforded exceptional protection ; there was only one type of the virus ; there were no animals that naturally carried it ; the incubation period of the infection was known and rarely varied from 12 days ; and infections always gave rise to symptoms , so it was clear who had the disease . 
 Following mass vaccinations , disease detection and containment were central to the eradication campaign . As soon as cases were detected , the victims were isolated as were their close contacts , who were vaccinated . Successes came quickly ; by 1970 smallpox was no longer endemic in western Africa , nor , by 1971 , in Brazil . By 1973 , smallpox remained endemic only in the Indian sub @-@ continent , Botswana and Ethiopia . Finally , after 13 years of coordinated disease surveillance and vaccination campaigns throughout the world , the World Health Organisation declared smallpox eradicated in 1979 . Although the main weapon used was vaccinia virus , which was used as the vaccine , no one seems to know exactly where vaccinia virus came from ; it is not the strain of cowpox that Edward Jenner used , and it is not a weakened form of smallpox . 
 The eradication campaign led to the death of Janet Parker ( c . 1938 – 1978 ) and the subsequent suicide of the smallpox expert Henry Bedson ( 1930 – 1978 ) . Parker was an employee of the University of Birmingham who worked in the same building as Bedson 's smallpox laboratory . She was infected by a strain of smallpox virus that Bedson 's team had been investigating . Ashamed of the accident and having blamed himself for it , Bedson committed suicide . 
 Before the September 11 attacks on the United States in 2001 , the World Health Organisation proposed the destruction of all the known remaining stocks of smallpox virus that were kept in laboratories in the US and Russia . Fears of bioterrorism using smallpox virus and the possible need for the virus in the development of drugs to treat the infection have put an end to this plan . Had the destruction gone ahead , smallpox virus might have been the first to be made extinct by human intervention . 
 = = = Measles = = = 
 Before the introduction of vaccination in the US in the 1960s there were more than 500 @,@ 000 cases each year resulting in about 400 deaths . In developed countries children were mainly infected between the ages of three and five years old , but in developing countries half the children were infected before the age of two . In the US and the UK , there were regular annual or biannual epidemics of the disease , which depended on the number of children born each year . The current epidemic strain evolved in the first part of the 20th century – probably between 1908 and 1943 . 
 In London between 1950 and 1968 there were epidemics every two years , but in Liverpool , which had a higher birth rate , there was an annual cycle of epidemics . During the Great Depression in the US before the Second World War the birth rate was low , and epidemics of measles were sporadic . After the war the birth rate increased , and epidemics occurred regularly every two years . In developing countries with very high birth rates , epidemics occurred every year . Measles is still a major problem in densely populated , less @-@ developed countries with high birth rates and lacking effective vaccination campaigns . 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , following a mass vaccination programme that was known as " make measles a memory " , the incidence of measles in the US had fallen by 90 per cent . Similar vaccination campaigns in other countries have reduced the levels of infection by 99 per cent over the past 50 years . Susceptible individuals remain a source of infection and include those who have migrated from countries with ineffective vaccination schedules , or who refuse the vaccine or choose not to have their children vaccinated . Humans are the only natural host of measles virus . Immunity to the disease following an infection is lifelong ; that afforded by vaccination is long term but eventually wanes . 
 The use of the vaccine has been controversial . In 1998 , Andrew Wakefield and his colleagues published a fraudulent research paper and he claimed to link the MMR vaccine with autism . The study was widely reported and fed concern about the safety of vaccinations . Wakefield 's research was identified as fraudulent and in 2010 , he was struck off the UK medical register and can no longer practise medicine in the UK . In the wake of the controversy , the MMR vaccination rate in the UK fell from 92 per cent in 1995 , to less than 80 per cent in 2003 . Cases of measles rose from 56 in 1998 to 1370 in 2008 , and similar increases occurred throughout Europe . In April 2013 , an epidemic of measles in Wales in the UK broke out , which mainly affected teenagers who had not been vaccinated . Despite this controversy , measles has been eliminated from Finland , Sweden and Cuba . Japan abolished mandatory vaccination in 1992 , and in 1995 – 1997 more than 200 @,@ 000 cases were reported in the country . Measles remains a public health problem in Japan , where it is now endemic ; a National Measles Elimination Plan was established in December 2007 , with a view to eliminating the disease from the country . The possibility of global elimination of measles has been debated in medical literature since the introduction of the vaccine in the 1960s . Should the current campaign to eradicate poliomyelitis be successful , it is likely that the debate will be renewed . 
 = = = Poliomyelitis = = = 
 During the summers of the mid @-@ 20th century , parents in the US and Europe dreaded the annual appearance of poliomyelitis ( or polio ) , which was commonly known as " infantile paralysis " . The disease was rare at the beginning of the century , and worldwide there were only a few thousand cases per year , but by the 1950s there were 60 @,@ 000 cases each year in the US alone and an average of 2 @,@ 300 in England and Wales . 
 During 1916 and 1917 there had been a major epidemic in the US ; 27 @,@ 000 cases and 6 @,@ 000 deaths were recorded , with 9 @,@ 000 cases in New York City . At the time nobody knew how the virus was spreading . Many of the city 's inhabitants , including scientists , thought that impoverished slum @-@ dwelling immigrants were to blame even though the prevalence of the disease was higher in the more prosperous districts such as Staten Island – a pattern that had also been seen in cities like Philadelphia . Many other industrialised countries were affected at the same time . In particular , before the outbreaks in the US , large epidemics had occurred in Sweden . 
 The reason for the rise of polio in industrialised countries in the 20th century has never been fully explained . The disease is caused by a virus that is passed from person to person by the faecal @-@ oral route , and naturally infects only humans . It is a paradox that it became a problem during times of improved sanitation and increasing affluence . Although the virus was discovered at the beginning of the 20th century , its ubiquity was unrecognised until the 1950s . It is now known that fewer than two per cent of individuals who are infected develop the disease , and most infections are mild . During epidemics the virus was effectively everywhere , which explains why public health officials were unable to isolate a source . 
 Following the development of vaccines in the mid @-@ 1950s , mass vaccination campaigns took place in many countries . In the US , after a campaign promoted by the March of Dimes , the annual number of polio cases fell dramatically ; the last outbreak was in 1979 . In 1988 the World Health Organisation along with others launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative , and by 1994 the Americas were declared to be free of disease , followed by the Pacific region in 2000 and Europe in 2003 . At the end of 2012 , only 223 cases were reported by the World Health Organisation . Mainly poliovirus type 1 infections , 122 occurred in Nigeria , one in Chad , 58 in Pakistan and 37 in Afghanistan . Vaccination teams often face danger ; seven vaccinators were murdered in Pakistan and nine in Nigeria at the beginning of 2013 . In Pakistan , the campaign was further hampered by the murder on 26 February 2013 of a police officer who was providing security . 
 = = = AIDS = = = 
 The human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) is the virus that – when the infection is not treated – can cause AIDS ( acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ) . Most virologists believe that HIV originated in sub @-@ Saharan Africa during the 20th century , and over 70 million individuals have been infected by the virus . By 2011 , an estimated 35 million had died from AIDS , making it one of the most destructive epidemics in recorded history . HIV @-@ 1 is one of the most significant viruses to have emerged in the last quarter of the 20th century . When , in 1981 , a scientific article was published that reported the deaths of five young gay men , no one knew that they had died from AIDS . The full scale of the epidemic – and that the virus had been silently emerging over several decades – was not known . 
 HIV crossed the species barrier between chimpanzees and humans in Africa in the early decades of the 20th century . During the years that followed there were enormous social changes and turmoil in Africa . Population shifts were unprecedented as vast numbers of people moved from rural farms to the expanding cities , and the virus was spread from remote regions to densely populated urban conurbations . The incubation period for AIDS is around 10 years , so a global epidemic starting in the early 1980s is credible . At this time there was much scapegoating and stigmatisation . The " out of Africa " theory for the origin of the HIV pandemic was not well received by Africans , who felt that the " blame " was misplaced . This led the World Health Assembly to pass a 1987 resolution , which stated that HIV is " a naturally occurring [ virus ] of undetermined geographic origin " . 
 The HIV pandemic has challenged communities and brought about social changes throughout the world . Opinions on sexuality are more openly discussed . Advice on sexual practices and drug use – which were once taboo – is sponsored by many governments and their healthcare providers . Debates on the ethics of provision and cost of anti @-@ retroviral drugs , particularly in poorer countries , have highlighted inequalities in healthcare and stimulated far @-@ reaching legislative changes . In developing countries the impact of HIV / AIDS has been profound ; key organisations such as healthcare , defense and civil services have been severely disrupted . Life expectancy has fallen . In Zimbabwe , for example , life expectancy was 79 years in 1991 but by 2001 it had fallen to 39 years . 
 = = = Influenza = = = 
 When influenza virus undergoes a genetic shift many humans have no immunity to the new strain , and if the population of susceptible individuals is high enough to maintain the chain of infection , pandemics occur . The genetic changes usually happen when different strains of the virus co @-@ infect animals , particularly birds and swine . Although many viruses of vertebrates are restricted to one species , influenza virus is an exception . The last pandemic of the 19th century occurred in 1899 and resulted in the deaths of 250 @,@ 000 people in Europe . The virus , which originated in Russia or Asia , was the first to be rapidly spread by people on trains and steamships . 
 A new strain of the virus emerged in 1918 , and the subsequent pandemic of Spanish flu was one of the worst natural disasters in history . The death toll was enormous ; throughout the world around 50 million people died from the infection . There were 550 @,@ 000 reported deaths caused by the disease in the US , ten times the country 's losses during the First World War , and 228 @,@ 000 deaths in the UK . In India there were more than 20 million deaths , and in Western Samoa 22 per cent of the population died . Although cases of influenza occurred every winter , there were only two other pandemics in the 20th century . 
 In 1957 another new strain of the virus emerged and caused a pandemic of Asian flu ; although the virus was not as virulent as the 1918 strain , over one million died worldwide . The next pandemic occurred when Hong Kong flu emerged in 1968 , a new strain of the virus that replaced the 1957 strain . Affecting mainly the elderly , the 1968 pandemic was the least severe , but 33 @,@ 800 were killed in the US . New strains of influenza virus often originate in East Asia ; in rural China the concentration of ducks , pigs , and humans in close proximity is the highest in the world . 
 The most recent pandemic occurred in 2009 , but none of the last three has caused anything near the devastation seen in 1918 . Exactly why the strain of influenza that emerged in 1918 was so devastating is a question that still remains unanswered . 
 = = = Yellow fever , dengue and other arboviruses = = = 
 <unk> are viruses that are transmitted to humans and other vertebrates by blood @-@ sucking insects . These viruses are diverse ; the term " arbovirus " – which was derived from " arthropod @-@ borne virus " – is no longer used in formal taxonomy because many species of virus are known to be spread in this way . There are more than 500 species of arboviruses , but in the 1930s only three were known to cause disease in humans : yellow fever virus , dengue virus and <unk> fever virus . More than 100 of such viruses are now known to cause human diseases including encephalitis . 
 Yellow fever is the most notorious disease caused by a flavivirus . The last major epidemic in the US occurred in 1905 . During the building of the Panama Canal thousands of workers died from the disease . Yellow fever originated in Africa and the virus was brought to the Americas on cargo ships , which were harbouring the Aedes aegypti mosquito that carries the virus . The first recorded epidemic in Africa occurred in Ghana , in West Africa , in 1926 . In the 1930s the disease re @-@ emerged in Brazil . Fred Soper , an American epidemiologist ( 1893 – 1977 ) , discovered the importance of the sylvatic cycle of infection in non @-@ human hosts , and that infection of humans was a " dead end " that broke this cycle . Although the yellow fever vaccine is one of the most successful ever developed , epidemics continue to occur . In 1986 – 91 in West Africa , over 20 @,@ 000 people were infected , 4 @,@ 000 of whom died . 
 In the 1930s , St. Louis encephalitis , eastern equine encephalitis and western equine encephalitis emerged in the US . The virus that causes La Crosse encephalitis was discovered in the 1960s , and West Nile virus arrived in New York in 1999 . As of 2010 , dengue virus is the most prevalent arbovirus and increasingly virulent strains of the virus have spread across Asia and the Americas . 
 = = = Hepatitis viruses = = = 
 Hepatitis is a disease of the liver that has been recognised since antiquity . Symptoms include jaundice , a yellowing of the skin , eyes and body fluids . There are numerous causes , including viruses – particularly hepatitis A virus , hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus . Throughout history epidemics of jaundice have been reported , mainly affecting soldiers at war . This " campaign jaundice " was common in the Middle Ages . It occurred among Napoleon 's armies and during most of the major conflicts of the 19th and 20th centuries , including the American Civil War , where over 40 @,@ 000 cases and around 150 deaths were reported . The viruses that cause epidemic jaundice were not discovered until the middle of the 20th century . The names for epidemic jaundice , hepatitis A , and for blood @-@ borne infectious jaundice , hepatitis B , were first used in 1947 , following a publication in 1946 giving evidence that the two diseases were distinct . In the 1960s , the first virus that could cause hepatitis was discovered . This was hepatitis B virus , which was named after the disease it causes . Hepatitis A virus was discovered in 1974 . The discovery of hepatitis B virus and the invention of tests to detect it have radically changed many medical , and some cosmetic procedures . The screening of donated blood , which was introduced in the early 1970s , has dramatically reduced the transmission of the virus . Donations of human blood plasma and Factor VIII collected before 1975 often contained infectious levels of hepatitis B virus . Until the late 1960s , hypodermic needles were often reused by medical professionals , and tattoo artists ' needles were a common source of infection . In the late 1990s , needle exchange programmes were established in Europe and the US to prevent the spread of infections by intravenous drug users . These measures also helped to reduce the subsequent impact of HIV and hepatitis C virus . 
 = = = Non @-@ human animal viruses = = = 
 <unk> are outbreaks ( epidemics ) of disease among non @-@ human animals . During the 20th century significant epizootics of viral diseases in animals , particularly livestock , occurred worldwide . The many diseases caused by viruses included foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease , rinderpest of cattle , avian and swine influenza , swine fever and bluetongue of sheep . Viral diseases of livestock can be devastating both to farmers and the wider community , as the outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease in the UK in 2001 showed . 
 First appearing in East Africa in 1891 , rinderpest , a disease of cattle , spread rapidly across Africa . By 1892 , 95 per cent of the cattle in East Africa had died . This resulted in a famine that devastated the farmers and nomadic people , some of whom were entirely dependent on their cattle . Two thirds of the population of Maasai people died . The situation was made worse by epidemics of smallpox that followed in the wake of the famine . In the early years of the 20th century rinderpest was common in Asia and parts of Europe . The prevalence of the disease was steadily reduced during the century by control measures that included vaccination . By 1908 Europe was free from the disease . Outbreaks did occur following the Second World War , but these were quickly controlled . The prevalence of the disease increased in Asia , and in 1957 Thailand had to appeal for aid because so many buffaloes had died that the paddy fields could not be prepared for rice growing . Russia west of the Ural Mountains remained free from the disease – Lenin approved several laws on the control of the disease – but cattle in eastern Russia were constantly infected with rinderpest that originated in Mongolia and China where the prevalence remained high . India controlled the spread of the disease , which had retained a foothold in the southern states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala , throughout the 20th century , and had eradicated the disease by 1995 . Africa suffered two major <unk> in the 1920s and 1980s . There was a severe outbreak in Somalia in 1928 and the disease was widespread in the country until 1953 . In the 1980s , outbreaks in Tanzania and Kenya were controlled by the use of 26 million doses of vaccine , and a recurrence of the disease in 1997 was suppressed by an intensive vaccination campaign . By the end of the century rinderpest had been eradicated from most countries . A few pockets of infection remained in Ethiopia and Sudan , and in 1994 the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme was launched by the Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) with the aim of global eradication by 2010 . In May 2011 , the FAO and the World Organisation for Animal Health announced that " rinderpest as a freely circulating viral disease has been eliminated from the world . " 
 Foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease is a highly contagious infection caused by an <unk> , and is classified in the same family as poliovirus . The virus has infected animals , mainly ungulates , in Africa since ancient times and was probably brought to the Americas in the 19th century by imported livestock . Foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease is rarely fatal , but the economic losses incurred by outbreaks in sheep and cattle herds can be high . The last occurrence of the disease in the US was in 1929 , but as recently as 2001 , several large outbreaks occurred throughout the UK and thousands of animals were killed and burnt . 
 The natural hosts of influenza viruses are pigs and birds , although it has probably infected humans since antiquity . The virus can cause mild to severe epizootics in wild and domesticated animals . Many species of wild birds migrate and this has spread influenza across the continents throughout the ages . The virus has evolved into numerous strains and continues to do so , posing an ever @-@ present threat . 
 In the early years of the 21st century epizootics in livestock caused by viruses continue to have serious consequences . <unk> disease , a disease caused by an <unk> broke out in sheep in France in 2007 . Until then the disease had been mainly confined to the Americas , Africa , southern Asia and northern Australia , but it is now an emerging disease around the Mediterranean . 
 = = = Plant viruses = = = 
 During the 20th century , many " old " diseases of plants were found to be caused by viruses . These included maize streak and cassava mosaic disease . As with humans , when plants thrive in close proximity , so do their viruses . This can cause huge economic losses and human tragedies . In Jordan during the 1970s , where tomatoes and cucurbits ( cucumbers , melons and gourds ) were extensively grown , entire fields were infected with viruses . Similarly , in Côte d 'Ivoire , thirty different viruses infected crops such as legumes and vegetables . In Kenya cassava mosaic virus , maize streak virus and groundnut viral diseases caused the loss of up to 70 per cent of the crop . Cassava is the most abundant crop that is grown in eastern Africa and it is a staple crop for more than 200 million people . It was introduced to Africa from South America and grows well in soils with poor fertility . The most important disease of cassava is caused by cassava mosaic virus , a <unk> , which is transmitted between plants by whiteflies . The disease was first recorded in 1894 and outbreaks of the disease occurred in eastern Africa throughout the 20th century , often resulting in famine . 
 In the 1920s the <unk> growers in the western US suffered huge economic loss caused by damage done to their crops by the leafhopper @-@ transmitted beet curly top virus . In 1956 , between 25 and 50 per cent of the rice crop in Cuba and Venezuela was destroyed by rice <unk> <unk> virus . In 1958 , it caused the loss of many rice fields in Colombia . Outbreaks recurred in 1981 , which caused losses of up to 100 per cent . In Ghana between 1936 and 1977 , the mealybug @-@ transmitted cacao swollen @-@ shoot virus caused the loss of 162 million cacao trees , and additional trees were lost at the rate of 15 million each year . In 1948 , in Kansas , US , seven per cent of the wheat crop was destroyed by wheat streak mosaic virus , spread by the wheat curl mite ( <unk> <unk> ) . In the 1950s papaya ringspot virus – a potyvirus – caused a devastating loss of solo papaya crops on Oahu , Hawaii . Solo papaya had been introduced to the island in the previous century but the disease had not been seen on the island before the 1940s . 
 Such disasters occurred when human intervention caused ecological changes by the introduction of crops to new vectors and viruses . Cacao is native to South America and was introduced to West Africa in the late 19th century . In 1936 , swollen root disease had been transmitted to plantations by mealybugs from indigenous trees . New habitats can trigger outbreaks of plant virus diseases . Before 1970 , the rice yellow mottle virus was only found in the Kisumu district of Kenya , but following the irrigation of large areas of East Africa and extensive rice cultivation , the virus spread throughout East Africa . Human activity introduced plant viruses to native crops . The citrus <unk> virus ( CTV ) was introduced to South America from Africa between 1926 and 1930 . At the same time , the aphid <unk> <unk> was carried from Asia to South America and this accelerated the transmission of the virus . By 1950 , more than six million citrus trees had been killed by the virus in São Paulo , Brazil . CTV and citrus trees probably coevolved for centuries in their original countries . The dispersal of CTV to other regions and its interaction with new citrus varieties resulted in devastating outbreaks of plant diseases . Because of the problems caused by the introduction – by humans – of plant viruses , many countries have strict importation controls on any materials that can harbour dangerous plant viruses or their insect vectors . 
 = = Emerging viruses = = 
 Emerging viruses are those that have only relatively recently infected the host species . In humans , many emerging viruses have come from other animals . When viruses jump to other species the diseases caused in humans are called <unk> or zoonotic infections . 
 = = = SARS = = = 
 Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) is caused by a new type of coronavirus . Other coronaviruses were known to cause mild infections in humans , so the virulence and rapid spread of this novel virus strain caused alarm among health professionals as well as public fear . The fears of a major pandemic were not realised , and by July 2003 , after causing around 8 @,@ 000 cases and 800 deaths , the outbreak had ended . The exact origin of the SARS virus is not known , but evidence suggests that it came from bats . 
 = = = West Nile virus = = = 
 West Nile virus , a flavivirus , was first identified in 1937 when it was found in the blood of a feverish woman . The virus , which is carried by mosquitoes and birds , caused outbreaks of infection in North Africa and the Middle East in the 1950s and by the 1960s horses in Europe fell victim . The largest outbreak in humans occurred in 1974 in Cape Province , South Africa and 10 @,@ 000 people became ill . An increasing frequency of epidemics and epizootics ( in horses ) began in 1996 , around the Mediterranean basin , and by 1999 the virus had reached New York City . Since then the virus has spread throughout the US . In the US , mosquitoes carry the highest amounts of virus in late summer , and the number of cases of the disease increases in mid July to early September . When the weather becomes colder , the mosquitoes die and the risk of disease decreases . In Europe , many outbreaks have occurred ; in 2000 a surveillance programme began in the UK to monitor the incidence of the virus in humans , dead birds , mosquitoes and horses . The mosquito ( Culex modestus ) that can carry the virus breeds on the marshes of north Kent . This mosquito species was not previously thought to be present in the UK , but it is widespread in southern Europe where it carries West Nile virus . 
 = = = Nipah virus = = = 
 In 1997 an outbreak of respiratory disease occurred in Malaysian farmers and their pigs . More than 265 cases of encephalitis , of which 105 were fatal , were recorded . A new paramyxovirus was discovered in a victim 's brain ; it was named Nipah virus , after the village where he had lived . The infection was caused by a virus from fruit bats , after their colony had been disrupted by deforestation . The bats had moved to trees nearer the pig farm and the pigs caught the virus from their droppings . 
 = = = Viral haemorrhagic fevers = = = 
 Several highly lethal viral pathogens are members of the <unk> . <unk> are filament @-@ like viruses that cause viral haemorrhagic fever , and include the Ebola and Marburg viruses . The Marburg virus attracted widespread press attention in April 2005 after an outbreak in Angola . Beginning in October 2004 and continuing into 2005 , there were 252 cases including 227 deaths . 
 The Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa , which began in 2013 , is the most devastating since the emergence of HIV . The initial outbreak occurred in December 2013 in <unk> , a village in southern Guinea . Among the first victims were a two @-@ year @-@ old boy , his three @-@ year @-@ old sister , their mother and grandmother . After the grandmother 's funeral , which was attended by her family and caregivers , the disease spread to neighbouring villages . By March 2014 the outbreak was severe enough to raise the concern of local health officials who reported it to the Guinean Ministry of Health . By the middle of the year the epidemic had spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone . As of June 2105 , the World Health Organisation reported over 27 @,@ 000 cases of the disease , which had resulted in more than 11 @,@ 000 deaths . 
 The natural source of Ebola virus is probably bats . Marburg viruses are transmitted to humans by monkeys , and Lassa fever by rats ( Mastomys natalensis ) . <unk> infections can be severe because humans often have no natural resistance to the infection and it is only when viruses become well @-@ adapted to new host that their virulence decreases . Some zoonotic infections are often " dead ends " , in that after the initial outbreak the rate of subsequent infections subsides because the viruses are not efficient at spreading from person to person . 
 The beginning of the 21st century saw an increase in the global awareness of devastating epidemics in developing countries , which , in previous decades had passed relatively unnoticed by the international health community . 
 = = Beneficial viruses = = 
 Sir Peter Medawar ( 1915 – 1987 ) described a virus as " a piece of bad news wrapped in a protein coat " . With the exception of the bacteriophages , viruses had a well @-@ deserved reputation for being nothing but the cause of diseases and death . The discovery of the abundance of viruses and their overwhelming presence in many ecosystems has led modern virologists to reconsider their role in the biosphere . 
 It is estimated that there are about 1031 viruses on Earth . Most of them are bacteriophages , and most are in the oceans . Microorganisms constitute more than 90 per cent of the biomass in the sea , and it has been estimated that viruses kill approximately 20 per cent of this biomass each day and that there are fifteen times as many viruses in the oceans as there are bacteria and archaea . Viruses are the main agents responsible for the rapid destruction of harmful algal blooms , which often kill other marine life , and help maintain the ecological balance of different species of marine blue @-@ green algae , and thus adequate oxygen production for life on Earth . 
 The emergence of strains of bacteria that are resistant to a broad range of antibiotics has become a problem in the treatment of bacterial infections . Only two new classes of antibiotics have been developed in the past 30 years , and novel ways of combating bacterial infections are being sought . Bacteriophages were first used to control bacteria in the 1920s , and a large clinical trial was conducted by Soviet scientists in 1963 . This work was unknown outside the Soviet Union until the results of the trial were published in the West in 1989 . The recent and escalating problems caused by antibiotic @-@ resistant bacteria has stimulated a renewed interest in the use of bacteriophages and phage therapy . 
 The Human Genome Project has revealed the presence of numerous viral DNA sequences scattered throughout the human genome . These sequences make up around eight per cent of human DNA , and appear to be the remains of ancient retrovirus infections of human ancestors . These pieces of DNA have firmly established themselves in human DNA . Most of this DNA is no longer functional , but some of these friendly viruses have brought with them novel genes that are important in human development . Viruses have transferred important genes to plants . About ten per cent of all photosynthesis uses the products of genes that have been transferred to plants from blue @-@ green algae by viruses . 
 = All things = 
 " all things " is the 17th episode of the seventh season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Written and directed by lead actress Gillian Anderson , it first aired on April 9 , 2000 , on the Fox network . The episode is unconnected to the wider mythology of The X @-@ Files and functions as a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story . Watched by 12 @.@ 18 million people , the initial broadcast had a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 1 . The episode received mixed reviews from critics ; many called the dialogue pretentious and criticized the characterization of Scully . However , viewer response was generally positive . 
 The series centers on Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called " X @-@ Files " . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal . The skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , a series of coincidences lead Scully to meet Dr. Daniel Waterston ( Nicolas Surovy ) , a married man with whom she had an affair while at medical school . After Waterston slips into a coma , Scully puts aside her skepticism and seeks out alternative medicine to save Waterston . 
 The script for " all things " , the only episode of the series written by Anderson , was originally fifteen pages too long with no fourth act . It was only after Anderson worked with series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz that the script was finished . The cast and crew helped Anderson adjust to her directorial debut — the first time a woman directed an episode of The X @-@ Files . The episode makes heavy use of " The Sky Is Broken " , a song from Moby 's 1999 album Play , as well as a gong . The episode has been analyzed for its themes of pragmatism and feminist philosophy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 FBI special agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is getting dressed in front of a mirror . As she leaves , her colleague Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) lies in his bed , half of his body covered by bedsheets . The narrative flashes back to a few days earlier : Scully arrives at a hospital and , after a series of coincidences , meets her former professor , Daniel Waterston ( Nicolas Surovy ) , with whom she had an affair while attending medical school . He is ill and suffering from an undiagnosed heart condition . She questions whether she made the right decision to leave him and abandon her medical career to pursue a career in the FBI . She meets Waterston 's daughter , Maggie ( Stacy <unk> ) , who is extremely resentful of Scully for the effect she had on Waterston 's family . 
 Mulder — on his way to England investigating heart chakra @-@ shaped crop circles — calls Scully and asks her to meet a contact of his , Colleen Azar ( Colleen Flynn ) , to obtain some information . As Scully speaks to Mulder on her cellphone while driving her car , a woman appears on a crosswalk . Scully brakes hard to avoid hitting the woman . As she does so , she narrowly avoids colliding with a diesel truck . She realizes that , had the woman not stepped in her path , the truck would have killed her . When she later arrives at the house of Azar , she observes that Scully is going through a personal crisis and tries to offer her guidance , but Scully is dismissive . 
 Later , Scully returns to apologize to Azar and agrees to listen to her ideas . Azar shares her knowledge of Buddhism , the concept of the collective unconscious , and the idea of personal auras . Azar believes these concepts might explain these strange occurrences . After a confrontation with Maggie at the hospital , Scully walks through Chinatown . Seeing the woman who appeared earlier at the crosswalk , she follows her to a small Buddhist temple before the mysterious woman seemingly vanishes . Inside the temple , Scully has a vision of what is ailing Waterston . She returns to the hospital with Azar to visit Waterston . 
 Azar and a healer provide alternative treatment for Waterston , who fully recovers . He announces that he still wants a relationship with Scully , but she realizes she is no longer the same person she was those many years ago and rejects him . As she sits outside the hospital on a bench , Scully thinks that she sees the mysterious woman again , but it turns out to be Mulder . Later , the two agents sit in Mulder 's apartment talking about the events of the last few days . Mulder begins to speak more existentially about what transpired , implying that fate has brought them together but , when he turns to look at Scully , he sees that she has fallen asleep . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Sometime during the sixth season of The X @-@ Files , Anderson approached series creator Chris Carter and asked to write an episode . Anderson 's own beliefs in the power of spiritual healing and Buddhism provided inspiration ; she wanted to write a script in which Scully pursued a " deeply personal X @-@ File , one in which [ she ] is taken down a spiritual path when logic fails her " . She wrote the basic outline of what became " all things " in one sitting , and pitched the script to Carter the next day ; he later approved of the " personal and quiet " characteristics of the story . 
 The first draft of the script was 72 pages — 15 pages too long — and did not feature a fourth act . Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz worked closely with Anderson to finish the episode , although Carter and Spotnitz later acknowledged that the majority of the script " was all Gillian " . Despite her satisfaction with the final version , Anderson regrets a handful of the " necessary " script changes , most notably , the addition that Scully and Waterston 's affair was intimate . In the original script , the two came close to having an affair , but Scully ended the relationship when she discovered that Waterston was married . 
 In the commentary for the episode , Anderson elaborated on Scully and Waterston 's original backstory : after Scully and Waterston came close to having an affair , Scully left to study at Quantico to become an FBI agent . After she left , Waterston become depressed , and his family began to suspect the affair . The emotional turmoil was too much for Waterston 's wife , who killed herself , which made Waterston 's daughter , Maggie , resent Scully , as shown in the finished episode . Anderson felt that the removal of this backstory made it hard for the audience to understand why Maggie was so angry at Scully . 
 When Anderson first wrote the episode , she did not hint that Scully and Mulder had had sex . Spotnitz and the production crew , however , felt it was natural to suggest that Scully and Mulder 's relationship may have evolved into a romantic one . The idea of heart chakra crop circles was included because Anderson wanted " whatever Mulder was involved in that took him away from me , away from Washington , to somehow tie into what it was that I was going through — the journey that I was going through " . As such , Anderson dedicated much of her time researching both crop circles and heart chakras , but she later gave additional credit to Spotnitz , who she noted was also heavily involved during the researching process . 
 = = = Directing and music = = = 
 Around the same time that she approached Carter about writing an episode , Anderson was also receiving offers from several television networks to direct shows . She , however , had never directed before , and decided that she would first attempt to helm an episode of The X @-@ Files before branching out into other series . Anderson thus expressed her wish to direct the episode when she pitched the original idea for " all things " . Carter accepted her story , but did not appoint her as director until all the revisions and rewrites had been completed . Anderson worked with series director Kim Manners for the majority of the episode , later noting that if she had any questions , she would approach Manners first . To help Anderson , Manners gave her directing exercises , such as making a list of shots for every scene . The episode also marked the first time that a woman had helmed the direction of an episode of The X @-@ Files . 
 Anderson 's directing helped to energize the production , and the cast and crew worked more than usual to make sure that everything was in order for her . Production designer Corey Kaplan made sure that the episode featured a Buddhist temple at Anderson 's request , and casting director Rick Millikan helped Anderson choose the appropriate actors and actresses . Millikan later said that he particularly enjoyed working with Anderson , because it was " fun " for him to watch her go through the casting process , which was entirely new to her . On set , Anderson 's directing style was described as " right on the money " by Marc Shapiro in his book all things : The Official Guide to The X @-@ Files , Volume 6 . He later wrote that " Anderson wielded a deft hand in her directorial debut , prodding the actors to her will , making decisions on the fly , and handling the complex special effects sequences " . Fans of the show later wrote to express their appreciation of Anderson 's directing abilities . Anderson was also involved in post @-@ production editing , during which she was forced to cut the final conversation scene between Scully and Daniel Waterston by 10 minutes in order to meet the allotted episode length . 
 The meditation scene required clips from previous episodes to appear in flashback . Initially , Paul Rabwin and the special effects crew cut the necessary scenes and placed them in animated bubbles . According to Rabwin , at this point , the crew was just experimenting with ideas . Eventually , the crew decided that the bubbles were too " hokey " , so they adopted a more standard slit @-@ scan effect . In order to create the sequence of Scully visualizing Waterston 's heart condition , Nicolas Surovy had to lie naked on a platform surrounded by a blue screen . A sphere was matched via motion control as a marker for a prosthetic beating heart that was crafted and filmed separately . The two shots were then combined . 
 Anderson wanted to include " The Sky Is Broken " , a song from Moby 's 1999 album Play in the episode , having heard it while driving home from work . She later explained that the song 's lyrics " fit with [ the ] idea that was unfolding for the script " . Anderson crafted the first shot after the opening credits , which involved Scully getting ready while water dripped from a sink , to create a " continuation of sound , rhythmic sound " , because it was important to the show 's musical aspect . Anderson and series composer Mark Snow worked together in post @-@ production ; after filming , she sent Snow several CDs of music and asked him for compositions that were similar in style and feel . A certain melody that the two worked on later became " Scully 's Theme " , which was not broadcast until the eighth season episode " Within " . " all things " also featured the use of the gong , an instrument that Anderson called " very Tibetan " and " appropriate for this episode " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In the chapter " Scully as a <unk> Feminist " of the book The Philosophy of The X @-@ Files , Erin McKenna argues that " all things " represents an " important shift " in Scully 's approach to science , knowledge acquisition , and the pursuit of the truth . She reasons that the events of the episode open Scully 's mind to new ways of knowing , specifically citing " auras , chakras , visions ... and the importance of coincidence " . McKenna notes that Scully 's shift in perspective is a shift to American pragmatism , a belief that reality is ever @-@ changing . Pragmatists believe " the truth is out there " — the motto of the series — in a manner similar to Mulder 's . In " all things " , Scully begins to embrace pragmatism , although she still clings to her skeptic roots . Mixing the two , Scully evolves from a mere skeptic who demands proof to validate a truth , to an empiricist who wants proof , but is open to other perspectives . 
 In addition , McKenna reasons that " all things " is heavily influenced by feminist philosophy and epistemology , schools of thought that try to criticize or re @-@ evaluate the ideas of traditional philosophy and epistemology from within a feminist framework . According to McKenna , feminism rejects dualistic ways of thinking , especially " typical male / female dualism " . Feminist philosophy , instead , calls for a pluralistic way of thinking , noting that there are many consistent sets of truths about the world . In the episode , Scully starts out " sure of her more rational scientific view and approach " . As the episode progresses , however , she decides to branch out . Eventually , she brings in a spirit healer to " corroborate or nullify the new beliefs she is encountering " . Despite dabbling in mysticism , a field generally stereotyped as feminine by the patriarchy , Scully engages in " protracted inquiry " , examining all sides of the issue , in order to return Waterston to health . 
 When Mulder and Scully talk at the end of the episode , Mulder questions the fact that he left " town for two days and [ Scully ] spoke to God in a Buddhist temple and God spoke back " . Scully retorts that , " I didn 't say God spoke back " . McKenna proposes that this is an example of Scully 's rational scientific approach meshing with her newer , <unk> pragmatism . The two modes of understanding are not " to be seen ... as competing systems , but as complementary , as are Scully and Mulder themselves " . McKenna concludes that this is represented in the opening scene , in which Mulder and Scully are implied to have had sex . This is meant as a metaphor , showing the full merging of Scully 's and Mulder 's different philosophies into pragmatic feminism . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 9 , 2000 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on July 9 , 2000 . In the U.S. , " all things " was watched by 12 @.@ 18 million viewers . It earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 5 , with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching television , tuned into the episode . In the U.K. , " all things " was seen by 580 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the seventh @-@ most watched program on Sky1 for that week . On May 13 , 2003 , the episode was released on DVD as part of the complete seventh season . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C " and called it " a curious failure " . He felt that the writing was " pretentious " and composed of " some weird , weird bullshit " . VanDerWerff wrote that , although the episode was unsuccessful , there was something so " pure and unadorned at its center that I can 't outright hate it " . Furthermore , he admired the show and Anderson for " making the attempt " . Kevin Silber of Space.com gave the episode a negative review , critical of the script and characterization . He said , " nothing much seems to happen , and what does occur is substantially driven by coincidence and arbitrariness " . He did not like Azar and disapproved of Scully 's philosophical " reverie " , calling it " facile , and hard to reconcile with the determined rationalism she 's displayed over the years in the face of events no less strange than those that occur here " . 
 In their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson rated the episode one star out of five , calling the premise and characters dull . The two criticized Anderson for looking at the " minutiae of life too intensely " , which made many of the actors and actresses come off as ciphers . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson were critical of Anderson 's directing style , calling it " pretentious " , noting that the plot 's significance was drowned out by unnecessary artistic flourishes and needless pizzazz . Paula Vitaris from CFQ gave the episode a negative review , awarding it one star out of four . She called Anderson 's directing " heavy @-@ handed " and bemoaned the storyline because it " plays havoc with Scully 's motivations and character as established in the past seven years " . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review and called it " wonderful " . He praised Anderson 's tenacity in presenting a darker moment from Scully 's past and favorably compared the episode to " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " in terms of character development . Kinney Littlefield of The Orange County Register wrote that the " wistful , meditative episode " was " not bad for Anderson 's first directing effort " . He did , however , comment that it was not as " sly as the episode about an alien baseball player that Duchovny directed " . The Michigan Daily writer Melissa Runstrom , in a review of the seventh season , called the episode " interesting " . 
 While the episode received lukewarm reviews from critics , fans of the show reacted generally positively to " all things " , and the show 's producers received calls and letters from viewers stating that they " loved the vulnerability and quiet determination that Scully revealed in the unusual episode " . 
 = Hurricane Doria ( 1967 ) = 
 Hurricane Doria was an unusual and erratic hurricane that existed during September 1967 . The fourth named storm and hurricane of the 1967 Atlantic hurricane season , Doria developed on September 8 off the east coast of Florida . It meandered until attaining tropical storm status , at which point the storm accelerated towards the northeast . On September 10 , Doria intensified into a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After moving out to sea , the storm turned westward towards the United States . A compact cyclone , Doria weakened to a tropical storm shortly before moving ashore in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . The storm ultimately dissipated on September 21 . 
 The storm , which ultimately made landfall near the Virginia – North Carolina border , produced high winds along the coast from New Jersey through North Carolina . A small boat sank off the coast of New Jersey , killing three of its occupants . Overall damage was estimated around $ 150 @,@ 000 ( 1967 USD ) , although the storm overall was considered beneficial . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Doria are traced back to an area of disturbed weather off the northeastern coast of Florida on September 4 . For several days , the low pressure system meandered as its central barometric pressure gradually fell . The storm is estimated to have organized into a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on September 8 . At the time , it was situated north of Grand Bahama Island . Drifting westward , the cyclone attained tropical storm intensity early the next day . Doria turned northeastward and accelerated as it moved away from Florida . On September 10 , the tropical storm achieved hurricane force . Cold air became entrained into the hurricane 's circulation by September 11 , causing it to weaken to a tropical storm . However , its forward motion slowed and it once again strengthened . 
 The hurricane moved eastward , seemingly out to sea . However , an area of high pressure over New England began to steer Doria westward on September 13 . The hurricane continued to strengthen , and it is estimated to have peaked with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum air pressure of 973 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 73 inHg ) . It maintained these winds for approximately 18 hours , before weakening slightly late on September 14 . In his 2007 book " Hurricanes and the Middle Atlantic States " , Rick Schwartz compared Doria to the 1933 Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane , citing similar intensities , tracks , and forward speeds . On September 16 , the storm weakened to a tropical storm in a colder , drier environment . As it turned southward , Doria quickly weakened . Initial forecasts suggested the possibility for the storm to maintain its severity and move ashore between Maryland and New Jersey . 
 Continually deteriorating , Doria made landfall near the Virginia – North Carolina border , and moved south over land . It reemerged over open waters on September 17 , and at around the same time , it weakened to a tropical depression . It curved southeastward as a weak depression , and several days later it was still identifiable as a storm system south of the island of Bermuda . It dissipated on September 21 . Doria had an unusual and capricious track , described as " one of the most erratic storms ever observed " . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In advance of the storm , hurricane warnings were issued for much of the East Coast of the United States . For 19 hours , about 260 mi ( 420 km ) of shoreline was under an advisory . At least 400 people were evacuated from their homes in southern New Jersey and 6 @,@ 600 from Ocean City , Maryland . 
 Doria was a small storm , although it brought high winds and moderate coastal flooding to some areas ; generally light rainfall was also observed . In North Carolina , 6 @.@ 09 in ( 155 mm ) of precipitation fell at <unk> . Flash flooding and the overflowing of storm sewers ensued in the southeastern portions of the state ; there were also losses to crops , especially corn , cotton , and tobacco . In Virginia , strong winds were reported along the coast , with gusts up to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at Wallops Island . Along the east coast of the state , winds damaged trees , roofs , signs , and billboards . In Maryland , similar impact occurred in Ocean City , with damage sustained to signs and billboards and tore the roof of a prefabricated home ; a city boardwalk also sustained storm @-@ related damage . 
 A station at the Indian River Inlet in Delaware recorded a tide 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) above @-@ normal ; the highest sustained winds reported on land association with the storm , 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , also occurred there . Atlantic City , New Jersey , recorded a peak gust of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , with rainfall amounting to 0 @.@ 53 in ( 13 mm ) . Damage from the storm was generally light . Off the coast of Ocean City , New Jersey , a cabin cruiser sank in 25 @-@ ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) seas . Three of the vessel 's occupants , a mother and her two sons , drowned . In Massachusetts , some small boats sank at the harbors . At Ipswich Bay , 10 people required rescue after two boats capsized . Minor beach erosion was reported at Nantucket . Overall damage was estimated at $ 150 @,@ 000 , which was considered minor . The storm 's passage was considered beneficial , due to adding sand to beaches and providing favorable rains . 
 = Brehon B. Somervell = 
 Brehon Burke Somervell ( 9 May 1892 – 13 February 1955 ) was a General in the United States Army and Commanding General of the Army Service Forces in World War II . As such he was responsible for the U.S. Army 's logistics . Following his death , the Washington Post lauded him as " one of the ablest officers the United States Army has produced . " 
 Somervell graduated near the top of his United States Military Academy class of 1914 and was commissioned in the United States Army Corps of Engineers . During World War I he served with the Pancho Villa Expedition in Mexico and the American Expeditionary Force in France in logistical posts . He was also decorated for gallantry in the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . 
 After the war he served in various engineering assignments . From 1936 to 1940 Somervell was head of the Works Project Administration in New York City , where he was responsible for a series of Great Depression relief works , including the construction of LaGuardia Airport . 
 As head of the Construction Division of the Quartermaster Corps in 1941 , Somervell took charge of the construction of a series of camps to house the large numbers of draftees who entering into the Army . Once again , Somervell was able to deliver vital projects on time . The most enduring of these projects was the Pentagon , which is today one of the most recognizable buildings in the world . From 1942 to 1945 , Somervell commanded the Army Service Forces , the logistical arm of the United States Army . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brehon Burke Somervell was born on 9 May 1892 in Little Rock , Arkansas , the only child of William Taylor Somervell , a physician , and wife Mary née Burke , a schoolteacher . The two of them opened Belcourt Seminary , a girls ' finishing school in Washington , D.C. , in 1906 . 
 Somervell was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York by Congressman Charles C. Reid of Arkansas . He entered West Point in 1910 and graduated sixth out of the 106 cadets in the class of 1914 . Like other high @-@ ranking cadets of the period , he was commissioned a second Lieutenant in the Corps of Engineers . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Somervell traveled to Europe for his two months ' graduation leave and was in Paris when World War I broke out . Reporting to the U.S. Embassy in Paris for volunteer duty , he became an assistant to the military attaché . He took charge of refugee funds and dispensed $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to help American citizens to get back home . 
 On return to the United States , he was posted to an engineer battalion at Washington Barracks , DC . Scoring high marks in his Garrison Officers ' School examinations , he was promoted to 1st Lieutenant on 28 February 1915 . During the Punitive Expedition into Mexico in 1916 , he was for a time depot manager at Columbus , New Mexico , the main logistical base of the expedition . Later , he joined the expedition in Mexico , working on roads and as a supply officer . 
 Somervell returned to Washington Barracks to attend the Engineer School but his course was interrupted by the declaration of war by the United States on Germany on 6 April 1917 . The course was abruptly terminated and Somervell , along with hundreds of other junior officers , was ordered to appear before an examination board that would determine his fitness for promotion . Following a favorable report from the board , Somervell was promoted to captain on 15 May 1917 . He helped organize the 15th Engineers , a rail transport unit , at Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . In July 1917 this became the first engineer regiment to be sent overseas , arriving in England in July 1917 and France later that month . The 15th Engineers worked on a several construction projects , including a munitions dump at <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> and an advanced depot and regulating station at Is @-@ sur @-@ <unk> . Somervell got his projects completed by working his men around the clock and deploying every available resource regardless of the cost . For his role , Somervell was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . 
 He was promoted to major on 15 August 1917 and lieutenant colonel on 1 October 1918 . While visiting some friends at the 89th Division , he volunteered his services to its chief of staff , Colonel John C. H. Lee , who accepted him as a temporary replacement for his Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 , in charge of operations , who had been captured a few days before . For leading a three @-@ man patrol to inspect damage to a bridge some 600 yards ( 550 m ) in front of American lines , Somervell was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . He was one of only nine American officers , including Douglas MacArthur , Barnwell R. Legge , Sereno E. Brett or William J. Donovan , to have been awarded both the Distinguished Service Cross and the Distinguished Service Medal in the First World War . A few days later Lee arranged for Somervell to be permanently assigned to the 89th Division . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 The 89th Division returned to the United States in May 1919 but Somervell remained behind as Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 , in charge of supply , of the U.S. Third Army , and the American Forces in Germany , as it was re @-@ designated on 2 July 1919 . There , he met Anna Purnell , the daughter of a Chicago businessman , who was there as a YMCA volunteer . The two were married in August 1919 . They had three children together , all daughters . While in Germany , Somervell also met Walker D. Hines , a prominent New York corporate lawyer , whom he assisted with a survey of shipping and navigation on the Rhine River . Somervell reverted to the permanent rank of major on 1 July 1920 . 
 Returning to the United States in July 1920 , Somervell was posted to the Office of the Chief of Engineers in Washington , D.C. His war record earned him a place at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth , reserved for the Army 's best and most promising officers . He once again ranked near the top of his class . After graduation he was posted to the 1st New York Engineer District but soon obtained leave to assist Hines with a special study of navigation on the Rhine and Danube Rivers on behalf of the League of Nations , essentially a continuation of the work that the two men had done in 1920 . He then attended the Army War College from 1925 to 1926 . 
 From 1926 to 1930 he was District Engineer , Washington , D.C. Engineer District . As such he became involved in a conflict between proponents of the development of hydroelectric power through damming the Great Falls of the Potomac River and the Maryland @-@ National Capital Park and Planning Commission . Despite his advocacy , the falls remain undammed to this day . On 1 September 1930 , Somervell was transferred to the Lower Mississippi Valley Division as Assistant Chief Engineer . The next year he became assistant to , and then the District Engineer of the Memphis District . In 1933 , he teamed up with Hines again , for an economic survey of Turkey , which culminated in a seven @-@ volume report . Named as District Engineer for Ocala , Florida , Somervell got behind a project to build the Cross Florida Barge Canal . Somervell was chosen to head the project but although President Franklin D. Roosevelt allocated emergency funds for the canal in 1935 , opponents of the canal protested that it would cause seawater to seep into the groundwater , and work was stopped a year later . In the meantime , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1935 . 
 In 1935 , Somervell was appointed as head of the Works Project Administration in New York City . Over the next three and a half years he spent $ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 a month on Great Depression relief works . He worked with the local politicians and labor leaders . He upheld the right of workers to form unions and improved relations with left @-@ wing groups , once declaring that " I wouldn 't know a Red if I saw one , and wouldn 't do anything about it if I did " . The biggest project was the construction of LaGuardia Airport . Somervell established a reputation as a man who could handle projects involving hundreds of thousands of people and hundreds of millions of dollars . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Construction Division = = = 
 In December 1940 , Somervell became head of the Construction Division of the Quartermaster Corps , and was promoted to the temporary rank of brigadier general on 29 January 1941 . His immediate concern was the construction of a series of camps — which were scheduled for completion by April 1941 — to house the large numbers of draftees who were then entering the Army . Reasoning that time was more important than money , Somervell pushed the project through to completion . By February , he was responsible for a work force 485 @,@ 000 people employed on military construction projects . The job was completed on time but over $ 100 million over budget . He was also responsible for constructing new facilities to hold stores and munitions , for which $ 700 million was allocated by December 1940 . By December , 375 projects had been completed and 320 were still under way , with a total value of $ 1 @.@ 8 billion . He accepted promotion to brigadier general in the Army of the United States on February 14 , 1941 with the date of rank of January 29 , 1941 . 
 The best known of these projects was the Pentagon , an enormous office complex to house the War Department 's 40 @,@ 000 @-@ person staff together in one building . On the afternoon of Thursday , 17 July 1941 , Somervell summoned George Bergstrom and Major Hugh Casey . Bergstrom was a former president of the American Institute of Architects ; Casey a Corps of Engineers officer seconded to the Construction Division . The two had previously worked together closely on the design of cantonments . Somervell gave them until 9am on Monday morning to design the building , which he envisaged as a modern , four @-@ story structure with no elevators on the site of the old Washington Hoover Airport . Over that " very busy weekend " , Casey , Bergstrom and their staff roughed out the design for a four @-@ story , five @-@ sided structure with a floor area of 5 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 470 @,@ 000 m2 ) — twice that of the Empire State Building . The estimated cost was $ 35 million . President Roosevelt subsequently moved the site of the building , over Somervell 's objections , in order to prevent it being constructed in front of Arlington National Cemetery . 
 Somervell still pursued his own designs , making important changes , including the addition of a fifth story . The outbreak of war led to a new urgency , and by May 1942 , some 13 @,@ 000 workers were working around the clock on the building , which was completed in early 1943 at a cost of $ 63 million , the overrun being caused by the emphasis on speed and the addition of the extra floor . For his work with the Construction Division , Somervell was awarded an oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal . 
 Somervell hoped to become Chief of Engineers but was " not really in the running " , being too junior in rank . Instead , the job went to Brigadier General Eugene Reybold , the Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 on the War Department General Staff . Somervell 's post was abolished on the transfer of the Construction Division to the Corps of Engineers . Reybold , who considered Somervell " a firecracker but ruthless " who " didn 't care who he hit " , selected Brigadier General Thomas M. Robins to head the new Corps of Engineers Construction Division . 
 Somervell instead received Reybold 's former assignment , with promotion to the temporary rank of major general on January 28 , 1942 and was promoted to temporary lieutenant general on March 9 , 1942 . The posting was unusual because Somervell had never previously served on War Department General Staff . As Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 4 , Somervell pressed for the adoption of a comprehensive Army Supply Program that would set targets and priorities for all Army production . Such a program could be used as the basis for requests for appropriations , for expenditures , and for allocating scare materials . 
 = = = Army Service Forces = = = 
 Within weeks Army Chief of Staff , General George Marshall , implemented sweeping changes to the War Department designed to reduce the number of people reporting to him so as to free his time for planning and conducting a global war . Three huge new commands were created by Executive Order Number <unk> of 28 February 1942 , " <unk> the Army and the War Department " : the Army Air Forces under Lieutenant General Henry H. Arnold , the Army Ground Forces under Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair and the Services of Supply , under Somervell . As such , he was not only promoted to the rank of lieutenant general over the heads of many more senior officers , but some of them , including Reybold , now found themselves his subordinates . He was answerable to two men : Marshall , and Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson . Somervell built up a good working relationship with both . Senator Harry S. Truman of the Truman Committee disapproved of Somervell 's cost overruns , declaring : " I will say this for General Somervell , he will get the stuff , but it is going to be hell on the taxpayer . He has a WPA attitude on the expenditure of money . " The Services of Supply were renamed the Army Service Forces in March 1943 , as the term " supply " was felt to be too narrow a description of the broad range of logistic activities carried out by the organization . As head of Army Service Forces , Somervell became responsible for the implementation of the Army Supply Program . 
 According to military historian John D. Millett , who served on Somervell 's Army Service Forces staff , Somervell was " impatient , tense , and decisive " . Some saw him as an " empire @-@ builder " . Millett noted the opinion of an observer that : 
 In the <unk> wrangles that developed there was one argument ad hominem that was constantly used , to wit : that the <unk> and its dynamic Commanding General were constantly seeking as <unk> Builders ' to enlarge their job by encroaching on that of others . By dint of repetition it got considerable acceptance inside the Department and out . There was something in the drive of the Commanding General of the <unk> , his quickness on the mental trigger , his adroitness and his evident ambition to tackle tough jobs that in itself lent some support to this feeling of impending encroachment among those of a more deliberate pace . I should be surprised if the Chief of Staff ever had any such feeling though he must have been well aware of the feelings of others in his organization in this respect . 
 A 1943 attempt by Somervell to abolish the Technical Services failed amid the furor and panic created by false rumors that he was being considered for the post of Chief of Staff if Marshall was sent to Europe to command the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force . Somervell sometimes pushed extravagant white elephant projects , such as the <unk> Road , which he continued long after the strategic imperative behind it had faded . 
 Somervell understood logistics and its paramount importance in modern warfare , and he spared no effort to ensure that the American fighting man had all he needed for victory . Near the end of the war , Somervell was promoted to general on March 9 , 1945 . He was the very few officers to be promoted to that rank during the war who had not commanded combat forces overseas . 
 When Somervell 's retirement was announced in December 1945 , Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson issued a press release that read : 
 In organizing and directing the worldwide supply lines on which our troops depended for their offensive power , General Somervell performed a service without parallel in military history . He was completely dedicated to the task of winning the war in the shortest possible time and with the smallest cost in America lives , and the energy and ability he applied to his task contributed in great measure to the force of our attack and the speed of our victory . 
 = = Decorations = = 
 Here is the ribbon bar of General Brehon B. Somervell : 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 Somervell retired from the Army on 30 April 1946 and moved to Ocala , Florida . His wife Anna had died in January , 1942 and he had married Mrs. Louise Hampton <unk> , a former student at Belcourt , in March 1943 . Somervell accepted an offer to become president of Koppers , a Pittsburgh @-@ based company that mined coal and manufactured and sold coal @-@ based products . Applying the same managerial techniques that he had employed in the Army , he thoroughly reorganized the company , and doubled revenues and tripled profits over the next five years . 
 Somervell suffered a series of health problems in the 1950s . He had an appendectomy in 1953 and a hernia operation in 1954 . He suffered a severe heart attack in September 1954 and returned to his home Ocala to recuperate . In early 1955 he decided to resign as president and withdraw from day @-@ to @-@ day operations . He had a second , fatal heart attack at his home on 13 February 1955 . He was buried in Arlington National Cemetery , not far from his " brain child " , the Pentagon . Unfortunately , his other great creation , the Army Service Forces did not survive , being abolished in May 1946 . The Washington Post lauded him as " one of the ablest officers the United States Army has produced . " The USAT General Brehon B. Somervell , a US Army Reserve logistics support vessel that can carry up to 2 @,@ 000 short tons ( 1 @,@ 800 t ) of cargo , is named in his honor . 
 = Littorio @-@ class battleship = 
 The Littorio class , also known as the Vittorio Veneto class , was a class of battleship of the Regia Marina , the Italian navy . The class was composed of four ships : Littorio , Vittorio Veneto , Roma , and Impero . Only the first three ships of the class were completed , however . Built between 1934 and 1942 , they were the most modern battleships used by Italy during World War II . The Littorio @-@ class ships were developed in response to the French Dunkerque @-@ class battleships , and were armed with 381 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) guns and had a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . The design was considered by the Spanish Navy , but the outbreak of World War II interrupted construction plans . 
 The first two ships , Littorio and Vittorio Veneto , were operational by the early months of Italy 's participation in World War II . They formed the backbone of the Italian fleet , and conducted several sorties into the Mediterranean to intercept British convoys , though without any notable success . The two ships were repeatedly torpedoed throughout their careers : Littorio was hit by a torpedo during the attack on Taranto in November 1940 and again in June 1942 and Vittorio Veneto was torpedoed during the Battle of Cape Matapan in March 1941 and while escorting a convoy to North Africa in September 1941 . Roma joined the fleet in June 1942 , though all three ships remained inactive in La Spezia until June 1943 , when all three were damaged in a series of Allied air attacks on the harbor . 
 In September 1943 , Italy capitulated and signed an Armistice with the Allies . Littorio was then renamed Italia . The three active battleships were transferred to Malta before they were to be interned in Alexandria . While en route to Malta , German bombers attacked the fleet with Fritz X radio @-@ guided bombs , damaging Italia and sinking Roma . Nevertheless , Italia and Vittorio Veneto reached Malta and were interned . The incomplete Impero was seized by the Germans after Italy withdrew from the war and used as a target , until she was sunk by American bombers in 1945 . Italia and Vittorio Veneto were awarded to the United States and Britain , respectively , as war prizes . Italia , Vittorio Veneto , and Impero were broken up for scrap between 1952 and 1954 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 allotted Italy an additional 70 @,@ 000 long tons ( 71 @,@ 000 t ) of total capital ship tonnage , which could be used in 1927 – 1929 , while other powers were observing the " holiday " in battleship construction prescribed by the treaty . France , which was given parity with Italy , also possessed 70 @,@ 000 tons of capital ship tonnage . Both countries were put under significant pressure from the other signatories to use their allotted tonnage to build smaller battleships with reduced caliber main batteries . The first Italian design , prepared in 1928 , called for a 23 @,@ 000 long tons ( 23 @,@ 000 t ) ship armed with a main battery of six 381 mm ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) guns in twin turrets . They opted for this design because this allowed three ships under the 70 @,@ 000 @-@ ton limit . This would have allowed the Italian fleet to keep at least two units operational at any given time . Protection and radius of action were sacrificed for speed and heavy armament , though the Italians did not value range , as they operated primarily in the confined waters of the Mediterranean . 
 Later in 1928 , the design staff prepared another ship , with a displacement of 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) , armed with six 406 mm ( 16 @.@ 0 in ) guns and protected against guns of the same caliber . At least one of these ships would have followed the three 23 @,@ 000 @-@ ton ships once the building holiday expired in 1931 . Funding was not allocated to begin construction , however , as the Italian Navy did not want to instigate an arms race with the French Navy . The London Naval Treaty of 1930 extended the building holiday to 1936 , though Italy and France retained the right to build 70 @,@ 000 tons of new capital ships . Both countries rejected British proposals to limit new battleship designs to 25 @,@ 000 long tons ( 25 @,@ 000 t ) and 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns . After 1930 , the Italian Navy abandoned the smaller designs altogether . By 1930 , Germany had begun to build the three Deutschland @-@ class ships , armed with six 280 mm ( 11 in ) guns , and France had in turn laid down two Dunkerque @-@ class battleships to counter them . The French vessels were armed with eight 330 mm ( 13 in ) guns . In late 1932 , Italian constructors responded with a design similar to the Deutschland class , but armed with six 343 mm ( 13 @.@ 5 in ) guns in triple turrets on a 18 @,@ 000 long tons ( 18 @,@ 000 t ) displacement . 
 The Italian Navy decided that the smaller design was impractical , and that a larger design should be pursued . A 26 @,@ 500 long tons ( 26 @,@ 900 t ) design was then prepared , which mounted eight 343 mm guns in twin turrets . This was ultimately abandoned in favor of a 35 @,@ 000 ton design to be armed with 406 mm guns . The 406 mm gun in turn was abandoned in favor of the 381 mm gun because there were no designs for the larger gun , which would delay construction ; a 381 mm gun had already been designed for the canceled Francesco Caracciolo class . Ultimately , nine 381 mm guns in three triple turrets were adopted as the primary battery for the ships , on a displacement in excess of 40 @,@ 000 long tons ( 41 @,@ 000 t ) , despite the fact that this violated the established naval treaties . Nevertheless , by the time these ships entered service , the international arms control system had fallen apart and the major naval powers had invoked the " escalator clause " that allowed for ships up to 45 @,@ 000 long tons ( 46 @,@ 000 t ) displacement . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the class varied slightly in dimensions . Littorio and Vittorio Veneto were 224 @.@ 05 meters ( 735 @.@ 1 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 237 @.@ 76 m ( 780 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall , while Roma and Impero were 240 @.@ 68 m ( 789 @.@ 6 ft ) long overall . All four ships had a draft of 9 @.@ 6 m ( 31 ft ) and a beam of 32 @.@ 82 m ( 107 @.@ 7 ft ) . Littorio displaced 40 @,@ 724 metric tons ( 40 @,@ 081 long tons ; 44 @,@ 891 short tons ) as designed and 45 @,@ 236 t ( 44 @,@ 522 long tons ; 49 @,@ 864 short tons ) at full load . Vittorio Veneto displaced 40 @,@ 517 t ( 39 @,@ 877 long tons ; 44 @,@ 662 short tons ) and 45 @,@ 029 t ( 44 @,@ 318 long tons ; 49 @,@ 636 short tons ) , respectively . Roma 's displacement increased slightly as compared to the other ships , to 40 @,@ 992 t ( 40 @,@ 345 long tons ; 45 @,@ 186 short tons ) and 45 @,@ 485 t ( 44 @,@ 767 long tons ; 50 @,@ 139 short tons ) , respectively . As Impero was not completed , her final displacement is unknown . As built , the ships were fitted with bulbous bows to increase their speed , but they were found to cause serious vibration , which forced a modification to the bow . 
 Littorio and Vittorio Veneto had a standard crew of 80 officers and 1 @,@ 750 enlisted men ; while serving as a flagship , the crew was increased by a command staff of between 11 and 31 additional officers . The standard crew for Roma and Impero was increased by 100 enlisted men . Aircraft facilities were located on the quarterdeck , where it was initially planned to base six La Cierva autogyros . Instead , a single catapult was fitted . The ships were equipped with three Ro.43 reconnaissance seaplanes or navalized Re.2000 fighters . The Re.2000 fighter was a wheeled aircraft and had to land on an airfield . 
 The ships ' propulsion system consisted of four Belluzzo geared steam turbines powered by eight oil @-@ fired Yarrow boilers . The engines were rated at 128 @,@ 200 shaft horsepower ( 95 @,@ 600 kW ) and a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . On sea trials , both Littorio and Vittorio Veneto exceeded the design specifications for their power plant . Littorio reached 137 @,@ 649 shp ( 102 @,@ 645 kW ) and 31 @.@ 3 kn ( 58 @.@ 0 km / h ; 36 @.@ 0 mph ) , while Vittorio Veneto made 133 @,@ 771 shp ( 99 @,@ 753 kW ) and 31 @.@ 4 kn ( 58 @.@ 2 km / h ; 36 @.@ 1 mph ) , both at light loadings . In service , however , the ships averaged 28 kn ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . Figures for Roma 's speed trials have not been recorded . The ships carried 4 @,@ 140 t ( 4 @,@ 070 long tons ; 4 @,@ 560 short tons ) of fuel oil , which enabled a maximum range of 4 @,@ 580 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 480 km ; 5 @,@ 270 mi ) at a cruising speed of 16 kn ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . At 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , the ships ' range increased slightly to 4 @,@ 700 nmi ( 8 @,@ 700 km ; 5 @,@ 400 mi ) . The entire machinery system accounted for about 5 @.@ 6 percent of the total displacement . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships ' main battery consisted of nine 381 mm L / 50 Ansaldo 1934 guns in three triple turrets , two in a superfiring pair forward and one aft . These long @-@ barrel , high @-@ velocity guns were chosen to compensate for the smaller 381 mm shell as compared to the 406 mm gun originally desired . The 381 mm guns had a maximum elevation of 35 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 42 @,@ 260 m ( 138 @,@ 650 ft ) . The guns fired a 885 kg ( 1 @,@ 951 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 870 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ) . High explosive shells weighed 774 kg ( 1 @,@ 706 lb ) . The high muzzle velocity of the guns reduced their service life and increased the dispersion of the fall of shot . Shell rooms were located below the propellant magazines beneath the gun house in the turret structure . The guns ' rate of fire was one shot every 45 seconds . 
 The ships ' secondary battery consisted of twelve 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) L / 55 Ansaldo Model 1934 guns in four triple turrets . Two were placed abreast the No. 2 main battery turret and two on either side of the rear turret . These guns fired a 50 kg ( 110 lb ) AP shell at a muzzle velocity of 910 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) . They could elevate to 45 degrees , permitting a maximum range of 25 @,@ 740 m ( 84 @,@ 450 ft ) . They had a rate of fire of slightly better than four rounds a minute . Four 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 40 guns supplemented the 152 mm guns . The ships ' anti @-@ aircraft armament was composed of a powerful battery of twelve 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 50 guns closely arranged amidships , twenty 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) L / 54 guns , and sixteen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) L / 65 guns . The 90 mm guns provided long @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft protection , and were mounted in <unk> stabilized single turrets . They had a rate of fire of 12 rounds per minute and had a ceiling of approximately 10 @,@ 800 m ( 35 @,@ 400 ft ) . The 37 mm and 20 mm guns were designed for close @-@ range defense and had effective ranges of 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) and 2 @,@ 500 m ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) , respectively . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ships ' belt armor was designed to defeat 380 mm shells at ranges over 16 @,@ 000 m ( 52 @,@ 000 ft ) , and was inclined at 11 degrees . The belt was layered as follows : a 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) hardened steel belt was used to de @-@ cap armor @-@ piercing projectiles . A 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) wide gap separated the outer layer from the main belt armor , which was 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick and was backed with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of timber and 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) skin plating . Another 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) wide gap separated the main belt from a 36 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick splinter screen . Another 25 mm thick screen was placed further inboard . The main section of the belt armor was closed on either end by 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick transverse bulkheads . The bow was protected by a 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick belt , while the stern was given 125 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) of armor protection . 
 Horizontal protection over the magazine consisted of a 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) thick armored deck . Over the machinery spaces , the deck was reduced in thickness to 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) , and on the outboard portions of the ships , the deck was reduced further to 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) . The aft steering rooms and auxiliary machinery spaces were protected by a 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick deck . The main conning tower was protected by 50 – 130 mm thick side armor . 
 Above the deck , the main battery barbettes that housed the turret assemblies for the 381 mm guns were protected with 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick armor , while below deck the thickness was reduced to 280 mm . The faces of the main battery turrets were 350 mm thick , with 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and roofs . The secondary gun turrets were housed in barbettes 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick above deck and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick below deck . The turret faces were 280 mm thick , with 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick sides . Below the third deck , neither the primary nor secondary barbettes were protected by armor . The anti @-@ aircraft guns were protected with gun shields ranging in thickness from 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 = = = = Pugliese torpedo defense system = = = = 
 All four ships incorporated a unique underwater protection system named after its designer , Umberto Pugliese . A 40 mm thick torpedo bulkhead extended inboard from the base of the main belt before curving down to meet the bottom of the hull . This formed a void which housed an empty drum 380 mm ( 15 in ) wide with 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) thick walls ; the rest of the void was filled with liquid . The drum ran the length of the torpedo defense system , and was designed to collapse to contain the explosive pressure of a torpedo hit . The torpedo bulkhead would prevent any splinters or explosive effects from entering the ships ' vitals . The system was designed to protect the ship from torpedo warheads up to 350 kg ( 770 lb ) . 
 The system did not perform as effectively as expected , however . This was due to two major defects in the design . The riveted joint that connected the interior torpedo bulkhead to the bottom of the hull was not strong enough to sustain the tremendous shear loadings associated with direct contact explosions . The joints failed even in cases of non @-@ contact explosions ; this prevented the hollow drum from collapsing as designed and resulted in massive flooding . The fineness of the hull shape prevented the 380 mm thickness from being maintained for the entire central citadel ; the width of the drum was reduced significantly abreast of the main battery , down to 228 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 in ) . The ability of the drum to absorb explosive shock correspondingly fell in relation to its size . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The keels for Vittorio Veneto and Littorio were laid on the same day , 28 October 1934 , at the Cantieri Riuniti dell 'Adriatico shipyard in Trieste and the Ansaldo shipyard in Genoa , respectively . Vittorio Veneto was launched on 22 July 1937 , with Littorio following exactly one month later on 22 August . While incomplete , Vittorio Veneto went to sea on 23 October 1939 to conduct machinery trials . She was delivered to the Italian Navy in Trieste , still incomplete , some six months later on 28 April 1940 . She departed Trieste on 1 May for final fitting out at the dockyard in La Spezia . After completion on 15 May 1940 , she went to Taranto to join the fleet . Littorio underwent the same pattern of machinery trials prior to completion ; she was delivered to the fleet on 6 May 1940 . 
 Two additional ships were laid down four years later . Roma was built by the CRDA shipyard , starting on 18 September 1938 . She was launched on 9 June 1940 and was completed on 14 June 1942 , after which she joined the fleet in La Spezia and replaced Littorio as the fleet flagship . Impero was laid down at the Ansaldo shipyard on 14 May 1938 . She was launched on 15 November 1939 , but she was never completed . After the entrance of Italy to World War II , the Italian Navy moved the unfinished ship from Genoa to Brindisi , out of fears of French attacks on the vessel . Work was not resumed . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Littorio and Vittorio Veneto were declared operational on 2 August 1940 , and were assigned to the 9th Division of the 1st Squadron . On 31 August , the two ships , along with three of the older battleships steamed with a force of ten cruisers and thirty @-@ one destroyers to engage the Operation Hats convoy , but poor reconnaissance prevented the Italian force from engaging the British ships . The ships made another unsuccessful sortie to attack another Malta convoy on 29 September . During the attack on Taranto on 12 November 1940 , Littorio was hit twice by torpedoes , suffering serious damage . Significant flooding caused the ship to settle by the bow . The ship was dry @-@ docked on 11 December , with repairs completed by 11 March 1941 . Vittorio Veneto , however , emerged from the attack undamaged . While her sister was being repaired , she took over flagship duties and was transferred to Naples . 
 Vittorio Veneto sortied on 26 November and encountered British forces south of Sardinia . During the resulting Battle of Cape Spartivento , Swordfish torpedo bombers from the carrier HMS Ark Royal attacked Vittorio Veneto , though she evaded the torpedoes . She briefly engaged British cruisers with her rear main battery turret , without scoring any hits . During the engagement , one of her Ro.43 reconnaissance planes was shot down by a Skua fighter . On the night of 8 – 9 January 1941 , the Royal Air Force attacked Naples with heavy bombers , but failed to hit the ship . In February , Vittorio Veneto , Andrea Doria and Giulio Cesare attempted to attack what was believed to be a Malta convoy . The British squadron was in fact Force H , steaming to bombard Genoa . The two fleets did not make contact , however , and the Italians returned to port . 
 On 26 March 1941 , Vittorio Veneto departed port to attack British convoys to Greece . Germany pressured the Italian Navy to begin the operation , under the impression that they had disabled two of the three battleships assigned to the British Mediterranean Fleet . This resulted in the Battle of Cape Matapan the following day , during which Vittorio Veneto engaged British cruisers . She was then attacked by torpedo bombers from HMS Formidable ; the first wave failed , but the second scored a single hit on both Vittorio Veneto and the heavy cruiser Pola . The battleship was flooded with some 4 @,@ 000 t ( 3 @,@ 900 long tons ; 4 @,@ 400 short tons ) of water , though she got underway after ten minutes and eventually reached Taranto on 29 March . Repairs lasted until July . 
 Littorio and Vittorio Veneto had both returned to active duty by August 1941 , and on the 22nd the two ships sortied to attack a convoy . They returned to port without encountering any British forces , however . On 26 September , the two battleships attempted to intercept the Operation Halberd convoy , but they broke off the operation without attacking the convoy . While escorting a convoy to North Africa , Vittorio Veneto was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS Urge ; repairs lasted until Spring , 1942 . Shortly thereafter , on 13 December , Littorio escorted another convoy to North Africa . This operation resulted in the First Battle of Sirte , which ended inconclusively . She provided distant cover to another convoy on 3 – 6 January 1942 . On 21 March , she sortied to attack a British convoy , which led to the Second Battle of Sirte . During the engagement , she badly damaged the destroyers Havock and Kingston . 
 Repairs to Vittorio Veneto were completed in time for her to join Littorio on attacks on the convoys Vigorous and Harpoon , which had departed Alexandria and Gibraltar to reinforce Malta simultaneously in mid @-@ June . Combat was limited to the opposing light forces , and Littorio and Vittorio Veneto did not see action ; the British nevertheless broke off Operation Vigorous due to the ships ' presence and heavy air attacks . While returning to port , Littorio was hit by a bomb from an American B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bomber ; the bomb struck the forward gun turret , though it did minimal damage . Before returning to port , a British Wellington bomber torpedoed the ship . The torpedo struck her starboard bow , though she returned to port . Repairs were completed and on 12 December , both ships were moved from Taranto to La Spezia in response to the Allied landings in North Africa . Roma joined the fleet shortly after the attacks on the two convoys , and joined her sisters for the move to La Spezia . There , she replaced Littorio as the fleet flagship . 
 In June 1943 , a series of Allied air raids attacked La Spezia in an attempt to neutralize the three battleships . On 5 June , she was hit by two large bombs that struck her port side . She was transferred to Genoa for repairs , which were not completed before the Armistice that ended Italian participation in the war . Littorio was hit by three bombs on 19 June , a week after her sister was damaged . She was renamed Italia after Benito Mussolini 's regime collapsed . Roma was damaged during the 5 June attack and again in a third attack on 23 June . In September 1943 , following the withdrawal of Italy from the war , all three ships and a significant portion of the Italian fleet left port to be interned in Malta . While en route , German bombers laden with Fritz @-@ X radio @-@ guided bombs attacked the formation . One hit Italia in the bow forward the main battery turrets , causing serious damage . Two hit Roma ; one passed through the ship and exploded under her keel , and the second hit near the forward magazines . The bomb detonated the magazines , causing a massive explosion that destroyed the ship with heavy casualties . 
 Italia and Vittorio Veneto reached Malta , where they remained until 14 September , when they were transferred to Alexandria . They remained at the Great Bitter Lake in the Suez Canal for the rest of the war . On 6 June 1946 , Vittorio Veneto steamed to Augusta in Sicily , where , under the Treaty of Peace with Italy , she was allocated to Britain . On 14 October 1946 , she was moved to La Spezia , paid off on 3 January 1948 , and broken up for scrap . Italia left Great Bitter Lake on 5 February 1947 , to join her sister in Augusta . Allocated to the United States , she was stricken on 1 June 1948 and scrapped in La Spezia . The incomplete Impero had meanwhile been seized by the retreating Germans in 1943 , who used her as a target , until she was sunk by American bombers on 20 February 1945 . In October 1947 , the ship was raised and towed to Venice , where she was broken up . 
 = = The Littorio design in foreign navies = = 
 In 1939 , Spain 's General Francisco Franco briefly considered a naval building program after seizing power in the Spanish Civil War . Franco concluded several agreements with the Italian government that would have seen the building of four Littorio @-@ class battleships in Spain . The Italians promised to provide all necessary technical and material support for the construction of the ships . The Italian Navy pushed to modernize and enlarge the existing shipyards in Spain , so that they could handle a vessel as large as the Littorio class . The project was abandoned after Italy became involved in World War II , and as a result of limited Spanish industrial capacity . 
 In the early 1930s , the Soviet Navy began a naval construction program , and sought advice from foreign shipbuilders for a new class of battleships . On 14 July 1939 , Ansaldo completed a design proposal for the Soviet Navy , for a ship largely based on the Littorio class , designated U.P. 41 . The design was for a 42 @,@ 000 t ( 41 @,@ 000 long tons ; 46 @,@ 000 short tons ) ship armed with nine 406 mm guns in triple turrets . The Italians did not disclose the specifications of the Pugliese system and instead used a multiple @-@ torpedo bulkhead system . Regardless , the Soviet Navy did not use the U.P. 41 design as the basis for the Sovetsky Soyuz @-@ class battleships they laid down in the late 1930s . They were , however , equipped with the Pugliese system , the details of which were revealed through Soviet espionage . 
 In preparing the design for the Design 1047 type of battlecruisers in early 1940 , the Dutch Navy inspected Vittorio Veneto , then under construction , in hopes of gathering some experience on the underwater protection system . The Italians refused to disclose the details of the Pugliese system , however . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 Notes 
 Citations 
 = Typhoon = 
 A typhoon is a mature tropical cyclone that develops in the western part of the North Pacific Ocean between 180 ° and 100 ° E. This region is referred to as the Northwestern Pacific Basin , and is the most active tropical cyclone basin on Earth , accounting for almost one @-@ third of the world 's annual tropical cyclones . For organisational purposes , the northern Pacific Ocean is divided into three regions : the eastern ( North America to 140 ° W ) , central ( 140 ° to 180 ° W ) , and western ( 180 ° to 100 ° E ) . The Regional Specialized Meteorological Center ( RSMC ) for tropical cyclone forecasts is in Japan , with other tropical cyclone warning centers for the northwest Pacific in Hawaii ( the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ) , the Philippines and Hong Kong . While the RSMC names each system , the main name list itself is coordinated among 18 countries that have territories threatened by typhoons each year . The Philippines use their own naming list for systems approaching the country . 
 Within the northwestern Pacific there are no official typhoon seasons as tropical cyclones form throughout the year . Like any tropical cyclone , there are six main requirements for typhoon formation and development : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to develop a low pressure center , a pre @-@ existing low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . The majority of storms form between June and November while tropical cyclone formation is at a minimum between December and May . On average , the northwestern Pacific features the most numerous and intense tropical cyclones globally . Like other basins , they are steered by the subtropical ridge towards the west or northwest , with some systems recurving near and east of Japan . The Philippines receive the brunt of the landfalls , with China and Japan being impacted slightly less . Some of the deadliest typhoons in history have struck China . Southern China has the longest record of typhoon impacts for the region , with a thousand @-@ year sample via documents within their archives . Taiwan has received the wettest known typhoon on record for the northwest Pacific tropical cyclone basins . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 = = = Etymology and usage = = = 
 The term Typhoon is the regional name in the northwest Pacific for a severe ( or mature ) tropical cyclone , whereas hurricane is the regional term in the northeast Pacific and northern Atlantic . Elsewhere this is called a tropical cyclone , severe tropical cyclone , or severe cyclonic storm . 
 The Oxford English Dictionary cites several Oriental words from Persian and Chinese giving rise to two early forms in English : <unk> ( from Persian ) and <unk> / tay @-@ fun ( from Chinese ) . 
 The Persian source is the word <unk> <unk> ( " storm " ; also Arabic <unk> ( <unk> , " to turn round " ) , Hindi <unk> ़ <unk> ( <unk> ) ) from the verb <unk> ( Persian : <unk> / <unk> , " to roar , to blow furiously " ) . 
 The Chinese source is the word tai <unk> ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , cited as a common dialect form of Mandarin dà " big " and <unk> " wind " . In Mandarin the word for the windstorm is <unk> ( <unk> , " big wind " ) and in Cantonese <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , " big wind " ) . 
 The Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> , " Typhon , father of the winds " ) is unrelated but has secondarily contaminated the word . 
 = = = Intensity classifications = = = 
 A tropical depression is the lowest category that the Japan Meteorological Agency uses and is the term used for a tropical system that has wind speeds not exceeding 33 knots ( 38 mph ; 61 km / h ) . A tropical depression is upgraded to a tropical storm should its sustained wind speeds exceed 34 knots ( 39 mph ; 63 km / h ) . Tropical storms also receive official names from RSMC Tokyo . Should the storm intensify further and reach sustained wind speeds of 48 knots ( 55 mph ; 89 km / h ) then it will be classified as a severe tropical storm . Once the system 's maximum sustained winds reach wind speeds of 64 knots ( 74 mph ; 119 km / h ) , the JMA will designate the tropical cyclone as a typhoon — the highest category on its scale . 
 From 2009 the Hong Kong Observatory started to further divide typhoons into three different classifications : typhoon , severe typhoon and super typhoon . A typhoon has wind speed of 64 @-@ 79 knots ( 73 @-@ 91 mph ; 118 – 149 km / h ) , a severe typhoon has winds of at least 80 knots ( 92 mph ; 150 km / h ) , and a super typhoon has winds of at least 100 knots ( 120 mph ; 190 km / h ) . The United States ' Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) unofficially classifies typhoons with wind speeds of at least 130 knots ( 67 m / s ; 150 mph ; 241 km / h ) — the equivalent of a strong Category 4 storm in the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale — as super typhoons . However , the maximum sustained wind speed measurements that the JTWC uses are based on a 1 @-@ minute averaging period , akin to the U.S. ' National Hurricane Center and Central Pacific Hurricane Center . As a result , the JTWC 's wind reports are higher than JMA 's measurements , as the latter are based on a 10 @-@ minute averaging interval . 
 = = Genesis = = 
 There are six main requirements for tropical cyclogenesis : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to develop a low pressure center , a pre @-@ existing low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . While these conditions are necessary for tropical cyclone formation , they do not guarantee that a tropical cyclone will form . Normally , an ocean temperature of 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) spanning through a depth of at least 50 metres ( 160 ft ) is considered the minimum to maintain the special mesocyclone that is the tropical cyclone . These warm waters are needed to maintain the warm core that fuels tropical systems . A minimum distance of 500 km ( 300 mi ) from the equator is normally needed for tropical cyclogenesis . 
 Whether it be a depression in the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) or monsoon trough , a broad surface front , or an outflow boundary , a low level feature with sufficient vorticity and convergence is required to begin tropical cyclogenesis . About 85 to 90 percent of Pacific typhoons form within the monsoon trough . Even with perfect upper level conditions and the required atmospheric instability , the lack of a surface focus will prevent the development of organized convection and a surface low . Vertical wind shear of less than 10 m / s ( 20 kn , 33 ft / s ) between the ocean surface and the tropopause is required for tropical cyclone development . Typically with Pacific typhoons , there are two outflow jets : one to the north ahead of an upper trough in the Westerlies , and a second towards the equator . 
 In general , westerly wind increases associated with the Madden – Julian oscillation lead to increased tropical cyclogenesis in all tropical cyclone basins . As the oscillation propagates from west to east , it leads to an eastward march in tropical cyclogenesis with time during that hemisphere 's summer season . On average , twice per year twin tropical cyclones will form in the western Pacific ocean , near the 5th parallel north and the 5th parallel south , along the same meridian , or line of longitude . There is an inverse relationship between tropical cyclone activity in the western Pacific basin and the north Atlantic basin , however . When one basin is active , the other is normally quiet , and vice versa . The main reason for this appears to be the phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation , or MJO , which is normally in opposite modes between the two basins at any given time . 
 = = Frequency = = 
 Nearly one @-@ third of the world 's tropical cyclones form within the western Pacific . This makes this basin the most active on Earth . Pacific typhoons have formed year round , with peak months from August to October . The peak months correspond to that of the Atlantic hurricane seasons . Along with a high storm frequency , this basin also features the most globally intense storms on record . One of the most recent busy seasons was 2013 . Tropical cyclones form in any month of the year across the northwest Pacific ocean , and concentrate around June and November in the northern Indian ocean . The area just northeast of the Philippines is the most active place on Earth for tropical cyclones to exist . Across the Philippines themselves , activity reaches a minimum in February , before increasing steadily through June , and spiking from July through October , with September being the most active month for tropical cyclones across the archipelago . Activity falls off significantly in November , although Typhoon Haiyan , the strongest Philippine typhoon on record , was a November typhoon . The most frequently impacted areas of the Philippines by tropical cyclones are northern and central Luzon and eastern Visayas . A ten @-@ year average of satellite determined precipitation showed that at least 30 percent of the annual rainfall in the northern Philippines could be traced to tropical cyclones , while the southern islands receive less than 10 percent of their annual rainfall from tropical cyclones . The genesis and intensity of typhoons are also modulated by slow variation of the sea surface temperature and circulation features following a near @-@ 10 @-@ year frequency . 
 = = Paths = = 
 Most tropical cyclones form on the side of the subtropical ridge closer to the equator , then move poleward past the ridge axis before recurving north and northeast into the main belt of the Westerlies . When the subtropical ridge position shifts due to El Niño , so will the preferred tropical cyclone tracks . Areas west of Japan and Korea tend to experience many fewer September – November tropical cyclone impacts during El Niño and neutral years . During El Niño years , the break in the subtropical ridge tends to lie near 130 ° E , which would favor the Japanese archipelago . During La Niña years , the formation of tropical cyclones , along with the subtropical ridge position , shifts westward across the western Pacific ocean , which increases the landfall threat to China and greater intensity to Philippines . Those that form near the Marshall Islands find their way to Jeju Island , Korea . 
 Typhoon paths follow three general directions . 
 Straight track ( or straight runner ) . A general westward path affects the Philippines , southern China , Taiwan , and Vietnam . 
 A parabolic , recurving track . Storms recurving affect eastern Philippines , eastern China , Taiwan , Korea , Japan , and the Russian Far East . 
 Northward track . From point of origin , the storm follows a northerly direction , only affecting small islands . 
 A rare few storms , like Hurricane John , were redesignated as typhoons as its track originated from the Eastern / Central Pacific and moved its way into the western Pacific . 
 = = Basin monitoring = = 
 Within the Western Pacific , RSMC Tokyo @-@ Typhoon Center , part of the Japan Meteorological Agency has had the official warning responsibility for the whole of the Western Pacific since 1989 , and the naming responsibility for systems of tropical storm strength or greater since 2000 . However each National Meteorological and Hydrological Service within the western Pacific has the responsibility for issuing warnings for land areas about tropical cyclones affecting their country , such as the Joint Typhoon Warning Center for United States agencies , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) for interests in the island archipelago nation , and the Hong Kong Observatory for storms that come close enough to cause the issuance of warning signals . 
 = = = Name sources = = = 
 The list of names consists of entries from 14 Southeast and East Asian nations and the United States who have territories directly affected by typhoons . The submitted names are arranged into five lists , and each list is cycled with each year . Unlike tropical cyclones in other parts of the world , typhoons are not named after people . Instead , they generally refer to animals , flowers , astrological signs , and a few personal names . However , PAGASA retains its own naming list , which does consist of human names . Therefore , a typhoon can possibly have two names . Storms that cross the date line from the central Pacific retain their original name , but the designation of hurricane becomes typhoon . In Japan , people use the numerical designation of typhoons according to the sequence of their occurrence in the calendar year . 
 = = Records = = 
 The most active Western Pacific typhoon season was in 1964 , when 39 storms of tropical storm strength formed . The least activity seen in the northwest Pacific ocean was during the 2010 Pacific typhoon season , when only 14 tropical storms and seven typhoons formed . In the Philippines , the most active season , since 1945 , for tropical cyclone strikes was 1993 when nineteen tropical cyclones moved through the country . There was only one tropical cyclone that moved through the Philippines in 1958 . The 2004 Pacific typhoon season was the busiest for Okinawa since 1957 . Within Guangdong in southern China , during the past thousand years , the most active decades for typhoon strikes were the 1660s and 1670s . 
 The highest reliably @-@ estimated maximum sustained winds on record for a typhoon were those of Typhoon Haiyan at 195 miles per hour ( 314 km / h ) shortly before its landfall in the central Philippines on Nov. 8 , 2013 . The most intense storm based on minimum pressure was Typhoon Tip in the northwestern Pacific Ocean in 1979 , which reached a minimum pressure of 870 hectopascals ( 26 inHg ) and maximum sustained wind speeds of 165 knots ( 85 m / s , 190 mph , 310 km / h ) . The deadliest typhoon of the 20th century was Typhoon Nina , which killed nearly 100 @,@ 000 in China in 1975 due to a flood that caused 12 reservoirs to fail . After Typhoon Morakot landed in Taiwan at midnight on August 8 , 2009 , almost the entire southern region of Taiwan ( Chiayi County / Chiayi City , Tainan County / Tainan City ( now merged as Tainan ) , Kaohsiung County / Kaohsiung City ( now merged as Kaohsiung ) , and Pingtung County ) and parts of Taitung County and Nantou County were flooded by record @-@ breaking heavy rain . The rainfall in Pingtung County reached 2 @,@ 327 millimeters ( 91 @.@ 6 in ) , breaking all rainfall records of any single place in Taiwan induced by a single typhoon , and making the cyclone the wettest known typhoon . 
 = Halo Original Soundtrack = 
 The Halo Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack for the video game Halo : Combat Evolved . Composed and produced by Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori for Bungie , the soundtrack was released on June 11 , 2002 . Most of the music from Halo : Combat Evolved is present on the CD , although some songs have been remixed by O 'Donnell in medley form for " more enjoyable " listening . The first piece O 'Donnell wrote , known as " Halo " , became the basis for Halo 's " signature sound " which has been heard in the other games of the main trilogy . 
 The soundtrack features a wide range of musical styles , including chanting , string orchestra , and percussion . Upon release , the soundtrack was well received by critics . Some complimented the wide range of musical styles , and most agreed that playing the game is not required to enjoy the soundtrack . A special edition of the soundtrack was released on October 28 , 2003 , featuring a DVD with a trailer , demo movie , and high quality music for Halo 2 . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the audio director for Bungie , Martin O 'Donnell was tasked with writing the music for Halo : Combat Evolved . He had scored previous Bungie projects , including Myth : The Fallen Lords , while working for his audio company , TotalAudio , along with Michael Salvatori . O 'Donnell was nervous about the project , saying he approached it , " with fear and trepidation " . O 'Donnell stated his main influences were music he liked — " a little Samuel Barber meets Giorgio Moroder " . Bungie 's Director of cinematics , Joseph Staten told O 'Donnell , " the music should give a feeling of importance , weight , and sense of the ' ancient ' to the visuals of Halo " . 
 O 'Donnell 's first piece of music , " Halo " , which would become " the signature theme for Halo " , was written and recorded in three days . O 'Donnell convinced Alex Seropian to allow him to produce an original piece of music for the game 's 1999 Macworld Conference & Expo demonstration . He drew inspiration for the theme from The Beatles ' " Yesterday " . O 'Donnell recruited Salvatori and three other colleagues he had recorded jingles with — Robert Bowker , Jeffrey Morrow , and Rob Trow — to produce the " chanting monks " that open the piece . Originally , he had intended the Qawwali accents to be sung by one of the professionals , but after singing an example of what he wanted , the others suggested using O 'Donnell 's own rendition instead . The theme premiered at the 1999 Macworld Conference & Expo . 
 The remaining themes were written , recorded , and produced throughout 2001 . The music was written with a variety of equipment including , " keyboards , synths , and samplers as well as digital recording equipment controlled by computers " . Live instrumentations , from members of the Chicago Symphony and Chicago Lyric Opera Orchestra , were added where needed . The soundtrack features a wide range of sounds , O 'Donnell described it as , " Gregorian chant , string orchestra , percussion and just a bit of a ' Qawwali voice ' " . Working closely with level designers , O 'Donnell divided the music " into chunks " . Based on these " chunks " , " [ Halo 's ] audio engine could play [ the music ] back dynamically based on the player 's actions " . For the soundtrack release , O 'Donnell rearranged the music featured in the game in order to make listening to the soundtrack " more enjoyable " . 
 Bungie had previously released soundtracks for their games due to fan request , but Microsoft was hesitant to commit to producing a soundtrack for Halo ; at the time most video games did not get a commercial soundtrack release . The publisher finally relented after pressure from O 'Donnell and the outside solicitation of musician Nile Rodgers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reception of the soundtrack was generally positive from critics . IGN praised the soundtrack for its wide use of instruments stating , " Where other videogame scores tend to miss their mark when combining electronic and organic elements , O 'Donnell and Salvatori seem to have found a rather stable balance between the two divergent sounds . " Adding , overall , the soundtrack is " one of the better videogame oriented musical experiences out there " and playing the game is not required to find enjoyment within the score . Reviewing for Monsters At Play , Michael Johnson called the soundtrack " 66 minutes of orchestral goodness " citing the wide range of music covered as a strong point . Nuketown gave the soundtrack 9 out of 10 , stating , " the soundtrack is a welcome and invigorating reminder of good times had blasting unstoppable alien hordes " . The release went on to sell over 40 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music was written and composed by Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori . 
 " Opening Suite " – 3 : 33 
 " Truth and Reconciliation Suite " – 8 : 25 
 " Brothers in Arms " – 1 : 29 
 " Enough Dead Heroes " – 3 : 00 
 " Perilous Journey " – 2 : 26 
 " A Walk in the Woods " – 1 : 52 
 " Ambient Wonder " – 1 : 57 
 " The Gun Pointed at the Head of the Universe " – 2 : 26 
 " Trace Amounts " – 1 : 51 
 " Under Cover of Night " – 3 : 41 
 " What Once Was Lost " – 1 : 40 
 " Lament for Pvt. Jenkins " – 1 : 14 
 " Devils ... Monsters ... " – 1 : 30 
 " Covenant Dance " – 1 : 57 
 " Alien Corridors " – 1 : 48 
 " Rock Anthem for Saving the World " – 1 : 17 
 " The Maw " – 1 : 06 
 " <unk> " – 1 : 01 
 " On a Pale Horse " – 1 : 35 
 " <unk> to Dream " – 1 : 00 
 " Library Suite " – 6 : 47 
 " The Long Run " – 2 : 12 
 " Suite Autumn " – 4 : 22 
 " Shadows " – 0 : 59 
 " Dust and Echoes " – 2 : 49 
 " Halo " – 4 : 22 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the CD credits . 
 = Icewind Dale II = 
 Icewind Dale II is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Black Isle Studios and published by Interplay Entertainment , released on August 27 , 2002 . Like its 2000 predecessor Icewind Dale , the game is set in the Forgotten Realms fantasy setting in the Icewind Dale region . The player assumes control of a group of mercenaries in a war between the Ten Towns of Icewind Dale and a coalition of persecuted races and religions . 
 The game is designed as an action @-@ oriented alternative to other Infinity Engine games , with less emphasis on exploration and story . It uses a real @-@ time adaptation of the Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) Third Edition ruleset . The Infinity Engine was extensively modified to comply with the Third Edition , but the team was forced to remove certain rules because of the engine 's outdated nature . It was the final game to be developed using the Infinity Engine . 
 The game was well received by critics , who praised its combat , pacing , and use of the Third Edition rules . However , some reviewers felt that the graphics and engine had become outdated , and could not compete with its contemporaries . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Icewind Dale II is a real @-@ time adaptation of the D & D Third Edition ruleset . The game is viewed from an isometric perspective , and a head @-@ up display ( HUD ) occupies the bottom of the screen . Accessible from the HUD are an automap and a journal that records quests and important events . The player uses a point @-@ and @-@ click interface to interact with the game ; for example , clicking on the ground moves the selected player character , and clicking on a passive non @-@ player character ( NPC ) will initiate dialogue . When conversations occur , the game presents multiple dialogue options . The game world is separated into area maps — obscured by fog of war — that are revealed as the area is explored . A multiplayer mode is available for up to six players over a local area network or the Internet . The " Heart of Fury " mode is also available , which increases the game 's difficulty and contains more powerful items . The game features over seven hundred items ; the designers included a system that <unk> the items the player obtains from enemies . 
 When beginning the game , the player may choose to play a pre @-@ selected party , or to create a party of up to six characters ; unlike the Baldur 's Gate series , Icewind Dale II does not permit the player to import characters from previous Icewind Dale games . While creating characters , the player chooses their gender , race , class , alignment , and attributes , among other things . The player can sometimes choose a <unk> of a race or class , such as Deep Gnome or Cleric of <unk> . Race , alignment , and attributes affect the player character 's available dialogue options , as well as NPC responses . For example , some NPCs will be prejudiced against certain races , or a character of low intelligence will have limited dialogue options . Some sub @-@ races in the game are significantly more powerful than the core races present in AD & D Third Edition ; these sub @-@ races must earn more experience points than others before leveling up . Characters can reach a maximum level of thirty . It is possible to add additional characters to the party at any time , including during combat . 
 Icewind Dale II 's gameplay is focused on combat . The combat system is a real @-@ time adaptation of the turn @-@ based system used in D & D Third Edition , which caused the developers to remove certain aspects , such as " attacks of opportunity " . Dice rolls are simulated by the game . In place of the turn @-@ based rounds used in D & D , characters have independent rounds , during which they may execute one or more actions , depending on such factors as the duration of the action . The player can pause the game and issue orders to characters at any time . Each character can carry a limited amount of items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Icewind Dale II takes place in the Forgotten Realms D & D campaign setting , on the continent of Faerûn . It centers on the northern Icewind Dale region , and is set thirty years after the original game . The game begins in the harbor town of Targos , one of the Ten Towns of Icewind Dale , which is under siege by a goblin army . The goblins are directed by the Legion of the Chimera , an army composed of outcast races and religious factions , such as <unk> , half @-@ breeds , and followers of winter goddess <unk> . Targos hires mercenaries to defend against the attack . Areas encountered in the game include : the Black Raven Monastery , built over an entrance to the Underdark ; the town of Kuldahar , constructed around a magical tree that emits heat ; the Severed Hand , an ancient elven fortress that was lost during a war with <unk> ; and the Dragon 's Eye , a network of volcanic caverns inhabited by yuan @-@ ti . Other areas include the Underdark and the Jungles of Chult . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins as the player 's group of mercenaries arrives by ship to defend Targos . They report to the town palisade and fend off an assault by the goblin army . Afterwards , the mayor of Targos orders them to start an offensive on the goblin army . The group kills the chieftain of the army , and discovers that he was under the command of a woman named Sherincal . When they return to Targos , the mayor asks them to rendezvous with reinforcements from Neverwinter . The group travels to meet them in an airship piloted by Oswald <unk> . 
 A storm causes the ship to crash , and the group awakens to discover that a glacier blocks the reinforcements ' path . While investigating the glacier , the group finds Sherincal , a half @-@ dragon , guarding the entrance to an <unk> temple . They learn that Sherincal leads the Legion of the Chimera 's western forces , and that the leaders of the Legion of the Chimera , <unk> twins named Isair and Madae , reside in the Severed Hand . Inside the <unk> temple , the group finds a prisoner from Kuldahar , who asks them to warn Kuldahar of the threat posed by the Legion of the Chimera . After this , the group creates a passage through the glacier , and meets with the reinforcements . 
 As the group travels to Kuldahar , they meet a drow ( dark elf ) named Nym , who tells them that the pass to Kuldahar is guarded by the Legion of the Chimera , and that an alternate path through the Underdark exists . Later , Isair and Madae locate the group with information from Nym . They state their intention to attack Kuldahar , and warn the group to not interfere . The group then passes through the Black Raven Monastery to enter the Underdark . After exiting the Underdark , they are flown to Kuldahar by Oswald <unk> . 
 When the group lands in Kuldahar , they discover it has been invaded by the Legion of the Chimera . They meet the <unk> of Kuldahar , who tells them that a portal has been opened to allow yuan @-@ ti from the Jungles of Chult to assault Kuldahar . After the group prevents the attack , the <unk> tells them that they may reach the Severed Hand through an exit at the bottom floor of the Dragon 's Eye . The group travels through Dragon 's Eye , and proceeds to the Severed Hand . Once inside , they learn that the war between the Ten Towns and the Legion of the Chimera was caused by the mayor of Bryn <unk> , who had sent Isair and Madae poisoned food . They also discover that a <unk> that was cast on the Severed Hand has been corrupted , and the structure will be transported to the plane of limbo . Eventually , the group finds Isair and Madae , and kills them . 
 = = Development = = 
 During summer 2001 , Black Isle Studios employed three development teams . These included the Icewind Dale team , the team developing Torn , and a team working on an unannounced project . Before and during Torn 's development , several members of its team expressed interest in developing another game using the Infinity Engine . The development team was not made aware of Black Isle Studios ' decision to develop Icewind Dale II until Torn 's cancellation . Lead designer J. E. Sawyer described , " I don 't know when the producers decided to make the game , but I was told that we were making the game when I learned that <unk> was being cancelled ... on a Wednesday afternoon " , and that Feargus Urquhart " asked me to work with Steve <unk> to create a story and area overview by Thursday afternoon . Steve and I talked about it for the rest of the day . I went home that night and worked on the overviews until the next day . I came in and turned the <unk> in , and after the Friday division meeting , the project was in development . " During this period , Interplay Entertainment relied on Black Isle Studios ' games to alleviate financial trouble , which put pressure to release games quickly . The decision to develop Icewind Dale II was based partly on the original Icewind Dale 's reception , and the development teams ' ability to create a game with the Infinity Engine relatively quickly . Sawyer said of the decision , " In all honesty , the reasons for making Icewind Dale II have to do with limiting risks and maximizing our chances for a popular title . " <unk> of Icewind Dale II progressed during the development of the Icewind Dale expansions , and production began late July 2001 , shortly after the completion of Icewind Dale : Trials of the <unk> . After six months of development , Icewind Dale II was officially announced on February 4 , 2002 . 
 Icewind Dale II was originally planned to be an incomplete conversion to the D & D Third Edition ruleset , with many rules omitted . The kit system ( class specialization ) introduced in Baldur 's Gate 2 was to be used , but this idea was later abandoned . Sawyer and several other members of the team pushed for the game 's conversion to Third Edition . The development team was eventually granted an extension , which allowed them to complete the change to Third Edition rules . The Infinity Engine required extensive modification to comply with Third Edition rules , as it had originally been designed for Second Edition rules ; certain elements of the rules were removed due to interface and engine issues . The game 's interface was redesigned , and all @-@ new art was created . It features new item icons , with new spell icons by Brian Menze ; Menze had previously created Planescape : Torment 's spell icons . Jason Manley , the portrait artist for the previous Icewind Dale games , left Black Isle Studios in late 2001 ; several new works he painted before his departure were later used in Icewind Dale II . Black Isle Studios artist Justin Sweet was asked to substitute . The game 's resolution was increased to a minimum resolution of <unk> , with an unofficially supported maximum resolution of <unk> . 
 J. E. Sawyer managed rule implementation , but the areas of the game were divided between designers . For example , designer Chris Avellone created the opening sequence , designer Dave Maldonado developed the Black Raven Monastery and a large area of wilderness , and designers John <unk> and Damien <unk> created the ending areas . Partway through development , Sawyer left the team to work as the lead designer on another internal project ; Dave Maldonado and Chris Avellone were given his areas to finish . The developers wanted the game to contain more breaks from combat , with character interaction and puzzle solving , than the previous Icewind Dale . The decision to include more puzzles was influenced by the positive reception to the puzzles in Icewind Dale : Trials of the <unk> . 
 The game went gold on August 5 , 2002 , and was released on August 27 . After the release of Icewind Dale II , Sawyer expressed dissatisfaction over the Icewind Dale series , saying that , " I wasn 't particularly thrilled with how my work on [ Icewind Dale ] came out ... " and , " ... [ Heart of Winter ] managed to actually be worse than my Icewind Dale stuff . " In regards to Icewind Dale II he said , " [ It ] came out better than I expected , but still , not exactly awe @-@ inspiring . " Chris Avellone later said , " Icewind Dale was a fun series , but it didn 't try to set the bar for anything other than a fun romp . People may remember enjoying it , but it wasn ’ t trying to break any new ground or do anything revolutionary . In some respects , it was almost a step back from other games we 'd done and focused more on exploration and dungeon crawls . " A Collector 's Edition containing bonus material , such as a full @-@ color cloth map and soundtrack CD , was also released . Icewind Dale II was the final game developed using the Infinity Engine . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music of the game was composed by Inon Zur , whose previous works included Baldur 's Gate 2 : Throne of Bhaal and Fallout Tactics . Inon Zur worked with Jeremy Soule , the composer for Icewind Dale , to maintain the tone of the music . Inon Zur also worked closely with Interplay audio director Adam Levenson while composing the music ; Zur and Levenson had worked together on several previous titles . Inon Zur said that while composing the theme for the game , " I wrote and rewrote the main theme several times " , and " we tried to create a piece that would preserve the sound of the first Icewind Dale [ ... ] we made great efforts to convey the new elements also . Capturing all of this in 30 @-@ 45 seconds was not easy however I believe that we eventually found the right path for this game 's soundtrack . " Zur described the composing process , " After learning the storyboard and getting additional insight from the producers / music supervisor I 'll start to compose . The thematic idea ( main melody or rhythmical groove ) comes first . Then comes the accompaniment followed by the orchestration , " and that , " each piece should have its own unique flavour so every step is carefully examined . I have to make sure that the main idea of the piece is reflected in all these steps . " He called the composing experience " very pleasant and rewarding . " 
 The music was composed in five weeks , and the recording and mixing lasted three weeks . As the game 's music budget was low , a small Los Angeles orchestra was used to record the music ; the sound of the each instrument was doubled during production . Inon Zur described the music as having " some uniqueness to it , that basically it developed throughout the game [ with ] the [ inclusion ] of more instruments , taking flutes and percussion and combining them with the standard orchestra . " Zur later said , " I thought that we definitely met some high standards ; we compared our products to big budget films scores , " and , " in the end we were quite happy . " The game features voice work from Gabrielle <unk> , Peter Stormare , and Grey DeLisle , among others . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Icewind Dale II reached sixth on the NPD PC games sales chart in the last week of August 2002 , and climbed to fourth during the first week of September . Icewind Dale II 's reception was generally positive . Game Informer hailed it as , " one of the best RPGs ever released for the PC , " and GameSpot called it , " simply a great role @-@ playing game . " However , PC Format said , " it 's uninspired and uninspiring , giving itself a narrow remit and fulfilling that <unk> . " Certain reviewers compared Icewind Dale II to Neverwinter Nights . IGN said , " [ Compared to Neverwinter Nights ] the pace of <unk> is more varied , its balance better , the gameplay more interesting , " and Game Informer considered the interface superior to that of Neverwinter Nights . PC Format said , " in the light of Neverwinter Nights in particular , there ’ s little that stands out in Icewind Dale II to recommend it , " and PC Zone said , " it 's not the <unk> killer we had all hoped for and neither does it stack up to Neverwinter Nights . " 
 Many reviewers praised the game 's combat and pacing . G4 called the game 's combat " sublime , " and said that " no Infinity Engine game thus far has had such interesting and intricate tactical combat . " GameSpot called it " expertly paced . " PC Zone complained that certain gameplay mechanics had become outdated , but that " the only real downer is the antiquated spell system and the inexplicable necessity to rest after every fight . " The game was also praised for its implementation of the Third Edition rules and interface . Computer Gaming World said that " <unk> II has the Third Edition rules down , and in no other place in the game is it more apparent than with character development , " and PC Gamer said it had " a dazzling implementation of the D & D 3rd Edition rules . " GameSpot called the interface " a big improvement on the spread @-@ out interface of all previous Infinity Engine games , " and IGN said that " the customization improvements to the interface that seem so natural , they make you wonder why they weren 't thought of before . " Game Informer called the interface " absolutely inspired " and its inventory system " second to none . " 
 The game was criticized for its graphics and engine , which reviewers considered to be outdated . G4 called the engine " old " and " clunky " , and PC Format said that " the whole thing is limited by the creaking engine . " However , certain sources praised the engine . Game Informer called it " the best role @-@ playing engine that has ever been invented , " and GameSpot said that " ' immortal ' may be a better word to describe the engine , because the fact is , Icewind Dale II plays great . " In regards to the graphics , GameSpot said that " in many ways Icewind Dale II represents the best use of the Infinity Engine 's prerendered , isometric settings to date , [ but ] that doesn 't change the fact that Icewind Dale II generally looks dated . " IGN thought the sprites had become out @-@ dated , and that " the animations are crude by today 's standards . " New Straits Times agreed , saying that although some of the effects were attractive , the " dated Infinity engine " could not compare to contemporaries Dungeon Siege and Neverwinter Nights . However , Computer Gaming World believed that " it consistently offers the same striking and imaginative environments that establish the tone and immersive charm of the game , " and Computer Games Magazine said , " it may not look like much , but it 's got it where it counts . " The game 's pre @-@ rendered backgrounds received praise . IGN said that " the artwork is attractive , both conceptually and in its final form , " and Game Informer called them " beautiful " . Many reviewers complained about the game 's pathfinding AI , which PC Zone called " outrageously bad . " 
 Game Informer called the writing and story " on par with any fantasy novel . " PC Gamer said it had " some of the richest and most enjoyable dialogue since Planescape Torment , " and an " impressive storyline . " GameSpot called the story " engrossing , " and said that " the game is very well written , offering up a number of strong characters and serious themes . " PC Zone noted that , " thanks to the excellent NPCs , the battles have a lot more meaning , as there is a strong storyline behind the endless hacking and slashing . " PC Format thought that " <unk> also suffers , like its predecessor , from a story irrevocably weakened by anonymous central characters – the six you create . " In regards to the audio , GameSpot said that " Inon Zur does a truly fantastic job that 's perhaps even better than Soule 's effort in the original Icewind Dale , " and that " the voice acting in Icewind Dale II is as great as you 've perhaps come to expect from a Black Isle Studios role @-@ playing game . " Computer Gaming World said that " [ the ] sound effects , music , and voiceovers are all excellent . " 
 Allen Rausch , writing for GameSpy 's 2004 retrospective " A History of D & D Video Games " , " While nobody would mistake it for " 2002 RPG of the Year " material , Black Isle Studios managed to give the Infinity engine a terrific game as its swan song . " 
 = Wu Zuguang = 
 Wu Zuguang ( Chinese : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Wu Tsu @-@ <unk> ; 21 April 1917 – 9 April 2003 ) was a Chinese playwright , film director and social critic who has been called a " legendary figure in Chinese art and literary circles " . He authored more than 40 plays and film scripts , including the patriotic drama City of Phoenix , one of the most influential plays during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , and Return on a Snowy Night , which is generally considered his masterpiece . He directed The Soul of the Nation , Hong Kong 's first colour film , based on his own historical drama Song of Righteousness . 
 He was also well known as an outspoken critic of China 's cultural policies , both of the Kuomintang ( KMT ) and the Communist governments , and was repeatedly persecuted as a result . He fled to Hong Kong in 1945 to avoid being captured by KMT agents , and returned to Beijing after the foundation of the People 's Republic China in 1949 . He was denounced as a " rightist " during the Anti @-@ Rightist Movement and performed hard labour in the " Great Northern Wilderness " for three years , and was again persecuted during the Cultural Revolution . His wife , the celebrated pingju actress Xin Fengxia , refused to divorce him and became disabled after undergoing beatings and penal labour . Despite these ordeals , Wu continued to criticize government censorship and to call for political freedom , and was widely admired for his moral conviction . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wu was born on 21 April 1917 to a prominent scholar @-@ official family in Beijing , with ancestral roots in Changzhou , Jiangsu Province . His grandfather Wu <unk> ( <unk> ) was a <unk> of the Qing dynasty reformer Zhang <unk> and participated in the Xinhai Revolution . His father Wu Ying ( <unk> ) was a founder and curator of the Beijing Palace Museum . His mother Zhou <unk> ( <unk> ) gave birth to 15 children , 11 of whom ( four sons and seven daughters ) survived to adulthood . She gave birth to Wu Zuguang , her first child , in the mansion of Wu Ying 's uncle Zhuang <unk> , a minister of the Republic of China government . 
 In 1935 , Wu entered Sino @-@ French University in Beijing . The next year , a relative who was running a drama school in Nanjing persuaded him to move there and teach at his school . There he met several people who would become prominent dramatists , including Cao Yu and Chen <unk> . 
 = = Wartime career = = 
 At the outset of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1937 , Wu wrote the patriotic war play City of Phoenix ( <unk> ) , which made him well @-@ known in China at age 20 . It was one of the most performed dramas during the eight @-@ year war . He later wrote several critically acclaimed plays , including Return on a Snowy Night , which is generally considered his masterpiece . His works are strongly influenced by the May Fourth New Culture Movement . 
 As eastern China fell to the Japanese , he moved to the wartime capital Chongqing , where he worked as an editor for the Xinmin <unk> newspaper . In 1945 , he published Mao Zedong 's now famous poem " Snow : to the Tune of Garden in Full Spring " , which infuriated the Kuomintang government . He escaped to British Hong Kong to avoid being captured by KMT agents , and made a living writing screenplays and making films . He directed The Soul of the Nation ( <unk> ) , Hong Kong 's first colour film , based on his historical drama , Song of Righteousness , about the Song dynasty patriot Wen <unk> . He also made Return on a Snowy Night into a film , as well as two others . In 1946 , Wu married the actress Lü En ( <unk> ) in Shanghai . 
 = = Early People 's Republic = = 
 After the Communist Party of China won the Civil War and established the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , Wu returned to Beijing . Like many intellectuals at the time , he held high hopes for the new People 's Republic which finally restored peace in a united China after decades of war and division . He wanted to return to writing plays , but was assigned by the government to direct Song of the Red Flag , a film about women textile workers . As he had no experience with factory life , it took him a year to finish the film , which he considered a " worthless failure . " He and Lü En divorced amicably in 1950 , due to differences in personality and interests . 
 In 1951 , his friend Lao She introduced him to the famous pingju opera performer Xin Fengxia , who had acted in one of Wu 's plays and admired his talent . They married that year , despite the fact that they were from differing socioeconomic backgrounds ; she had no formal education and was nearly illiterate , while he was from a prominent family of scholars . Wu helped her to study reading , writing , and calligraphy . 
 During this period he made the Peking opera film Goddess of the Luo River ( <unk> ) and Mei Lanfang and His Stage Art , a documentary about Mei Lanfang . He also wrote the Peking operas Three Beatings of Tao <unk> ( <unk> ) and San Guan Yan ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Persecution = = 
 During Mao Zedong 's Anti @-@ Rightist Movement , Wu was denounced as a " rightist " in 1957 and sent to the Great Northern Wilderness in Heilongjiang to be " reformed through labour . " His crime was to criticize the Communist Party 's control of the theatre and to argue that the <unk> ( experts ) should have a greater role in such matters . He was called an enemy of the Party , even by his renowned colleague Tian Han . Tian later referenced Wu 's work approvingly , which is seen by some as an implicit apology , and was himself persecuted to death . Xin Fengxia was pressured to divorce him , but refused . Citing a legendary love story from one of her operas , she said " Wang <unk> waited 18 years for Xue <unk> , and I will wait 28 years for Wu Zuguang . " As a result , she was herself labeled a rightist and went through struggle sessions . 
 Wu returned to Beijing after three years of hard labour , but six years later , China fell into the even greater turmoil of the Cultural Revolution , which began in 1966 . Xin Fengxia and Wu Zuguang were both denounced at the beginning of the period . She became disabled below her left knee after a severe beating . Their friend Lao She drowned himself after being similarly tortured . During the tumultuous decade Wu and Xin both served years of forced labour . In December 1975 , she became paralyzed after suffering a stroke , and Wu took care of her for the rest of her life . 
 = = Post @-@ Cultural Revolution = = 
 After the end of the Cultural Revolution , Wu was politically rehabilitated in 1980 and inducted into the Communist Party , an event he described as " neither an occasion for laughter or tears " , and his publication ban was lifted after two decades . His play Itinerant Players ( <unk> ) , based on Xin Fengxia 's experiences , was performed that year . In 1983 , Wu traveled to the University of Iowa in the U.S. to attend the International Writing Program . 
 Wu was in general loyal to Deng Xiaoping 's government , but continued to be an outspoken critic . In 1983 , he dismissed Deng 's Anti @-@ Spiritual Pollution Campaign as futile . In September 1986 , he read an essay at a meeting of the China Writers Association entitled " Against Those Who Wield the Scissors — a Plea for an End to Censorship " . It was enthusiastically received by the audience , but only a censored version was published , minus 1 @,@ 000 characters deemed " acrimonious " . After the December 1986 student demonstrations , he was pressured to leave the Communist Party in 1987 . Retired Politburo member Hu <unk> came to his home in person to demand his resignation from the Party . He obliged , as he did not think he was " the sort of person who should be in the Party . " In spring 1989 , Wu signed a petition calling for greater political freedom . Following the army crackdown of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 , Wu called for a reassessment of the incident , but was forbidden to speak at a CPPCC meeting . 
 Xin Fengxia died on 12 April 1998 , during a trip to Changzhou , Wu 's ancestral hometown . He was devastated by the loss and his health quickly deteriorated . He suffered three strokes in the next few years , and died on 9 April 2003 . 
 = = Children = = 
 Wu Zuguang and Xin Fengxia had three children . Their son Wu Huan is also a writer , painter , and calligrapher . After the deaths of Wu Zuguang , he organized the exhibition " A Hundred Years of the Wu Family " at the Poly Art Museum in Beijing . It was also held in France , Hong Kong , and Taiwan . 
 = Zara Yaqob = 
 Zar 'a <unk> or Zera <unk> ( Ge 'ez <unk> : <unk> <unk> 'ā <unk> " Seed of Jacob , " modern <unk> 'a <unk> <unk> ) ( 1399 – 26 August 1468 ) was <unk> <unk> ( 19 or 20 June 1434 – 1468 ) of Ethiopia ( throne name <unk> I Ge 'ez <unk> <unk> or Constantine I ) , and a member of the Solomonic dynasty . Born at <unk> in the province of <unk> ( now part of the <unk> Region , near the Awash River ) , Zara Yaqob was the youngest son of Dawit I and his youngest queen , <unk> <unk> . 
 The British expert on Ethiopia , Edward <unk> , stated that Zara Yaqob " was unquestionably the greatest ruler Ethiopia had seen since Ezana , during the heyday of Aksumite power , and none of his successors on the throne – excepted only the emperors <unk> II and Haile Selassie – can be compared to him . " 
 Paul B. Henze repeats the tradition that the jealousy of his older brother Tewodros I forced the courtiers to take Zara Yaqob to Tigray where he was brought up in secret , and educated in Axum and at the monastery of Debre <unk> . While admitting that this tradition " is invaluable as providing a religious background for Zar 'a @-@ Ya <unk> 's career " , <unk> <unk> dismisses this story as " very improbable in its details . " The professor notes that Zara Yaqob wrote in his <unk> Berhan that " he was brought down from the royal prison of Mount <unk> only on the eve of his accession to the throne . " 
 = = Reign = = 
 Upon the death of Emperor Dawit , his older brother Tewodros ordered Zara Yaqob confined on Amba <unk> ( around 1414 ) . Despite this , Zara Yaqob 's supporters kept him a perennial candidate for Emperor , helped by the rapid succession of his older brothers to the throne over the next 20 years , and left him as the oldest qualified candidate . David Buxton points out the effect that his forced seclusion had on his personality , " deprived of all contact with ordinary people or ordinary life . " Thrust into a position of leadership " with no experience of the affairs of state , he [ Zara Yaqob ] was faced by a kingdom seething with plots and rebellions , a Church riven with heresies , and outside enemies constantly threatening invasion . " Buxton continues , 
 In the circumstances it was hardly possible for the new king to show adaptability or tolerance or diplomatic skill , which are the fruit of long experience in human relationships . Confronted with a desperate and chaotic situation he met it instead with grim determination and implacable ferocity . Towards the end of his life , forfeiting the affection and loyalty even of his courtiers and family he became a lonely figure , isolated by suspicion and mistrust . But , in spite of all , the name of this great defender of the faith is one of the most memorable in Ethiopian history . 
 Although he became Emperor in 1434 , Zara Yaqob was not crowned until 1436 at Axum , where he resided for three years . It was not unusual for Ethiopian rulers to postpone their coronation until later in their reigns . 
 After he became Emperor , Zara Yaqob married princess Eleni , who had converted from Islam before their marriage . Eleni was the daughter of the king of <unk> , one of the Sidamo kingdoms south of the <unk> River . Although she failed to bear him any children , Eleni grew into a powerful political person . When a conspiracy involving one of his <unk> came to light , Zara Yaqob reacted by appointing his two daughters , <unk> <unk> and Berhan <unk> , to these two offices . According to the Chronicle of his reign , the Emperor also appointed his daughters and nieces as governors over eight of his provinces . These appointments were not successful . 
 He defeated <unk> ad @-@ Din , the Sultan of Adal at the Battle of <unk> in 1445 , which consolidated his hold over the Sidamo kingdoms in the south , as well as the weak Muslim kingdoms beyond the Awash River . Similar campaigns in the north against the <unk> and the <unk> were not as successful . 
 After witnessing a bright light in the sky ( which most historians have identified as Halley 's Comet , visible in Ethiopia in 1456 ) , Zara Yaqob founded Debre Berhan and made it his capital for the remainder of his reign . 
 In his later years , Zara Yaqob became more despotic . When <unk> <unk> , abbot of <unk> <unk> , criticized Yaqob 's beatings and murder of men , the emperor had the abbot himself beaten and imprisoned , where he died after few months . Zara Yaqob was convinced of a plot against him in 1453 , which led to more brutal actions . He increasingly became convinced that his wife and children were plotting against him , and had several of them beaten . <unk> <unk> , the mother of the future emperor <unk> Maryam I , died from this mistreatment in 1462 , which led to a complete break between son and father . Eventually relations between the two were repaired , and Zara Yaqob publicly designated <unk> Maryam as his successor . 
 = = The Ethiopian church = = 
 At the time Zara Yaqob assumed the throne , the Ethiopian church had been divided over the issue of Biblical Sabbath observance for roughly a century . One group , loyal to the Coptic bishops , believed that the day of rest should be observed only on Sunday , or Great Sabbath ; another group , the followers of Ewostatewos , believed with their founder that both the original seventh @-@ day Sabbath ( i.e. , Saturday , or Lesser Sabbath ) and Sunday should be observed . 
 He was successful in persuading two recently arrived Egyptian bishops , Mikael and Gabriel , into accepting a compromise aimed at restoring harmony with the House of Ewostatewos , as the followers of Ewostatewos were known . At the same time , he made efforts to pacify the House of Ewostatewos . While the <unk> were won over to the compromise by 1442 , the two Egyptian bishops only agreed to the compromise at the Council of Debre <unk> in <unk> ( 1450 ) . 
 Emperor Zara Yaqob also continued as the defender of the Patriarch of Alexandria . When he heard in 1441 of the destruction of the Egyptian monastery of <unk> <unk> by Sultan Jaqmaq , he called for a period of mourning , then sent a letter of strong protest to the Sultan . He reminded Jaqmaq that he had Muslim subjects whom he treated fairly , and warned that he had the power to divert the Nile , but refrained from doing so for the human suffering it would cause . Jaqmaq responded with gifts to appease Zara Yaqob 's anger , but refused to rebuild the Coptic Churches he had destroyed . 
 According to Richard Pankhurst the Emperor was also " reputedly an author of renown " , having contributed to Ethiopian literature as many as three important theological works . One was Mahsafa <unk> ( " The Book of Light " ) , an exposition of his ecclesiastical reforms and a defence of his religious beliefs ; the others were Mahsafa Milad ( " The Book of Nativity " ) and Mahsafa Selassie ( " The Book of the Trinity " ) . 
 = = Foreign affairs = = 
 Zara Yaqob sent a diplomatic mission to Europe ( 1450 ) , led by a Sicilian Pietro <unk> who had previously been successful in a mission to India , specifically asking for skilled labor . <unk> first visited Pope Nicholas V , but his ultimate goal was the court of Alfonso V of Aragon , who responded favorably . The Catholic Ecumenical Council of Florence ( 1438 – 1445 ) declared that Zara Yaqob was the legendary rumored king Prester John . 
 = Fujiwara no Teika = 
 Fujiwara <unk> ( <unk> ) , better @-@ known as Fujiwara no Teika , ( 1162 – September 26 , 1241 ) was a Japanese poet , critic , calligrapher , novelist , anthologist , scribe , and scholar of the late Heian and early Kamakura periods . His influence was enormous , and he is counted as among the greatest of Japanese poets , and perhaps the greatest master of the waka form – an ancient poetic form consisting of five lines with a total of 31 syllables . 
 Teika 's critical ideas on composing poetry were extremely influential and studied until as late as the Meiji era . A member of a poetic clan , Teika was born to the noted poet Fujiwara no Shunzei . After coming to the attention of the Retired Emperor Go @-@ Toba ( 1180 – 1239 ; r . 1183 – 1198 ) , Teika began his long and distinguished career , spanning multiple areas of aesthetic endeavor . His relationship with Go @-@ Toba was at first cordial and led to commissions to compile anthologies , but later resulted in his banishment from the retired emperor 's court . His descendants and ideas would dominate classical Japanese poetry for centuries afterwards . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Teika was born to a minor and distant branch of the aristocratic and courtly clan , the Fujiwara , in 1162 , sometime after the Fujiwara regents had lost their political pre @-@ eminence in the Imperial court during the Hōgen Rebellion . His branch of the clan sought prestige and power in the court by aligning itself with the Mikohidari family , and by specializing in artistic endeavors , principally poetry . Such specialization was not unusual ; branches of extended clans were not in a position to compete directly in politics with the head branch of the clan ( or indeed other clans because of their junior status ) , but could compete in more restricted aesthetic pursuits . ( The Mikohidari , also known as the Miko , were a cadet branch of the <unk> , through Fujiwara no Michinaga 's sixth son , Fujiwara no <unk> ( 1005 – 1064 ) ; the Mikohidari were themselves aligned with the more senior Kujō branch of the original Fujiwara , who opposed the <unk> family ) 
 Teika 's grandfather was the venerable poet Fujiwara no <unk> . His father was Fujiwara no Shunzei ( 1114 – 1204 ) , a well known and greatly respected poet ( and judge of poetry competitions ) , who had compiled the seventh Imperial anthology of waka ( the <unk> Wakashū ) . His sister would also become a well @-@ respected poet of waka and renga , known as <unk> or Shunzei 's Daughter , whom he would occasionally seek out for poetic advice . His elder brother , Fujiwara no <unk> ( sometimes romanized as " <unk> " ; <unk> ) , would be somewhat successful in court , but not nearly as much as his sister . Teika 's foster @-@ brother , the priest Jakuren or " <unk> " c . 1139 – 1202 would be successful as a poet although his career was cut tragically short ; he had been adopted by Shunzei when Shunzei 's younger brother " retired from the world " . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Teika 's goals as the senior male of his branch were to inherit and cement his father 's position in poetry , and to advance his own reputation ( thereby also improving the political fortunes of his own clan in the court ) . While his life would be marked by repeated illness and wildly shifting fortunes – only partially moderated by his father 's long @-@ lasting influence in court ( Shunzei would live to the advanced age of 90 ) , the young and poetically inclined Retired Emperor Go @-@ Toba 's patronage would prove to lead to some of Teika 's greatest successes . 
 = = = = Go @-@ Toba 's patronage = = = = 
 The Retired Emperor Go @-@ Toba announced , in the second year of his abdication ( 1200 , the second year of the Shōji era ) that he would be conducting a poetry contest . Retired Emperors frequently became more influential after their retirement from the office of Emperor rather than as the actual Emperor , since they were free from the highly restricting ceremonial requirements and politics of the court . Go @-@ Toba was 20 when he abdicated ; he was the consummate amateur , skilled at playing the lute , considered an authority on traditional learning and courtly precedent , excellent at playing Go , and fond of equestrian pursuits such as horseback archery , shooting at running dogs , and swordsmanship . 
 Go @-@ Toba regarded all these pursuits as hobbies , taking one up and dropping another . One of these was his support of poetry , especially the waka . Immediately after his abdication , he had announced that he would hold two poetry contests , each requiring a number of preeminent poets to compose some 100 waka in a particular thematic progression , known as the hyakushu genre of poem sequences . The first contest ( Go @-@ Toba In <unk> <unk> - " Ex @-@ Emperor Go @-@ Toba 's First Hundred @-@ Poem Sequences " ) was considered a crucial political nexus ; if a clan 's poet did well and impressed the powerful ( and youthful ) Go @-@ Toba , the clan would benefit considerably . 
 Teika 's diary records that he looked forward to this chance to improve himself . He was 38 , and had reached middle age . While he was recognized as a talented poet , his career was stagnant ; he had been in the Palace Guards of the Left for twenty years , and had not been promoted for nearly 10 . He was " Lesser Commander of the Palace Guards of the Left " with little prospect of further advancement . 
 He had wider political problems : The influence of his patrons , the <unk> , over the Emperors had declined drastically . Minamoto no Michichika ( d . 1202 ) had insinuated himself into Imperial circles through Go @-@ Toba 's former nursemaid ; with this leverage , Michichika 's adopted daughter ( the then Shogun 's daughter , who had decided to marry his daughter off to the Emperor , using Michichika as a go @-@ between – contrary to the Shogun 's usual policy if favoring <unk> Kanezane . The Shogun 's lack of confidence allowed Michichika to push Go @-@ Toba into firing Kanezane as <unk> in 1196 ) became Go @-@ Toba 's concubine ( making Michichika the Retired Emperor Go @-@ Toba 's father in law ) , and she bore him his first heir in 1195 ; the shame of this usurpation led Go @-@ Toba 's first wife , <unk> , to retire from the court . As <unk> was the daughter of the Kujō 's leader <unk> no Kanezane , the Kujō 's influence in court diminished considerably , even to the extent of Kanezane and Yoshitsune ( d . 1206 ; once the regent and prime minister ) being driven from the court in 1196 ; with the diminution of their influence , so dimmed Teika 's prospects . Teika expressed his disappointment through poetry , such as this example , written when he was " passed over for promotion in the spring list " in 1187 ( he would eventually be promoted in 1190 , but as his good and encouraging friend <unk> died that year , it was cold comfort ) : 
 In fact , Teika was initially not invited , the instigation of the rival <unk> clan 's leader , Suetsune and the connivance of Michichika . Suetsune and Teika were bitter enemies ; just a few months before , Teika had humiliated Suetsune by calling him " that fake poet " and publicly refusing to participate in a poetry competition with Suetsune . His revenge was well @-@ done ; Teika was furious , writing in his Meigetsuki : : " I never heard of such a thing as choosing only senior poets [ writes Teika about the pretext used to exclude him ] . I can just see Suetsune at the bottom of this , contriving by some bribe that I be left out . It has to be Suetsune , <unk> , that whole family . Well , I have no regrets , for there is no possible hope for me now . But I did write in confidence to <unk> so this may all come out eventually . He has replied that there is still room for hope . " 
 " I gather that it was probably not the Emperor who decided on the rules for the hundred @-@ poem competition . It was due entirely to the machinations of Michichika . One feels like flicking him away in disgust . " 
 Teika 's appeals to the unrelenting Michichika failed , and so Shunzei stepped in with an eloquent letter ( the well @-@ known <unk> <unk> ; " Appeal in Japanese " – writing in Japanese as opposed to the official Chinese was considered a mark of sincerity ) addressed to Go @-@ Toba , arguing that such an exclusion was without precedent , and motivated by base jealousy on their opponent 's part : 
 " Of late the people who call themselves poets have all been mediocrities . The poems they compose are unpleasant to hear , wordy and lacking in finesse . " 
 As Keene writes , " He denounced by name Teika 's enemy Suetsune , calling him an ignoramus , and urged Gotoba not to be misled by his machinations . " Gotoba relented at this appeal from a man he greatly respected ( the second time Shunzei had so interceded on Teika 's behalf ; the first time was in 1185 when Teika had lost his temper and struck a superior – the lesser general Masayuki – with a lamp ) . He allowed Teika , along with two other " young " poets , Fujiwara no Ietaka ( 1159 – 1237 ; 1158 – 1237 , according to Brower ) , adopted son of Jakuren and pupil to Shunzei , and Takafusa ( 1148 – 1209 ) to enter the contest . Teika was overjoyed at this turn of events : 
 " Early this morning came a message from Lord <unk> that last evening the Ex @-@ Emperor ordered my inclusion among the participants for the hundred @-@ poem sequences ..... To have been added to the list for this occasion fills me with inexpressible joy . Though they can hinder me no more , I am still convinced that the trouble was all due to the machinations of those evil men . And that it has turned out this way is a fulfillment of all my hopes and prayers for this life and the next . " 
 Teika furiously worked for more than two weeks to complete the full sequence , and when he finally turned his Shoji hyakushu in a day late , Go @-@ Toba was so eager he read the poems immediately . Go @-@ Toba 's personal secretary , Minamoto Ienaga , kept a diary ( the Minamoto Ienaga nikki ) which <unk> concerned itself with Go @-@ Toba 's poetic activities , and he records that it was Teika 's hundred @-@ poem sequence , and more specifically , poem number 93 which was directly responsible for Teika 's being granted the special permission necessary to be admitted to the Retired Emperor 's court ( distinct from the reigning emperor 's court ; this special admittance was crucial to any future patronage ) ; this is scarcely surprising as the 100 @-@ poem sequences submitted were of uniformly high quality ( more poems originating in the sequences Go @-@ Toba commissioned were included in the Shin Kokinshū than from any other source except the enormous " Poetry Contest in 1 @,@ 500 Rounds " ) . 
 Interestingly , this poem is both a fine example of the <unk> ( " personal grievances " ) genre and as Minamoto no Ienaga first pointed out , also an allusion to the poem ( preserved , along with Go @-@ Shirakawa 's reply , in the Imperial anthology <unk> Wakashū ) Shunzei had sent Retired Emperor Go @-@ Shirakawa 14 years previously , imploring him to forgive Teika for striking a superior with a candlestick ; " the allusion conveys the hope that just as Shunzei 's poem obtained his erring son 's restoration to rank and office under Go @-@ Shirakawa , now Teika 's own poem will win him admission to Go @-@ Toba 's Court despite his connection with the " disgraced " Kujō faction . " 
 Teika and Go @-@ Toba would have a close and productive relationship ; Teika would be favored in such ways as being appointed by Go @-@ Toba as one of the six compilers ( and de facto head compiler by virtue of his dedication and force of personality in addition to his already established reputation as a poet ) of the eighth Imperial Anthology of waka poetry , the esteemed Shin Kokinshū ( c . 1205 , " New Collection of Japanese Poetry , Ancient and Modern " ) which Go @-@ Toba ordered to be written after the success of the hundred @-@ poem sequences ( which furnished a base for the collection ) . In order to compile it , Go @-@ Toba had resurrected the defunct institution , the Poetry Bureau in the seventh month of 1201 , with fifteen <unk> , or " contributing members " , and three added later ) , who participated in the many poetry contests and similar activities that soon began taking place in the Bureau ; of the Fellows , six ( Minamoto <unk> , Fujiwara <unk> , Teika , Fujiwara Ietaka , Fujiwara <unk> and Jakuren , who would not live to finish the task , and was not replaced . Minamoto Ienaga was apparently detached from being Go @-@ Toba 's personal secretary to instead serve as the secretary for the compilation committee ; his and Teika 's diaries have survived , affording an unprecedentedly good view of the inner workings of how an imperial anthology was created ) were chosen to compile the Shin Kokinshū in the eleventh month of 1201 . 
 As if the honor of helping to compile the Shin Kokinshū and of having a remarkable 46 of his poems ( including three from the Shoji hyakushu ) included were not enough , Teika would later be appointed in 1232 by the Retired Emperor Go @-@ Horikawa to compile – by himself – the ninth Imperial Anthology , the <unk> Wakashū ( c . 1235 ; " New Imperial Collection " ) . Teika was the first person to have ever been a compiler of two Imperial anthologies . 
 = = = = Teika and Go @-@ Toba quarrel = = = = 
 This favorable patronage and collaboration eventually soured even as Teika 's relation with Emperor <unk> and Minamoto no Sanetomo deepened , over many things such as differences in how one should use " association and progression " ( as Brower terms it ) in poetic sequences . In 100 @-@ poem sequences and the like , the poems were usually in one of several groups ( the four seasons were common ones , as was love ) ; the poems generally formed an integrated sequence in which they dealt with the same subject matter , proceeding from stage to stage ( for instance , a sequence on Love might proceed from loneliness , to falling in love , to a mature relationship , and then the sorrow when it ends ) or which refer to elements of previous poems ( a technique later central to renga sequences ) . Go @-@ Toba used such techniques consistently and often , whereas Teika 's use was more erratic . During the compilation of the Shin Kokinshū , there were other differences , apparently over how wide @-@ ranging a net to throw for poems : 
 " In a situation like the present , where he [ Go @-@ Toba ] has included poems by a great many people one has never heard of , whose names have remained in almost total obscurity for generations , and persons who have only recently begun to attract attention had as many as ten poems apiece included – in such a situation it is no particular distinction for me to have forty @-@ odd [ 46 ] poems chosen , or for Ietaka to have a score or more . The Ex @-@ Sovereign 's recent decisions make it appear he is choosing men rather than poems – a questionable procedure . " 
 Teika 's displeasure manifested itself in more petty ways , such as refusing to attend a banquet in 1205 ( 300 years after the Kokinshū was completed ) celebrating the official completion of the Shin Kokinshū because there was no precedent for such a banquet ( apparently he was not convinced by the precedent of the banquet celebrating the completion of the Nihon Shoki ) ; Go @-@ Toba reciprocated by cutting Teika out of the process of continually revising the Shin Kokinshū ( while it was officially complete by the date of the banquet , it was de facto incomplete as the Japanese Preface only existed in rough drafts and because Go @-@ Toba would continue revising the selection of poems for some time thereafter , only releasing the final edition approximately 6 years later , sometime after the ninth month of 1210 ; indeed , Go @-@ Toba would continue revising it until his death , although the later revisions are not extant ) . 
 In addition , there apparently were serious personality conflicts , which lead Go @-@ Toba to write once , after praising Teika 's poetry , that : 
 " The way Teika behaved , as if he knew all about poetry , was really quite extraordinary . Especially when he was defending his own opinion , he would act like the man who insisted a stag was a horse . He was utterly oblivious of others , and would exceed all reason , refusing to listen to anything other people had to say . " 
 ( The stag and horse anecdote refers to the ancient Chinese Chao Kao ( d . 207 BCE ) , who revolted after an incident in which he brought a stag to the Imperial court , claimed it was actually a horse , and saw that more of the officials <unk> agreed with him , rather than the emperor who pointed out that the horse was actually a stag . ) 
 Donald Keene believes that as Teika grew more important , he resented Go @-@ Toba 's peremptory use of him . In his later years , Go @-@ Toba took issue not merely with Teika 's personality , but also with his poetry , complaining of Teika 's more liberal style that Teika ( among other things ) " by contrast , paid no attention whatsoever to the topic . For this reason in recent times even beginners have all come to be like this . It is outrageous . Only when one concentrates very hard upon a compound topic and composes a poem which centers upon the topic is the result of any interest . This modern style is sheer carelessness . It is absolutely essential to practice composing poems on compound topics in the correct way . " 
 In any event , the precipitating events were two incidents , one in 1207 and the next in 1220 . In 1207 , Go @-@ Toba decided to organize the creation of 46 landscape screens for the Saishō <unk> Temple which he had built in 1205 ( interestingly , apparently " in order to enlist divine aid in the overthrow the feudal government " ) ; each of these screens would also have a waka on the famous landscape depicted , composed by a leading poet , who would compose the requisite 46 , with the best poems for each landscape selected . Of course , Teika was asked to contribute , but one ( on the " Wood of Ikuta " , a famous and picturesque woodland attached to the Ikuta Shrine of Settsu Province , modern @-@ day Kobe ; it was famous for being a battlefield between the Minamoto and Taira clans , as well as for its scenic beauty ) was rejected by Go @-@ Toba ; not because it was a bad poem , but because it was a " poor model " , as Keene puts it . Teika , already annoyed by the minimal notice for the contest and the lack of time for composing the poems ( he had to turn them in two days after he was first informed of the contest ) , began complaining about Go @-@ Toba and attacking his poetic judgement , both with regard to the Shin Kokinshū and the poems selected from the screens . Nothing came of this incident , but nevertheless , the damage had been done . 
 The second incident took place in the second month of 1220 and is described in a preface to the two poems concerned as recorded in Teika 's personal anthology , the Shū <unk> ; during the six @-@ year period covering such events as Teika 's banishment from Go @-@ Toba 's court and Go @-@ Toba 's participation in the Jōkyū War of 1221 , Teika 's diary is silent . Teika was asked to participate in a poem competition on the 13th of the second month ; Teika declined , citing as a reason the anniversary of his mother 's death 26 years previous , in 1194 . Go @-@ Toba and his officials sent several letters to him , strongly urging him to come , and Teika eventually gave in , arriving with only two waka . The headnote to the two poems reads : 
 " Having been summoned to the palace for a poetry gathering on the thirteenth day of the second month in the second year of <unk> [ 1220 ] , I had begged to be excused because of a ritual defilement , it being the anniversary of my mother 's death . I thought no more about it , but quite unexpectedly in the evening of the appointed day , the Archivist Iemitsu come with a letter from the ex @-@ emperor , saying that I was not the hold back on account of the defilement , but was to come in any case . I continued to refuse , but after the ex @-@ emperor had sent two more letters insisting on my presence , I hastily wrote down the following two poems and took them with me . " 
 The first waka was critical of Go @-@ Toba but otherwise fairly innocuous , but the second was quite pointed , obliquely attacking Go @-@ Toba both for forcing Teika to attend Go @-@ Toba 's contest when Teika was memorializing his mother and also for insufficiently promoting Teika ( the final line is a variation on a phrase dealing with " double griefs " ) : 
 Go @-@ Toba saw this attack as both ingratitude of the <unk> sort and the culmination of a series of affronts , this latest being petty resentment at what Go @-@ Toba would have seen as a flimsy pretext for attempting to get out of the poetry competition . Accordingly , he banished Teika from his court , a banishment that would last for more than a year ; this feud distressed devotees of poetry . 
 = = = = Teika in the ascendancy = = = = 
 Possibly another a factor in this estrangement was politics – Teika had had the good fortune of being selected in 1209 as a poetry teacher to the new and young shogun , Minamoto no Sanetomo ; the Shogunate was a rival and superior authority to that of the Emperors and the Imperial court . It was probably to the unhappy Sanetomo that Teika addressed the prefatory essay to his didactic collection , Kindai shūka ( " Superior Poems of Our Time " ) , and his treatise on poetry Maigetsusho ( " Monthly Notes " ) . Go @-@ Toba would become an enemy of the then @-@ bedridden Teika . Fortunately for Teika , Go @-@ Toba would be exiled by the Kamakura shogunate in 1221 for the rest of life to the Oki Islands after Go @-@ Toba led a failed rebellion against the Shogunate ( the Jōkyū War ) which Go @-@ Toba had long hated ; 
 Teika 's political fortunes improved in this period , as it was after Go @-@ Toba 's exile that Teika was appointed compiler of the ninth imperial anthology , the <unk> Wakashū ( " New Imperial Collection " ; completed c . 1234 ) . While it was a great honor , it was poorly received except by conservatives . According to Donald Keene , Shunzei 's Daughter " declared that if it had not been compiled by Teika she would have refused even to take it into her hands . " ( From a letter sent to Fujiwara no Tameie , Teika 's son ) . She and others also criticized it for apparently deliberately excluding any of the objectively excellent poems produced by the three Retired Emperors exiled in the aftermath of the Jōkyū War This absence has been variously attributed to vengefulness on the part of Teika , or simply a desire to not potentially offend the Kamakura shogunate . 
 In 1232 , Teika was advanced at the age of 70 to the court rank of " Gon <unk> " ( Acting Middle Counselor . 
 But even Teika 's improved fortunes could not insulate him entirely from the various famines and disasters that wracked the country in this period , and which greatly <unk> his illnesses : 
 " Today I had my servants dig up the garden ( the north one ) , and plant wheat there . Even if we only grow a little , it will sustain our hunger in a bad year . Don 't make fun of me ! What other stratagem does a poor old man have ? " ( Meigetsuki , 13th day of the 10th month , 1230 ) 
 " Starving people collapse , and their dead bodies fill the streets . Every day the numbers increase .... The stench has gradually reached my house . Day and night alike , people go by carrying the dead in their arms , too numerous to count . " ( Meigetsuki , 2nd day of the 7th month , 1231 ) 
 During the later portions of his life , Teika experimented with refining his style of ushin , teaching and writing it ; in addition to his critical works and the manuscripts he studied and copied out , he experimented with the then @-@ very young and immature form of renga – " They are an amusement to me in my dotage . " He died in 1241 , in Kyoto , and was buried at a Buddhist temple named " <unk> " . 
 = = = Rival descendants = = = 
 One of his 27 children by various women ( and one of two legitimate sons ) , Fujiwara no Tameie ( 1198 – 1275 ; he is remembered as a reluctant heir , in youth inclining rather to court football at the encouragement of Go @-@ Toba than to poetry ) , would carry on Teika 's poetic legacy . Tameie 's descendants would split into three branches : the conservative elder Nijō branch ( founded by Tameie 's elder son , Nijō <unk> ( 1222 – 1286 ) ; the middle branch of the <unk> founded by Fujiwara no <unk> ( 1226 – 1279 ) , which , before it became extinct in 1332 with the death of Fujiwara no <unk> , merged with the Reizei at the prompting of Nun <unk> ; and the younger , more liberal Reizei branch , founded by Tameie ' younger son Fujiwara no Tamesuke ( b . 1263 ) by <unk> ( d. circa 1283 ; a poet and a great diarist , especially remembered for her diary <unk> Nikki ( " Diary of the Waning Moon " ) chronicling her legal battles to get the Kamakura shogunate to stop <unk> from disinheriting Tamesuke of the Hosokawa estate near the capital that Tameie had left Tamesuke ) . 
 It is a testament to Teika 's importance that the poetic history of the next centuries is in large part a story of the battles between the rival branches ; indeed , it is this rivalry that is chiefly responsible for the great number of forgeries attributed to Teika . When the Reizei lost a court case concerning possession of the Hosokawa estate Tameie had willed to Tamesuke , they were ordered to hand over the valuable manuscripts and documents inherited from Teika and Tameie over to the Nijō ; they outwardly complied , but along with the few genuine documents whose existence the Nijō had already learned of , they mostly included forgeries which the Nijō had little choice but to accept . In retaliation , the Nijō manufactured a number of forgeries of their own , the better to buttress their claims . 
 After a period of Reizei ascendancy under Reizei Tamehide ( <unk> , great @-@ grandson of Teika ) ( b . 1302 ? , d . 1372 ) , they suffered a decline and a consequent rise in the fortunes of the Nijō , as Tamehide 's son , <unk> , became a Buddhist monk . However , the Nijō soon suffered setbacks of their own under the wastrel Nijō no <unk> ( b . 1325 , d . 1385 ) , whose promising son , Nijō no <unk> ( b . 1341 , d . 1381 ) , died comparatively young , killed by a brigand . 
 In a further disaster for the Nijō , <unk> 's son , Nijō no <unk> was killed by a brigand as well in 1399 ( ? ) , effectively wiping out the Nijō as an organized force . Under the grandson of Tamehide , <unk> ( b . 1361 , d . 1417 ) , the <unk> achieved temporary victory in the time of <unk> . Ironically , the once @-@ liberal Reizei would become associated during and after the <unk> Era with the ultra @-@ conservatives of the " Palace School " . 
 = = Poetic achievements = = 
 " In this art of poetry , those who speak ill of Teika should be denied the protection of the gods and Buddhas and condemned to the punishments of hell . " <unk> 
 Teika selected the works for the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu , an anthology of a hundred poems by a hundred poets . His Ogura Hyakunin Isshu was later thought to be a book of waka theory in which all types of ideal waka and all techniques were laid out ; disputes over specific style and whether to be conservative or liberal that divided his descendants into a number of feuding schools / clans like the Reizei , <unk> , and Nijō . 
 Teika made many manuscript copies of Japanese classics , including such landmarks of Japanese literature as The Tale of Genji , The Tales of Ise and the Kokinshū anthology . In his days , the ancient Japanese pronunciations were lost or difficult to understand , rendering the orthography of kana confused and uncertain . Teika researched old documents and recovered the earlier system of deciding between interpretations of kana , and developed a systematic orthography which was used until the modern Meiji period . He applied his kana system to his manuscripts , which were known for their accuracy and general high quality and called Teika bon ( " Teika text " ) . Using his method he was able to document the accurate pronunciation of earlier waka like the ones in the Kokin Wakashū . His manuscripts were also appreciated for his eponymous distinct and bold style of calligraphy . The Adobe font " <unk> SPN " , released in 2009 , is based upon the calligraphic style of Fujiwara Teika . 
 Teika is also remembered , like his father , as being something of an innovator – the Encyclopædia Britannica says : 
 " Teika employed traditional language in startling new ways , showing that the prescriptive ideal of " old diction , new treatment " [ kotoba <unk> , kokoro <unk> ] inherited from Shunzei might accommodate innovation and experimentation as well as ensure the preservation of the language and styles of the classical past . " 
 The " old diction " here are phrases and words from the " Three Collections " : the Kokinshū , the Gosen Wakashū , and the Shūi Wakashū , but not much older than that ( for instance , the diction of the Man 'yōshū was considered too old ) . Teika wrote in his Maigetsusho that the best poems were spontaneous and original , but nevertheless traditional : 
 " But such a notion is quite erroneous . For if we were to call such verses as that superior , then any poem at all we might write could be a fine one . No , first the powers of invention must be freed by reciting endless possibilities over and over to oneself . Then , suddenly and spontaneously , from among all the lines one is composing , may emerge a poem whose treatment of the topic is different from the common run , a verse that is somehow superior to the rest . It is full of poetic feeling , lofty in cadence , skillful , with resonances above and beyond the words themselves . It is dignified in effect , its phrasing original , yet smooth and gentle . It is interesting , suffused with an atmosphere subtle yet clear . It is richly evocative , its emotion not tense and nervous but sensible from the appropriateness of the imagery . Such a poem is not to be composed by conscious effort , but if a man will only persist in unremitting practice , he may produce one spontaneously . " 
 The following is an example of how Teika used old and classic imagery such as Takasago and <unk> , as well as pine and cherry trees , in fresh ways : 
 His poems were described as remarkable for their elegance and exemplars of Teika 's ideals , in his early and later years ( respectively ; Teika considerably modified his personal beliefs during his 40s , after the death of Shunzei , and simplified his style of composition ) , of the styles of yoen – one of the ten orthodox styles Teika defined and defended in his poetic criticism , with some of the others being the <unk> ( " demon @-@ quelling force " ) style , the style of sabi or " loneliness " ( closely related to mono no aware ) , the style of <unk> , or " mystery and depth " ; the yoen style was concerned with " ethereal beauty " , and ushin ( " deep feeling " or " conviction of feeling " . This shift in style from yoen to ushin was intended to achieve a certain sort of <unk> , or integrity ; Teika sometimes referred to his aim as ushin ( " deep feeling " ) , which confusingly was also the name of one of the ten styles . The yoen style was one of the most popular in his time due in no small part to Teika 's of it ( yoen had first been described by Fujiwara no <unk> in the 1150s , but had been only marginally successful ) ; years later , the Symbolists would admire and emulate ( to a degree ) his use of language to evoke atmosphere in his brief poems in the yoen style . An excellent example ( and one later chosen for an Imperial anthology ) is the first poem below : 
 = = Partial bibliography = = 
 Shūi <unk> ( <unk> ) ; Teika 's personal anthology which includes over 3500 poems selected by himself . The two poems which offended Retired Emperor Go @-@ Toba so much and caused the rift between Teika and him are preserved here only . 
 Meigetsuki ( <unk> ) ( " The Record of the Clear Moon " ; sometimes called " Diary of the Clear Moon " or possibly " Chronicle of the Bright Moon " ; as the second translation suggests , this was a diary Teika kept in classical Chinese between the ages of approximately 18 ( in 1180 ) to just before his death , around 1241 ; the entries for 1180 and 1181 may have been written when Teika was an old man , but the bulk of the diary covers the 47 years between 1188 and 1235 . As its comprehensiveness might suggest , it is an extremely valuable resource for understanding the court and Teika 's place in the Imperial court , even despite its incompleteness — available extant versions consist of 56 scrolls ( the Reizei family possesses in its family library <unk> of 56 and copies of two more ) , while scholars estimate that the original consisted of over 180 scrolls . ) Among its many interesting passages ( some quoted previously ) about Teika 's career and life is a famous passage from the ninth month of 1180 about Teika 's indifference to political or military advancement , in which he <unk> remarked that " Reports of disturbances and punitive expeditions fill one 's ears , but I pay them no attention . The red banners and the expeditions against the traitors are no concern of mine . " ( Here , " red banners " probably refers to the Imperial standard ; the last line is possibly a reference to a poem by Po Chu @-@ i in which he tells of how he has been effectively exiled and passes his time playing Go ) . 
 Hyakunin isshu ( <unk> ) ( c . 1235 " Single Poems by One Hundred Poets " ; this collection became the foundation of the modern Japanese New Year game <unk> . ) 
 Hyakunin <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1229 – 1236 ? ; a 101 @-@ poem anthology arranged at the request of Utsunomiya <unk> to be copied onto 101 strips of paper and pasted onto the walls of his villa ; it has 97 poems in common with Hyakunin isshu , suggesting that perhaps it is a misidentified and variant version of the Isshu . ) 
 Shoji hyakushu ( <unk> ) ( 1200 ; " Hundred @-@ Poem Sequence of the Shoji era " ) 
 Gotoba @-@ in Kumano <unk> Ki ( <unk> ) ( 1201 ; " The Visit of the <unk> Emperor to Kumano " ) . Portion of Meigetsuki which Teika wrote about a trip to Kumano he took with Go @-@ Toba and Michichika ; like his other diary , it is written in classical Chinese , except for the <unk> along the way to the shrines there that Go @-@ Toba was so devoted to that this trip was but one of more than thirty . Teika seems not to have enjoyed the trip ; his diary often records concern over his health and matters of decorum such as the proper clothes to wear . 
 Eiga <unk> or <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ) ( c . 1216 , 1222 ? ; " Essentials of Poetic Composition " ) . Besides normal advice and criticism of poetry such as pedantic rules on <unk> – poems used as a base in <unk> should always be old poems and from either the Kokinshū , Shūi Wakashū , or the Gosen Wakashū with no more than two and a half lines borrowed from the originals ; similarly , borrowed elements were to be moved within the new poem and the new poem should have a different theme ) , Teika also tellingly recommends certain classic works for aspiring poets to study : the Tales of Ise , <unk> ( or " Poems of the Thirty @-@ Six Immortals " ) and the first two portions of The Collected Works of Po <unk> @-@ i . Portions of the Eiga <unk> have been translated into English 
 Kindai shūka ( <unk> ) ( c . 1209 ; " Superior Poems of Our Time " ; a collection of poems Teika felt to be excellent models , with a preface dealing with his critical philosophy , sent to Sanetomo to instruct him in how his poems should emulate the great ancient Japanese poets – teaching by example . This sequence was constructed when he was 47 , after the death of Shunzei , which depressed Teika , as evidenced by his writing in the Kindai shūka that he had " forgotten the color of the followers of words ; the well @-@ springs of inspiration have run dry . " ) 
 Maigetsusho ( <unk> ) ( c . 1219 ; " Monthly Notes " ; an epistle of corrections of one hundred poems , sent to a student of Teika 's . Besides the corrections , it bore a preface which is a major source of information regarding Teika 's view on the aesthetics of poetry ; <unk> states that it was sent to Minamoto no Sanetomo ; Ton 'a holds rather that it had been sent to the " Kinugasa Great Inner Minister " , or Fujiwara no <unk> . ) Besides Brower 's English translation , the Maigetsusho was also translated to French , Italian and Hungarian . 
 <unk> Monogatari ( <unk> ) ( " The Tale of the <unk> Palace " ; an experimental novel believed to be written by Teika , though Teika 's manuscript claims that he was merely copying it . ) 
 Teika <unk> sho ( <unk> ) ( Anthology of 1811 poems from the first 8 Imperial anthologies . ) 
 <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ) ( " A Basic Canon of Superior Poems " ) 
 Teika <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1207 – 1213 ; an anthology of 286 poems , chiefly derived from the Shin Kokinshū ; long believed a forgery , but some modern scholars contend that it is a genuine work . ) 
 = Evan Rachel Wood = 
 Evan Rachel Wood ( born September 7 , 1987 ) is an American actress . She began acting in the 1990s , appearing in several television series , including American Gothic ( 1995 – 1996 ) and Once and Again ( 1999 – 2002 ) . Wood made her début as a leading film actress at the age of nine in Digging to China ( 1998 ) and became well known after her transition to a more adult @-@ oriented Golden Globe @-@ nominated role in the teen drama film Thirteen ( 2003 ) . 
 Wood continued acting mostly in independent films , including Pretty Persuasion ( 2005 ) , Down in the Valley ( 2006 ) , Running with Scissors ( 2006 ) , and in the big studio production Across the Universe ( 2007 ) . Since 2008 , Wood has appeared in more mainstream films , including The Wrestler ( 2008 ) , Whatever Works ( 2009 ) and The Ides of March ( 2011 ) . She has also returned to television , playing the supporting role of Queen Sophie @-@ Anne on True Blood from 2009 to 2011 and playing Kate Winslet 's character 's daughter in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce ( 2011 ) , a role for which she was nominated for the Golden Globe and Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Her personal life , particularly her relationship with Marilyn Manson , to whom she was previously engaged , has attracted press attention . In 2012 , she married English actor Jamie Bell , with whom she has one son . They separated in 2014 after two years of marriage . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Wood was born in Raleigh , North Carolina . Her father , Ira David Wood III , is a locally prominent actor , singer , theater director , and playwright ; he is the Executive Director of a local regional theatre company called Theatre in the Park . Her mother , Sara Lynn Moore ( b . March 6 , 1958 ) , is an actress , director , and acting coach . Wood 's brother , Ira David Wood IV , is also an actor ; she has two other brothers , Dana and Thomas , and a sister named Aden . Her paternal aunt , Carol Winstead Wood , was a Hollywood production designer . 
 Wood and her brothers were actively involved in Theatre in the Park while growing up , including an appearance by her in the 1987 production of her father 's musical comedy adaptation of A Christmas Carol when she was just a few months old . Subsequently , she played the Ghost of Christmas Past in several productions at the theater , and she later starred as Helen Keller alongside her mother ( who played Anne Sullivan ) in a production of The Miracle Worker , under her father 's direction . Wood briefly attended Cary Elementary , a public school in Cary , North Carolina . She was subsequently home @-@ schooled and received her high school diploma at age 15 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early works : 1994 – 2000 = = = 
 Wood began her career appearing in several made @-@ for @-@ television films from 1994 onward , also playing an occasional role in the television series American Gothic . In 1996 , Wood 's parents separated and later divorced , and Wood moved with her mother to her mother 's native Los Angeles County , California . After a one @-@ season role on the television drama Profiler , Wood was cast in the supporting role of Jessie <unk> on the television show Once and Again . 
 Wood 's first major screen role was in the low @-@ budget 1998 film Digging to China , which also starred Kevin Bacon and Mary Stuart Masterson . The film won the Children 's Jury Award at the Chicago International Children 's Film Festival . Wood remembers the role as initially being hard , but notes that it " eventually led to her decision that acting is something she might never want to stop doing . " She also had a role in Practical Magic , a fantasy film directed by Griffin Dunne , starring Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman , that same year . 
 = = = 2001 – 2005 = = = 
 Wood made her teenage debut as a leading film actress in 2002 's Little Secrets , directed by Blair Treu , where she played aspiring 14 @-@ year @-@ old concert violinist Emily Lindstrom . For that role , she was nominated for Best Leading Young Actress at the Young Artist Awards . That same year , Wood played a supporting role in the Andrew Niccol @-@ directed science fiction satirical drama film , S1m0ne , which starred Al Pacino . Wood 's breakthrough movie role followed with the 2003 film Thirteen . She played the role of Tracy Louise Freeland , one of two young teens who sink into a downward spiral of hard drugs , sex , and petty crime . Her performance was nominated for a Golden Globe Award as Best Actress - Drama and for a Screen Actors Guild ( SAG ) Award for Best Actress . During the time of Thirteen 's release , Vanity Fair named Wood as one of the It Girls of Hollywood , and she appeared , along with the other actresses , on the magazine 's July 2003 cover . A supporting role opposite Cate Blanchett and Tommy Lee Jones in Ron Howard 's The Missing , in which she played the kidnapped daughter , Lilly Gilkeson , followed the same year , as well as a role in the CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode " Got Murder ? " . 
 In 2005 , Wood appeared in the Mike Binder @-@ directed The Upside of Anger , opposite Kevin Costner and Joan Allen , a well @-@ reviewed film in which Wood played Lavender " Popeye " <unk> , one of four sisters dealing with their father 's absence . Her character also narrated the film . Wood 's next two starring roles were in dark independent films . In the 2005 Grand Jury Prize Sundance Film Festival nominee Pretty Persuasion , a black comedy / satirical focusing on themes of sexual harassment and discrimination in schools and attitudes about females in media and society , Wood played Kimberly Joyce , a manipulative , sexually active high @-@ schooler . One critic commented , " Wood does flip cynicism with such precise , easy rhythms and with such obvious pleasure in naughtiness that she 's impossible to hate . " 
 In Down in the Valley , which was directed by David Jacobson , Wood 's character , Tobe , falls in love with an older man , a cowboy who is at odds with modern society ( Edward Norton ) . Of her performance , it was written that " Wood conveys every bit of the adamant certainty and aching vulnerability inherent in late adolescence . " Wood has commented on her choice of sexually themed roles , saying that she is not aiming for the " shock factor " in her film choices . 
 In 2005 , Wood starred in the music videos for Bright Eyes ' " At the Bottom of Everything " and Green Day 's " Wake Me Up When September Ends " . 
 = = = 2006 – present = = = 
 In September 2006 , Wood received Premiere magazine 's " Spotlight Award for Emerging Talent . " Also in 2006 , she was described by The Guardian as being " wise beyond her years " and as " one of the best actresses of her generation . " Later in 2006 , Wood appeared with an all @-@ star ensemble cast as Natalie Finch in the Golden Globe @-@ nominated 2006 comedy @-@ drama film Running with Scissors . Directed by Ryan Murphy and starring Annette Bening , the film was based on the memoir by <unk> Burroughs , which is a semi @-@ autobiographical account of Burroughs ' childhood in a dysfunctional family . Wood was awarded the 2007 Cannes Film Festival Chopard Trophy for Female Revelation for her performance . 
 Wood had roles in two films released in September 2007 . King of California , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival , a story of a bipolar jazz musician ( Michael Douglas ) and his long @-@ suffering teenage daughter , Miranda ( Wood ) , who are reunited after his two @-@ year stay in a mental institution and who embark on a quixotic search for Spanish treasure . One review praised Wood 's performance as " excellent " . 
 Across the Universe , a Julie Taymor @-@ directed musical that was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award and was set in Liverpool , New York City , and Vietnam , focused on the tribulations of several characters during the counter @-@ cultural revolution of the 1960s . It was set to the songs of The Beatles . Wood , who has described the music of The Beatles as a major part of her life , played Lucy , who develops a relationship with Jude ( Jim Sturgess ) . The film featured her singing musical numbers and she describes the role as her favorite , calling director Julie Taymor " one of the most amazing directors out there . " One critic wrote that " Wood brings much @-@ needed emotional depth . " Wood provided the voice of an alien named Mala , a mechanically inclined free @-@ thinker , in Battle for Terra , a 2008 computer @-@ animated science fiction film about a peaceful alien planet that faces destruction from colonization by the displaced remainder of the human race . The film won the 2008 Grand Prize at the Ottawa International Animation Festival . The film showed at the San Francisco International Film Festival , where she received an award at the Midnight Awards along with Elijah Wood . 
 Wood starred in 2008 's Vadim Perelman @-@ directed The Life Before Her Eyes , based on the Laura <unk> novel of the same name , about the friendship of two teens of opposite character who are involved in a Columbine @-@ like shooting incident at their school and are forced to make an impossible choice . Wood played the younger version of Uma Thurman 's character , Diana . One critic cited her performance as " hands @-@ down extraordinary " . Wood stated that she intended the film to be the last one in which she played a teenager . 
 In the same year , she also co @-@ starred in director Darren Aronofsky 's The Wrestler , winner of the Golden Lion Award for Best Film at the Venice Film Festival , about Randy " Ram " Robinson ( Mickey Rourke ) , a professional wrestler from the 1980s who is forced to retire after a heart attack threatens to kill him the next time he wrestles . Wood played Stephanie , Randy " Ram " Robinson 's estranged daughter . Of her performance , one critic wrote , " Once her character stops stonewalling her father and hears him out , Wood provides a fine foil for Rourke in their turbulent scenes together . " 
 Wood co @-@ starred in Woody Allen 's Whatever Works , which premiered at the 2009 Tribeca Film Festival , playing the young wife of Larry David 's character . In May 2009 , she played Juliet in six fundraising performances of William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet at the Theater In The Park . The production was directed by her brother , who also starred . Wood had a recurring role in the second and third seasons of the HBO supernatural drama series , True Blood , from 2009 to 2011 as Sophie @-@ Anne <unk> . She appeared at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12 , 2010 . Wood had a role in the film The Conspirator , which premiered at Ford 's Theatre in Washington D. C. in April , 2011 , directed by Robert Redford ( about the conspiracy surrounding the assassination of Abraham Lincoln ) . She also had a role in The Ides of March . She portrayed the title character 's daughter in the 2011 HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce , for which she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie . 
 Wood played Gabi in the 2013 psychological romantic thriller film Charlie Countryman with Shia LaBeouf and Rupert Grint . 
 She is featured with Chris Evans in a 2016 ad for Gucci Guilty Eau fragrances . " 
 In June 2016 , the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting ; in the video , Wood and others told the stories of the people killed there . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wood began dating British actor Jamie Bell in 2005 after they co @-@ starred in the music video for Green Day 's song " Wake Me Up When September Ends . " They got matching tattoos of each other 's initials ; in Wood 's case , a " J " on her left ankle . After a year together , the relationship ended in 2006 . Wood later commented that , " We had matching tattoos because we knew our love would last forever . Trouble is , it didn 't , things happened , we split . But I don 't regret the tattoo . It reminds me of a great , great period in my life . " 
 In January 2007 , Wood 's relationship with Marilyn Manson became public . The two met at a party at the Chateau Marmont Hotel ; Wood has stated that she was attracted to Manson 's frequent use of black eye liner and once described their relationship as " healthy and loving " . Two portraits of Wood , painted by Manson , have been exhibited at the <unk> Corporation Gallery of Fine Art . Wood is also the inspiration behind Manson 's song " Heart @-@ Shaped Glasses " , and she appeared with Manson in the song 's music video . Manson has said that Wood 's appearance was the highest @-@ paid music video role ever . The couple split in November 2008 ; according to Wood , they " both decided to take some time apart so [ they ] could concentrate on work . " They later re @-@ united and it was reported in early January 2010 that the couple was engaged to be married . Wood and Manson ended their engagement in August 2010 . 
 In the summer of 2011 , Wood was reported to have rekindled her relationship with Jamie Bell , five years after they first broke up . The couple married in a small ceremony on October 30 , 2012 . They have one son , born in July 2013 . Wood had a natural home birth with her son , and publicly thanked Ricki Lake , creator of the documentary The Business of Being Born , for inspiring her decision . In May 2014 , Wood and Bell announced that they had separated after 19 months of marriage . 
 In August 2012 , Wood came out as bisexual via Twitter . 
 Wood 's mother is a convert to Judaism and Wood 's father is Christian . In 2003 , Wood described herself as Jewish . In 2012 , she stated , " I believe in God but I am not religious . I am spiritual . My definition of God isn 't in any religion . It 's very personal " . 
 Wood has a black belt in taekwondo . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = M @-@ 30 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 30 is a state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan that runs in a north – south direction from the Midland area to West Branch . The highway runs through rural parts of three counties in the Lower Peninsula . The southern end runs along the Michigan Meridian and parallel to the Tittabawassee River . Prior to 1962 , M @-@ 30 's southern terminus ended at a junction with M @-@ 46 in Merrill . Since then , the segment south of US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) was returned to local control and decommissioned . In May 2009 , M @-@ 30 was extended southerly from US 10 to M @-@ 20 , restoring some of the highway decommissioned in the 1960s to M @-@ 30 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 30 is a rural , two @-@ lane highway . M @-@ 30 follows Meridian Road starting at an intersection with M @-@ 20 ( Isabella Road ) outside of Midland . From this intersection , the highway runs north along the Michigan Meridian through forest lands to a crossing of the Tittabawassee River near Sanford . M @-@ 30 passes through the community and crosses the US 10 freeway near the location where the latter crosses a narrow section of Sanford Lake . The road continues north running parallel to the lake along the meridian to a point near Edenville . There , the highway turns westerly along Curtis Road and then back northerly on Midland Road to a crossing of the Tittabawassee and Wixom Lake . 
 Past the river and lake crossings , M @-@ 30 angles to the northeast to return to the Michigan Meridian . The area adjacent to the lake is farm land , but continuing north , the highway returns to the woodlands of the Au Sable State Forest . M @-@ 30 intersects M @-@ 61 at Wooden Shoe Village near Smallwood Lake . The highway continues to parallel the Tittabawassee River , crossing several of its smaller tributaries , until a point south of the Gladwin – Ogemaw County county line . The trunkline passes through a small unnamed , unincorporated community northwest of Hockaday near Indian and Elk lakes as the road turns to the northeast between the lakes in the area . M @-@ 30 crosses the county line near Edwards and continues northward . The highway turns to the northeast as it approaches West Branch , crossing under I @-@ 75 without an interchange . M @-@ 30 ends at Business Loop I @-@ 75 / M @-@ 55 on the west side of West Branch . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains M @-@ 30 like all other parts of the state trunkline highway system . As a part of these responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic using its roads in surveys using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . MDOT calculates the traffic level for a segment of roadway for any average day of the year in these surveys . For 2009 , the highest traffic levels were observed on the section north of US 10 at 7 @,@ 579 vehicles per day . The lowest AADT levels were the 2 @,@ 952 vehicles between the M @-@ 61 junction and the Gladwin – Ogemaw county line . The survey did not include the section south of US 10 . No segment has been listed as part of the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 30 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 . The original routing only ran from Winegars to West Branch . South of Winegars , the roadway is a portion of M @-@ 18 . An extension of M @-@ 18 in 1928 or 1929 south of Beaverton led to the redesignation and extension of M @-@ 30 south through Edenville and Sanford to end at M @-@ 46 . M @-@ 30 was completely paved as the last 15 miles ( 24 km ) of gravel roadway were completed between Sanford and the Midland – Saginaw county line in 1961 . The next year , when M @-@ 30 was truncated to end at the US 10 freeway in Sanford , the remaining portion south of US 10 was turned over to county control . On May 13 , 2009 , the Midland County Road Commission ( MCRC ) and the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) signed a Memorandum of Understanding that transferred control of Meridian Road south of US 10 to M @-@ 20 . The roadway transferred included a newly constructed bridge over the Tittabawassee River and other segments of roadway rebuilt by the MCRC . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Father 's Day ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Father 's Day " is the eighth episode of the first series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , first broadcast on 14 May 2005 on BBC One . It was written by Paul Cornell and directed by Joe Ahearne . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) agrees to take his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) back to the day her father Pete ( Shaun Dingwall ) died in 1987 . When Rose intervenes and pulls her father out of the path of a car , time is wounded and dangerous Reapers attack , threatening to erase history . Pete eventually learns that to get rid of the Reapers , he must throw himself under the car that was originally meant to kill him . 
 Lead writer and executive producer Russell T Davies conceived " Father 's Day " as an emotionally driven time travel story to explore Rose 's character . He chose Cornell to write the episode ; Cornell had been a successful writer of spin @-@ off material during the years the programme was on hiatus . The monster element of the story was expanded based on suggestions from Cornell and BBC Head of Drama Jane Tranter , and the Reapers went through many designs . The episode was filmed in November 2004 at St Paul 's Church and streets in Cardiff . " Father 's Day " was watched by 8 @.@ 06 million viewers in the United Kingdom and received generally positive reviews . Critics praised the focus on character and emotion . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with a flashback of Jackie Tyler telling a younger Rose about her father Pete , who died in a hit @-@ and @-@ run accident on the way to a friend 's wedding . 
 In the TARDIS , the Doctor agrees to take Rose to the day her father died so that she can be there when it happens . Upon their arrival in London on Saturday 7 November 1987 , they witness the accident , but Rose is unable to move when The Doctor tells her to go comfort her dying father . Rose asks the Doctor if she can try again , and the Doctor allows it but warns Rose to not run until their former selves have left to prevent a paradox . As the accident is about to happen , Rose suddenly runs out and pushes Pete aside , saving his life . The younger versions of the Doctor and Rose vanish . Rose and the Doctor fight about her actions , with the Doctor rebuking her for potentially damaging the timeline . The Doctor takes Rose 's TARDIS key back and storms off without her . Rose decides to go with Pete to the wedding , while the Doctor walks back to the TARDIS only to find that it is now an empty shell . Strange flying beasts called Reapers appear and begin consuming people . 
 Rose and Pete drive to the wedding together , and the car that had been meant to kill Pete nearly collides with their car . They join the other guests , including Jackie who has brought the infant Rose with her . Rose is surprised to find that Jackie and Pete argue frequently . A young Mickey runs in to warn the guests about the Reapers , who think it is a joke until a Reaper appears above and attacks them . The Doctor runs to the church and directs everyone inside , noting that the age of the church will protect them against the Reapers . The Doctor explains to Rose that her actions have caused a paradox that normally the Time Lords would have prevented . Without them , the Reapers are sterilising the wound in time by consuming everyone within it . The Doctor further warns Rose not to touch her infant self , as it could cause further damage to time and allow the Reapers into the church . Feeling that his TARDIS key is still warm , the Doctor sets it up in the middle of the church and the TARDIS slowly begins materialising around it . 
 While waiting in the church , Jackie sees Pete talking to Rose and thinks he is having an affair . Pete and Rose talk alone , and he comes to realise that she is his daughter . When Rose is unable to answer questions about how good of a father he was , Pete realises he was meant to die in the accident . Jackie thinks Rose is Pete 's daughter with another woman , and in a fit of frustration Pete hands the baby Rose to adult Rose . The paradox worsens , and a Reaper is able to enter the church . The Doctor declares himself the oldest thing in the church and offers himself to the Reaper , who consumes him and disappears . The TARDIS key goes cold and drops to the ground . Pete realises that they now have no other choice and that he must die in order to restore the timeline . He bids Rose and Jackie an emotional farewell , races out of the church and throws himself under the car that was originally meant to kill him . The timeline is repaired , and those previously consumed by the beasts reappear . The Doctor sends Rose off to be with her dad as he dies , and she holds his hand until he is gone . Rose and the Doctor walk hand @-@ in @-@ hand back to the restored TARDIS . 
 The episode ends with a flashback similar to the opening , as Jackie explains to a young Rose that Pete did not die alone . She tells Rose about a young woman who stayed with him until he died . In a voice @-@ over , the adult Rose eulogises her father . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Continuing the " Bad Wolf " arc of the series , a poster advertising a rave on a wall near where Pete was supposed to die in the beginning has the words " BAD <unk> " defacing it . Rose refers to the ending of this episode in " The Parting of the Ways " , telling Jackie that she met her father and was the girl who held Pete 's hand as he died . Although Pete Tyler dies in this episode , an alternative universe version of him appears in the second series episodes " Rise of the Cybermen " / " Age of Steel " and " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to producer Phil Collinson , showrunner Russell T Davies came up with the concept for " Father 's Day " at an early stage in the planning of the series , as it was a " perfect time travel story " . Davies wanted the storyline to be easy @-@ to @-@ follow and drawn from human emotions . Additionally , the previous seven episodes had established why Rose was a good companion , and so " Father 's Day " shows that she does make mistakes , but in a relatable way . Davies chose Paul Cornell to write the episode ; Cornell was a successful writer of Doctor Who spin @-@ off material , especially in novels for the Virgin New Adventures , which bridged the gap between the classic series and the new . Davies originally intended that the episode be a small budget @-@ saver character piece investigating the death of Rose 's father , but Cornell suggested the addition of the Reapers and BBC Head of Drama Jane Tranter encouraged the additions of monsters to the new series . Working titles for the episode included " Wounded Time " and " Wound in Time " . Davies came up with the final title of " Father 's Day " in February 2005 , shortly before the series began airing . 
 Davies and Cornell debated whether it should have been Rose 's plan all along to save her father ; this is left ambiguous in the episode . Billie Piper felt that it did not occur to Rose until after she began travelling . In the original script , in the scene where the Doctor opens the TARDIS doors and discovers only a police box interior , the police box fell apart . This was changed for reasons of cost , and Cornell has stated that he thinks the change is an improvement . Cornell also states that the character of Pete Tyler is based on his own father , who attempted many different jobs and schemes ( including , like Pete , selling health drinks ) before eventually finding success running a betting shop . Pete 's line " I 'm your dad , it 's my job for it to be my fault " is taken from something Cornell 's father once said to him . Originally Pete was to take a swig of wine before sacrificing himself , but this was removed because a correlation between alcohol and bravery was not thought to be a positive message . 
 The entire episode was shot in Cardiff , in November 2004 . The weather changed frequently during filming , and the cast began to fall ill ; Eccleston had a cold . The production team selected several streets that looked similar . Most of the streets were in the community of Grangetown . The streets did not require much work for them to resemble 1980s streets ; only a few satellite dishes were taken down . The church is St Paul 's Church , also in Grangetown . The set of the Tyler 's flat was redressed for the time period . For the 1980s style , members of the cast and crew brought in photographs of themselves from the ' 80s ; for example , peach dresses and " big hair " were incorporated , but these elements were not meant to be distracting . Camille Coduri , who played Jackie , wore a wig for this episode . Some of the conversation between Rose and her father in the car was cut because the car had made the dialogue delivery too " bouncy " . Piper was scared of holding the baby . Because the baby is present throughout the majority of the episode , but they were limited to how many hours they could work with the infant , an " artificial baby " was used as a placeholder in some scenes . 
 The Reapers went through many designs . Originally , they were supposed to be " men in cowls " based on the Grim Reaper ; the final design retains some of this image with its " scythe @-@ like tail " . The original design was deemed too similar to creatures seen in " The End of the World " , and so were reworked into something more " otherworldly " . They were not originally intended to fly . There was also discussion of how much they should resemble animals as opposed to the Grim Reaper ; the end result is a mixture of the two approaches . The final design had a " shark quality " , bat wings , and a mouth influenced by the praying mantis . Vulture sound effects were used for its screech . The model was made over two months , being finished at the end of February 2005 rather than at the beginning of January as scheduled . The special effects team then had two or three weeks to complete the " 40 @-@ odd shots " of the completely CGI Reapers in the episode . The episode ended up more expensive than intended because of the CGI . 
 = = Outside references = = 
 " The Lamb and Flag " , a pub from the sitcom Bottom , is referenced in the episode . When time is damaged , one of the effects is that mobile telephones all begin to repeat the message , " Watson , come here , I need you , " purportedly Alexander Graham Bell 's first words ever spoken over a telephone . However historical records believe the words to be " Watson , come here , I want you . " The error was not present in Paul Cornell 's original script , but crept in at some point during production . Producer Phil Collinson speculated that it was because the line was rerecorded ; it was originally recorded by someone who the production team felt put on too false of a Scottish accent , and so it was rerecorded with a real Scot . 
 The episode features two hits from 1987 , " Never Gonna Give You Up " performed by Rick Astley and " Never Can Say Goodbye " performed by The Communards , both of which have some relevance to the basic themes of the story . It also features the 2002 song " Don 't Mug Yourself " by The Streets , indicating the damage to the timeline . Rose believes Pete to be " a bit of a Del Boy " , referring to the character from 1980s comedy Only Fools and Horses . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Father 's Day " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on 14 May 2005 on BBC One . The episode received UK overnight ratings of 7 @.@ 47 million viewers , an audience share of 42 @.@ 74 % . When time @-@ shifted viewers were taken into account , the number rose to 8 @.@ 06 million . It received an Appreciation Index of 83 . 
 " Father 's Day " was met with a generally positive reception . Piper stated that this was her favourite episode of the first series , and the most emotionally taxing for her to perform . SFX praised the way the concept of time was explored as well as the accurate representation of the ' 80s , and stated that Dingwall gave " one of the series ' best performances " as Pete Tyler . However , the reviewer thought that the Reapers were the let @-@ down of the episode , finding that " the episode doesn 't feel as much like horror as it should " . Arnold T Blumburg of Now Playing gave the episode an A for the emotional impact and the acting . Blumburg did note , however , that there were " enormous logical gaps " involving " glowing TARDIS keys and under @-@ explained paradoxes " . In 2013 , Radio Times reviewer Mark Braxton described it as " a time @-@ travel tale with immense heart " and highlighted the shift of identification from the Doctor to Rose and the acting of Piper and Dingwall . Braxton , on the other hand , felt that the Reapers were redundant and the episode would have done " equally well if you scythed the Reapers from the script " . Reviewing " Father 's Day " for The A.V. Club in 2013 , Alasdair Wilkins gave it a grade of " A " , finding the story powerful . In Who Is the Doctor , a guide to the revived series , Robert Smith praised the emotion and the dilemma , which he felt was not heavy @-@ handed . He was also positive about the direction and Dingwall 's performance , though he felt that removing the Doctor from the plot suggested that he would have done something else to resolve it , and he was not a fan of the scene where the Doctor tells two ordinary people how important their lives are , because it was " cheesy " and " disconnected " from the rest of the story . <unk> Graeme Burk was also positive , writing that it may be " the best story this season " . He called the direction " wonderful " and the script " sublime " , and noted how the story was more about family than time travel . 
 " Father 's Day " was nominated for the 2006 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , alongside other first series episodes " Dalek " and " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " . The latter won . " Father 's Day " topped the third place category in terms of votes . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Father 's Day " reviews at Outpost Gallifrey 
 " Father 's Day " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Cyril Newall , 1st Baron Newall = 
 Marshal of the Royal Air Force Cyril Louis Norton Newall , 1st Baron Newall GCB , OM , GCMG , CBE , AM ( 15 February 1886 – 30 November 1963 ) was a senior officer of the British Army and Royal Air Force . He commanded units of the Royal Flying Corps and Royal Air Force in the First World War , and served as Chief of the Air Staff during the first years of the Second World War . From 1941 to 1946 he was the Governor @-@ General of New Zealand . 
 Born to a military family , Newall studied at the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , before taking a commission as a junior officer in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment in 1905 . After transferring to the 2nd Gurkha Rifles in the Indian Army , he saw active service on the North West Frontier , but after learning to fly in 1911 turned towards a career in military aviation . During the First World War he rose from flying instructor to command of 41st Wing RFC , the main strategic bombing force , and was awarded the Albert Medal for putting out a fire in an explosives store . 
 He served in staff positions through the 1920s and was Air Officer Commanding the Middle East Command in the early 1930s before becoming Air Member for Supply and Organisation in 1935 . Newall was appointed Chief of the Air Staff in 1937 and , in that role , supported sharp increases in aircraft production , increasing expenditure on the new , heavily armed , Hurricane and Spitfire fighters , essential to re @-@ equip Fighter Command . However , he was sacked after the Battle of Britain after political intrigue caused him to lose Churchill 's confidence . In 1941 he was appointed Governor @-@ General of New Zealand , holding office until 1946 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Newall was born to Lieutenant Colonel William Potter Newall and Edith Gwendoline Caroline Newall ( née Norton ) . After education at Bedford School , he attended the Royal Military College , Sandhurst . After leaving Sandhurst , he was commissioned into the Royal Warwickshire Regiment on 16 August 1905 . He was promoted to lieutenant on 18 November 1908 , and transferred to the 2nd King Edward VII 's Own Gurkha Rifles on 16 September 1909 . He served on the North @-@ West Frontier , where he first encountered his future colleague Hugh Dowding ; at an exercise in 1909 , Dowding 's artillery section ambushed Newall 's Gurkhas whilst they were still <unk> . 
 Newall began to turn towards a career in aviation in 1911 , when he learned to fly in a Bristol Biplane at Larkhill whilst on leave in England . He held certificate No. 144 issued by the Royal Aero Club . He later passed a formal course at the Central Flying School , Upavon in 1913 , and began working as a pilot trainer there from 17 November 1913 ; it was intended that he would form part of a flight training school to be established in India , but he had not yet left England when the First World War broke out . 
 = = First World War = = 
 On the outbreak of war , Newall was in England . On 12 September 1914 , he was given the temporary rank of captain , and attached to the Royal Flying Corps as a flight commander , to serve with No. 1 Squadron on the Western Front . He was promoted to the permanent rank of captain on 22 September , effective from 16 August . On 24 March 1915 he was promoted to major and appointed to command No. 12 Squadron , flying BE2c aircraft in France from September onwards . The squadron took part in the Battle of Loos , bombing railways and carrying out reconnaissance missions in October 1915 . 
 On taking command of the squadron , he chose to stop flying personally in order to concentrate on administration , a decision which was regarded dismissively by his men ; relations were strained until January 1916 , when he demonstrated his courage by walking into a burning bomb store to try to control the fire . He was awarded the Albert Medal for this act on the personal recommendation of General Hugh Trenchard , and in February 1916 was promoted to lieutenant colonel and given command of Training No. 6 Wing in England . In December 1916 he took command of No. 9 Wing in France , a long @-@ range bomber and reconnaissance formation , and in October 1917 took command of the newly formed No. 41 Wing . This was upgraded as the 8th Brigade in December , with Newall promoted accordingly to the temporary rank of brigadier @-@ general on 28 December 1917 . During 1918 , it joined the Independent Bombing Force , which was the main strategic bombing arm of the newly formed Royal Air Force . In June 1918 Newall was appointed the Deputy Commander of the Independent Bombing Force , serving under Trenchard . 
 Newall was awarded the Croix d <unk> of the French Legion of Honour on 10 October 1918 , and appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George on 1 January 1919 , a Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 3 June 1919 and an Officer of the Belgian Order of Leopold on 18 April 1921 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Newall was granted a permanent commission in the Royal Air Force as a lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1919 and promoted to group captain on 8 August 1919 . He became Deputy Director of Personnel at the Air Ministry in August 1919 and then Deputy Commandant of the apprentices ' technical training school in August 1922 . He married May Weddell in 1922 ; she died in September 1924 , and he remarried the following year to Olive Foster , an American woman . He had three children with Foster , a son and two daughters . 
 Newall was promoted to air commodore on 1 January 1925 , and took command of the newly formed Auxiliary Air Force in May 1925 . He was appointed to a League of Nations disarmament committee in December 1925 and then became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff and Director of Operations and Intelligence on 12 April 1926 . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1929 Birthday Honours and , having been promoted to air vice marshal on 1 January 1930 , he stood down as Deputy Chief on 6 February 1931 . He became Air Officer Commanding Wessex Bombing Area in February 1931 and then Air Officer Commanding Middle East Command in September 1931 . He then returned to the Air Ministry , where he became Air Member for Supply and Organisation on 14 January 1935 , during the beginnings of the pre @-@ war expansion and rearmament . He was advanced to Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in the 1935 Birthday Honours and promoted to air marshal on 1 July 1935 . He attended the funeral of King George V in January 1936 . 
 Philosophically , Newall remained a close follower of Trenchard during the interwar period ; his time in the Independent Bombing Force had left him convinced that strategic bombing was an exceptionally powerful weapon , and one that could not effectively be defended against . In this , he was a supporter of the standard doctrine of the day , which suggested that the destructive power of a bomber force was sufficiently great that it could cripple an industrial economy in short order , and that so merely its presence could potentially serve as an effective deterrent . He was promoted to air chief marshal on 1 April 1937 . 
 = = Chief of the Air Staff = = 
 On 1 September 1937 , Newall was appointed as Chief of the Air Staff , the military head of the RAF , in succession to Sir Edward Ellington . The promotion was unexpected ; of the prospective candidates mooted for the job , Newall has been widely seen by historians as the least gifted . The most prominent candidate was Hugh Dowding , the head of RAF Fighter Command and senior in rank to Newall by three months , who had been informally told by Ellington in 1936 that he was expected to be appointed as the new Chief of the Air Staff . The decision was taken by the Air Minister , Viscount Swinton , without consulting Ellington for advice . 
 During 1936 and 1937 , the Air Staff had been fighting with the Cabinet over the rearmament plans ; the Air Staff wanted a substantial bomber force and only minor increases in fighters , whilst the Minister for Defence Co @-@ ordination , Sir Thomas Inskip , successfully pushed for a greater role for the fighter force . Newall was promoted during the middle of this debate , and proved perhaps more flexible than might have been expected . In 1938 he supported sharp increases in aircraft production , including double @-@ shift working and duplication of factories , and pushed for the creation of a dedicated organisation to repair and refit damaged aircraft . He supported expenditure on the new , heavily armed , Hurricane and Spitfire fighters , essential to re @-@ equip Fighter Command . He even began to distance himself , albeit slightly , from orthodox bomber philosophy , noting to the Minister for Air that " no one can say with absolute certainty that a nation can be knocked out from the air , because no @-@ one has yet attempted it " . Discussing plans for reacting to a war with Italy , in early 1939 , he opposed a French proposal to force Italy 's surrender by the use of heavy bombing raids against the north , arguing that it would be unlikely to force the country out of the war without the need for ground combat . 
 Newall was advanced to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath in the 1938 Birthday Honours . He was still Chief of the Air Staff at the outbreak of the Second World War on 1 September 1939 ; his main contribution to the war effort was his successful resistance to the transfer of fighter squadrons to aid the collapsing French thus preserving a large portion of Fighter Command which would become crucial during the Battle of Britain . While he remained committed to the idea of a " knock @-@ out blow " offensive by Bomber Command , he also recognised that it was too weak to do so successfully , but still strongly opposed the use of the RAF for close air support . 
 Following the end of the Battle of Britain , Newall was quickly forced into retirement and replaced as Chief of the Air Staff by Sir Charles Portal . Contemporaries attributed this to the effects of overwork , which had certainly taken its toll , but there were also other aspects ; Newall had lost political support , particularly following a dispute with Lord Beaverbrook over the control of aircraft production and repair . Matters came to a head with the circulation of an anonymous memo attacking Newall , among other senior officers , as " a real weakness to the RAF and to the nation 's defences " . The author was Edgar McCloughry , a disaffected staff officer who saw himself as passed over for promotion and who had been brought into Beaverbrook 's inner circle . Beaverbrook pressed Churchill to dismiss Newall , gaining the support of influential ex @-@ RAF figures such as Trenchard and Salmond . Trenchard had come out against Newall for his failure to launch a decisive strategic bombing offensive , while Salmond saw Newall 's removal as the simplest way to replace Dowding as head of Fighter Command – despite Newall having also sought to sack Dowding . 
 He was promoted to Marshal of the Royal Air Force on 4 October 1940 and retired from the RAF later that month . He was awarded the Order of Merit on 29 October , and made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George on 21 November . 
 = = New Zealand and later life = = 
 In February 1941 Newall was appointed Governor @-@ General of New Zealand , a post he would hold for the remainder of the war . His time there was mostly quiet – described by one biographer as " a nice long rest " – and he toured the country extensively , referring to the war " in every public address " . Newall and his wife , who also carried out an extensive program of engagements , were broadly popular , but there were occasional tensions ; shortly after his arrival , it was widely ( but mistakenly ) rumoured that he had slighted the " men " of the Army in favour of the " gentlemen " of the RNZAF in a speech . A Freemason , Newall became Grand Master of New Zealand 's Grand Lodge while Governor @-@ General . 
 Politically , he had a lukewarm relationship with the Prime Minister , Peter Fraser – " I can 't persuade myself that he is all he quite appears to be " , Newall noted in a private report – but the two worked together effectively . Small problems occasionally flared up , such as that in October 1942 , when Fraser was reprimanded for not personally informing Newall of the resignation of four ministers . However , only one developed into a direct confrontation , when Newall became the last Governor @-@ General to refuse to follow the advice of his cabinet . Newall was presented with a government recommendation to remit four prisoners sentenced to be flogged , but refused to do so . He argued that if the government was opposed to flogging , it should repeal the legislation rather than simply remitting the sentences , and that it was constitutionally improper for the government to retain the law while ignoring it . Fraser , and his deputy Walter Nash , refused to accept this response , and the impasse stretched out for several days ; in the end , a compromise was reached where Newall remitted the sentences but the government undertook to repeal the legislation . 
 A second conflict emerged just before the end of his term , when in 1945 , the Labour government sought to abolish the country quota , a system that gave additional electoral seats in rural areas . Farming groups – predominantly National @-@ supporting – strongly opposed the move , and argued that such a major change could only be made after gaining approval in a general election . Newall sympathised , and advised Fraser to wait until after the election , but did not feel it was appropriate to intervene ; he assented to the bill . 
 Following his return from New Zealand in 1946 , Newall was raised to the peerage as Baron Newall , of Clifton upon <unk> , in the county of Warwick . He spoke in the House of Lords rarely , making five speeches between 1946 and 1948 and one in 1959 , mostly addressing defence issues . Newall died at his home at Welbeck Street in London on 30 November 1963 , at which time his son Francis inherited his title . 
 = = Arms = = 
 = Salyut 6 = 
 Salyut 6 ( Russian : <unk> @-@ 6 ; lit . Salute 6 ) , DOS @-@ 5 , was a Soviet orbital space station , the eighth flown as part of the Salyut programme . Launched on 29 September 1977 by a Proton rocket , the station was the first of the ' second @-@ generation ' type of space station . Salyut 6 possessed several revolutionary advances over the earlier Soviet space stations , which it nevertheless resembled in overall design . These included the addition of a second docking port , a new main propulsion system and the station 's primary scientific instrument , the BST @-@ 1M multispectral telescope . The addition of the second docking port made crew handovers and station resupply by unmanned Progress freighters possible for the first time . The early Salyut stations had no means of resupply or removing accumulated garbage ( aside from the limited amount that cosmonauts could carry in their Soyuz spacecraft ) , nor could the propulsion system be refueled once it exhausted its propellant supply . Consequently , once the consumables launched with the station were used up , its mission had to be concluded and as a result , manned missions had a maximum duration of three months . Progress spacecraft could now bring fresh supplies and propellant and also be used to dispose of waste , which was then destroyed once the spacecraft was deorbited . 
 Five crew residencies took place over the station 's lifespan , in late 1977 @-@ early 1978 , late 1978 , mid @-@ 1979 , mid @-@ 1980 , and early 1981 , including cosmonauts from Warsaw Pact countries as part of the Intercosmos programme . These crews were responsible for carrying out the primary missions of Salyut 6 , including astronomy , Earth @-@ resources observations and the study of the effect of spaceflight on the human body . Following the completion of these missions and the launch of its successor , Salyut 7 , Salyut 6 was deorbited on 29 July 1982 , almost five years after its launch . 
 = = Description = = 
 Salyut 6 , launched on a Proton <unk> rocket on 29 September 1977 , marked the switch from engineering development stations to routine operations , and united the most effective elements from each of the previous stations . Its navigation system , made up of the Delta semi @-@ automatic computer to depict the station 's orbit and the <unk> system to control its orientation , was based on that used on Salyut 4 , as was its power system , which consisted of a trio of steerable solar panels together producing a peak of 4 kilowatts of power over 51 m ² . The station 's thermal regulation systems , which made use of a sophisticated arrangement of insulation and radiators , was also derived from that used on Salyut 4 . In addition , Salyut 6 made use of environmental systems first used on Salyut 3 , and controlled its orientation using gyrodynes first tested on that station . 
 The most important feature on Salyut 6 , however , was the addition of a second docking port on the aft end of the station , which allowed two spacecraft to be docked at once . This , in turn , allowed resident crews to receive shorter , ' visiting ' expeditions whilst they remained on board , and for crew handovers to take place . In addition , it allowed Soyuz spacecraft that had exceeded their operating lifespan to be returned to Earth and replaced by fresh ones ( the Soyuz 7K used from 1972 @-@ 81 had a maximum operating lifespan of three months ) . Such handovers , with one expedition vacating the station only after the next had arrived , permitted the long sought @-@ after aim of continuous occupation to move a step closer . The very first long @-@ duration crew to visit the station broke a long @-@ standing endurance record set on board the American Skylab station , staying 96 days in orbit , whilst the longest expedition lasted 185 days . Some of the visiting expeditions were flown as part of the Intercosmos programme , with non @-@ Soviet cosmonauts visiting the station . Vladimír Remek of Czechoslovakia , the first space traveller not from the US or USSR , visited Salyut 6 in 1978 , and the station hosted cosmonauts from Hungary , Poland , Romania , Cuba , Mongolia , Vietnam , and East Germany . 
 The rearward of the two ports was fitted with plumbing to allow the station to be refueled by unmanned Progress spacecraft . These freighters , which brought supplies and extra equipment to keep the station replenished , helped ensure that the crew were always able to carry out useful scientific work aboard the station . In all , twelve Progress flights delivered over 20 tonnes of equipment , supplies and fuel . 
 The addition of the extra docking port caused the adoption of the Almaz @-@ derived twin @-@ chamber propulsion system first used on Salyut 3 and 5 , with the two engine nozzles — each producing 2 @.@ 9 kilonewtons of thrust — mounted peripherally on either side of the aft port . Salyut 6 introduced a Unified Propulsion System , with both the engines and the station 's control thrusters running on unsymmetrical <unk> and nitrogen tetroxide , drawn from a common set of pressurized tanks , allowing the refueling capabilities of the visiting Progress tankers to be exploited to the maximum effect . The entire engine and fuel storage assembly was contained within an unpressurized bay at the rear of the station , which was the same diameter as the main pressurized compartment . However , the replacement of the Soyuz engine used on previous stations with the bay meant that the station kept a similar overall length to its predecessors . The main engines could not be fired if the rear docking port was in use , hence any orbital maneuvers during this time had to be performed by the visiting spacecraft . 
 Salyut 6 's propulsion system experienced a serious malfunction during the second crew residency in 1978 and was not usable again for the remainder of the station 's lifespan . As a consequence , it was limited to firing its attitude control thrusters and visiting spacecraft had to perform orbital adjustments . After each crew residency ended , it was necessary for Progress and TKS spacecraft to boost the station into a high orbit so it wouldn 't decay until the next residency began . 
 To enable spacewalks , Salyut 6 was equipped with an inward @-@ opening EVA hatch on the side of the forward transfer compartment , which could be used as an airlock in a similar way to the system used on Salyut 4 . This compartment contained two new semi @-@ rigid spacesuits which allowed much greater flexibility than earlier suits , and could be donned within five minutes in case of an emergency . Finally , the station offered considerable improvements in living conditions over previous outposts , with machinery being soundproofed , the crews being provided with designated ' cots ' for sleeping and the equipping of the station with a shower and extensive gymnasium . 
 = = = Instruments = = = 
 The primary instrument carried aboard the station was the BST @-@ 1M multispectral telescope , which could carry out astronomical observations in the infrared , ultraviolet and submillimetre spectra using a 1 @.@ 5 metre @-@ diameter mirror which was operated in cryogenic conditions at around − 269 ° C. The telescope could be operated only when Salyut 6 was on the night side of the Earth , and had its cover closed for the rest of the time . 
 The second major instrument was the <unk> @-@ 6M multispectral camera , which carried out Earth @-@ resources observations . An improved form of a camera first tested on Soyuz 22 , the camera captured an area of 165 × 220 kilometres with each image , down to a resolution of 20 metres . Each image was captured simultaneously in six bands in 1200 @-@ frame cassettes , which required regular replacement due to the fogging effects of radiation . Salyut 6 also featured a <unk> @-@ 140 stereoscopic topographic mapping camera with a focal length of 140 <unk> , which captured images of 450 × 450 kilometres with a resolution of 50 metres in the visible and infrared spectra , which could be operated either remotely or by the resident crews . The photographic capabilities of the station were , therefore , extensive , and the Soviet Ministry of Agriculture had planted a number of specifically selected crops at test sites to examine the capabilities of the cameras . 
 To further expand its scientific capabilities , Salyut 6 was equipped with 20 portholes for observations , two scientific <unk> to expose equipment to space or eject rubbish , and various pieces of apparatus to carry out biological experiments . Later on during the flight , a Progress spacecraft delivered an external telescope , the <unk> @-@ 10 radio observatory , which incorporated a directional antenna and five radiometers . The antenna was deployed on the rear docking assembly , with the controller remaining inside the station , and was used for both astronomical and meteorological observations . 
 = = Support craft = = 
 Salyut 6 was primarily supported by the manned Soyuz spacecraft , which carried out crew rotations and would also have been used in the event of an emergency evacuation . The ferries docked automatically to the station , making use of the new Igla automatic docking system , and were used by departing crews to return to Earth at the end of their flight . 
 The station was the first to be able to be resupplied by the newly developed unmanned Progress freighters , although they could only dock at the rear port , as the front port lacked the plumbing used to refuel the propulsion system . The freighters docked automatically to the station via the Igla , and were then opened and emptied by the cosmonauts on board , whilst transfer of fuel to the station took place automatically under supervision from the ground . 
 In addition to the Soyuz and Progress spacecraft , after the final crew had left , Salyut 6 was visited by an experimental transport logistics spacecraft called Kosmos 1267 in 1982 . The transport logistics spacecraft , known as the TKS , was originally designed for the Almaz programme , and proved that large modules could dock automatically with space stations , a major step toward the construction of multimodular stations such as Mir and the International Space Station . 
 = = Resident crews = = 
 The station received 16 cosmonaut crews , including six long @-@ duration crews , with the longest expedition lasting 185 days . Resident crew missions were identified with an EO prefix , whilst short @-@ duration missions were identified with EP . 
 On 10 December 1977 the first resident crew , Yuri Romanenko and Georgi Grechko , arrived on Soyuz 26 and remained aboard Salyut 6 for 96 days . 
 On 15 June 1978 , Vladimir <unk> and Aleksandr <unk> ( Soyuz 29 ) arrived and remained on board for 140 days . 
 Vladimir <unk> and Valery Ryumin ( Soyuz 32 ) arrived on 25 February 1979 and stayed 175 days . 
 On 9 April 1980 Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin ( Soyuz 35 ) arrived for the longest stay on Salyut 6 , 185 days . While aboard , on 19 July , they sent their greetings to the Olympians and wished them happy starts in the live communication between the station and the Central Lenin Stadium , where the opening ceremony of the 1980 Summer Olympics was held . They appeared on the stadium 's scoreboard and their voices were translated via loud speakers . 
 A repair mission , consisting of Leonid <unk> , Oleg Makarov , and Gennady Strekalov ( Soyuz T @-@ 3 ) worked on the space station for 12 days starting on 27 November 1980 . 
 On 12 March 1981 the last resident crew , Vladimir <unk> and Viktor <unk> , arrived and stayed for 75 days . 
 = = Station operations = = 
 = = = Docking operations = = = 
 Dates and times are 24 @-@ hour Moscow Time . Source : 
 = = = Station crews = = = 
 Dates and times are 24 @-@ hour Coordinated Universal Time . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Dates and times are 24 @-@ hour Coordinated Universal Time . Source : 
 = HMS Achilles ( 1863 ) = 
 HMS Achilles was an armoured frigate built for the Royal Navy in the 1860s . Upon completion in 1864 she was assigned to the Channel Fleet . The ship was paid off in 1868 to refit and be re @-@ armed . When she recommissioned in 1869 , she was assigned as the guard ship of the Fleet Reserve in the Portland District until 1874 . Achilles was refitted and re @-@ armed again in 1874 and became the guard ship of the Liverpool District in 1875 . Two years later , she was rejoined the Channel Fleet before going to the Mediterranean in 1878 . The ship returned to the Channel Fleet in 1880 and served until she was paid off in 1885 . 
 Achilles was recommissioned in 1901 as a depot ship at Malta under a succession of different names . She was transferred to Chatham in 1914 and was again renamed multiple times before she was sold for scrap in 1923 . Achilles had more changes of her rigging and armament than any other British warship , before or since . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Achilles was the third member of the 1861 Naval Programme and was designed as an improved version of the earlier Warrior @-@ class armoured frigates with a complete waterline armour belt . 
 The ship was 380 feet 2 inches ( 115 @.@ 9 m ) long between perpendiculars , had a beam of 58 feet 3 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) and a draft of 27 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 820 long tons ( 9 @,@ 980 t ) and had a tonnage of 6 @,@ 121 bm . The hull was subdivided by watertight transverse bulkheads into 106 compartments and had a double bottom . Achilles was designed with a high centre of gravity and was very stiff . So much so that the ship only rolled 10 degrees during one storm that ripped the main and mizen topgallant masts off and split her topsails . Because of her great length she was not very manoeuvrable . Achilles had a crew of 709 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single two @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine made by John Penn and Sons driving a single 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) propeller . Ten rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 25 psi ( 172 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . During her sea trials on 15 March 1865 , Achilles had a maximum speed of 14 @.@ 32 knots ( 26 @.@ 52 km / h ; 16 @.@ 48 mph ) from 5 @,@ 722 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 267 kW ) . The ship carried 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of coal , enough to steam 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at 6 @.@ 5 knots ( 12 @.@ 0 km / h ; 7 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 As built , Achilles was ship @-@ rigged with four masts , called bow , fore , main and mizen from fore to aft , and she was the only British warship ever to have four masts . They carried a total of 44 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 088 m2 ) of sail area , excluding the <unk> , the greatest area ever spread in a British warship . Her performance was unsatisfactory when the wind was before the beam and her bowsprit and <unk> were removed in June 1865 in an attempt to correct this problem . However , now she had too much weather helm so the bowsprit was replaced and the foremast was moved forward 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) in July 1866 . This reduced her sail area to 30 @,@ 133 square feet ( 2 @,@ 799 m2 ) . In 1877 Achilles was rerigged as a barque . Both of her funnels were retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail alone . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The intended armament of Achilles changed no less than five times before it was finally mounted . She received four rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns mounted on the upper deck , two of which served as chase guns at the bow and stern , and 16 smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 100 @-@ pounder Somerset cannon , eight on each side on the main deck . The breech @-@ loading guns were a new design from Armstrong and much was hoped for them . Firing tests carried out in September 1861 against an armoured target , however , proved that the 110 @-@ pounder was inferior to the 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun in armour penetration and repeated incidents of breech explosions during the Battles for Shimonoseki and the Bombardment of Kagoshima in 1863 – 64 caused the navy to withdraw the gun from service shortly afterwards . In 1865 , six 68 @-@ pounder smoothbores were added , three on each side of the main deck , although she was not comprehensively rearmed until her 1868 refit . 
 Detailed data for the Somerset cannon is not available , but the 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) and had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110 @-@ pounder Armstrong breech @-@ loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of 11 @.@ 25 ° , a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . The 110 @-@ pounder gun weighed 9 @,@ 520 pounds ( 4 @,@ 318 @.@ 2 kg ) . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 Achilles was rearmed during her 1867 – 68 refit with 22 seven @-@ inch and eight 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The eight @-@ inch guns and 18 seven @-@ inch guns were mounted on the main deck and the remaining seven @-@ inch guns replaced the 110 @-@ pounders on the upper deck . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre eight @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed nine long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre seven @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 pounds ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 In 1874 the ship was rearmed with 16 nine @-@ inch rifled muzzle @-@ loaders replacing the 4 eight @-@ inch and 20 of the 22 seven @-@ inch guns . Fourteen of the nine @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) guns were mounted on the main deck and the other two replaced the seven @-@ inch chase guns . The two remaining seven @-@ inch guns stayed in their position on the quarterdeck . As the nine @-@ inch guns were considerably bigger than their predecessors , the gun ports had to be widened to accommodate them . The shell of the 14 @-@ calibre nine @-@ inch gun weighed 254 pounds ( 115 @.@ 2 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 12 long tons ( 12 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was rated with the ability to penetrate a 11 @.@ 3 inches ( 287 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The ship had a wrought iron waterline armour belt that ran the full length of the ship . Amidships , it was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick for a length of 212 feet ( 64 @.@ 6 m ) and tapered to a thickness of 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) to the ends of the ship . The armour extended 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) below the waterline . The main deck was protected by a strake of armour , also 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch thick and 212 feet long . To protect against raking fire the upper strake was closed off by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads at each end . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Achilles , named after the Greek mythological hero , was ordered on 10 April 1861 from the Chatham Dockyard . She was the first iron @-@ hulled warship to be built at a royal dockyard and her construction was delayed by the need to acquire the necessary machinery to handle iron and to train the workers to use it . The ship was laid down on 1 August 1861 in a drydock and was floated out rather than being launched on 23 December 1863 . Achilles was completed on 26 November 1864 at the cost of £ 469 @,@ 572 . 
 She served in the Channel Fleet until 1868 . After a refit and her first major re @-@ armament , Achilles became the guardship at Portland until 1874 when she was again re @-@ armed . Upon its completion in 1875 , the ship became guardship at Liverpool until 1877 when Captain William Hewett , VC , assumed command . In 1878 she was one of the ships in the Particular Service Squadron which Admiral Geoffrey Hornby took through the Dardanelles at the time of the Russian war scare in June – August 1878 during the Russo @-@ Turkish War . Achilles accidentally collided with the flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet , Alexandra , in October 1879 , but was only lightly damaged by Alexandra 's propeller . The ship rejoined the Channel Fleet in 1880 and was paid off in 1885 . 
 She lay derelict in the Hamoaze until April 1901 , when she was sent to Malta as a depot ship . To release her name for the new armoured cruiser , Achilles was renamed Hibernia in 1902 . She was renamed Egmont in March 1904 , and remained in Malta until 1914 . Her role in Malta was assumed by the stone frigate Fort St Angelo . She was brought home to Chatham that year , and served there as a depot ship under the successive names of Egremont ( 19 June 1916 ) and Pembroke ( 6 June 1919 ) . The ship was sold for scrap on 26 January 1923 to the Granton Shipbreaking Co . 
 = M3 Gun Motor Carriage = 
 The M3 Gun Motor Carriage ( GMC ) was a United States Army tank destroyer equipped with one 75 mm gun and was produced by Autocar . After the fall of France , the U.S. Army decided to make a self @-@ propelled artillery piece from the <unk> gun on the M3 chassis , which was designated the T12 . After some improvement , it came into production as the M3 Gun Motor Carriage . However , the supply of M2A3 gun shields was insufficient for production needs , so a new gun shield was used . This was designated the M3A1 GMC . 
 The T12 / M3 first served in the Philippines Campaign in 1942 with the Provisional Field Artillery Brigade in the anti @-@ tank and the fire @-@ support role . It then served in North Africa in tank destroyer battalions . It was used ineffectively in the Battle of Kasserine Pass and several other engagements , but was used with success in the Battle of El Guettar . It also served in the Allied invasion of Sicily , but was eventually superseded by the M10 tank destroyer . A total of 2 @,@ 203 were produced , of which 1 @,@ 361 were converted back into M3A1 half @-@ tracks . 
 The M3 GMC also served in the Pacific theater , starting with the Battle of Saipan . It proved effective against the Japanese Type 95 Ha @-@ Go and Type 97 Chi @-@ Ha tanks . It later served in the Battle of Okinawa , the Battle of Peleliu and many other island battles . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The M3 GMC was 20 @.@ 46 feet ( 6 @.@ 24 m ) long , 6 @.@ 45 feet ( 1 @.@ 97 m ) wide , 8 @.@ 17 feet ( 2 @.@ 49 m ) high ( including the gun shield ) , and weighed 20 @,@ 000 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . Its suspension consisted of semi @-@ elliptical <unk> leaf springs for the wheels and vertical volute springs for the tracks , while its transmission consisted of constant mesh . Its ground clearance was 11 @.@ 2 inches ( 280 mm ) . 
 It had a White 160AX 147 horsepower ( 110 kW ) , 386 cubic inch ( 6 @,@ 330 cc ) , 6 @-@ cylinder engine with a compression ratio of 6 @.@ 44 : 1 . It had a 150 mile ( 240 km ) range , 60 US gal ( 230 l ) fuel tank , a speed of 47 mph ( 75 km / h ) , and a power to weight ratio of 14 @.@ 7 hp per ton . It was armed with one 75 mm M1897A5 with 59 rounds , had 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 625 in ( 6 @.@ 4 – 15 @.@ 9 mm ) of armor , and a crew of five consisting of a commander , gunner , two loaders , and a driver . The M3 ( with the M2A3 mount ) could traverse 19 ° left and 21 ° right , elevate 29 ° and depress − 10 ° . The M3A1 ( using the M5 mount ) could traverse 21 ° in both directions , but could only depress − 6 @.@ 5 ° . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the fall of France , the U.S. Army studied the reasons behind the effectiveness of the German campaign against the French and British forces . One aspect that was highlighted by this study was the use of self propelled artillery ; however , by 1941 , there was little available in the U.S. Army 's arsenal that could be used in such a role . The Army had a number of M1897A5 guns , sufficient enough for the mass @-@ production for such a weapon , and the M3 half @-@ track was coming into production . After some debate , the Army decided to place M1897A5 guns on the M3 half @-@ track chassis , which was designated the T12 GMC . The M1897A5 gun was originally adapted for the M3 chassis by placing it in a welded box riveted to the chassis behind the driver 's compartment . It was accepted by the Army on 31 October 1941 . 
 A batch of 36 T12s were used for testing , while another 50 were built and transported to the Philippines . The 36 T12s were improved in multiple ways . The improvements included the inclusion of a mount that raised the gun shield , the replacement of the original gun shield with the M2A3 gun shield , and the addition of a 0 @.@ 5 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning machine gun , which was later removed . After the final improvements were finished , the prototype vehicles were sent to the Autocar Company for production . 
 = = = M3A1 = = = 
 As the existing supply of M2A3 gun shields was insufficient to meet requirements for the production of the M3 , the Ordnance Department developed the M5 gun shield , which replaced the M2A3 . The new design was designated as the M3A1 Gun Motor Carriage . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = American use = = = 
 The T12 / M3 GMC first saw action with the U.S. Army in the Philippines in 1941 – 42 , six months after it was designed . Three battalions of the Provisional Field Artillery Brigade operated T12s against the Japanese when they invaded the Philippines . During the early part of the campaign , the vehicle was used to provide direct covering fire and anti @-@ tank support . The Japanese captured a few vehicles in 1942 and used them in the defense of the Philippines . 
 By 1942 , M3 GMCs were being used by tank destroyer battalions in the North African Campaign , each of which consisted of 36 M3s and four 37 mm M6 GMCs . The M3 GMCs , which were designed for ambushing tanks , proved to be inadequate for this task in the battles of Sidi Bou Zid and Kasserine Pass , mainly due to poor tactics . Nevertheless , the M3 was later used in the Battle of El Guettar with success , claiming 30 German tanks , including possibly two Tiger tanks , at the cost of 21 M3s . Some M3s also saw service in Allied invasion of Sicily ( Operation Husky ) , but by that time , the M10 tank destroyer had replaced it in the U.S. Army . A total of 1 @,@ 360 M3 GMCs were also converted back into M3A1 half @-@ tracks . 
 The M3 also served with the U.S. Marines in the Pacific Theater of Operations and was first used in the invasion of Saipan . It proved highly effective against the Type 95 Ha @-@ Go and the Type 97 Chi @-@ Ha , in the fight against the Japanese 9th Tank Regiment on Saipan . It also served in the Battle of Peleliu and the Battle of Okinawa , and many other conflicts in the Pacific . 
 = = = Allied use = = = 
