 = Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men = 
 The Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men comprised ten volumes of Dionysius Lardner 's 133 @-@ volume Cabinet Cyclopaedia ( 1829 – 46 ) . Aimed at the self @-@ educating middle class , this encyclopedia was written during the 19th @-@ century literary revolution in Britain that encouraged more people to read . 
 The Lives formed part of the Cabinet of Biography in the Cabinet Cyclopaedia . Within the set of ten , the three @-@ volume Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy , Spain and Portugal ( 1835 – 37 ) and the two @-@ volume Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of France ( 1838 – 39 ) consist of biographies of important writers and thinkers of the 14th to 18th centuries . Most of them were written by the Romantic writer Mary Shelley . Shelley 's biographies reveal her as a professional woman of letters , contracted to produce several volumes of works and paid well to do so . Her extensive knowledge of history and languages , her ability to tell a gripping biographical narrative , and her interest in the burgeoning field of feminist historiography are reflected in these works . 
 At times Shelley had trouble finding sufficient research materials and had to make do with fewer resources than she would have liked , particularly for the Spanish and Portuguese Lives . She wrote in a style that combined secondary sources , memoir , anecdote , and her own opinions . Her political views are most obvious in the Italian Lives , where she supports the Italian independence movement and promotes republicanism ; in the French Lives she portrays women sympathetically , explaining their political and social restrictions and arguing that women can be productive members of society if given the proper educational and social opportunities . 
 The Lives did not attract enough critical attention to become a bestseller . A fair number were printed and sold , however , and far more copies of the Lives circulated than of Shelley 's novels . Some of the volumes were illegally copied in the United States , where they were praised by the poet and critic Edgar Allan Poe . Not reprinted until 2002 , Mary Shelley 's biographies have until recently received little academic appreciation . 
 = = Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia = = 
 During the first quarter of the 19th century , self @-@ improvement literature became an important portion of the book market : " it was the age of the ' Family Library ' edition " . In his article on the Cabinet Cyclopaedia , Morse Peckham writes that this " revolution in literacy , [ was ] partly the result of the spread of liberal ideas by the French Revolution , [ and ] partly of the desire to combat those ideas by teaching the poor to read the Bible and religious tracts [ ... It ] was to have an effect on modern society almost as profound as the industrial and agricultural revolutions " . Dionysius Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia , published between 1829 and 1846 , was one of the most successful of these enterprises , which also included John Murray 's Family Library and the publications of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge . Although intended for the " general reader " , the series was aimed specifically at the middle class rather than the masses : each volume cost six shillings , prohibiting purchase by the poor . The advertisements for the Cyclopaedia describe the expected audience as " merchants , captains , families , [ and ] new @-@ married couples " . The prospectus assured its readers that " nothing will be admitted into the pages of the ' <unk> <unk> ' which can have the most remote tendency to offend public or private morals . To enforce the cultivation of religion and the practice of virtue should be a principal object with all who undertake to inform the public mind . " 
 The series was divided into five " Cabinets " : Arts and Manufactures , Biography , History , Natural History , and Natural Philosophy . The advertisement claimed these covered " all the usual divisions of knowledge that are not of a technical and professional kind " . Unlike other encyclopedias of the time , Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia arranged its articles topically rather than alphabetically . The series eventually contained 61 titles in 133 volumes and customers could purchase a single volume , a single cabinet , or the entire set . The first volume was published in December 1829 by Longman , Reese , Orme , Browne , Greene , and John Taylor . Thirty @-@ eight identified authors contributed ( others are unidentified ) ; Mary Shelley was the only female contributor and the eighth most productive . 
 Reverend Dr. Dionysius Lardner , a science lecturer at University College London , started the Cabinet Cyclopaedia in 1827 or 1828 . The authors who contributed to the volumes spanned the political spectrum and included many luminaries of the day . James Mackintosh , Walter Scott , Thomas Moore , and <unk> Thirlwall wrote histories ; Robert Southey wrote naval biographies ; Henry Roscoe wrote legal biographies ; John Herschel wrote on astronomy and the philosophy of science ; August de Morgan wrote on mathematics ; David Brewster wrote on optics ; and Lardner himself wrote on mathematics and physics . Authors were usually paid about £ 200 for each volume , though some contracts were much higher or lower . For example , Irish poet Thomas Moore was contracted to write a two @-@ volume History of Ireland for £ 1 @,@ 500 . One of the reasons the overall project ran into difficulty may have been that it overpaid well @-@ known writers . Peckham speculates that the reason many of the famous writers listed on the prospectus never participated was because of the project 's financial problems . The 19 substitute contributors were , he writes , " at the time and subsequently a far less distinguished group than Lardner had originally announced " . 
 The books were relatively expensive to print , because of the Corbould and <unk> illustrations , the images for the scientific volumes , and the use of Spottiswoode 's printing house . In order to cut costs , the publishers decided to use small print and narrow margins . An estimated 4 @,@ 000 copies of the first edition of the early volumes were printed , but the print run would probably have fallen to 2 @,@ 500 since the sales did not pick up after 1835 . As it became clear that the series was not going to take off , fewer review copies were sent out and advertisements became smaller . Lardner 's interest in the project may also have waned , as he paid less attention to its business dealings . However , some volumes of the Cabinet Cyclopaedia remained in print until 1890 . 
 Because of the popularity of encyclopedias at the beginning of the 19th century , the Cabinet Cyclopaedia did not receive enough critical notice to make it a bestseller . Often the reviews were " perfunctory " . However , some individual writers received attention . Moore , for example , was given a front @-@ page spread in the Literary Gazette for his history of Ireland . Shelley 's volumes received 12 reviews in total — a good number — but " her name was never fully exploited " in the project ; whether by her choice or Lardner 's , it is unclear . Nevertheless , Peckham writes that " the Cyclopaedia on the whole was a distinguished and valuable work " , and some of the individual volumes became famous . 
 = = Mary Shelley 's contributions = = 
 Written during the last productive decade of Mary Shelley 's career , her contributions fill about three @-@ quarters of these five volumes and reveal her to be a professional woman of letters . They demonstrate her knowledge of several languages and historical research covering several centuries , her ability to tell a gripping biographical narrative , and her interest in the burgeoning field of feminist historiography . She " wrote with many books to hand – reading ( or rereading ) some , consulting others , cross @-@ referring , interweaving abridged and paraphrased source material with her own comment " . Shelley combined secondary sources with memoir and anecdote and included her own judgments , a biographical style made popular by the 18th @-@ century critic Samuel Johnson in his Lives of the Poets ( 1779 – 81 ) . She describes this technique in her " Life of Metastasio " : 
 It is from passages such as these , interspersed in his letters , that we can collect the peculiar character of the man – his difference from others – and the mechanism of being that rendered him the individual that he was . Such , dr Johnson [ sic ] remarks , is the true end of biography , and he recommends the bringing forward of minute , yet characteristic details , as essential to this style of history ; to follow which precept has been the aim and desire of the writer of these pages . 
 William Godwin 's theories of biographical writing significantly influenced Shelley 's style . Her father believed that biography could tell the history of a culture as well as serve a pedagogical function . Shelley felt that her nonfiction works were better than her fiction , writing in 1843 to publisher Edward Moxon : " I should prefer quieter work , to be gathered from other works — such as my lives for the Cyclopedia — & which I think I do much better than romancing . " 
 The 18th century had seen a new kind of history emerge , with works such as David Hume 's History of England ( 1754 – 63 ) . Frustrated with traditional histories that highlighted only military and monarchical history , Hume and others emphasised commerce , the arts , and society . Combined with the rise of sensibility at the end of the 18th century , this " produced an unprecedented historical interest in the social , the inward , and particularly the realm of affect " . These topics and this style explicitly invited women into the discussion of history as both readers and writers . However , since this new history often subordinated the private sphere to the public , women writers took it upon themselves to bring " sentimental and private elements " to the centre of historical study . In this way , they argued for the political relevance of women , claiming , for example , that women 's sympathy for those who suffered enabled them to speak for marginalised groups , such as slaves or the poor . 
 Shelley practised this early form of feminist historiography . Biographical writing was , in her words , supposed to " form as it were a school in which to study the philosophy of history " and to teach " lessons " . These " lessons " consisted , most frequently and importantly , of criticisms of male @-@ dominated institutions , such as primogeniture . She also praises societies that are progressive with regard to gender relations — she wrote , for example , " No slur was cast by the [ Renaissance era ] Italians on feminine accomplishments ... Where abstruse learning was a fashion among men , they were glad to find in their friends of the other sex , minds educated to share their pursuits " . 
 Shelley was particularly interested in tying private , domestic history to public , political history . She emphasises romance , the family , sympathy , and compassion in the lives of the people she writes about . This is particularly true in her essays on Petrarch and Vincenzo Monti . Her belief that these domestic influences would improve society , and that women could be at the forefront of them , ties her approach to that of other early feminist historians such as Mary Hays and Anna Jameson . Shelley argues that women possess a " distinctive virtue " in their ability to sympathise with others and should use this ability to improve society . She castigates Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , for example , for abandoning his children at a foundling hospital , decrying the " masculine egotism " associated with his philosophy — a criticism similar to the one she makes of Victor Frankenstein in Frankenstein ( 1818 ) . 
 Unlike most of her novels , which had a print run of only several hundred copies , the Lives 's print run of about 4 @,@ 000 for each volume became , in the words of one scholar , " one of her most influential political interventions " . However , Shelley 's biographies have not been fully appreciated until recently . The Lives were not reprinted until 2002 , and little study has been made of them because of a critical tradition that " dismiss [ es ] the Lives as hack work churned out rapidly in order to pay off debts " . 
 = = Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy , Spain and Portugal = = 
 The three @-@ volume Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy , Spain and Portugal contains numerous biographies of writers and thinkers of the 14th to 18th centuries . The first volume was published on 1 February 1835 , the second on 1 October 1835 , and the third on 1 November 1837 . An unlicensed edition of the first two volumes was published in the United States by Lea and Blanchard in 1841 . 
 = = = Italian Lives = = = 
 The Italian Lives constitute the first two volumes of Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy , Spain and Portugal . The poet , journalist , and literary historian James Montgomery contributed the biographies of Dante , Ariosto , and Tasso . Historian of science Sir David Brewster contributed that of Galileo . Mary Shelley contributed the rest : Petrarch , Boccaccio , Lorenzo de 'Medici , <unk> Ficino , Giovanni Pico della Mirandola , Angelo Poliziano , Bernardo Pulci , Luca Pulci , Luigi Pulci , <unk> Da Ferrara , <unk> , <unk> , Berni , Machiavelli , Guicciardini , Vittoria Colonna , Guarini , <unk> , Tassoni , Marini , <unk> , Metastasio , <unk> , Alfieri , Monti , and Ugo Foscolo . Although there has been some confusion regarding the attribution of these biographies , the Lives 's recent editor , <unk> Mazzeo , notes that Shelley claimed authorship of all of these and granted Montgomery and Brewster 's authorship of the others in her letters . 
 Shelley began the Italian Lives on 23 November 1833 and by December was working methodically : she wrote the Lives in the morning and read novels and memoirs in the evening . She added the revision of her novel Lodore ( 1835 ) and the checking of its proofs to this already busy schedule . She worked on the Italian Lives for two years and was probably paid £ 140 for each volume . By the time she began working on the Lives , Shelley had spent 20 years studying Italian authors and had lived in Italy for five years . Her major sources for the biographies were first @-@ person memoirs and literature by the authors , aided by scholarly works . Shelley had gained much of her knowledge of these authors in Italy when she was researching her historical novel Valperga ( 1823 ) ; the rest she obtained from her own books or those of her father , the philosopher William Godwin . She had limited access to books at this time and was thus restricted to those she owned or could borrow from friends . Shelley copied sections from some of these works in a manner that would today be termed plagiarism , but , as Mazzeo explains , because the standards of intellectual property and copyright were so different in the early 19th century , Shelley 's practice was common and not considered unethical . She writes , " Mary Shelley 's objectives in the Italian Lives were to gather what had been said by these authors and about them and to infuse the work with her own judgements on their interest and credibility . " 
 To supplement her printed sources , Shelley interviewed Gabriele Rossetti and other Italian expatriates in London for the modern biographies . Mazzeo writes that " her lives of the contemporary Italian poets – Alfieri , Monti and Foscolo – are unquestionably the most personal and most inspired of the two volumes " . Of all of the volumes Shelley contributed to the Cabinet Cyclopaedia , Italian Lives is , according to editor Nora Crook , the " most overtly political " . Shelley was a friend to the Italian exiles and a proponent of the Risorgimento ; she reveals her republicanism by depicting Machiavelli as a patriot . She continually praises writers who resist tyranny by " <unk> [ ing ] private virtue and inner peace " . In the first volume of the Italian Lives her primary goal was to introduce lesser @-@ known Italian writers to English readers and build up the reputation of those who were already known , reflecting the view she expressed in her travel narrative Rambles in Germany and Italy ( 1844 ) : " Italian literature claims , at present , a very high rank in Europe . If the writers are less numerous , yet in genius they equal , and in moral taste they surpass France and England " . 
 Shelley specifically addressed gender politics in her biography of the 16th @-@ century poet Vittoria Colonna , highlighting her literary achievements , her " virtues , talents , and beauty " , and her interest in politics . However , Shelley was careful to describe feminine virtues in their historical context throughout the Italian Lives . For example , her analysis of the cavalier <unk> system in Italy , which allowed married women to take lovers , was rooted in an understanding that many marriages at the time were made not for love , but for profit . She refused to indict any particular woman for what she saw as the faults of a larger system . 
 Little has been written on the contributions by Montgomery or Brewster . According to Mazzeo , Montgomery 's biographies , which draw a picture of the subject 's character and incorporate autobiographical material , are written in a " digressive though not unengaging manner " . He is less concerned with factual accuracy , although he identifies his sources , and more interested in developing " extended parallels between Italian and English literature " . Brewster includes descriptions of 16th @-@ century scientific experiments in his formally written biography of Galileo , as well as information on other Renaissance natural philosophers . According to Mazzeo , " Brewster 's pious religiosity infuses the work and his opinions " . 
 Ninety @-@ eight review copies of the first two volumes were distributed , eliciting five reviews . Some of these were simply short advertisements for the Cabinet Cyclopaedia . Mazzeo writes that the " commentary on both volumes was mixed and often contradictory , but on balance positive ; prose style , organisation and use of source materials were the three most often identified points of discussion " . The first volume was declared to be unorganised , the second volume less so . Reviewers did not agree on the value of frequently using primary sources , nor on the elegance of the writing style . The Monthly Review dedicated the most substantial review and extracts to the volumes , writing that " we by no means think highly of the volume as a whole " , complaining that it presented facts and dates without context . However , the reviewer praised two of Mary Shelley 's biographies : Petrarch and Machiavelli . According to Mazzeo , the reviewer " notes , in particular , her efforts to question conventional assumptions about Machiavelli by returning to autobiographical materials and credits her with originality on this point " . Graham 's Magazine , in a piece probably by its co @-@ editor , Edgar Allan Poe , positively reviewed the unauthorized American edition . 
 = = = Spanish and Portuguese Lives = = = 
 The Spanish and Portuguese Lives constitute the third volume of the Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy , Spain and Portugal . Except for the biography of <unk> , whose author is unknown , Mary Shelley wrote all of the entries in this volume : <unk> , Garcilaso de la Vega , Diego Hurtado de Mendoza , Luis de León , Herrera , Sá de Miranda , Jorge de <unk> , <unk> , Cervantes , Lope de Vega , Vicente <unk> , Esteban de Villegas , Góngora , Quevedo , Calderón , Ribeiro , Gil Vicente , Ferreira , and <unk> . 
 During the two or three years that Mary Shelley spent writing the Spanish and Portuguese Lives from 1834 or 1835 to 1837 , she also wrote a novel , Falkner ( 1837 ) , experienced the death of her father , William Godwin , started a biography of him , and moved to London after her son , Percy Florence Shelley , entered Trinity College , Cambridge . She had more difficulty with these Lives than with the other volumes ' biographies , writing to her friend Maria Gisborne : " I am now about to write a Volume of Spanish & <unk> [ sic ] Lives – This is an arduous task , from my own ignorance , & the difficulty of getting books & information " . According to Lisa Vargo , a recent editor of the Spanish and Portuguese Lives , Spanish books were hard to come by in England and not much was known regarding Shelley 's subjects . However , Shelly ended one plaintive letter to another friend : " The best is that the very thing which occasions the difficulty makes it interesting – namely – the treading in unknown paths & dragging out unknown things – I wish I could go to Spain . " While living in Harrow , she refused to go to the British Library in London , writing : " I would not if I could – I do not like finding myself a stray bird among strange men in a character <unk> [ sic ] to their own " . At this time , the British Library had special tables for women in the reading room . While some scholars see her refusal to work there as a mark of " feminist protest " others see it as " matter of comfort and practicality " , since the reading rooms were " noisy , badly lit , and poorly ventilated " . Shelley 's continual problems with finding sources mean that her biographies are based on relatively few works . However , Vargo writes that " there is always a sense of an engaged and intelligent mind at work weighing what should be included , what seems accurate " . Shelley tended to focus on obtaining accounts written by people who knew the authors , and when translations of the authors ' works were unavailable or poor , she provided her own . 
 Shelley 's biographies begin by describing the author , offering examples of their writings in the original language and in translation , and end by summarising their " beauties and defects " . She also discusses the problems of writing biography itself , engaging in a written dialogue with the theories of her now @-@ dead father . In " Of History and Romance " Godwin had written that for the genius , " I am not contented to observe such a man upon the public stage , I would follow him into his closet . I would see the friend and the father of a family , as well as the patriot " . Shelley and Godwin had seen the negative effects of this approach when Godwin published Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) , his biography of Shelley 's mother , Mary Wollstonecraft . Its frank description of Wollstonecraft 's affairs and suicide attempts shocked the public and sullied her reputation . Shelley criticises this technique in her biographies , concerned that such works perpetuate " follies " . She is even more concerned that often an absence of information regarding a particular writer is interpreted as evidence that the writer was insignificant . 
 Overall , the Spanish Lives , according to Vargo , " tells a story of the survival of genius and moral independence in spite of oppression by public institutions , both individually and nationally " . Shelley argues that Spain 's literature is directly related to its politics and seeks to inspire her readers by outlining a national literature stretching back to Lucan which represents the best characteristics of Spanish identity : " originality " , " independence " , " enthusiasm " , and " earnestness " . 
 = = Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of France = = 
 The two @-@ volume Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of France includes the following works by Mary Shelley : Montaigne , Corneille , Rochefoucauld , Molière , Pascal , Madame de Sévigné , Boileau , Racine , Fénelon , Voltaire , Rousseau , Condorcet , Mirabeau , Madame Roland , and Madame de Staël . Rabelais and La Fontaine are by an as yet unidentified author . Shelley was the only contributor to Lardner 's Cabinet Cyclopaedia to give such pride of place to female biographical subjects . In these volumes , " she stretched the definition of ' Eminent Literary Men ' not just by including two more women but by her choice of a quartet of French revolutionary personalities who were political actors more than , or as much as writers : Condorcet and Mirabeau , Mme Roland and Mme de Staël " . As Clarissa Campbell Orr , a recent editor of the French Lives , explains , this choice " represents a concerted attempt to disassociate the early ideals of the French Revolution from its subsequent extremism and state @-@ authored bloodshed " . 
 Mary Shelley worked on the French Lives from the end of 1837 until the middle of 1839 and she was paid £ 200 upon their completion . No other substantial projects occupied her during this time and research materials were easily accessible ; she even subscribed to a specialist circulating library to acquire books . She wrote to her friend Leigh Hunt of the project , " I am now writing French Lives . The Spanish ones interested me — these do not so much – yet , it is pleasant writing enough – sparing one imagination yet occupying one & supplying in some small degree the needful which is so very needful . " 
 Mary Shelley spoke French fluently and was knowledgeable about 17th- and 18th @-@ century French literature . Although she was distilling other works , the biographies are still deeply personal works and have autobiographical elements . Orr writes that they " are the culmination of her work for Lardner , and represent the final stage of a sustained overview of four literatures . Few British women of letters in the 1830s could command this extensive range and write so confidently about four national cultures . " Orr compares Shelley to the 19th @-@ century historical writers Lady Morgan , Frances Trollope , Anna Jameson , and Agnes and Eliza Strickland . Shelley 's assessment of French literature was not as generous as her evaluation of Italian literature . She criticized its artificiality , for example . However , the biographies are " written with a sprightly narrative thrust and an agreeable tone " . She also often provided her own translations and focused on themes that resonated with her own life . 
 The French Lives provided Shelley with a way to celebrate literary women , particularly <unk> . In her life of Madame de Sévigné , Shelley celebrates " her chaste widowhood ; her loyalty as a friend ; [ and ] her maternal devotion " . However , Orr writes that it is difficult to see a pattern in the way Shelley addresses gender issues in these volumes . She argues that " the most consistent ' feminism ' displayed throughout [ the second volume of French Lives ] lies in her examination of French attitudes toward love , marriage , and sexuality " . Shelley sympathetically portrays customs such as taking lovers , explaining the custom in the context of France 's arranged marriages . Overall , Orr explains , Shelley 's " historical sympathy for the varied circumstances of women 's relationships mirrors her personal practice of understanding and assisting those of her women friends who transgressed moral norms " . The biographies of Roland and Staël focus on their abilities and the social forces that both helped and hindered them from succeeding . Shelley argues that women are as intellectually capable as men , but lack a sufficient education and are trapped by social systems such as marriage that restrict their rights . The emphasis that Shelley places on education and reading reflect the influence of her mother 's A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) . In these two biographies , Shelley reinforces contemporary gender roles while at the same time celebrating the achievements of these women . She describes Roland through traditionally feminine roles : 
 She was her husband 's friend , companion , amanuensis ; fearful of the temptations of the world , she gave herself up to labour ; she soon became absolutely necessary to him at every moment , and in all the incidents of his life ; her servitude was thus sealed ; now and then it caused a sigh ; but the holy sense of duty reconciled her to every inconvenience . 
 Shelley also defends Roland 's " unwomanly " actions , however , by arguing that they were " beneficial " to French society . Shelley 's most overt feminist statement in the French Lives comes when she criticises Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's novel Julie , or the New Heloise ( 1761 ) , writing " his ideas ... of a perfect life are singularly faulty . It includes no instruction , no endeavours to acquire knowledge and refine the soul by study ; but is contracted to mere domestic avocations " . 
 Sixty review copies of each volume were sent out , but only one short notice of the first volume of French Lives has been located , in the Sunday Times . The volumes were bootlegged in the United States by Lea and Blanchard of Philadelphia and reviewed by Edgar Allan Poe in Graham 's Lady 's and Gentleman ’ s Magazine in 1841 . He wrote , " a more valuable work , when considered solely as an introduction to French literature , has not , for some time , been issued from the American press " . 
 = Agent Carter ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the American television series Agent Carter , which is inspired by the film Captain America : The First Avenger and the Marvel One @-@ Shot short film of the same name , features the Marvel Comics character Peggy Carter as she must balance doing administrative work and going on secret missions for Howard Stark while trying to navigate life as a single woman in 1940s America . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films of the franchise . The season , which aired on ABC from January 6 to February 24 , 2015 , over 8 episodes , was produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and F & B Fazekas & Butters , with Tara Butters , Michele Fazekas , and Chris Dingess serving as showrunners . 
 Hayley Atwell reprises her role from the film series and One @-@ Shot as Carter , with James D 'Arcy , Chad Michael Murray , Enver Gjokaj , and Shea Whigham also starring . In May 2014 , ABC bypassed a pilot , ordering a show based on the One @-@ Shot straight to series for an eight episode season . Filming took place in Los Angeles from September 2014 to January 2015 , and Industrial Light & Magic provided visual effects . The season introduces the origins of several characters and storylines from MCU films , while other characters from the films and Marvel One @-@ Shots also appear . 
 The season aired during the season two mid @-@ season break of Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Despite steadily dropping viewership , critical response to Agent Carter was positive , with much praise going to Atwell 's performance , the series ' tone and setting , and its relative separation from the rest of the MCU . The series was renewed for a second season on May 7 , 2015 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 By September 2013 , Marvel Television was developing a series inspired by the Agent Carter One @-@ Shot short film , featuring the Marvel Comics character Peggy Carter . On May 8 , 2014 , ABC officially ordered the series , bypassing a pilot order , and later confirmed that Agent Carter would air between the 2014 finale and 2015 premiere of the second season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , beginning January 6 , 2015 . Later in May , star Hayley Atwell stated that the season would consist of eight episodes . Executive producers for the season include Tara Butters , Michelle Fazekas , Christopher Markus , Stephen McFeely , Chris Dingess , Kevin Feige , Louis D 'Esposito , Alan Fine , Joe Quesada , Stan Lee , and Jeph Loeb . Butters , Fazekas , and Dingess serve as showrunners on the season . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Markus & McFeely , writers on the Captain America films , had written a script for the first episode by January 2014 . They stated in March that the series would be set in 1946 , occurring in the middle of the timeline established in the One @-@ Shot . In July , Butters and Fazekas revealed that writing for the rest of the season would begin in August 2014 . 
 In July 2014 , Fazekas stated that it was " fabulous from a writing perspective " to have an eight episode order , as " it 's a really nice number where you can plan it and know where you 're heading ... They 're all their own stories and they all have their own drive , but it 's sort of building toward a big thing at the end of the eight episodes . " Elaborating on this , Atwell said , " it 's incredibly tight , the script , which is great . It 's fast moving and fast paced but luckily because it 's not stretched out of 22 episodes , nothing is diluted . Every line is vital to not only moving the story and the action [ along ] but also developing the characters . So you get to know these characters incredibly quickly . You get to know who you should be trusting , who you shouldn 't be , and then it takes you on this adventure with a lot of surprises and twists and turns which are a surprise to Peggy and they 'll also be a surprise to the audience . " Also in July , it was revealed that Carter 's husband would be explored in the series . However , it was not explored much in the first season , with McFeely saying , " This was the season where she says goodbye to Steve [ Rogers ] ... But we knew by the end [ of season one ] that she should say goodbye to him . In a second season , she could be freer to have those conversations about a life after him . " 
 Speaking about the season 's use of 1940s terminology , Fazekas stated that terms like " broad " and " dame " were preferably avoided , while research was done to ensure terms that were used in the series were actually in use during that time , with Fazekas giving the example , " you know what didn 't exist in 1946 ? Smart ass . I looked up the etymology on that , didn 't exist in 1946 . Turns out it was a term that came around in the 60s . But for instance , I wrote a line that said , " Oh I think someone 's yanking your chain . " And I had to look it up , did that exist in 1946 ? And actually it did ; it 's a mining term that exists from a long time ago . That 's our research that we do . " Research was also done on radio shows of the time to ensure realism when creating the fictional Captain America Adventure Program , with details discovered and replicated on the series including the use of lobsters and ham to create sound effects for the radio show . The Griffith Hotel , the all @-@ women boarding house where Carter lives , is based on the real @-@ life Barbizon Hotel for Women . Butters felt that while working in the time period , it became an issue to not sound " too period " . Additionally , it was difficult to write British people from the time in order to avoid stereotypes such as the " typical British butler " . However , D 'Arcy , who is British , felt the writing staff wrote the British characters better than anyone else he had worked with , despite there not being any British writers on the staff . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The main cast for the season includes Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter , reprising her role from the film series , James D 'Arcy as Edwin Jarvis , Chad Michael Murray as Jack Thompson , Enver Gjokaj as Daniel Sousa , and Shea Whigham as Roger Dooley . 
 In March 2014 , Markus and McFeely stated that Howard Stark would be a recurring character , contingent on Dominic Cooper 's involvement . In June 2014 , Atwell confirmed that Cooper would be involved with the series . Kyle <unk> , Ralph Brown , <unk> Fay , Lyndsy Fonseca , and Bridget Regan also recur as Ray <unk> , Johann <unk> , Miriam Fry , Angie Martinelli , and Dottie Underwood , respectively , throughout the series . 
 In November 2014 , it was announced that Costa Ronin would portray a younger version of Anton Vanko , who was portrayed in Iron Man 2 by Yevgeni Lazarev . Chris Evans appears as Steve Rogers / Captain America via archive footage from The First Avenger . Neal McDonough and Toby Jones also reprise their roles of Timothy " Dum Dum " Dugan and Arnim Zola from previous MCU films , One @-@ Shots , and / or television series during the season . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in Los Angeles around late September / early October 2014 and was completed on January 20 , 2015 . Cinematographer Gabriel Beristain , returning from the One @-@ Shot , used a combination of modern digital technology and traditional analog techniques to replicate the feel of classic films that are set in the 1940s , but to also have the convenience and consistency of modern technology . Beristain uses the Arri Alexa digital camera , along with Leica Lenses and silk @-@ stocking diffusion nets , the latter on which he recalled " I had last used in the 1980s in England on videos and commercials . I remembered that they were fantastic . In combination with the Leica lenses , the look is very classic , very much like a 1940s film . When I saw it , I said , ' This is absolutely Marvel , ' and [ D 'Esposito ] agreed . " For the series ' lighting , Beristain again mixed modern and traditional , using LED fixtures to recreate classic Hollywood lighting . He called his lighting of Atwell " an homage to the great cinematographers who lit Lauren Bacall and Grace Kelly . " 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Sheena Duggal , who served as visual effects supervisor on the Agent Carter One @-@ Shot , returned to the position for the series , while the companies Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) and Base FX created the visual effects . Work by ILM includes the creation of backdrops for the series , including matte paintings , depicting 1940s New York . DNeg TV also created visual effects , with ILM coordinating with them and Base to maintain a " seamless workflow " . The season had 1038 visual effects shots , with multiple episodes being worked on in post @-@ production simultaneously to complete the work . In addition to all the set extensions required to depict the period ( the series filmed at " every back lot in LA , including Universal , Paramount and Warner Bros. , relying on a tremendous amount of green screen and matte paintings to create the show 's authentic @-@ looking locations " ) , Duggal also noted difficulty in simulating the imploding bombs and creating a fully CG truck that drives off a cliff . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In September 2014 , Christopher Lennertz officially signed on to compose for the series , having previously composed the Agent Carter One @-@ Shot . Lennertz combined all the different style elements of the show in the music , such as mixing jazz and period elements , with orchestra and electronic elements . In his research of the music of the time period , Lennertz learned that jazz was shifting from big band to smaller ensembles , and bebop was being introduced . This allowed him to incorporate trumpets in his scores , to harken to the time period and because they are " also very sneaky , and it lends itself to espionage " . Lennertz used the alto flute to capture " Carter 's aura " , saying , " It feels like a strong woman 's voice , especially as she 's sneaking around .... it also has that spy quality . " Additionally , Lennertz was able to <unk> " Star @-@ Spangled Man " for the season , which is originally by Alan Menken for Captain America : The First Avenger , and introduced a folk choral piece performed by a Russian men 's choir during " The Iron Ceiling " . A soundtrack album for the season was released on iTunes on December 11 , 2015 . 
 All music composed by Christopher Lennertz . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 Markus , talking about the series place in the greater architecture of the MCU in January 2015 said " you really only need to drop the tiniest bit of hint and its connected . You don 't have to go , " Howard Stark 's wearing the same pants that Tony wears ! " ... Everything is enhanced just by the knowledge that its all connected . " The season introduces the Red Room and the origins of the Black Widow program , which will eventually produce Natasha Romanoff , who appears in multiple MCU films portrayed by Scarlett Johansson . Although the origins of the program are explored , the term " Black Widow " is never used in the series . Agent Carter also explores the origins of the Hydra @-@ led Winter Soldier program , as seen by the end tag in " <unk> " when Zola approaches Faustus about mind control . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Agent Carter debuted in the United States and Canada as a two @-@ hour series premiere on January 6 , 2015 , on ABC and CTV , respectively . It began airing in New Zealand on TV2 on February 11 , 2015 . In October 2014 , Channel 4 , the channel that airs Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the United Kingdom , stated that they did not " have any current plans [ to air ] Agent Carter " . In June 2015 , FOX UK purchased the broadcast rights for the United Kingdom , with the series premiering on July 12 , 2015 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In the lead up to the airing of the series , Atwell made several appearances as Carter in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s second season . Footage from the first episode was shown at New York Comic Con on October 10 , 2014 , and again in ABC 's one @-@ hour television special , Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp to Pop ! , which aired in November 2014 . The first teaser for the series debuted during Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on October 28 , 2014 , with the tagline " Sometimes the best man for the job ... is a woman . " Though the trailer itself was received positively , the tagline was criticized as " awful " and " ridiculous " , and Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said " I get that one of the themes of the show will be Peggy dealing with the sexism of the time , but these ads exist in 2014 , not 1945 . Please find a new tagline . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The season was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on September 18 , 2015 , as an Amazon.com exclusive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 95 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 9 / 10 based on 42 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Focusing on Peggy Carter as a person first and an action hero second makes Marvel 's Agent Carter a winning , stylish drama with bursts of excitement and an undercurrent of cheeky fun " . Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 73 out of 100 based on 27 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Brian Lowry , reviewing the two @-@ part premiere for Variety , felt that giving Atwell her own television series was " a pretty smart bet " by Marvel , and he called the episodes " considerable fun " . He noted the period setting as contributing to this , and positively mentioned the score by composer Christopher Lennertz . Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly felt that " the show isn 't as retro @-@ stylish as it thinks it is ... the first hour of Agent Carter feels like an above @-@ average episode of Young Indiana Jones Chronicles " , noting that it tonally aims for His Girl Friday , Dick Tracy , and Alias ( " A tough tonal mixture on a weekly broadcast budget , but also an ambition worth pursuing " ) , but praised Atwell 's performance , calling her " a delight " and " firing on all cylinders " . Franich was negative about what he saw to be common MCU tropes , notably " Somebody named Stark invented something dangerous ; everyone wants an All @-@ Important Glowing Thing ; there 's an implicit promise that nothing will be solved for weeks / years to come . " Though he was wary about the series being forced to contribute to the rest of the MCU , he did note that " Agent Carter feels pleasantly segmented off from the greater Marvel Machinery " . 
 Eric Goldman of IGN gave the first season an 8 @.@ 8 out of 10 , saying , " Agent Carter didn 't need to succeed by setting up something to pay off in Guardians of the Galaxy 2 – it just needed to be an entertaining , involving show . And boy , was it . " He also praised the Peggy / Jarvis dynamic , the MCU tie @-@ ins and connections the series included , such as the Black Widow program , and the strong portrayals of the season 's supporting characters . Amy Ratcliffe at Nerdist called the season " a memorable splash " a noted that the lack of filler in the short season lead to " action @-@ packed but not overstuffed " episodes . She praised the " period aspect that 's defined so well by music , sets , and costumes " as placing the series " head and shoulders above others " , and called the cast " eminently talented " . On the other hand , Lowry ultimately found the series " just didn 't have legs " , saying that after the premiere it " meandered through several episodes that merely seemed to inch the story along , rallying only slightly in the not wholly satisfying conclusion . " He felt that outside of Atwell 's Carter and D 'Arcy 's Jarvis that characters were not developed enough , and said that the MCU tie @-@ in with Toby Jones ' Arnim Zola made the series seem like " a footnote " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Maureen Ryan of Variety named the show one of the Top 20 Best New Shows of 2015 , while Digital Spy ranked it 10th on their Best TV Shows of 2015 list . The A.V. Club named Atwell 's performance as one of the " Best Individual Performances " of 2015 . 
 = Banksia aquilonia = 
 Banksia aquilonia , commonly known as the northern banksia , is a tree in the family Proteaceae native to north Queensland on Australia 's northeastern coastline . With an average height of 8 m ( 26 ft ) , it has narrow glossy green leaves up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long and 6 to 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) high pale yellow flower spikes , known as inflorescences , appearing in autumn . As the spikes age , their flowers fall off and they develop up to 50 follicles , each of which contains two seeds . 
 Alex George described the plant in his 1981 monograph of the genus Banksia as a variety of Banksia integrifolia , but later reclassified it as a separate species . Genetic studies show it to be related to Banksia plagiocarpa , Banksia oblongifolia and Banksia robur . The species is found in wet sclerophyll forest and rainforest margins on sandy soils . Banksia aquilonia regenerates after bushfire by regrowing from epicormic buds under its bark . It is rarely cultivated . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia aquilonia grows as a tall shrub or small tree up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) high , though plants up to 15 m ( 49 ft ) have been recorded . It has hard , fissured , grey bark , and narrow elliptic or lanceolate leaves measuring 5 – 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) long by 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide with entire ( straight ) margins and acute tips . They are a smooth shiny green above and white below with a prominent midrib covered in red @-@ brown hair . The brownish new growth appears in summer . The plant is in bloom from March to June . Flowers occur in Banksia 's characteristic vertical flower spike , an inflorescence made up of hundreds of pairs of flowers densely packed in a spiral around a woody axis . B. aquilonia 's flower spike is a pale yellow colour , roughly cylindrical , 6 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) high , and up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter . The tubular perianths of the individual flowers are 2 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 – 1 @.@ 14 in ) long . These open at maturity ( anthesis ) to release the styles . All old flower parts fall away as up to 50 oval follicles develop on the bare woody spike . The follicles measure 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) long , 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 35 in ) high , and 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) wide . Furry at first , they become smooth with age and open when ripe , and their two half @-@ oval valves split to release the one or two seeds they contain . The obovate dark grey @-@ brown to black seeds sandwich a woody separator . Measuring 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long , they are made up of a wedge @-@ shaped seed body , 0 @.@ 8 – 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 1 in ) wide . The woody separator is the same shape as the seed , with an impression where the seed body lies next to it . Seedlings have bright obovate green cotyledons around 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) long . Juvenile leaves are narrower , measuring 7 – 24 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 4 in ) long and 0 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide , and often have serrate ( toothed ) margins . 
 Although the inflorescences of Banksia aquilonia are similar to B. integrifolia , the leaves are marked in their differences — the midrib on the leaves ' undersides is distinctively covered in short reddish @-@ brown hairs and the leaves are spirally arranged on the branches rather than in whorls as in all B. integrifolia subspecies . It was these differences that George felt were distinctive enough for it to be separate it as a full species from B. integrifolia . The overall habit of a Banksia aquilonia tree resembles that of B. integrifolia , though is generally smaller . The southernmost populations of B. aquilonia are separated from the northernmost B. integrifolia occurrence by 200 km ( 120 mi ) , hence location is helpful in identification . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 Field volunteers for The Banksia Atlas recorded plants with large adult and juvenile leaves up to 38 cm ( 15 in ) long along the Tully to Mission Beach Road , and a population of smaller shrub @-@ sized plants to 3 m ( 10 ft ) high with small narrow leaves 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long and 0 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide at Coronation Lookout in <unk> National Park , plants with normal morphology occurring further down the mountain . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia aquilonia was first described by Alex George in 1981 as a variety of Banksia integrifolia ( coast banksia ) , from a specimen collected at Witts Lookout in Crystal Creek National Park south of Ingham on 12 April 1975 . The species name is the Latin adjective <unk> , meaning " northern " , as it was the most northerly form of B. integrifolia . In 1996 Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a cladistic analysis of Banksia based on morphology , in which this taxon stood out as the only member of B. integrifolia to be both morphologically and geographically distinct from other infraspecific taxa . They also noted that there were no intermediate plants between what was then known as B. integrifolia var. aquilonia and other populations of B. integrifolia . On this basis they would have liked to promote it to species rank , but did not because their inferred phylogeny suggested that this taxon arose from within B. integrifolia . They were unwilling to render B. integrifolia paraphyletic by elevating this taxon to species rank , and they were equally unwilling to elevate all four varieties to species rank , since the others all had significant overlaps in distribution and morphology . Therefore , they simply promoted all four to subspecies rank . This example has since been held up as an interesting case study on how the concept of species should be defined , as it presents the problem of " a monophyletic group comprising a paraphyletic basal group of incompletely differentiated geographic forms within which is nested at least one divergent , <unk> taxon that invites treatment as a species . " 
 George promoted it to species rank on the basis of its distinctive leaf arrangement and midrib in 1996 . Thus its full name with author citation is " Banksia aquilonia ( <unk> ) <unk> " . It is placed in subgenus Banksia , section Banksia and series Salicinae . Its placement within Banksia may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Salicinae 
 Banksia dentata - Banksia aquilonia - Banksia integrifolia - Banksia plagiocarpa - Banksia oblongifolia - Banksia robur - Banksia conferta - Banksia paludosa - Banksia marginata - Banksia canei - Banksia saxicola 
 Series Grandes 
 Series Banksia 
 Series Crocinae 
 Series Prostratae 
 Series Cyrtostylis 
 Series Tetragonae 
 Series Bauerinae 
 Series Quercinae 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 Despite initially assigning Banksia aquilonia to be variety of B. integrifolia , George noted that it had affinities with the then newly described species Banksia plagiocarpa , with which it co @-@ occurs on and near Hinchinbrook Island in north Queensland . 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . Banksia aquilonia formed a clade with B. plagiocarpa , B. oblongifolia and B. robur , rather than B. integrifolia . Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and published B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. aquilonia is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 Common names include northern banksia , white banksia , honeysuckle or white bottlebrush . A local aboriginal name is <unk> , in the <unk> and <unk> languages . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia aquilonia occurs in coastal areas of northern Queensland from the Cedar Bay National Park to Paluma Range National Park , in areas with an annual rainfall of 1 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 to 157 in ) . It occurs from near sea level to an altitude of 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , in a variety of habitats and aspects . It grows in wet sclerophyll forest or rainforest margins , on plateaus , ridges , slopes and low @-@ lying swampy areas on sandy or rocky soils , generally of granitic origin , or sometimes clay . It commonly grows with tree species such as the pink bloodwood ( Corymbia intermedia ) , forest red gum ( Eucalyptus tereticornis ) , swamp turpentine ( <unk> suaveolens ) , forest oak ( Allocasuarina torulosa ) , and black sheoak ( A. littoralis ) , and understorey species such as coin spot wattle ( Acacia <unk> ) and yellow wattle ( A. flavescens ) . Much of its lowland habitat in the Wet Tropics has been degraded or fragmented . Although the range overlaps with B. dentata , the two species are not known to occur together . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Banksia aquilonia regenerates after bushfire by regrowing from epicormic buds under its bark . Regeneration from root suckers has also been recorded . Unlike many banksia species which release their seed after bushfires , Banksia aquilonia sets seed when the follicles mature . 
 Banksia inflorescences are energy @-@ rich sources of food , and B. aquilonia nectar is a likely food item of the endangered mahogany glider ( Petaurus gracilis ) , as well as many other mammals and birds . Avian species observed visiting the flower spikes include the bridled honeyeater , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater , eastern spinebill and rainbow lorikeet . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia aquilonia adapts readily to cultivation in humid or temperate climates , but is rarely cultivated . A fast @-@ growing plant , it can grow in acidic soils from pH 3 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 5 . Propagation is generally by seed , and plants flower at four to six years of age . Vegetative propagation is possible from semi @-@ hardened cuttings of pencil thickness . The flower spikes attract birds to the garden . It can also be grown in a pot , with its branches heavily pruned to keep foliage dense . 
 = A Hero Sits Next Door = 
 " A Hero Sits Next Door " is the fifth episode of season one of Family Guy , originally aired on Fox on May 2 , 1999 . The episode features the introduction of Joe Swanson , who would become a main character in the series . Peter Griffin must find a replacement player for an upcoming softball game . Peter eventually convinces Joe to play for the team after learning that he played baseball in college . When Joe shows up the following morning , Peter realizes that Joe is in a wheelchair . Joe turns out to be a great player , and the team wins the game . Peter becomes jealous of Joe and tries to become a hero . In a subplot , Meg Griffin tries to get Joe 's son Kevin to notice her . 
 " A Hero Sits Next Door " was directed by Monte Young and written by the writing team of Mike Barker and Matt Weitzman . It featured guest performances from actress Suzie Plakson , figure skater Michelle Kwan , as well as actors Wally Wingert and Carlos Alazraqui . Much of the episode features a cutaway style of humor that is typically used in Family Guy , many of which feature cultural references and include Super Friends , Pez , Teletubbies , and the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy . 
 The episode received positive praise from television critics , who considered it to be a memorable introduction for the character of Joe Swanson ; certain critics praised the fight sequence between Joe and The Grinch , while others criticized the episode 's cutaway gags as well as its plot twists , which they regarded as " odd " and " counter @-@ intuitive " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 At the Happy @-@ Go @-@ Lucky Toy Factory , safety inspector Peter Griffin is working when his boss Mr. Weed introduces Guillermo , a ringer who will attempt to assist the company in winning the annual softball game . At home , Peter 's wife Lois informs him of their new neighbors , the Swanson family , and wishes for him to make friends with them ; however , Peter is not interested and leaves with Brian for softball practice . The regular pitcher is absent , so Peter fills in . He injures Guillermo with a wild pitch during practice and must find a new player to replace him or be fired . 
 Meanwhile , Lois goes with her son Stewie to meet the new neighbors . She is greeted by Bonnie Swanson and soon after meets her husband Joe , while Meg falls in love with Joe and Bonnie 's son , Kevin . When Peter comes home he is rude to the Swansons . Later that night , Peter thinks about who can replace Guillermo , and Lois mentions that Joe played baseball in college . Peter sees Joe in his truck and sitting down on a chair later that day , which prevents him from seeing he is in a wheelchair , and invites him to join the team . The next morning Peter and Mr. Weed are at the field . Joe shows up for the game and Peter and Mr. Weed are horrified to see that he is in a wheelchair . However , Joe turns out to be a fantastic player and leads the team to victory . That night Joe has a celebratory party in his house , where he reveals that he is a police officer who was crippled after fighting The Grinch on the roof of an orphanage ( this was later revealed to be a cover up , in the 2012 episode Joe 's Revenge ) and soon becomes very popular with the neighbors , including Peter 's family . 
 Joe 's popularity makes Peter jealous , so Peter wants to be a hero too . He attempts to stop a bank robbery to compete with Joe 's heroism . Peter and Brian are taken hostage in the process , but Joe convinces the robbers to surrender . An applauding crowd hoists Joe away in praise , leaving his wheel chair empty . Stewie tries to unlock the " power of the wheelchair " , but Lois manages to remove him and puts a pacifier in his mouth , so he quickly falls asleep . After the hostage situation , Peter is disappointed , but his family consoles him by telling him that he is their hero . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Hero Sits Next Door " was written by Mike Barker and Matt Weitzman , the first time writing for the series for both , and directed by Monte Young , also his first Family Guy episode . During the production of the episode , the writers shared one office lent to them by the King of the Hill production crew . MacFarlane compared the production of the first season to a college project ; the only difference was that he was being funded this time . The guest cast for the episode featured actress Suzie Plakson , figure skater Michelle Kwan , as well as actors Wally Wingert and Carlos Alazraqui . Recurring guest voice actors included writer and animator Butch Hartman . " A Hero Sits Next Door " serves as the introduction of police lieutenant and neighbor of the Griffin family Joe Swanson ( voiced by Patrick Warburton ) , as well as his family consisting of his wife Bonnie ( Jennifer Tilly ) and their son Kevin ( Jon Cryer ) . 
 During the production of the episode they developed a way to hide the fact that Joe used a wheelchair . This was done by showing the character Joe from the waist up during part of the episode . " A Hero Sits Next Door " is notable as it is the first episode of Family Guy not to feature words in its title pertaining to " Death " or " Murder " . This convention was originally started due to creator Seth MacFarlane being a fan of 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology Suspense ; however , this convention was dropped after individual episodes became hard to identify and the novelty wore off . 
 I 'm a huge fan of old radio dramas and I came up with this idea , when the show was still trying to find itself at the beginning , that the title of each episode would be a very ominous title borrowed from an old 40 's suspense drama . And thus we had titles like " Death Has a Shadow " and " Mind Over Murder " that had nothing to do with the show . We realized that that kind of stopped being funny after four episodes . It 's two in the morning and we 're trying to come up with these things . So we kind of grew out of that and moved on to more traditional titles . 
 The story of how Joe was crippled has recently been retconned in a recent episode ( Joe 's Revenge ) . In the episode , Joe reveals that he was actually paralyzed by a drug dealer , whom he was investigating , after accidentally giving himself away . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Super Friends make an appearance in the episode when Peter references a time when he played strip poker in the Hall of Justice . After Wonder Woman loses and takes off her clothes , Robin simply stares at Peter instead of a naked Wonder Woman . 
 The episode also makes a historical reference when a boy is showing his friend a Pez dispenser that looks like John F. Kennedy 's head . The dispenser is then destroyed by a policeman 's bullet . The boy says , " Oh well , at least I still have my Bobby Kennedy Pez dispenser " . This is a reference to the assassinations of both John and Robert Kennedy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " A Hero Sits Next Door " received favorable reviews from television critics . In a 2008 review , Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the episode , rating it a 7 @.@ 9 / 10 and calling it " a great introduction for Joe " . He noted that the fight sequence between Joe and the Grinch " paved the road for many action sequences to come " . He also praised the strong emphasis on storyline . He deemed some of the gags " classic " including the gag featuring the Super Friends . Robin Pierson of The TV Critic wrote a more mixed review , rating the episode a 55 out of 100 ; Pierson found the plot odd , stating that its twists were counter intuitive , causing them to be less funny and not stand out . He also felt the cutaway jokes were short and average . He commented positively on some of the jokes , and the inclusion of Peter 's new neighbors saying they provided a new dynamic to the series . 
 = Congregation Beth Israel ( Scottsdale , Arizona ) = 
 Congregation Beth Israel ( Hebrew : בית ישראל ) is a Jewish congregation located at <unk> North 56th Street in Scottsdale , Arizona . Formally incorporated in 1920 , it affiliated with the Reform Judaism in 1935 . 
 Abraham Lincoln Krohn was rabbi of Beth Israel from 1938 to 1953 , and during his tenure the congregation grew from under 100 to almost 600 member families . He was succeeded by Albert Plotkin , who served for almost 40 years . 
 Beth Israel 's original building in Downtown Phoenix , constructed in 1921 – 1922 , is listed on both the city ’ s historic property register and the National Register of Historic Places . After being sold in 1949 , it housed churches until 2002 , when the Jewish community repurchased it . In 2007 the Arizona Jewish Historical Society started a $ 4 million campaign to restore it and convert it into a museum . 
 As of 2014 , Beth Israel was the oldest synagogue in the Phoenix metropolitan area . The senior rabbi was Stephen Kahn , the associate rabbi was Rony Keller , and the cantor was Jaime Shpall . 
 = = Early years , first building = = 
 Jewish settlers in Phoenix began gathering for High Holiday services as early as 1906 . A formal congregation was established by Barnett E. Marks , a lawyer from Chicago , who held services in a room over <unk> 's saloon , and also organized a Sunday School to provide a Jewish education for his two sons . By 1918 the congregation was calling itself " Emanuel " , and holding services in English and Hebrew on the Jewish Festivals . In 1920 , the congregation incorporated as " Congregation Beth Israel " . Its first rabbi was David L. <unk> , and its first president was Charles Steinberg . <unk> would serve until 1924 . 
 Services were held in a number of temporary locations . In 1915 and 1917 respectively the local chapters of the B 'nai B 'rith and the National Council of Jewish Women were formed . Together they purchased a church in 1921 , and converted it for use as a Phoenix 's first synagogue by the Phoenix Hebrew Center Association . The Association soon became defunct , and the building was taken over by the Congregation Beth Israel . 
 That year the congregation raised $ 14 @,@ 000 ( today $ 186 @,@ 000 ) and hired the architectural firm Lescher , <unk> and Mahoney to design and construct a synagogue building near Central Avenue and Culver Street , in Downtown Phoenix . The building , a simple , stuccoed , gable @-@ end @-@ to @-@ the @-@ street Mission Revival Style structure , was constructed in 1921 – 1922 , and an annex added in 1930 . 
 At the time the building was constructed , the Phoenix area had only 120 Jewish residents . The synagogue served as a cultural center for the Jewish community , including hosting communal Passover <unk> , at a time when Jews faced discrimination at hotels and other places of public gathering . 
 During the 1920s the synagogue had difficulty keeping rabbis . Most would only stay for a few years , and one in particular was suspected of being a charlatan ; " [ t ] he rabbi college where he claimed he attended had no record of him . " A.I. Goldberg served from 1924 to 1925 , Adolph Rosenberg from 1926 to 1929 . 
 In 1930 , the congregation became divided over the need for the Jewish community to hire a shochet to ritually slaughter animals for kosher meat , and over whether the synagogue should hire a Reform or Conservative rabbi . More traditional members broke away to form the Beth El Congregation , affiliated with Conservative Judaism . 
 That year Samuel Dodkin Hurwitz was hired as Beth Israel 's rabbi . Born in <unk> , Belarus in 1901 , his family emigrated to the United States in 1903 . He graduated from the University of Cincinnati in 1926 , and was ordained at Hebrew Union College in 1929 . His first pulpit , from 1929 to 1930 , was Temple Emanuel in Davenport , Iowa . In 1934 he was appointed to the board of the Phoenix Public Library . In 1935 he left Beth Israel to become rabbi at Temple Beth El in Benton Harbor , Michigan . 
 Philip W. Jaffa , ordained at Hebrew Union College in 1928 , joined as rabbi in 1935 . He adopted the Reform Judaism 's Union Prayer Book and its religious school curriculum , and added choir music to the services . That year much of the synagogue building was destroyed by a fire , and Jaffa 's whole library was lost . The congregation re @-@ built the structure , extensively remodeling the sanctuary , and added a religious school building / classroom annex . Jaffa would serve until 1938 . 
 = = Krohn era = = 
 Abraham Lincoln Krohn became Beth Israel 's rabbi in 1938 , replacing Jaffa , who was not well . At the time , the congregation had 100 or fewer member families , and 64 children in the religious school . Born in 1893 and named after Abraham Lincoln , Krohn was one of eight children of Russian Jews who had immigrated to the United States . His first career was as a social worker , but during a chance meeting , Stephen Samuel Wise was " so impressed with Krohn 's compassion , intellect and eloquence [ that ] he strongly urged him to consider a career in the rabbinate . " Krohn entered Wise 's Jewish Institute of Religion in 1926 , and graduated as a rabbi in 1930 . He then served as assistant rabbi of Temple Sholom in Plainfield , New Jersey for a year , then as senior rabbi at Temple Albert in Albuquerque , New Mexico for almost seven years , before joining Beth Israel . 
 Krohn was heavily involved in the community . According to Ira Morton of the Arizona Jewish Historical Society : 
 The organizations he served in the capacity of president or board member include B 'nai Brith , the Urban League , the Maricopa Mental Health Association and Child Guidance Clinic , Phoenix Public Library , Phoenix Elementary School District , the American Red Cross , the Roosevelt Council of Boy Scouts , the United Fund ( later changed to United Way ) and the Jewish Family Service ( now Jewish Family & Children 's Service ) , which Krohn founded . Krohn also served as president of the Valley of the Sun Symphony Orchestra , which later became the Phoenix Symphony , moderator of a Phoenix town hall lecture series , lecturer in biblical literature at Arizona State University and as a civilian chaplain for neighboring military bases and hospitals during World War II . 
 During Krohn 's tenure the congregation began calling itself " Temple Beth Israel " , and under his leadership the synagogue flourished . 
 During World War II , Beth Israel provided religious services for servicemen stationed at Luke Air Force Base , and hosted dances for the military personnel there . In 1942 , the congregation started its Judaica library , which initially consisted of 60 works on one shelf . 
 By the late 1940s , the congregation had increased in size to approximately 300 families , and had outgrown its original facilities . The congregation moved to a more suburban location at Eleventh and Flower in 1949 , and formalized its relationship with the Reform movement by joining the Union of American Hebrew Congregations ( now the Union for Reform Judaism ) . The Central Avenue and Culver Street building was sold to the Southern Baptist Convention , and housed the First Chinese Baptist Church until 1981 , and then the Iglesia Bautista Central . By 2001 it was on the market again , and the Jewish community raised $ 540 @,@ 000 ( today $ 710 @,@ 000 ) to purchase it in 2002 . The building is listed on both the city ’ s historic property register and the National Register of Historic Places . 
 When Krohn stepped down as rabbi in 1953 due to poor health , the congregation had grown to 538 families . Krohn had also been active in interfaith work , and in June , 1958 was named Man of the Year by the National Conference of Christians and Jews at its annual dinner . He was , however , too ill to attend , and died five months later . 
 = = Plotkin and Segel eras = = 
 By 1955 , Phoenix 's Jewish population had grown to over 3 @,@ 000 families , and the city still had two Jewish congregations , Beth Israel and Beth El . That year , with the support of Krohn , Albert Plotkin joined Beth Israel as rabbi . Born in 1920 and raised in South Bend , Indiana , his parents were immigrants from Russia . After getting an undergraduate degree from the University of Notre Dame , he entered Hebrew Union College in 1943 – on academic probation , because he had taken no Hebrew at Notre Dame . He was ordained by Hebrew Union College in 1948 , graduating with a Master of Hebrew Letters . Plotkin had started his rabbinic career as assistant rabbi of Temple De Hirsch in Seattle , his first pulpit after ordination . There he met his future wife Sylvia Pincus , whose family were long @-@ time members of Temple De Hirsch . They married a year later , and shortly after moved to Spokane , Washington , where Plotkin became senior rabbi at Temple Emanuel . 
 During his tenure at Beth Israel , Plotkin was heavily involved in Phoenix 's Jewish and non @-@ Jewish communities . He was a strong Zionist at Hebrew Union College , at a time when the movement was unpopular there , and was later a staunch supporter of Israel . He was an advocate for civil rights , and a supporter of the arts . He founded the Jewish Studies program at Arizona State University and taught there , and volunteered for 25 years as a chaplain at Phoenix Veterans Hospital . In 1972 , the National Conference of Christians and Jews awarded him the National Award for Brotherhood . 
 Beth Israel added a " cultural and educational wing " to its Flower Street building in 1967 , and in it Sylvia Plotkin founded a Jewish museum . The museum had three galleries : one " house [ d ] artifacts from a Tunisian synagogue , a second [ held ] a Judaica collection that chronicle [ d ] the history of Arizona Jewry and a third [ was ] used for exhibitions . " Sylvia Plotkin would direct the museum until her death in 1996 , acquiring and mounting many exhibitions there . Renamed the " Sylvia Plotkin Judaica Museum " the day before her death , it was " one of the largest and most respected synagogue museums in the United States . " After Plotkin 's death , Pamela Levin became the museum 's director ; she had begun working with Plotkin as a volunteer in 1985 , and eventually earned a degree in museum studies . 
 Albert Plotkin would himself go on to serve as the congregation 's rabbi for almost 40 years , retiring in 1992 , and becoming rabbi emeritus . He loved opera music , and two years after retiring , he sang professionally with the Arizona Opera . The <unk> ' daughter Debra would become the founding artistic director of the Toronto Jewish Film Festival , and their daughter Janis was , for 21 years , one of the main forces behind the San Francisco Jewish Film Festival , and its executive director from 1994 to 2002 . 
 Plotkin was succeeded by Kenneth Segel in 1992 , and the following year Howard <unk> joined as cantor . In 1997 , the congregation moved to its current location at <unk> North 56th Street and Shea Boulevard . The 45 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 200 m2 ) building had a main sanctuary that seated 500 , and a chapel that seated 300 . The Torah ark was decorated with " fused glass surrounded by colored glass " . 
 <unk> left to join Temple Shalom in <unk> , New Jersey in 2000 , and was replaced by Andrew Meyer as cantor and Michael Sokol as " cantorial soloist " . Meyer had previously served for five years as spiritual leader of Temple Beth Emeth in Scottsdale , Arizona . Sokol , who grew up in Phoenix and had his Bar Mitzvah at Beth Israel , was a professor of voice and opera at University of California , Santa Barbara , and sang with New York 's Metropolitan Opera for three years . 
 Segel would serve as rabbi for until 2002 , moving to Temple Beth Or in Montgomery , Alabama . 
 = = Recent events = = 
 Stephen Kahn became Beth Israel 's rabbi in July 2003 . By then , membership was approximately 1 @,@ 000 families , the largest Jewish congregation in Arizona . The congregational library , which was open to the public , had grown to over 20 @,@ 000 volumes , making it one of the largest Judaica libraries in the Southwestern United States . 
 For financial reasons , Levin 's job as museum director was reduced from 25 to 12 hours per week in 2004 , and the position made volunteer in 2005 . By then , the museum had 8 @,@ 000 visitors a year , regular traveling exhibits , and the number of artifacts in it had grown to over 1 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2005 , the congregation purchased a 1 @.@ 25 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 51 ha ) lot across the street from its building , and the house on it , to accommodate future growth . At that time the synagogue had over 900 member families . 
 That year the congregation also reverted to its original name of " Congregation Beth Israel " . In Kahn 's view , " To me , a ' congregation ' represents people and community while the word " temple " represents a place or building . I would like us to be about the people . " 
 The Arizona Jewish Historical Society undertook a $ 4 million campaign in 2007 to raise the funds needed to restore the original synagogue building and other related structures to create the Cutler @-@ Plotkin Jewish Heritage Center . The plan was for the Center to include a museum and other public spaces that would be used to show the connection between the history of the Jewish community as part of Arizona 's history . A $ 150 @,@ 000 grant had been received in May of that year from the Arizona State Heritage Fund . By August 2008 much of the work of the first phase – the restoration of the sanctuary and annex – had been completed , and $ 2 @.@ 1 million of the $ 2 @.@ 6 million required for the work had been raised . 
 In 2007 , Beth Israel opened the Phoenix metropolitan area 's first <unk> ( ritual bath ) . It was , according to local Modern Orthodox rabbi Darren <unk> , " the first time in Jewish history that a <unk> has been built and approved under the auspices of Reform , Conservative and Orthodox rabbis . " 
 The congregation also hired Jaime Shpall as cantor that year , replacing Bruce Benson , who left in 2006 . Shpall , who graduated as a cantor from the Hebrew Union College in 1997 , had previously served as cantor of Congregation Beth Israel in Austin , Texas . Plotkin died in February 2010 . 
 As of 2014 , Beth Israel was the oldest congregation in the Phoenix metropolitan area . The senior rabbi was Stephen Kahn , the associate rabbi was Rony Keller , and the cantor was Jaime Shpall . The congregation also owned and operated Camp Daisy and Harry Stein , a Jewish overnight camp in Prescott National Forest near Prescott , Arizona , the only Jewish camp in the area . 
 = Hurricane Igor = 
 Hurricane Igor was the most destructive tropical cyclone to strike the Canadian island of Newfoundland on record . Igor originated from a broad area of low pressure that moved off the west coast of Africa on September 6 , 2010 . Tracking slowly westward , it developed into a tropical depression on September 8 and strengthened into tropical storm shortly thereafter . Higher wind shear temporarily halted intensification over the following days . On September 12 , explosive intensification took place , and Igor reached Category 4 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . By this time , Igor had already begun a prolonged turn around the western periphery of the subtropical ridge . Peaking with winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) , the cyclone began to enter an area unfavorable for continued strengthening , and Igor gradually weakened before brushing Bermuda as a minimal hurricane on September 20 . After turning northeastward , the system began an extratropical transition , which it completed shortly after striking southern Newfoundland . The remnants of Igor were later absorbed by another extratropical cyclone over the Labrador Sea on September 23 . 
 While over the open ocean , large swells produced by the hurricane caused the deaths of three people — two in the Caribbean and one in the United States . Passing west of Bermuda as a minimal hurricane , damage was limited primarily to trees and power lines , with roughly 27 @,@ 500 residences having lost electricity . Total losses in the territory were less than $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 2010 USD ) . In Newfoundland , damage wrought by Igor was extreme , claimed to be the worst ever seen in some areas . Large stretches of roadways were completely washed out by severe flooding , including a portion of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway , isolating approximately 150 communities . Throughout the region , one person was killed and damage costs amounted to a record $ 200 million ( 2010 CAD ) . In the storm 's wake , military personnel were deployed to assist in recovery efforts and aid distribution . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Igor was first identified as a broad area of low pressure accompanying a tropical wave over western Africa in early September 2010 . Tracking nearly due west , the system emerged into the eastern Atlantic Ocean on September 6 . Gradual development took place as convection – thunderstorm activity – consolidated around its center . At 0600 UTC on September 8 , the low was deemed sufficiently organized to be classified as a tropical depression while situated roughly 90 mi ( 140 km ) southeast of the Cape Verde Islands . Attaining gale @-@ force winds six hours later , the depression intensified into a tropical storm and was subsequently named Igor by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) . 
 Development of Igor quickly ceased once it was named as a nearby disturbance produced moderate wind shear over the storm , displacing convection from its center . Embedded within a monsoon trough over the eastern Atlantic , the system maintained a slow westward track as it weakened to a tropical depression on September 9 . Intensification resumed the following day once shear lessened and the dominant steering factor shifted to a mid @-@ tropospheric ridge north of Igor ; it would remain so throughout the remainder of the cyclone 's existence . Contrary to its earlier movement , the storm 's forward motion markedly increased . Following the development of an intermittent eye feature and steady convection around its center , Igor strengthened into a hurricane around 0000 UTC on September 12 . 
 Once classified a hurricane , Igor underwent explosive intensification over the following 24 hours . During this time , satellite observations indicated that the storm 's winds increased from 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and its barometric pressure decreased by 52 mbar ( hPa ; 1 @.@ 53 inHg ) . Near the end of this phase , forecasters at the NHC predicted that Igor would attain Category 5 status , the highest classification on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . With a symmetrical 17 mi ( 27 km ) wide eye , deep convection and spiral banding , Igor maintained Category 4 intensity for nearly five days . Minor fluctuations took place during this period as multiple eyewall replacement cycles occurred . After the first of these cycles , the hurricane is estimated to have reached its peak strength around 0000 UTC on September 15 with winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) and an estimated pressure of 924 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 29 inHg ) . By this time , Igor began a northwestward track as it executed a prolonged " C @-@ shaped " curve over the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Passing roughly 345 mi ( 555 km ) northeast of the Leeward Islands on September 17 , Igor gradually weakened as it experienced increased wind shear and dry air intrusion . Over the following several days , the storm became exceedingly large , with tropical storm @-@ force winds covering an area about 920 mi ( 1 @,@ 480 km ) wide . Due to an overestimated bias in Igor 's intensity , forecasts from the NHC showed that the storm would strike Bermuda as a major hurricane . However , weakening was more marked than anticipated and by the time its center neared the territory on September 20 , winds decreased to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Igor made its closest approach to Bermuda around 0230 UTC , passing roughly 40 mi ( 65 km ) to the west @-@ northwest . 
 Once north of Bermuda , Igor began to undergo an extratropical transition as it turned northeastward . Though deep convection was no longer consistently over its center , data from Hurricane Hunters continued to support hurricane intensity . Accelerating along the leading edge of a trough over the Canadian Maritimes , the storm intensified within a baroclinic zone as it neared Newfoundland . The interaction between these two systems allowed the hurricane to strengthen despite moving over decreasing sea surface temperatures . Around 1500 UTC on September 21 , Igor made landfall near Cape Race , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , slightly higher than several hours earlier . Shortly thereafter , the storm completed its transition into an extratropical cyclone as it became fully embedded within the baroclinic zone . After turning northwestward between Labrador and Greenland , the remnants of Igor were absorbed by another extratropical cyclone on September 23 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Cape Verde and Leeward Islands = = = 
 Forming near the Cape Verde Islands , Igor prompted the issuance of tropical storm watches for the southern islands on September 8 . Though the storm passed relatively close to the region , only minimal effects were recorded . Once the cyclone tracked away from Cape Verde , the watches were discontinued on September 9 . 
 Although several hundred miles from the Leeward Islands , Igor produced large swells averaging 9 to 13 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 0 m ) in height , between September 16 and 21 . There were also large breaking waves of 15 to 20 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 1 m ) or higher . The prolonged period of this event resulted in minor coastal flooding in St. Croix . One person drowned near <unk> Beach Resort after being overcome by large swells . Similar conditions affected Puerto Rico where another person drowned . On several occasions , Luquillo was flooded by the surf , though no damage took place . In nearby Haiti , still reeling from a devastating earthquake in January , officials warned residents of possible relocation from " tent cities " to safer areas . An orange alert was declared across the country , indicating that heavy rains could result in flooding . Portions of the Greater Antilles were affected by large swells and rip currents for several days as Igor approached Bermuda . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Though Igor 's closest approach to the United States only brought it within 600 mi ( 970 km ) of land , its large circulation produced significant swells along the entire East Coast . High surf advisories were issued in Long Island , New York as waves of 6 to 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) affected the area . Rip currents in Florida pulled two people out to sea who were later rescued . One person drowned in Surf City , North Carolina after being overwhelmed by rough surf . Along the New Jersey coastline , waves averaging between 6 and 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 and 2 @.@ 7 m ) and dangerous rip currents were reported . 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 Long seen to be within Igor 's track , Bermuda was finally placed under a hurricane watch on September 17 as the threat became imminent . Later that day , the watch was upgraded to a warning as hurricane @-@ force winds were anticipated to impact the islands within the following 24 hours . This remained in place for nearly three days while Igor battered Bermuda . Following the passage of hurricane winds , the advisory was changed to a tropical storm warning early on September 20 before being discontinued later that day . 
 The Bermudian government closed its schools and the Bermuda International Airport on September 20 and 21 in anticipation of Igor . No evacuation plans were put in place , although a local high school was converted into a shelter for residents who felt unsafe in their homes . Residents boarded up structures with plywood in order to protect windows . Tourists on the island wanting to escape the storm left more than a week before Igor 's arrival . Additionally , a British Royal Navy vessel and helicopter were stationed offshore to assist with recovery efforts once the storm passed . Prior to Igor 's arrival , there were fears that the enormous hurricane would be worse than Hurricane Fabian in 2003 and could " flatten " the territory . These fears resulted from forecasts from the National Hurricane Center which indicated the storm would strike Bermuda as a Category 3 hurricane . However , following post @-@ storm analysis , it was found that the forecast model consensus overestimated the storm 's future intensity . 
 Although effects from Igor were observed in Bermuda for several days , relatively little rain fell , with the highest amount being 3 @.@ 19 in ( 81 mm ) . Winds proved to be the most significant factor ; sustained winds reached 91 mph ( 146 km / h ) and gusts peaked at 117 mph ( 188 km / h ) at an unofficial <unk> station on St. David 's Lighthouse . Additionally , a storm surge of 1 @.@ 75 ft ( 0 @.@ 53 m ) took place in St. George 's , this combined with tides to produce a storm tide of over 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 22 m ) . As the storm arrived , the island 's airport was shut down earlier than originally planned due to the threat of tornadoes . Against initial fears , Igor left relatively little damage across Bermuda . The most significant impact was from downed trees and powerlines which cut power to 27 @,@ 500 residents . A few emergency rescues had to be made during the storm but no injuries took place . The causeway @-@ bridge connecting St. George ’ s Islands to the main island of Bermuda sustained minor damage , leaving one lane closed for several days . Waves over 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) battered the coast , breaking several ships from their moorings and tossing them into rocks . Officials in Bermuda stated that the biggest loss from Igor would be lessened tourism revenue following a mass exodus prior to the hurricane 's arrival . Throughout the islands , damage from the storm was less than $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 On September 20 , roughly one day prior to Igor 's arrival in Atlantic Canada , the Canadian Hurricane Center ( CHC ) issued tropical storm watches and warnings for southern Newfoundland and the French territory of Saint Pierre and Miquelon . The following day the CHC issued a hurricane watch for the eastern and northern coasts . Although sustained hurricane @-@ force winds were recorded across parts of the island , warnings were not issued due to stronger @-@ than @-@ expected re @-@ intensification of the storm as it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Early on September 22 , all advisories were discontinued as Igor moved away from the region . In response to the storm 's arrival , schools were closed and several flights were delayed or canceled at St. John 's International Airport . Offshore , an oil rig with 110 personnel was mostly evacuated near the coast of Newfoundland on September 19 . In comparison to Hurricane Earl two weeks earlier , there was substantially less media attention given to Igor , attributed to the possibility of it going out to sea . 
 The combination of a stationary front and significant moisture from Hurricane Igor resulted in unprecedented rainfall across parts of eastern Newfoundland , leading to widespread flooding . In Bonavista , more than 10 in ( 250 mm ) was estimated to have fallen between September 20 and 21 . In St. Lawrence , a confirmed 9 @.@ 37 in ( 238 mm ) of rain fell , ranking Igor as the third @-@ wettest tropical cyclone in Canadian history . The widespread nature of heavy rains ranked the storm as a 1 @-@ in @-@ 100 year event . Similar to the rainfall , winds across eastern Newfoundland were exacerbated by the interaction of the front and Igor . In Cape Pine , near where the center of Igor tracked , sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and gusts to 107 mph ( 172 km / h ) battered the area . No records for sustained winds or gusts were broken ; however , it was noted as a 1 @-@ in @-@ 50 year event even with powerful winter storms taken into account . Along the coast , Igor produced a storm tide of 3 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) . Additionally , offshore waves reached immense heights , measured up to 83 @.@ 6 ft ( 25 @.@ 5 m ) ; one buoy reported a wave of 92 ft ( 28 m ) but data is subject to further analysis to verify it . 
 The most significant impacts from Igor were attributed to torrential rains , which led to excessive runoff and flash flooding . Several rivers rose to record levels across the Bonavista and Burin Peninsulas where many roads were washed out . Entire bridges , homes and portions of roads were destroyed . In some instances , flood waters were higher than entire homes . In response to the widespread floods , Newfoundland Power Inc. warned residents who still had power by the afternoon of September 21 to turn off their main electrical panel if water enters their basement . Much of St. Bernard 's – Jacques Fontaine had to be evacuated by boat during the storm as rising water obstructed all roads in and out of the small town . Portions of <unk> had to be evacuated under similar circumstances after a state of emergency was declared for the town . Water and sewage lines in Sunnyside broke due to flooding . In <unk> , downed power lines sparked two fires during the storm , both of which were put out by firefighters without injuries . 
 Roughly 150 communities were temporarily isolated as all roads leading to them were severely damaged or washed out . Overall damage to roadways was regarded as " colossal " by Tom <unk> , the minister for emergency preparedness . A 100 ft ( 30 m ) section of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway in Terra Nova National Park was severely eroded , leaving a large ravine behind and disconnecting the main population of Newfoundland from the rest of the island , while a bridge washout on the Burin Peninsula left 20 @,@ 000 people cut off from the rest of the island . Public infrastructure losses were estimated in excess of $ 100 million , mainly attributed to roadways . On Random Island , a man was killed when his driveway collapsed from flooding and he was swept out to sea . 
 In addition to flood damage , hurricane @-@ force winds downed trees and power lines over large areas and many homes were damaged to varying degrees . An estimated 50 @,@ 000 residences were left without electricity in the region . The small coastal community of South East Bight sustained some of the most significant wind damage where entire fishing sheds were hurled into the air . Along the East Coast hiking trail , an estimated 5 @,@ 000 trees were downed . In all , losses from the hurricane were placed at $ 200 million , ranking it as the costliest cyclone in Newfoundland history . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Igor 's wake , a state of emergency was declared for 30 communities in Newfoundland . The mayor of one of the towns affected by Igor , Sam <unk> , remarked that " We 've never seen such a violent storm before . " More than 50 families involved in the storm @-@ induced destruction were relocated to evacuation shelters . Electricity was gradually restored to residents ; by six days after the hurricane 's passage , a few hundred had yet to regain power . 
 In light of the widespread damage , 1 @,@ 000 personnel from the Canadian military were brought in for recovery efforts . The military operation , known as Operation Lama , was to last for the duration of the emergency phase in the immediate aftermath . An initial deployment of 120 soldiers and 40 vehicles arrived on September 25 from the Canadian Forces Base Gagetown in <unk> , New Brunswick arrived in Newfoundland . Three ships and a fleet of helicopters were called in for the distribution of emergency aid and the military set up temporary bridges while long @-@ term plans for reconstruction were made . Operation Lama also enabled partial repairs of several buildings , and simultaneously , emergency personnel surveyed roughly 500 mi ( 900 km ) of roads in Newfoundland . On September 27 , government officials stated that it would take months for cleanup efforts to finish . Ten days after the storm , six towns were still isolated as progress on temporary road reconstruction was being made only slowly . Allocation of military aid continued through October 6 , though the number of on @-@ scene personnel began to decrease two days earlier . 
 Roughly a month after the storm , a benefit concert was held in St. John 's . The concert raised about $ 400 @,@ 000 ( 2010 CAD ) toward storm relief in one night . In late October , the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador allocated $ 275 @,@ 000 in funds for 200 workers who lost their jobs after two fish processing plants were damaged in Marystown and Port Union . However , union leaders claimed that the assistance was insufficient and accounted for just 420 of 600 work hours . Following more than a year of discussions , the plant 's parent company , Ocean Choice International , decided to permanently shut down operations on December 2 , 2011 . Numerous insurance claims , reaching $ 65 million by early November , were made following Hurricane Igor 's landfall Over the course of the recovery phase , several complaints , including concerns lodged by church ministers , that relief funds for victims of the storm were not being distributed fast enough and the overall process was taking too long . Roughly ten months after the hurricane , work on permanent reconstruction of roadways began in several areas across the Burin Peninsula . By January 24 , 2011 , The Salvation Army received about $ 1 @.@ 6 million worth of donations for residents affected by Hurricane Igor , roughly half of which had been distributed at that point . An additional $ 200 @,@ 000 had been pledged by donors . 
 In June 2011 , a federal document detailing the actions made by province officials was released to be public and incited further outcry from residents affected by the storm . The main complaint raised was related to the delay in accepting federal aid despite the severity of the damage . In an email sent on September 21 , 2010 , Denys Doiron , the nation 's Emergency Preparedness and Response Officer , relayed that local emergency services reported Igor to be the worst disaster they have had to deal with . Doiron also stated that no requests for federal aid were made . 
 Nearly a year after the passage of Igor , a weather buoy from St. John 's was spotted near the Shetland Islands north of Scotland on September 12 , 2011 . In early October , Newfoundland was again struck by a tropical cyclone – Hurricane Ophelia . Though a weaker storm , Ophelia caused more damage than expected as it destroyed infrastructure repaired in the wake of Igor . The mayor of Marystown criticized government officials for not increasing the size of repairs , especially to culverts , to account for flooding . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Due to the extensive damage in Newfoundland , the name Igor was retired in the spring of 2011 by request of the Meteorological Service of Canada , and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . In Canada 's report to the World Meteorological Organization , it was stated to be a storm without parallel in the island 's history . This was only the second time that the Meteorological Service of Canada had requested that a hurricane name be retired ( the first was Hurricane Juan in 2003 ) . The hurricane is also considered a probable benchmark for future cyclones in the region , having illustrated to residents that they are not immune from hurricanes and their impacts . The name was replaced by Ian for 2016 . 
 = The Harbingers = 
 The Harbingers is an Australian video board game designed by Brett Clements and Phillip Tanner and published by Mattel as a major update to the <unk> series . The object of the game is to collect six different coloured " Keystones " , face player 's worst fear and thus beat the " Gatekeeper " . Each player adopts the persona of one of the " Harbingers " , otherwise must play as a " Soul Ranger " . The game is set in a place known as " The Other Side " . The Gatekeeper is to ensure the other characters do not " escape " from The Other Side . The game board is made up of a central hub and six two @-@ sided interchangeable " Provinces " which fit together , creating a hexagon . A videotape is included with the game , and acts as a game clock . The videotape stars <unk> <unk> as The Gatekeeper . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Game rules = = = 
 When they are ready , players roll the dice in turn , the one who rolls highest becoming the " Chosen One " who assembles the game board by connecting the Provinces to the central hub , creating a hexagon shape . The players write down their greatest fear on a slip of paper which is placed in the " well of fears " by the Chosen One . The Gatekeeper then starts the game , and the players , using their Numb Skulls , race to become a Harbinger by landing on the Harbinger 's headstone located in each province . If a player fails to make it to a headstone within ten minutes , they become Soul Rangers for the rest of the game . They must remain in the sewers until either they are released by the Gatekeeper , or collect the Keystone which allows them to release themselves . 
 Players who become Harbingers start collecting Keystones either by landing on them on the game board , or by taking them from other players by dueling . Soul Rangers cannot collect Keystones by landing on them ; instead , they chase down other players and steal their Keystones . Players must collect the six Keystones of different colours to win . Although players only need one keystone per colour , players can collect more than one which can prevent other players from completing the game . Each Keystone gives players different powers , depending on which Harbinger they are , the list of powers being described on the back of the character 's card . When players have collected the Keystones , they can win the game by returning home to the central hub . Then they must roll a six on the dice ; a fear is picked from the well of fears , and if it does not correspond to the player 's earlier expressed " greatest fear " , that player wins the game . Otherwise , players must return to their headstone and try again . If none of players is able to win the game within sixty minutes , the Gatekeeper is the winner . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The six Harbingers in the game are : <unk> the werewolf ; Hellin the poltergeist ; Khufu the mummy ; Baron Samedi the zombie ; Anne de Chantraine the witch , and Elizabeth Bathory the vampire . Each of the Harbingers is based on either a real person or a myth , except for Hellin . Hellin is the only Harbinger entirely created by Brett Clements . 
 Soul Rangers , players who have failed to become Harbingers , are described as miserable , skeletal scavengers , the scourge of The Other Side . Soul Rangers hunt down other players and steal their keystones . Soul Rangers were created during the game 's development . Brett Clements wanted to introduce characters that players did not want to become , but he later found that players enjoyed the anarchic role of the Soul Ranger . The final character in the game is the Gatekeeper , whose job is to make sure the other characters cannot escape from The Other Side to the real world . The Gatekeeper 's character is based on the old cemetery gatekeepers , whose job was to guard cemeteries from grave robbers . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 The game board is made up of the Central Hub and six two @-@ sided Provinces which fit together creating a hexagon . The Central Hub is made up of the Well of Fears , the home positions and the Ring Road . The Well of Fears is a cup with a lid that fits inside the hole in the middle of the Central Hub . Located around the Well of Fears are six numbered grooves , called " Home " ; players must start from and return to Home . The Home positions are connected to the Ring Road , a path that runs around the Central Hub . The Ring Road give players access to all the Provinces . 
 Each Province is a two @-@ sided interchangeable board , on one side of which is a Harbinger 's province while on the other are the sewers . The Provinces can be assembled in any order , which can allow different game experiences when the Provinces are changed . Each Province has its own headstone and is in the Harbinger 's colours . Both sides of the Province board have paths used by the players to move around the board . Located along the paths are the six Keystones for that colour Province , and three different game symbols : the black holes , the lighting bolts and the compasses . 
 The game includes six boomerang @-@ shaped slabs which allow players to store their character card , Numb Skull and collected Keystones . The character card has a photograph of the character on the front , and on the back a list of powers each keystone gives to the player . To move around the game board , players use their own character 's playing pieces : a vampire bat for Elizabeth Bathory , a cobra for Khufu , a top hat for Baron Samedi , an " H " building block for Hellin , a fang for <unk> , a cauldron for Anne de Chantraine and a Numb Skull for Soul Rangers . The Numb Skull is also used at the beginning of the game , before players become Harbingers . 
 = = = Videotape = = = 
 A VHS videotape is included with The Harbingers which is played during the game . The videotape begins with The Gatekeeper – played by <unk> <unk> – starting the game with " On your marks ... Get ready ... Get set ... Go ! " . As the game begins the game clock appears in the right @-@ hand corner of the screen , counting down from sixty minutes ; unless the game is won by a player within one hour the Gatekeeper is declared the winner . During the sixty minutes the Gatekeeper will appear on screen , to give players instructions or a choice between receiving a prize or imposing a penalty on an opponent . Players must carry out all instructions given by the Gatekeeper . When the Gatekeeper appears he demands that players stop and listen to him . He will not hold back from insulting players and is reluctant to reward or help players . During the game a computer @-@ generated storm can be seen in the background ; sometimes the storm partly covers the game clock . Along with the storm , spooky sounds and sometimes the Gatekeeper 's laughter can be heard . 
 During development there was a concern that the game might initially seem too complicated . At the end of the videotape there is a special fifteen @-@ minute presentation called the rules presentation in which a voice @-@ over along with the Gatekeeper explains the game , the characters and how to play . The rules presentation was created to help explain the game to new players . The videotape can be forwarded to the start of the instructions . During the rules presentation a game is played by actors who are dressed as three Harbingers – Baron Samedi , Anne de Chantraine and Elizabeth Bathory – and three Soul Rangers . The demonstration game is used throughout the rules presentation to help explain how to play the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 With the feedback received from players after the release of Nightmare , Brett Clements and Phillip Tanner started work on the major update to the series . They struck a deal with J. W. Spear & Sons , to use publishing experience and market research with Nightmare to help create the new game . The deal allowed J. W. Spear & Sons to have input into how the game was developed , which was not the case with Nightmare . Village Roadshow was also involved with the game 's development and with its release in the United States . The development ended six years after it started , with about six million dollars invested in the development of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Harbingers sold above the industry 's sales predictions in Australia and became one of the top ten best selling games in the United States and the United Kingdom , within months of its release . On the game 's release , Mattel launched a marketing campaign with a spot on MTV , cross @-@ promotions with soft drinks and a website for the game . 
 = = Expansions = = 
 = = = Booster tapes = = = 
 Two booster tapes were released following the success of The Harbingers . The tapes provide a challenging experience to The Harbingers for experienced players . The booster tapes run for forty @-@ five minutes instead of the sixty minutes of the original , and come with a new rule to limit the number of Keystones added to each province based on the number of players . Other than this limit the normal rules apply . 
 = = = The Soul Rangers = = = 
 A year later , an add @-@ on called The Soul Rangers was released . The add @-@ on allows players to play only as The Soul Rangers and is hosted by a Soul Ranger calling himself Dr. Mastiff . The add @-@ on was released because the creators found out that players enjoy causing damage as The Soul Rangers . 
 = Andreas Thorkildsen = 
 Andreas Thorkildsen ( born 1 April 1982 ) is a former Norwegian javelin thrower , born in Kristiansand . He is the first male javelin thrower in history to be European champion , World champion and Olympic champion . He was Olympic champion in 2004 and 2008 , European champion in 2006 and 2010 , World Champion in 2009 as well as a three @-@ time silver medalist at the World championships in 2005 , 2007 and in 2011 . He set a world junior record in 2001 . He has a personal best of 91 @.@ 59 m set in 2006 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Thorkildsen 's father Tomm Thorkildsen is a former javelin thrower , achieving a personal best throw of 71 @.@ 64 metres in 1974 . His mother Bente ( née Amundsen ) became national champion in the 100 metres hurdles in 1972 , representing Hamar IL . He has one older brother . He took his secondary education at Kristiansand Cathedral School . 
 = = = Relationship with Christina Vukicevic = = = 
 Thorkildsen 's relationship with the Norwegian hurdler Christina Vukicevic generated some unwanted publicity on his part . When Thorkildsen and Vukicevic won the King 's Cup for men and women respectively at the 2006 Norwegian championships , Thorkildsen left the stadium to avoid photographers , whom he had shown the finger the previous day . Thorkildsen has performed as a fashion model for former footballer Martin <unk> , fronting his 2007 winter and autumn collections . 
 In March 2011 Christina Vukicevic and Thorkildsen announced in Norwegian media that they no longer were a couple . 
 = = Career = = 
 Thorkildsen took up javelin throwing at the age of 11 , and was coached by his father Tomm until 1999 . He established numerous national boys ' records as a teenager . In 1996 he set a national record for the 14 years ' class ( 53 @.@ 82 m ) , in 1998 for the 16 years ' class ( 61 @.@ 57 m ) , in 1999 for the 17 years ' class ( 72 @.@ 11 m ) , and in 2000 a record for the 18 years ' class ( 77 @.@ 48 m ) . In 1999 he finished seventh at the European Junior Championships . 
 In 2000 Thorkildsen took his first medal at the Norwegian championships , finishing in silver medal position behind Ronny Nilsen . His form earned Thorkildsen his first call @-@ up to the Norwegian European Cup team . In October he participated at the World Junior Championships and received a silver medal behind winner <unk> Pienaar from South Africa . 
 = = = 2001 – 2003 = = = 
 In 2001 Thorkildsen moved to Oslo and started competing for the club SK Vidar under coach Åsmund Martinsen , a former javelin thrower who won the bronze medal at the 1994 Norwegian Championships , and had a career best throw of 68 @.@ 12 metres . The cooperation proved fruitful as Thorkildsen soon broke the 80 metre barrier , throwing 83 @.@ 87 metres on Fana stadion in June . This was a world junior record till 2011 . Participating in his second European Junior Championships , he won a silver medal behind Aleksandr Ivanov . Both competed at the World Championships in Edmonton , but while Ivanov managed to reach the final , Thorkildsen finished last in the entire competition with only 68 @.@ 41 metres . When asked to comment on his own throwing he described it as " completely awful " . 
 On the national level Thorkildsen became Norwegian champion for the first time . In August he competed in a discus throw meet at Sognsvann , establishing a personal best of 83 @.@ 02 metres . He has not competed on national level in other athletic events . 
 In 2002 , he recorded a season best of 83 @.@ 43 metres in June before witnessing his form gradually declining over the next months . At his first European Championships , which were held in August in Munich , he again failed to progress from the qualifying round . With a best throw of 78 @.@ 36 metres he finished fifteenth overall , 68 centimetres behind Ari <unk> who secured the last spot in the final . Although Thorkildsen only managed to take silver at the Norwegian championships behind Pål Arne Fagernes , his result of 83 @.@ 43 metres was enough to front the national top list in javelin throw for the first time . 
 Next year he finished eleventh at the 2003 World Championships in Paris , his first major international final . His performance and throw of 77 @.@ 75 metres was slightly disappointing as he had thrown 79 @.@ 44 metres in the qualifying round , having travelled to Paris with a personal best of 85 @.@ 72 metres , established in June in Ventspils . On the lighter side he took his second national title , consolidating his spot as Norway 's leading javelin thrower . 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 In 2004 Thorkildsen faced competition from Ronny Nilsen , who threw 84 @.@ 73 metres in May . Although Thorkildsen did not retake the national number one spot right away , he did display increasing form in the preparations for the Olympic Games . He qualified for the Olympics with an 84 @.@ 12 m throw at the Bergen Bislett Games , an event which was won by Breaux Greer with a North American record and world leading throw of 87 @.@ 39 metres . On 27 July Thorkildsen took his first victory in an IAAF Grand Prix meet , beating Breaux Greer by a comfortable margin at the DN Galan meet in Stockholm . Three days later he improved his season best to 84 @.@ 45 metres at the London Grand Prix at Crystal Palace . 
 Even though several throwers , including Nilsen , still towered above Thorkildsen on the world list , the Olympic javelin contest was regarded as widely open – " one of the most open finals in Olympic history " , according to the IAAF Olympic coverage . Thorkildsen threw 81 @.@ 74 m in the qualification round , barely earning a mention in the event report as he safely passed the automatic qualifier mark of 81 metres to go through to the final . Breaux Greer won the qualification with 87 @.@ 25 m , but left the stadium in a limping state . In the javelin final held two days later , Thorkildsen opened with an 84 @.@ 82 m release which saw him ranked third at the end of the first round . <unk> <unk> of Latvia had thrown a personal best of 84 @.@ 95 m to earn a surprising lead ahead of reigning World champion Sergey Makarov . In the second round Thorkildsen threw a personal best of 86 @.@ 50 metres . As neither Aleksandr Ivanov , Greer nor anyone else managed to beat this , Thorkildsen won a surprising Olympic gold medal with <unk> and Makarov staying in place to take the silver and bronze medals respectively . Commenting on his win , Thorkildsen described the feeling as " completely insane " . A second place behind Breaux Greer at the World Athletics Final in Monte Carlo rounded off the season . 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 The most important event of 2005 was the World Championships . The preparations for this event looked promising for Thorkildsen as he improved his personal best to 86 @.@ 82 metres in <unk> in June , beating the Norwegian record of Pål Arne Fagernes . Tero Pitkämäki from Finland , who achieved a world leading result of 91 @.@ 53 metres in the same competition , seemed a likely contender for the world champion title . In July , When Thorkildsen further improved his national record to 87 @.@ 66 metres at the Bislett Games , reigning world champion Sergey Makarov had already thrown 90 @.@ 33 metres two weeks earlier at the Russian Championships in Tula . Going into the World Championships , Pitkämäki was still in first place on the world top list ahead of Makarov and Thorkildsen , who in turn was ahead of Breaux Greer by one centimetre . 
 In the qualification round at the World Championships , held in windy conditions on the Helsinki Olympic Stadium , only Pitkämäki , Makarov and Thorkildsen managed to beat the automatic qualification mark of 81 metres . Rain supplemented the wind the following day , constituting difficult weather conditions for the javelin final . Thorkildsen , in the lead after three rounds with 86 @.@ 18 metres , eventually finished in silver medal position behind Andrus <unk> of Estonia as the latter threw 87 @.@ 17 metres in the fourth round . 
 Pitkämäki , who finished a disappointing fourth at the World Championships , bounced back to win the World Athletics Final ahead of Thorkildsen , despite the latter improving his national record to 89 @.@ 60 metres . 89 @.@ 60 metres was enough to finish third on the world top list that season , behind Pitkämäki and Makarov . 
 = = = 2006 – 2008 = = = 
 In 2006 Thorkildsen returned to his original club <unk> IF , having represented SK Vidar in competitions the five previous seasons . In May he broke the 90 metre barrier for the first time , with 90 @.@ 13 metres from the Doha Super Grand Prix . At the Bislett Games he yet again improved his record to 91 @.@ 59 metres , reaching his goal of 300 feet . As no one managed to top his 91 @.@ 59 metre result , he entered the 2006 European Championships as a favorite , together with Tero Pitkämäki who had won the IAAF Golden League meet in Paris . Thorkildsen won the event with 88 @.@ 78 metres , having led the competition since the second round . Thorkildsen finished the season by winning his first World Athletics Final as well as the 2006 IAAF World Cup . With 91 @.@ 59 metres he finished on top of the world list for the first time . 
 Thorkildsen 's main goals for the 2007 season were the Bislett Games and the 2007 World Championships in Osaka , as well as winning the Golden League jackpot . In addition he aims to beat the old record of Terje Pedersen , who threw 91 @.@ 72 metres with the old javelin implement , by throwing in the range of 93 to 94 metres . The season started in a mediocre manner as he threw 81 @.@ 10 metres in Dakar and 86 @.@ 39 m in Doha . He recovered his form at the world championships , but once again could only achieve a silver medal , this time losing to Pitkämäki finally fulfilling his potential with a throw of 90 @.@ 33 ( though he 'd already been assured the medal by this point ) . 
 In 2008 Thorkildsen won the Golden League event at Bislett in Oslo , his main goal besides the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . He won a gold medal in the Olympics where he set a new Olympic record with 90 @.@ 57 metres . Thorkildsen dominated the competition , leading it from his first throw and making the two longest throws in the competition without using his last attempt . All of his 5 throws would have given a medal . Thorkildsen also won the javelin competition of the 2008 IAAF Golden League in Zürich on 29 August . 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 = = = 
 He became the first male javelin thrower in history to hold all three titles of European champion , World champion and Olympic champion , winning IAAF World Championship in Berlin with <unk> Thorkildsen also has the season 's leading throw , with <unk> achieved in Zürich on 28 August . 
 He opened his 2010 season with a large throw of 90 @.@ 37 m at the <unk> Track & Field Festival in May and went on to score a victory over <unk> in their first match up in the 2010 IAAF Diamond League at the Bislett Games , finishing with a best throw of 86 @.@ 00 m . On 31 July he defended his European title with a throw of 88 @.@ 37 , finishing ahead of second @-@ placed Matthias de <unk> . 
 = = Awards = = 
 At the end of 2004 Thorkildsen was selected Norwegian Sportsperson of the Year by Norwegian sports journalists . 
 In 2008 he was awarded the European Athlete of the Year Trophy by the European Athletic Association , announced on 2 October 2008 , and to be presented at the European Athletics Awards Dinner in Amsterdam on 18 October . The Association cited Thorkildsen 's success at the Beijing Olympics and his breaching of the 90 @-@ metre barrier as part of their reasoning for the award . 
 = = Seasonal bests by year = = 
 1998 - 61 @.@ 57 
 1999 - 72 @.@ 11 
 2000 - 77 @.@ 48 
 2001 - 83 @.@ 87 
 2002 - 83 @.@ 43 
 2003 - 85 @.@ 72 
 2004 - 86 @.@ 50 
 2005 - 89 @.@ 60 
 2006 - 91 @.@ 59 
 2007 - 89 @.@ 51 
 2008 - 90 @.@ 57 
 2009 - 91 @.@ 28 
 2010 - 90 @.@ 37 
 2011 - 90 @.@ 61 
 2012 - 84 @.@ 72 
 2013 - 84 @.@ 64 
 2014 - 80 @.@ 52 
 = Real ( Ivy Queen album ) = 
 Real is the fourth studio album by Puerto Rican reggaetón recording artist Ivy Queen , released on November 21 , 2004 , by Universal Music Latino . Initially to be Queen 's debut full @-@ length English @-@ language studio album , it featured collaborations with hip hop and fellow reggaetón artists Hector El Father , Fat Joe , Getto & <unk> , La India , Gran Omar and Mickey Perfecto . The album was primarily produced by Rafi Mercenario , and included guest production by American producer Swizz Beatz , Puerto Rican producers Ecko , Noriega , Monserrate and DJ Nelson . The executive producers were Goguito " Willy " Guadalupe , Gran Omar and Queen . 
 Real is Queen 's only record with a Parental Advisory label . The album departs from the lyrical content characterizing Queen 's musical style , detailing hood life in Puerto Rico and love . It alternates musically between reggaetón and hip hop , experimenting with electronica , funk , dancehall , pop , R & B , and acoustic ballads . The wide range of styles and musical exploration earned Real mainly positive reviews from critics . Many praised Queen 's raspy vocals and production quality , whilst others criticized the lack of instrumentation . 
 Spawning three singles ( " Chika Ideal " , " Rociarlos " and " Dile " ) , Real peaked at number twenty @-@ five on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , number four on the Billboard Top Reggae Albums chart and number six on the Billboard Tropical Albums chart . " Chika Ideal " and " Rociarlos " failed to attain chart success , although the former reached the top ten of Terra Networks ' music @-@ video countdown . " Dile " peaked at number eight on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart , earning Queen three Billboard Latin Music Award nominations ( including one for Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , Female ) . Several other tracks , including " Tócame " and " Baila Así " , received airplay on Anglophone and Hispanophone radio stations in the United States . 
 Real is regarded as a factor in 2004 's reggaetón exposure to mainstream English @-@ speaking markets , along with Queen 's previous album ( her 2003 studio recording , Diva ) and albums by Daddy Yankee and Tego Calderón . It became one of the best @-@ selling albums of 2005 ( along with her fifth studio album , Flashback ) , with sales of both going " through the roof " . Queen then embarked on concert tours of Latin America and the United States ; she also promoted the album with a network television @-@ news segment detailing her career and struggle for respect in reggaetón , performing " Chika Ideal " on Don Francisco Presenta . The album was re @-@ released on September 25 , 2007 by Machete Music , but failed to impact the charts . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the failure of Ivy Queen 's first two studio albums , En Mi Imperio ( 1997 ) and The Original Rude Girl ( 1998 ) , Sony Music Latin released Queen from her musical contract and she took a hiatus from her musical career in 1999 . The 1999 hip @-@ hop single " In The Zone " , a duet with Haitian singer Wyclef Jean , was moderately successful in the United States . However , the album " fizzled " . Over the next few years , Queen appeared on reggaetón compilation albums , spawning hits ( including " Quiero Bailar " ) and collaborations with artists on Tommy Boy and Columbia Records . In 2003 , Queen released her third studio recording , Diva , which was highly anticipated and acclaimed . It was a factor in reggaetón 's mainstream exposure in 2004 ( with Daddy Yankee 's Barrio Fino and Tego Calderon 's El Enemy de los Guasíbiri ) , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . In early 2004 , after a string of compilation appearances , Queen appeared on the compilation album 12 Discípulos by Eddie Dee with " Los 12 Discípulos " , " Quítate Tu Pa ' <unk> " and " Que Es La Que Hay " . " Los 12 Discípulos " managed to reach number eight of the Billboard Tropical Songs chart , becoming a top ten hit . It received a nomination for " Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , New Artist " at the 2005 Billboard Latin Music Award . The song featured eleven other reggaeton musicians , who were among the most requested in the genre at the time . These included Dee along with Queen , Daddy Yankee , Tego Calderón , Voltio , Vico C , Zion , Lennox , Nicky Jam , Johnny Prez , Gallego , and <unk> G. The song brought all twelve artist together as one to show that " unity is needed for the genre reggaetón to evolve and survive " . 
 That year , Queen released a platinum edition of the album which included new songs , such as " Papi Te Quiero " and " Tu No Puedes " , and began recording her next album . Queen 's fourth studio album was planned to be her debut full @-@ length English @-@ language album after she received record @-@ contract offers from a number of labels , including Sony . She said it was a good opportunity to reach the competitive Anglo hip hop music market after her success in Latin American countries . Queen received an offer to record an English @-@ language album after Sony notified her that her Sony albums from six years earlier were being played in cities such as London because of Diva 's success . Despite her concerns about her English pronunciation , she continued with the project . Queen recorded songs with some of hip hop 's most popular MCs , including American rapper Fat Joe ( who appeared on her debut English album ) . His song later became " Quítate Two " , and was included on Real ; American hip @-@ hop producer Swizz Beatz produced " Soldados " , showcasing her crossover appeal . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After the success of Diva : Platinum Edition , Ivy Queen began recording her fourth studio album in March 2004 ; it wrapped up in September at Marroneo Studios in Bayamón , Puerto Rico . The album was mastered and arranged by Esteban Piñero ; Dennis Nieves did the mixing and served as engineer . 
 Production was divided among several hip @-@ hop and reggaetón producers . Swizz Beatz produced " Soldados " ; longtime collaborator DJ Nelson reappeared with " Dile " ( the lead single ) and " Acércate " . Grammy @-@ Award winning Latin music producers Echo and Diesel , Hyde , Gran Omar , Noriega , Monserrate , Dennis Nieves , DJ Blass and DJ David Montañez also aided in production and Rafi Mercenario produced seven of the album 's nineteen tracks . Queen and Omar were executive producers . 
 Collaborations include " Matando " , " Rociarlos " ( also featuring Hector El Father ) and " Baila Así " with Queen 's then @-@ husband , Gran Omar ; a hip @-@ hop track , " Quítate Two " , with Fat Joe ; " Acércate " with Mikey Perfecto , " Tócame " with salsa singer La India and " Vas A Morir " with Puerto Rican duo Getto & <unk> . " Soldados " and " Dee Jay " were co @-@ written with Kasseem Dean and Omar Navarro , respectively . " People thought we were going to make a salsa track " , Queen said about the collaboration with La India , noting that the song was a dancehall track ( not salsa or reggaetón ) . She added that India was " original " and she worked well with people who are genuine , explaining the other collaborations . According to Navarro and Queen in an 2004 interview on mun2 The Roof , the album was expected to feature a duet with Puerto Rican singer Don Omar . Spin saw Queen 's collaboration with Fat Joe as a trend in reggaetón to have American rappers " team up with its stars " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Rolling Stone , the album contains " raspy braggadocio and sexy rhymes " which complement Queen 's raspy vocals . It alternates between reggaetón and hip hop as Queen experiments with Caribbean music , R & B , pop , electronica , funk , dancehall and acoustic ballads : " I really think this album is for people to really just sit down and listen to it " . She explained that " there are times that the songs will make you want to dance " , but their lyrics are more meaningful . Although Queen said the album has its share of " battles against men " , she wants it to demonstrate that she is a well – rounded artist . Describing the songs , she said " [ they ] are always going to be real because they are feelings that people have ... The hits that I have now , the girls love them because they are real . If I am feeling hurt and need to curse to express that , then I will . I am going to be real all the way because that 's what made Ivy Queen " . 
 The introduction to the album features Queen lyrically blessing and thanking her audience for the support . " Chika Ideal " ( " Ideal Girl " ) assures the protagonist 's lover that she wants to be with him and fulfill his dreams . " Soldados " ( " Soldiers " ) , a hip @-@ hop track influenced by electronic music , was produced by Swizz Beatz . " Matando " ( " Killing " ) , a duet with Gran Omar , explores dancing in a club . The song , in a minor key , features the synthetic instrumentation of techno music . " Dale Volumen " ( " Add Volume " ) , in a minor key , is characterized by simple harmonic progressions , synthesizers and stick @-@ drum percussion and influenced by reggae and Afro @-@ Latin music . It features a techno @-@ influenced beat . " Dile " ( " Tell Her " ) features lilting rhythms from Colombia ( including cumbia ) , combining Latin vallenato with reggaetón . Queen noted that she sang the song without rapping to prove she is a complete musician and not just a rapper . " Mi Barrio " ( " My Hood " ) criticizes " the problems present in Añasco , Puerto Rico " . Queen compared the song to " Corazones " by Daddy Yankee from his album , Barrio Fino . " Dee Jay " is a reggaetón number which " recognizes the DJs " of reggaetón . In it , Queen mentions DJ Nelson , Noriega , DJ Adam , DJ Negro , DJ Baby , Rafi Mercenario , Luny Tunes , Monserrate & DJ Urba and others . " Quítate Two " ( " Remove Yourself " ) , with Fat Joe , combines hip @-@ hop and funk music . The acoustic guitar ballad " Ángel <unk> " ( " Fallen Angel " ) and its acoustic version are the fourteenth and nineteenth tracks on the album , respectively . " Tócame " " ( " Touch Me " ) , a dancehall track , features La India . In a minor key , " <unk> " , another minor @-@ key song , has Queen asserting that she is " queen " in the genre of reggaetón . The track features synthesizers and strings , and is influenced by reggae and Afro @-@ Latin music . " Baila Así " ( " Dance Like That " ) , produced by Gran Omar , has a Punjabi – influenced hip @-@ hop beat . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Real was released on November 16 , 2004 , after originally being scheduled for release in September and on November 26 . The album was also released in a censored version . It was later re @-@ issued on September 25 , 2007 by Machete Music , after having been announced in July 2007 as a fourth @-@ quarter release . This was a result of Ivy Queen 's success with her seventh studio album , Sentimiento , which sold 9 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and was certified platinum within two months of release . Ivy Queen appeared on Don Francisco Presenta , where she performed " Chika Ideal " ( the first single from Real ) to promote the album . " Rociarlos " was released as the second single , and " Dile " was released as the third ( and final ) single later in 2004 after the album 's release . Music videos for both singles were also released , along with music videos for " Dale Volumen " and " Matando " . Queen performed on the Reggaeton Tour 2004 , also featuring Aldo Ranks and La Factoria , in a number of South American countries ( including Ecuador ) ; she sang " Papi Te Quiero " and " Tu No Puedes " , promoting Diva and Real . 
 This was her first tour in South America , following shows in Atlanta and New York City ( where she was " designated as the Puerto Rico Youth God Mother of the National Puerto Rican Day Parade " in June 2004 ) . At the end of June 2004 Queen appeared on a network @-@ television @-@ news segment , detailing her career and struggle for respect in reggaetón , during recording sessions for the album . In February 2005 Queen appeared at the Festival of Puerto Rican Stars — an historic achievement for reggaetón , since no other performer from the genre was invited . In June 2005 Queen appeared on the Invasion Del Reggaetón Tour with Daddy Yankee , which grossed $ 817 @,@ 220 for the week of June 18 . She also attended ( and performed at ) the Billboard Bash the night before the 2005 Billboard Latin Music Awards . 
 Unlike Queen 's previous albums , the artwork for Real features provocative photography ; her middle and thighs are emphasized to create a sexy image . Queen said her breasts were enlarged from a B to a C cup , adding that the packaging described the style of music on the album . The album cover also features Queen 's signature long nails , which she sports in a variety of colors . Incorporating graffiti , the album has " street cred " in the <unk> hip @-@ hop world . The change in image for Queen is attributed to Universal Latino 's feeling that Real had crossover potential for U.S. mainstream audiences . The album 's title suggests this ; it means " real " in English and Spanish and " royal " in Spanish , hinting at Queen 's status as the Queen of Reggaetón . It is also Queen 's response to Puerto Rican criticism for looking like a tomboy , wearing baggy pants and large shirts ( which she addresses in her autobiography , Detrás Del Glamour [ Behind the Glamour ] ) . She accepted responsibility for her change in image , attributing it to a " new growth in person " and admitting that the makeover stemmed from a " crisis " and " female vanity " . To change her figure , Queen used a Colombian plastic surgeon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album was moderately commercially successful . On the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , Real debuted at number twenty @-@ nine and peaked at number twenty @-@ five , one position higher than Diva 's peak at twenty @-@ four . It ended its chart run at number sixty @-@ nine on February 26 , 2005 . On the Reggae Albums chart the album debuted at number four , sharing its peak with Diva and spending seventeen consecutive weeks on the chart . On the Billboard Tropical Albums chart , the album debuted ( and peaked ) at number six , not matching Diva 's peak position at the top . It fell off the chart after being number eighteen for the week of April 9 , 2005 . At the time Diva was still on the countdown at number twenty , to be displaced two weeks later by Marc Anthony 's 2004 <unk> La Pena . Sales were boosted by " distribution by Universal Music & Video Distribution , coupled with strong airplay at English- and Spanish @-@ language stations " . Queen did not enter the Billboard 200 until 2007 , when her sixth studio album ( Sentimiento ) reached number 105 on the chart . " Dile " was the only commercially successful of the three singles , reaching number eight on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . After the reggaetón " explosion " on the west coast of the United States , Real helped Ivy Queen enter " Bay Area mainstream hip hop dials " with " Dile " , " Tócame " and " Baila Así " " staples " on Hispanic radio stations . " Dile " received a Billboard Latin Music Award nomination for Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , Female at the 2005 Billboard Latin Music Awards , where Queen was also nominated for Reggaeton Album of the Year and Tropical Airplay Track of the Year , New Artist . Echo and Diesel received a Latin Grammy Award for their production work on Real . At Telemundo 's El Premio De La Gente Latin Music Awards of 2005 , the album was nominated for Urban or <unk> Album of the Year — Male or Female , where Queen was also nominated for Urban or <unk> Artist of the Year — Male or Female . 
 Rolling Stone gave Real three out of five stars , complimenting the " combo of raspy braggadocio and sexy rhymes " and noting the " pop @-@ savvy " nature of the LP . According to Patricia <unk> of Miami New Times , the album features a " wide range of styles , including the lilting Haitian compas rhythms of ' Dile ' ( ' Tell Her ' ) , the bhangra – flavored ' Baila Asi ' ( ' Dance Like This ' ) , the acoustic guitar ballad ' Ángel <unk> ' ( ' Fallen Angel ' ) and ' <unk> ' ( ' Caress Me ' ) , all of which are adapted to Ivy Queen 's ' confident , raspy vocals ' " . The latter track was labeled " spicy " . <unk> also noted the exploration of hip @-@ hop and dancehall rhythms set to " rough and rugged fast @-@ paced raps " . She ended her review by saying that it was " the audacious musical explorations that make Real a surprisingly nuanced and ultimately satisfying release " . Music journalist Rafer Guzman of Newsday complimented the " electro @-@ crunch of ' Soldados ' " and " snaky funk of ' Quítate Tu ' " . Leila Cobo of Billboard said the album was " highly anticipated " after the release of Diva : Platinum Edition several months earlier , with over 100 @,@ 000 copies sold . The album was considered a factor in reggaetón 's mainstream exposure to American and global audiences . Agustin Gurza of the Los Angeles Times criticized the album , saying " [ it ] lacks real instruments " and was bawdy and indecent . An editor for Bulb Magazine selected the album as one of reggaetón 's most classic albums in 2007 . The music magazine XLR8R put the album at number two on its " Five Important Reggaetón Albums " list behind Don Omar 's The Last Don ( 2003 ) and before Tego Calderon 's El <unk> ( 2003 ) , Nicky Jam 's Vida <unk> ( 2002 ) and Zion & Lennox 's <unk> a la <unk> ( 2004 ) . While reviewing the reggaetón compilation album Jamz TV Hits , Vol . 3 , an editor for Allmusic listed " Chika Ideal " as an " Allmusic Pick " . The song was selected as a hit from " The Golden Era of Reggaetón " ( 2003 – 2007 ) by Jesus Trivino of Latina magazine . Terra Networks called the music video for " Chika Ideal " one of the hottest of the summer , saying the song showed " why she is the queen of reggaetón " . The video reached the Top 10 for four consecutive weeks on Terra Networks ' Top Music Video countdown . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Standard edition 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from liner notes : 
 = = = Track credits = = = 
 = = = Guest credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Russian battleship Poltava ( 1911 ) = 
 Poltava was the second of the Gangut @-@ class battleships of the Imperial Russian Navy built before World War I. The Ganguts were the first class of Russian dreadnoughts . She was named after the Russian victory over Charles XII of Sweden in the Battle of Poltava in 1709 . She was completed during the winter of 1914 – 15 , but was not ready for combat until mid @-@ 1915 . Her role was to defend the mouth of the Gulf of Finland against the Germans , who never tried to enter , so she spent her time training and providing cover for mine laying operations . She was laid up in 1918 for lack of trained crew and suffered a devastating fire the following year that almost gutted her . Many proposals were made to reconstruct or modernize her in different ways for the next twenty years , but none were carried out . While all this was being discussed she served as source of spare parts for her sister ships and was used as a barracks ship . She was finally struck from the Navy List in 1940 and scrapping began at a very leisurely rate . She was intentionally grounded in late 1941 to prevent her from being sunk in some inconvenient location by the Germans . She was refloated in 1944 and scrapped beginning in 1949 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Poltava was 180 meters ( 590 ft ) long at the waterline and 181 @.@ 2 meters ( 594 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 26 @.@ 9 meters ( 88 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 99 meters ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , 49 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 61 ft ) more than designed . Her displacement was 24 @,@ 800 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 400 long tons ; 27 @,@ 300 short tons ) at load , over 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) more than her designed displacement of 23 @,@ 288 t ( 22 @,@ 920 long tons ; 25 @,@ 671 short tons ) . 
 Poltava 's machinery was built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works . Ten Parsons steam turbines drove the four propellers . The engine rooms were located between turrets three and four in three transverse compartments . The outer compartments each had a high @-@ pressure ahead and reverse turbine for each wing propeller shaft . The central engine room had two each low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines as well as two cruising turbines driving the two centre shafts . The engines had a total designed output of 42 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 31 @,@ 319 kW ) , but they produced 52 @,@ 000 shp ( 38 @,@ 776 kW ) during Poltava 's full @-@ speed trials on 21 November 1915 and gave a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) . Twenty @-@ five Yarrow Admiralty @-@ type small @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines at a designed working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 standard atmospheres ( 1 @,@ 770 kPa ; 257 psi ) . Each boiler was fitted with Thornycroft oil sprayers for mixed oil / coal burning . They were arranged in two groups . The forward group consisted of two boiler rooms in front of the second turret , the foremost of which had three boilers while the second one had six . The rear group was between the second and third turrets and comprised two compartments , each with eight boilers . At full load she carried 1 @,@ 847 @.@ 5 long tons ( 1 @,@ 877 @.@ 1 t ) of coal and 700 long tons ( 710 t ) of fuel oil and that provided her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Pattern 1907 52 @-@ calibre guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . The Russians did not believe that super firing turrets offered any advantage as they discounted the value of axial fire and believed that super firing turrets could not fire while over the lower turret because of muzzle blast problems . They also believed that distributing the turrets , and their associated magazines , over the length of the ship improved the survivability of the ship . Sixteen 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 119 mm ) 50 @-@ calibre Pattern 1905 guns were mounted in casemates as the secondary battery intended to defend the ship against torpedo boats . She completed with only a single 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 30 @-@ calibre Lender anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun mounted on the quarterdeck . Other anti @-@ aircraft guns were probably added during the course of World War I , but details are lacking . Conway 's says that four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) were added to the roofs of the end turrets during the war . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted with three torpedoes for each tube . 
 = = Service = = 
 Poltava was built by the Admiralty Shipyard at Saint Petersburg . She was laid down on 16 June 1909 and launched on 23 July 1911 . At the end of October 1914 she was struck by her sister Gangut which jammed her kedge anchor , damaged her hull and delayed her trials to late November 1914 . She entered service on 30 December 1914 when she reached Helsinki and was assigned to the First Battleship Brigade of the Baltic Fleet . However , gunnery and torpedo trials had to be postponed until mid @-@ 1915 because of the thick winter ice . She was the only ship of the class to perform a full @-@ power speed trial , which she did in November 1915 . She played a passive part in World War I as her role was to prevent the Germans from breaking into the Gulf of Finland , something the Germans never even tried . She ran aground in June 1916 , but suffered little damage . Her crew participated in the February Revolution of 1917 . She , and most of the Baltic Fleet , evacuated Helsingfors between 12 and 17 March 1918 despite the winter ice in the Gulf of Finland . Due to a shortage of crew she was placed into long @-@ term conservation at Petrograd in October 1918 . 
 On 24 November 1919 a fire broke out in her forward boiler room and gutted much of her interior . She was henceforth used as a source of spare parts for her sisters . Along with the Borodino @-@ class battlecruiser Izmail she was considered for conversion to an aircraft carrier in 1924 for service in the Black Sea , but this proved to be too ambitious and expensive given the state of the Soviet economy shortly after the end of the Russian Civil War . A more modest goal was to restore her to her original configuration and the Baltic Works actually began work in 1925 , but exhausted the allotted funds on 15 February 1926 by which time she was estimated to be 46 @.@ 5 % complete . On 7 January 1926 she was given the name Frunze , after the recently deceased Bolshevik military leader Mikhail Frunze . Subsequent plans that focused on reconstructing her as a modernized equivalent to her sisters or even as a battlecruiser , with one turret deleted to save weight , were considered , but finally abandoned on 23 January 1935 when all work was stopped . Kliment Voroshilov approved one last plan to turn her into a floating battery , but the Baltic Works had no capacity to spare and this project was cancelled on 9 July 1939 . During this period she was used as a barracks hulk while she was stripped for parts , until she was formally discarded 1 December 1940 , after scrapping had already begun at a leisurely pace . After the German invasion she was towed to Kronstadt and run aground late July 1941 near the Leningrad Sea Canal . During the Siege of Leningrad her hull was used as a base for small ships . She raised on 31 May 1944 , towed to Leningrad and scrapped beginning in 1949 . 
 After World War II two turrets and their guns were used to rebuild Coast Defence Battery 30 ( Maksim Gor 'kii I ) in Sevastopol . It remained in service with the Soviet Navy through 1997 . 
 = Battle of Nalapani = 
 The Battle of Nalapani was the first battle of the Anglo @-@ Nepalese War of 1814 – 1816 , fought between the forces of the British East India Company and Nepal , then ruled by the House of Gorkha . The battle took place around the Nalapani fort , near Dehradun , which was placed under siege by the British between 31 October and 30 November 1814 . The fort 's garrison was commanded by Captain Balbhadra Kunwar , while Major @-@ General Rollo Gillespie , who had previously fought in the Battle of Java , was in charge of the attacking British troops . Gillespie was killed on the first day of the siege while rallying his men and despite considerable odds , both in terms of numbers and firepower , Balbhadra and his 600 @-@ strong garrison successfully held out against more than 3 @,@ 000 British troops for over a month . 
 After two costly and unsuccessful attempts to seize the fort by direct attack , the British changed their approach and sought to force the garrison to surrender by cutting off the fort 's external water supply . Having suffered three days of thirst , on the last day of the siege , Balbhadra , refusing to surrender , led the 70 surviving members of the garrison in a charge against the besieging force . Fighting their way out of the fort , the survivors escaped into the nearby hills . Considering the time , effort , and resources spent to capture the small fort , it was a pyrrhic victory for the British . A number of later engagements , including one at <unk> , unfolded in a similar way ; but more than any other battle of the war , the fighting around Nalapani established the Gurkhas ' reputation as warriors . As a result , they were later recruited by the British to serve in their army . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Situation = = = 
 In 1814 under the new and ambitious Governor @-@ General Francis Edward Rawdon @-@ Hastings , the Earl of Moira , the long @-@ standing diplomatic disputes between British India and the Kingdom of Nepal , caused by expansionist policies of both parties , descended into open hostility . The British East India Company sought to invade Nepal not just to secure the border and to force the Nepali government to open trading routes to Tibet , but also for what Hastings saw as a geo @-@ political necessity to secure the foothold of the Company in the Indian sub @-@ continent . 
 The initial British campaign plan was to attack on two fronts across a frontier stretching more than 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 miles ) , from the Sutlej river in the west to the Koshi river in the east . On the eastern front , Major @-@ Generals Bennet Marley and John Sullivan Wood led their respective columns across the <unk> towards the heart of the Kathmandu Valley ; at the same time Major @-@ General Rollo Gillespie and Colonel David Ochterlony led the columns on the western front . These two western columns faced the Nepalese army under the command of Amar Singh Thapa . Around the beginning of October 1814 , the British troops began to move towards their depots and the army was soon after formed into four divisions : one at Benares , one at Meerut , one at Dinapur , and one at Ludhiana . 
 The division at Meerut was formed under Gillespie , and originally consisted of one British infantry regiment , the 53rd , which with artillery and a few dismounted dragoons , made up about 1 @,@ 000 Europeans . In addition to this , there were about 2 @,@ 500 native infantrymen ; this made up a total force of 3 @,@ 513 men . Once assembled , it marched directly to Dehra Dun , which was the principal town in the Dun Valley . After having captured or destroyed the forts in the valley , the plan called for Gillespie to either move eastwards to expel Amar Singh Thapa 's troops from Srinagar , or westwards to take Nahan , the largest town in the <unk> district , where Amar Singh 's son , <unk> Singh Thapa , controlled the government . Once completed , Gillespie was to sweep on towards the Sutlej in order to isolate Amar Singh , and force him to negotiate . 
 Of the four British divisions mentioned above , Gillespie 's was the first to penetrate the enemy 's frontier . The Nepalese had anticipated that Dehra Dun would be the first place of assault , and had tasked Captain Balbhadra Kunwar with the fortification of the place . When Balbhadra Kunwar , commander of the Nepalese defence army at Dehradun , heard of the approach of the British Army and its size , he realised that it would be impossible to defend the city . He withdrew from Dehradun and moved his force of about 600 , including dependents , to a hill north @-@ east of the city . He subsequently took up a position in the small fort of Nalapani , <unk> . His force was ethnically diverse , consisting of <unk> soldiers belonging to the <unk> <unk> Battalion and soldiers that had been recruited from Garhwal and nearby areas . On 22 October , before the British declaration of war on 1 November 1814 , Gillespie seized the <unk> Pass leading into the Dun Valley . He then proceeded to Dehra unchallenged . 
 A letter was sent by the British to Balbhadra , summoning him to surrender the fort . Upon receiving the note , Balbhadra tore it up . The letter having been delivered to him at midnight , he observed that " it was not customary to receive or answer letters at such unseasonable hours " . Nevertheless , he responded by sending his " salaam " to the English " <unk> " , assuring him that he would soon visit him in his camp . 
 = = = Terrain and defences = = = 
 The Nalapani fort was situated on a 500 – 600 @-@ foot ( 150 – 180 m ) hill that was covered in dense jungle . The approach to the fort was very steep in most directions and the top of the hill , which formed a tabletop feature , was about .75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) in length . Its highest point was to the south , where the town of Kalanga was located . The fort was constructed in an irregular shape , having been built to conform with the shape of the ground upon which it was situated , and at the time the British entered the Dun Valley , its walls had not been finished . Upon their arrival , the British found the Nepalese defenders working to improve the fort 's defences and raising the height of the walls . 
 By the time the first attack took place , the walls of the fort still had not been finished , although they had been raised slightly . As a result of the hasty construction work , even at the wall 's lowest part , it was high enough that the attacking force would need ladders to reach the top of the rampart . Every point where the fort was approachable , or thought weak by its defenders , was bolstered by stockades made out of stones and stakes that had been stuck into the ground . These were covered by cannons that were placed where they could be most effective , and a wicket gate that flanked a large part of the wall , was left open but cross @-@ barred , to make it difficult for attacking soldiers to enter but also to channel their advance towards a cannon that had been placed at the gate to enfilade its approach with showers of grapeshot . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First British attack = = = 
 Following their arrival , the British reconnoitred the fort and began planning for the assault . Parties were employed in preparing fascines and gabions for the establishment for artillery batteries , while two 12 @-@ pounder guns , four 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzers , and four six @-@ pounders were carried up the hill on elephants . The British secured the table @-@ land without any Nepalese resistance and the gun batteries were ready to open fire on the fort on the morning of 31 October , at a distance of 600 yards ( 550 m ) . 
 The first British attack on Nalapani took place on 31 October , a day before the official declaration of war . Gillespie planned to storm the fort from four sides . The storming party was formed into four columns , support by a reserve : the first , under Colonel Carpenter , consisted of 611 men ; the second , under Captain Fast , was 363 strong ; the third , under Major Kelly , was made up of 541 men ; the fourth , under Captain Campbell , had 283 men ; while 939 men made up the reserve , under Major Ludlow . It was intended for these columns to ascend from different points , at a signal made through the guns firing in a specific manner , and thus attack the Nepalese from different sides . In doing so , the British hoped to divert the attention of the Nepalese and prevent them from concentrating their fire on any one point , allowing the attackers to gain an advantage . 
 However , after the attack began only two columns , those under Carpenter and Ludlow , responded to Gillespie 's signal to assault , which was given some hours earlier than was intended . Under the cover of fire , pioneers twice swarmed up to the walls , only to be cut down by the enfilade fire of Bal Bhadra 's cannons that were positioned along a large part the wall . The garrison maintained a heavy bombardment from the walls , and heavy showers of arrows and of stones rained down on the assailants . Women inside the fort also threw missiles , exposing themselves to British fire . Gillespie 's men fell back and on seeing this , he moved forward from the artillery line to personally rally his men . With three fresh companies of the 53rd Regiment , he reached a spot within 30 yards ( 27 m ) of the wicket , where , " as he was cheering the men , waving his hat in one hand , and his sword in the other , " a Nepalese marksman shot him " through the heart , and he fell dead on the spot . " The General 's death forced the British to temporarily cease their attack and withdraw . Total British casualties for the day were 32 dead and 228 wounded , some of whom subsequently died . 
 = = = Second British attack = = = 
 Not having expected such a determined resistance from the Nepalese , Colonel Sebright <unk> , who was next in command of the British troops at Nalapani , retired to Dehra until 24 November so that heavy guns could arrive from Delhi . After the reinforcements had arrived , the fighting resumed on 25 November and for three days the fort was bombarded until , at noon on 27 November , a large section of northern wall finally gave away . The British forces , seeing their opportunity , twice tried to charge into the breach that day , but were repelled and pinned to an exposed position just outside the wall . An attempt was then made to fire one of the light guns into the breach to provide obscuration with gun smoke to cover a further attack , but that too proved unsuccessful . The day ended with the British assault force withdrawing after spending two hours pinned outside the wall , exposed to heavy fire from the garrison , and having suffered significant losses . British casualties for the day amounted to 37 dead and over 443 wounded . 
 = = = Nepalese withdrawal = = = 
 After two failed attempts to capture the fort by straight forward attacks , the British resorted to attrition tactics . On 28 November , instead of launching another infantry assault , the fort was encircled from all sides and placed under siege . This prevented Nepalese reinforcements from entering the fort . <unk> then instructed his gunners , by now strongly reinforced , to fire into the fort . He also sent scouts to locate and cut off the fort 's external water source . The water situation was made worse for the defenders when about a hundred earthen vessels stocked with water , stored in a portico , were destroyed in the bombardment . The eastern and northern walls of the fort were razed to the ground . The continuous bombardment also caused three of the four cannons installed on the fort 's battlements to fall outside the fort , while the other fell inside . The other cannons that the Nepalese possessed were unusable , having either been disabled by misfiring during previous attacks , or because they had been buried under rubble in the British bombardment . Left without any cannons to reply , the garrison suffered heavy casualties . They continued to resist using gunfire and stones , but eventually the few people that remained in the fort became desperate and could not hold on any longer . That night , despite threats to their person and property , desertion became rampant . 
 By the following day , 29 November , the garrison 's water supply had been exhausted . The walls of the fort had also collapsed and the garrison was exposed , leading to further casualties amongst the Nepali troops . Seeing the disheartened state of men , the Captain and other officers asked them to sign a pledge to fight to the last . Eighty @-@ four soldiers signed . However , that night the <unk> <unk> Company , which had arrived as reinforcements and was stationed at a portico east of Nalapani , secretly abandoned their post , taking with them their arms and colours . Seeing this , some of the men who had signed the pledge followed . The 50 or 60 men that remained , overcome by the hopelessness of the situation , felt that instead of confronting certain death by remaining in the fort , it was better to escape to the hills and hold their position there . Perhaps unable to convince their commanders with words , the escaping men caught hold of their Captain and other officers by their arms , and dragged them away from the fort . Learning of this new movement , the British renewed their fire ; but the Nepalese managed to cut through and make a successful escape . 
 Thus , after days of thirst and continuous bombardment , the Nepalese were forced to evacuate the fort on 30 November . Bal Bhadra refused to surrender and with about 70 of his surviving men he was able to fight his way through the besieging force and escape into the hills . When the British troops entered the fort , it was found , as Prinsep writes , in a " shocking state , full of the remains of men and women killed by the shot shells of our batteries ; a number of wounded were likewise lying about , and the stench was intolerable . " 
 Upwards of 90 dead bodies were found and cremated , while the wounded were sent to British hospitals ; the rest of the fort was then razed to the ground . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Conduct during battle = = = 
 During the fighting , the British were impressed by the conduct of the Nepalese soldiers during the battle who , according to British accounts , exhibited fair conduct towards them . This endeared them to the British , who were willing to reciprocate by giving medical aid to wounded and captured Nepalese . The confidence the Nepalese exhibited in the British officers was significant : they not only accepted , but also solicited surgical aid , even while continuing to fight . This gave rise , on one occasion , to a scene , which was recounted by the Scottish traveller James Baillie Fraser : 
 While the batteries were playing , a man was perceived on the breach , advancing and waving his hand . The guns ceased firing for a while , and the man came into the batteries : he proved to be a <unk> , whose lower jaw had been shattered by a cannon shot , and who came thus frankly to solicit assistance from his enemy . 
 It is unnecessary to add , that it was instantly afforded . He recovered ; and , when discharged from the hospital , signified his desired to return to his corps to combat us again : exhibiting thus , through the whole , a strong sense of the value of generosity and courtesy in warfare , and also of his duty to his country , – separating completely in his own mind private and national feelings from each other , – and his frank confidence in the individuals of our nation , from the duty he owed his own , to fight against us collectively . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The fighting around Nalapani , more than any other battle , established the reputation of the Gurkhas as warriors , and won the admiration of the British . Gillespie had been killed and Balbhadra and his 600 men had held the might of the British and their native Indian troops for a month . Even with only 70 remaining survivors after his water source had been cut off , Balbhadra had refused to surrender , and instead had charged out and successfully fought his way through the siege . It set the tone for the rest of the campaign . 
 Fraser recorded the situation in the following terms : 
 The determined resolution of the small party which held this small post for more than a month , against so comparatively large a force , must surely wring admiration from every voice , especially when the horrors of the latter portion of this time are considered ; the dismal spectacle of their slaughtered comrades , the sufferings of their women and children thus immured with themselves , and the hopelessness of relief , which destroyed any other motive for their obstinate defence they made , than that resulting from a high sense of duty , supported by <unk> courage . This , and a generous spirit of courtesy towards their enemy , certainly marked the character of the garrison of Kalunga , during the period of its siege . 
 Whatever the nature of the <unk> may have been found in other quarters , there was here no cruelty to wounded or to prisoners ; no poisoned arrows were used ; no wells or waters were poisoned ; no rancorous spirit of revenge seemed to animate them : they fought us in fair conflict , like men ; and , in intervals of actual combat , showed us a liberal courtesy worthy of a more enlightened people . 
 So far from insulting the bodies of the dead and wounded , they permitted them to lie untouched , till carried away ; and none were stripped , as is too universally the case . 
 The battle also had significant political repercussions , shaking the British Army 's confidence . The fact that the siege had taken so long exposed the British forces ' vulnerabilities and encouraged the native Indian states – in particular the old Maratha Confederacy in central India – to continue their resistance against British imperialism in the hope that they could still be defeated . 
 In the years following the battle , the British constructed two small obelisks that still stand in Nalapani . One was laid in honour of Gillespie , while another was dedicated with the inscription " Our brave adversary Bul <unk> and his gallant men " . In Nepal , the story of the battle at Nalapani has gained a legendary status and has become an important part of the nation 's historical narrative , while Balbhadra himself has become a national hero . The fighting spirit displayed by the Nepalese in this and other following battles of Anglo @-@ Nepalese War ultimately led to the recruitment of Gurkhas into the British Army . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The battle provides the setting to a Nepali musical drama called <unk> written by Bal Krishna Sama and composed by Shiva Shankar . In the drama , the patriotism of a Nepalese soldier is depicted when , after being wounded , the soldier seeks help from the British camp . Later he is grateful for the humanitarian assistance provided by the British but refuses an offer to defect to their army . 
 = Kurt Brändle = 
 Kurt @-@ Werner Brändle ( 19 January 1912 – 3 November 1943 ) was a German Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a fighter ace credited with 180 enemy aircraft shot down in over 700 combat missions . The majority of his victories were claimed over the Eastern Front , with 25 claims over the Western Front . 
 Born in Ludwigsburg , Brändle , who already was a civilian motor @-@ powered aircraft and glider pilot , volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1935 . He was posted to Jagdgeschwader 53 ( JG 53 — 53rd Fighter Wing ) in 1939 and claimed 14 aerial victories on the Western Front . In May 1942 he was given command of II . Gruppe ( 2nd group ) of Jagdgeschwader 3 " Udet " ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) . Fighting on the Eastern Front , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 1 July 1942 after 49 aerial victories . In July and August 1942 , he claimed a further 50 aerial victories in the southern sector of the Eastern Front . After claiming his 100th aerial victory he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 27 August 1942 . 
 On 5 July 1943 during the Battle of Kursk , Brändle achieved his 150th aerial victory and in August 1943 was transferred to the Western Front fighting in Defense of the Reich . There Brändle was killed in action on 3 November 1943 west of Amsterdam in the Netherlands . His body was washed ashore near Zandvoort on 30 December 1943 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Brändle was born on 19 January 1912 in Ludwigsburg in the Kingdom of Württemberg , a federated state of the German Empire . His father was a Meister , a master craftsman , in the field of precision mechanics . Following school , Brändle learned the trade of a surgical instrument maker and worked in his father 's firm . 
 Since his early youth he was very enthusiastic about flying and volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich on 10 December 1935 . There he participated in a number of exercises and was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) of the Reserves on 1 December 1936 . In his civilian life , Brändle attained a pilot license and worked as a flight instructor . As an instructor , he trained roughly 150 students and logged more than 6 @,@ 000 starts and 8 @,@ 000 flight hours before he became a military aviator . In addition to his passion for motor power flight , he also was a glider pilot . 
 In early 1937 Brändle passed his Meister examination in aircraft construction and in the same year was trained as a fighter pilot with Jagdgeschwader 134 " Horst Wessel " ( JG 134 — 134th Fighter Wing ) , named after the martyr of the Nazi movement Horst Wessel . As of 1 February 1939 , Brändle served with Flieger @-@ <unk> @-@ Regiment 22 ( 22nd Flight Training Regiment ) in Güstrow . There , he transferred from the reserve force to active service and was promoted to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) on 1 June 1939 . He was then transferred to the 4 . Staffel ( 4th Squadron ) of Jagdgeschwader 53 ( JG 53 — 53rd Fighter Wing ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday 1 September 1939 when German forces invaded Poland . Brändle received the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) on 20 April 1940 . He claimed his first aerial victory on 10 May 1940 during the Battle of France , shooting down an Armée de l 'Air ( French Air Force ) Morane @-@ Saulnier M.S.406 south of Sedan . In total Brändle claimed two victories over France before he was wounded on 26 May 1940 . During takeoff on a maintenance test flight he crashed into a Dornier Do 17 injuring himself in the head . He spent the next few weeks in the military hospital at Heidelberg . 
 After recovering from the hospital , Brändle claimed his second victory during the Battle of Britain over the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) on 11 August 1940 . On 26 August 1940 , he was tasked with the leadership of 5 . Staffel ( 5th Squadron ) of JG 53 . Following his fourth aerial victory , he was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 1 . Klasse ) on 3 September 1940 . He was officially appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 5 . Staffel on 15 September 1940 . On 11 November 1940 he claimed his 6th and 7th aerial victories and was awarded the Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots ( Frontflugspange für Jagdflieger ) in Silver on 5 May 1941 and in Gold on 7 June 1941 . 
 The bulk of the Geschwader 's air elements were moved via Jever , in northern Germany , to Mannheim @-@ Sandhofen on 8 June 1941 . There the aircraft were given a maintenance overhaul prior to moving east . The II . Gruppe was transferred to <unk> in East Prussia , present @-@ day <unk> in Kaliningrad Oblast in Russia , between 12 – 14 June . On 22 June the Geschwader crossed into Soviet airspace in support of Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union which opened the Eastern Front . There , Brändle claimed further victories and by the end of October 1941 was credited with 28 aerial victories . 
 Brändle 's unit was then relocated to the Western Front again in October 1941 where it was based at Leeuwarden in the Netherlands before it was moved to the Mediterranean theater in December 1941 . Based at Comiso airfield , Brändle flew combat missions against the RAF during the Siege of Malta . There he was awarded the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) on 25 February 1942 and four days later , on 1 March , he was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) . 
 = = = Group commander = = = 
 On 1 May 1942 , Brändle was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of II . Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 3 " Udet " ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) , named after the World War I fighter ace Ernst Udet . Its former Gruppenkommandeur , Hauptmann Karl @-@ Heinz <unk> , had been killed in action over Malta on 14 April 1942 . At the time , the Gruppe was stationed at Plzeň for rest and refit before it was relocated to the Eastern Front on 18 May 1942 . Too late to participate in the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula , it was located on the left wing of Army Group South , assigned to an airfield at <unk> in the Kharkov area . Brändle scored the Gruppe 's first victory after the relocation , claiming a Polikarpov R @-@ 5 reconnaissance bomber aircraft at 3 : 49 am on 20 May 1942 . By this date , Brändle had accumulated 36 victories . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) on 1 July 1942 for 49 aerial victories . On this day , he claimed his 53rd aerial victory , after he shot down a Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 " Sturmovik " . 
 Brändle often claimed multiple victories per day , three victories on 8 July 1942 took his tally to 58 and further three claims made on 10 July took his score to 61 . On 16 July 1942 he filed four claims , numbers 64 – 67 . He became an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " for the first time on 26 July 1942 when he shot down five enemy aircraft , aerial victories 73 – 77 , and again five on 7 August 1942 , 89 in total . 
 In July and August 1942 , he claimed 50 aerial victories in the southern sector of the Eastern Front , among them his 100th to 102nd victory on 23 August 1942 . He was the 17th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . For this achievement he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 27 August 1942 , the 114th officer or soldier of the Wehrmacht so honored . The presentation was made by Adolf Hitler personally . 
 Brändle was promoted to Major on 1 March 1943 . On 29 April 1943 , he claimed his 135th to 138th aerial victories . On 5 July 1943 , the first day of the Battle of Kursk ( Unternehmen Zitadelle ) , he claimed five victories taking his total to 151 . His II . Gruppe claimed 77 aircraft shot down on 12 July which included its 2 @,@ 000 aerial victory of the war . 
 = = = Defense of the Reich and death = = = 
 In early August 1943 , Brändle 's II . Gruppe was withdrawn from the Eastern Front for service in Defense of the Reich on the Western Front . The Gruppe spent one @-@ month training in northern Germany before they arrived at the Schiphol airfield near Amsterdam in the Netherlands on 12 September . 
 On 3 November 1943 , Brändle shot down two P @-@ 47 Thunderbolts fighters escorting a formation of Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses on a mission targeting Wilhelmshaven . Later that day , he was killed in action west of Amsterdam in the Netherlands . Following an attack by a group of Martin B @-@ 26 Marauders on Schiphol airfield , II . Gruppe scrambled to counter the attack . It is assumed that he was shot down in his Messerschmitt Bf 109 G @-@ 6 ( Werknummer <unk> — factory number ) by Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) fighters under the command of Wing Commander Lloyd Chadburn . His body was later washed ashore near Zandvoort on 30 December 1943 and was buried at the Heroes Cemetery in Amsterdam ( field 74 , grave 405 ) one day later . His remains were moved in January 1944 before they were reinterred for a last time on 2 December 1947 , this time at the cemetery Ysselsteyn ( block CW , row 1 , grave 25 ) . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 20 April 1940 ) 
 1st Class ( 3 September 1940 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots 
 in Silver ( 5 May 1941 ) 
 in Gold ( 7 June 1941 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 25 February 1942 as Oberleutnant in the 5 . / JG 53 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 1 July 1942 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the II . / JG 3 " Udet " 
 114th Oak Leaves on 27 August 1942 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the II . / JG 3 " Udet " 
 = Phil Lamason = 
 Phillip ( Phil ) John Lamason DFC & Bar ( 15 September 1918 – 19 May 2012 ) was a pilot in the Royal New Zealand Air Force ( RNZAF ) during the Second World War , who rose to prominence as the senior officer in charge of 168 Allied airmen taken to Buchenwald concentration camp , Germany , in August 1944 . Raised in Napier , he joined the RNZAF in September 1940 , and by April 1942 was a pilot officer serving with the Royal Air Force in Europe . 
 On 8 June 1944 , Lamason was in command of a Lancaster heavy bomber that was shot down during a raid on railway marshalling yards near Paris . Bailing out , he was picked up by members of the French Resistance and hidden at various locations for seven weeks . While attempting to reach Spain along the Comet line , Lamason was double @-@ crossed by a traitor within the Resistance and handed over to the Gestapo . After interrogation , he was taken to Fresnes prison . Classified as a " <unk> " ( terror flier ) , he was not accorded prisoner @-@ of @-@ war ( POW ) status , but instead treated as a criminal and spy . By 15 August 1944 , Lamason was senior officer of a group of 168 captured Allied airmen who were taken by train to Buchenwald concentration camp , arriving there five days later . 
 At Buchenwald , the airmen were fully shaved , starved , denied shoes , and for three weeks forced to sleep outside without shelter in one of the sub @-@ camps known as " Little Camp " . As senior officer , Lamason took control and instilled a level of military discipline and bearing . For several weeks Lamason negotiated with the camp authorities to have the airmen transferred to a POW camp , but his requests were denied . At great risk , Lamason secretly got word to the Luftwaffe of the Allied airmen 's captivity and , seven days before their scheduled execution , 156 of the 168 prisoners were transferred to Stalag Luft III . Most of the airmen credit their survival at Buchenwald to the leadership and determination of Lamason . After the war , he moved to Dannevirke and became a farmer until his retirement . During the 1980s and 1990s , he was a regular speaker at KLB Club and POW reunions . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Lamason was born and raised in Napier , a city in New Zealand 's North Island , on 15 September 1918 . He was educated at Napier Boys ' High School and Massey University ( Palmerston North campus ) where he was awarded a Diploma in <unk> . During this period , Lamason described himself as " a bit of a <unk> " . Prior to the war , he worked for the Department of Agriculture at New Plymouth as a stock inspector . It was there Lamason took the opportunity of free flying lessons , clocking up 100 hours . He was described as a tall , good @-@ looking man with blue eyes and a broken nose . 
 Lamason joined the RNZAF in September 1940 . By April 1942 , he had been posted to the European theatre of operations as a pilot officer in No. 218 Squadron RAF . During a bombing raid on Pilsen , Czechoslovakia , he was in command of an aircraft that was attacked by an enemy fighter and badly damaged , but managed to return to base . As a result of his actions , he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) on 15 May 1942 . The citation read : 
 Pilot Officer Philip John . <unk> , ( N.Z. <unk> ) , Royal New Zealand Air Force , No. 218 Squadron . 
 One night in April , 1942 , this officer was the captain of an aircraft which attacked Pilsen . During the return flight his aircraft was attacked by an enemy fighter and sustained damage ; the hydraulics were shot away and the turret rendered unserviceable , while a fire broke out in the middle of the fuselage . Displaying great presence of mind , Pilot Officer Lamason coolly directed his crew in the emergency and , while 2 of them dealt with the fire , he skilfully outmanoeuvred his attacker and finally shook him off . By his fine airmanship and great devotion to duty , Pilot Officer Lamason was undoubtedly responsible for the safe return of the aircraft and its crew . This officer has completed 21 sorties and he has at all times displayed courage and ability . 
 After his first tour ended flying Stirlings with 218 Squadron , Lamason then instructed other pilots at 1657 Heavy Conversion Unit . Returning to operations with No. 15 Squadron RAF , Lamason was twice Mentioned in Despatches , first on 2 June 1943 and again , having received promotion to acting squadron leader , on 14 January 1944 . He was awarded a Bar to his DFC on 27 June 1944 , for " courage and devotion to duty of a high order " and " vigorous determination " in attacks on Berlin and other heavily @-@ defended targets . Lamason was presented his award after the war by King George VI at Buckingham Palace , where he met and befriended a young Princess Elizabeth , later to be queen . A day after making an emergency landing at an American base in England , Lamason was introduced to , shook hands and spoke with Clark Gable . 
 Lamason was not afraid to speak his mind . On the night of 30 / 31 March 1944 , when 795 bombers were sent to attack Nuremberg , he was very critical of the route chosen , warning his station commander that heavy losses could be expected . On the moonlit night , 95 bombers were lost , its heaviest losses of the entire war during a single raid . 
 = = Buchenwald = = 
 On 8 June 1944 , Lamason was serving as a flight commander in a Lancaster <unk> LS @-@ H of No. 15 Squadron RAF , on his 45th operation , when he was shot down during a raid on railway marshalling yards at Massy @-@ Palaiseau near Paris . Lamason recalled : 
 On the night of the raid our bomber was spotted by a German fighter , which locked on to it . I decided to turn and fight him . Within seconds an incendiary round hit a wing and caught the fuel tank . I gave the order to bail out as the gas torched . But Robbie , our mid @-@ upper gunner , kept on firing . When he eventually did jump , we no longer had enough height . I saw his parachute open , but too late . He must have died on impact . I pushed the navigator out and managed to jump clear at the last minute . 
 Along with his English navigator , Flying Officer Ken Chapman , Lamason was picked up by members of the French Resistance and hidden at various locations for seven weeks . In August , while attempting to reach Spain along the Comet line , Lamason and Chapman were captured by the Gestapo in Paris after they were betrayed by the French double agent Jacques <unk> for 10 @,@ 000 francs each . After interrogation at the Gestapo headquarters in Paris , they were taken to Fresnes Prison . Many fliers were classified as " <unk> " ( terror flier ) by the Germans , and were not given a trial . The most common act for allied airmen to be classified a terror flier was to be captured in civilian clothing and / or without their dog tags . The German Foreign Office decided that these captured enemy airmen should not be given the legal status of prisoner of war ( POWs ) but should instead be treated as criminals and spies . Consequently , Lamason was amongst a group of 168 allied airmen from Great Britain , United States , Australia , Canada , New Zealand and Jamaica who , along with over 2 @,@ 500 French prisoners , were taken by train — in overcrowded cattle boxcars — from Fresnes Prison outside Paris , to Buchenwald concentration camp . As the airmen were herded into the boxcars , Lamason protested about the poor treatment of the airmen , only to be struck in the face by a SS guard . Lamason fell to the ground and captured pilot Roy Allen watched as a SS Major pulled a Luger from his holster and thought Lamason would be shot on the spot . After five days travel , during which the airmen received very little food or water , they arrived at Buchenwald on 20 August 1944 . 
 Buchenwald was a labour camp of about 60 @,@ 000 inmates of mainly Russian POWs , but also common criminals , religious prisoners ( including Jews ) , and various political prisoners from Germany , France , Poland , and Czechoslovakia . It was known for its brutality and barbaric medical experiments . Upon arrival , Lamason , as ranking officer , demanded an interview with the camp commandant , Hermann <unk> , which he was granted . He insisted that the airmen be treated as POWs under the Geneva Conventions and be sent to a POW camp . The commandant agreed that their arrival at Buchenwald was a " mistake " but they remained there anyway . The airmen were given the same poor treatment and beatings as the other inmates . For the first three weeks at Buchenwald , the prisoners were totally shaved , denied shoes and forced to sleep outside without shelter in one of Buchenwald 's sub @-@ camps , known as ' Little Camp ' . Little Camp was a quarantine section of Buchenwald where the prisoners received the least food and harshest treatment . 
 After their first meal , Lamason stepped forward and said : 
 Attention ! ... Gentlemen , we have ourselves in a very fine fix indeed . The goons have completely violated the Geneva Convention and are treating us as common thieves and criminals . However , we are soldiers . From this time on , we will also conduct ourselves as our training has taught us and as our countries would expect from us . We will march as a unit to roll call and we will follow all reasonable commands as a single unit . 
 Lamason then instructed the group not to trust the SS , or provoke them in any way because as they had experienced on the train , the guards were unpredictable and trigger @-@ happy . Also , they were not to explore the camp because of the chance of breaking unknown rules , but to stay together and keep as far away from the guards as possible . He further stated that acting on the group 's behalf , he would make further contact with the camp authorities for recognition of their rights . Lamason then proceeded to organise the airmen into groups by nationality and appointed a Commanding officer within each group . Lamason did not do this just to improve their morale but because he also saw it as his responsibility to carry on his war duties despite the adverse circumstances . Captured US pilot Joe Moser believed that Lamason also did this because if the right opportunity presented itself , the group would be able to operate much more effectively if military discipline and operations were applied . Lamason 's leadership boosted the airmen 's spirits and gave them hope while instilling a level of discipline and bearing . One of the first assignments Lamason gave was to mount a guard detail , both day and night , to prevent pilfering by other inmates , which had begun during their first night at camp . During their incarceration , Lamason also insisted the airmen march , parade and act as a military unit , a behavior which infuriated the camp authorities while simultaneously impressing them . 
 Within days of their arrival , Lamason met Edward Yeo @-@ Thomas , a British spy being held at Buchenwald under the alias Kenneth Dodkin . Lamason , who knew the real Dodkin quite well , immediately became suspicious and later confided in Christopher Burney , who assured Lamason the cover was legitimate . Through Yeo @-@ Thomas and Burney , Lamason was introduced to two Russian colonels , senior members of the International Camp Committee , an illegal underground resistance group of prisoners in the main camp . As senior officer , Lamason had access to the main camp and quickly built a rapport with the group . As a result , he was able to secure extra blankets , clothes , clogs and food for the airmen . Lamason also built a rapport with two other prisoners ; French Scientist Alfred <unk> and Dutch Olympian trainer Jan Robert . Both men had developed trustworthy contacts within the camp administrative area and were able to provide Lamason with reliable intelligence that assisted in the survival of the airmen . 
 For the next six weeks , Lamason negotiated with <unk> and the German camp authorities , but his requests to have the airmen transferred to proper POW camps were denied . One captured British airman , Pilot Officer Splinter <unk> , was a Dutchman flying for the Royal Air Force . <unk> , who spoke fluent German , regularly acted as an interpreter for Lamason when he negotiated with the camp authorities . Because Buchenwald was a forced labor camp , the German authorities had intended to put the 168 airmen to work as slave @-@ labor in the nearby armament factories . Consequently , Lamason was ordered by an SS officer to instruct the airmen to work , or he would be immediately executed by firing squad . Lamason refused to give the order and informed the officer that they were soldiers and could not and would not participate in war production . After a tense stand @-@ off , during which time Lamason thought he would be shot , the SS officer eventually backed down . 
 Most airmen doubted they would ever get out of Buchenwald because their documents were stamped with the acronym " <unk> " ( <unk> in <unk> <unk> Lager ) , or " not to be transferred to another camp " . At great risk , Lamason and Burney secretly smuggled a note through a trusted Russian prisoner , who worked at the nearby <unk> airfield , to the German Luftwaffe of their captivity at the camp . The message requested in part , that an officer pass the information to Berlin , and for the Luftwaffe to intercede on behalf of the airmen . Lamason understood that the Luftwaffe would be sympathetic to their predicament , as they would not want their captured men treated in the same way ; he also knew that the Luftwaffe had the political connections to get the airmen transferred to a POW camp . 
 Eventually , Lamason 's persistence paid off . Under the pretence of inspecting aerial bomb damage near the camp , two Luftwaffe officers ( including Hannes Trautloft ) made contact with the airmen and also spoke to Lamason . Convinced the airmen were not spies , but bona @-@ fide airmen , Trautloft reported his findings to command . After reading the report , an outraged Hermann Göring demanded ' at the highest level ' the transfer of the airmen to Luftwaffe control . Unknown to all airmen except Lamason , their execution had been scheduled for 26 October , if they remained at Buchenwald . News of the airmen 's scheduled execution had been conveyed to Lamason by a German political prisoner , Eugen <unk> , who had a reliable contact within the camp administrative area . Lamason discussed the information at length with Yeo @-@ Thomas , Burney and Robert and they concluded there was little that could be done to avert the mass execution . Lamason decided not to inform the airmen , but to keep this information to himself to keep morale high and in the slight hope the Luftwaffe would intervene in time . Then , on the night of 19 October , seven days before their scheduled execution , 156 of the 168 airmen , including Lamason , were transferred from Buchenwald to Stalag Luft III by the Luftwaffe . 
 Two airmen died at Buchenwald . The other ten , who were too ill to be moved with the main group , were transported to Stalag Luft III in small groups over a period of several weeks . In the two months at Buchenwald , Lamason had lost 19 kilograms ( 42 lbs ) and had contracted diphtheria and dysentery . At Stalag Luft III , he spent a month in the infirmary recovering . In late January 1945 , all Stalag Luft III POWs were force @-@ marched to other POW camps further inside Germany . Lamason and Chapman were marched to Stalag III @-@ A outside <unk> , where they remained until liberated by the Russian army at the end of the war in Europe . Lamason and Chapman were taken to Hildesheim airfield and flown to Brussels and then onto England . 
 Many airmen credit their survival at Buchenwald to the leadership and determination of Lamason . Captured pilot Stratton Appleman stated that " they were very fortunate to have Lamason as their leader " . Another airman , Joe Moser , stated that Lamason was a great leader whom he would have been glad to follow anywhere he asked . British pilot James Stewart described Lamason as " a wonderful unsung hero " . In the book 168 Jump into Hell , Lamason was described as having single @-@ minded determination , selflessness , cold courage and forcefulness in the face of the threat of execution by the camp authorities because he was their leader and said that Lamason quickly established himself as a legendary figure in the airmen 's eyes . In the National Film Board of Canada 1994 documentary , The Lucky Ones : Allied Airmen and Buchenwald , captured pilot Tom Blackham stated that Lamason was not only the senior officer , but also their natural leader . Lamason emerged from Buchenwald with a giant reputation . In the book Destination Buchenwald , Lamason stated that he felt deeply honoured to have been the senior officer during the Buchenwald period . 
 = = Aftermath and later life = = 
 Following their liberation and return to England , Lamason was asked to consider commanding one of the Okinawa squadrons for the final attack on Japan . However , the RNZAF refused and Lamason returned to New Zealand , arriving there the day after the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima . After the war , Lamason was discharged from the air force on 16 December 1945 . In 1946 , Lamason was asked to be the lead pilot to test the flight paths for a new British airport . As part of the agreement , he was offered a farm in Berkshire . However , family said he needed to be home instead and Heathrow Airport went ahead without him . In 1948 , Lamason moved to Dannevirke , a small rural community north east of Palmerston North where he acquired 406 acres and became a farmer until his retirement . 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , Lamason was a regular speaker at KLB ( initials for <unk> Buchenwald ) Club reunions , a club formed by the allied airmen while detained in Buchenwald . Lamason was also a member of the Caterpillar Club , an informal association of people who have successfully used a parachute to bail out of a disabled aircraft . 
 Lamason hid the fact for 39 years that the order for the airmen 's execution was given and scheduled for 26 October 1944 , first mentioning it at a Canadian POW convention in Hamilton in 1983 . In May 1987 , the New Zealand government in Wellington approved a fund to compensate servicemen held in German concentration camps and Lamason was awarded $ 13 @,@ 000 . However , Lamason was never honoured by his homeland for his leading role in saving the lives of the allied airmen at Buchenwald . 
 In 1994 , the National Film Board of Canada released a documentary movie titled , “ The Lucky Ones : Allied Airmen and Buchenwald ” , in which former Allied airmen recounted their personal and collective stories of life before , during and after Buchenwald . Lamason was interviewed and mentioned throughout the documentary . Lamason was also portrayed in the History Channel ’ s 2004 documentary " Shot from the Sky " , about the real life saga of B @-@ 17 pilot Roy Allen , one of the captured airmen taken to Buchenwald . In April 2005 , Lamason , then 86 , recollected the events of Buchenwald on TV New Zealand . In June 2010 , Lamason , then 91 , was interviewed again about his experience at Buchenwald by Mike Dorsey . This and other interviews with Lamason are featured in Dorsey 's 2011 documentary film titled , Lost Airmen of Buchenwald , which tells the complete story of the 168 Allied airmen who were sent to Buchenwald , including Lamason . Mike Dorsey said Lamason remained scarred by his experiences to the extent that Dorsey said “ I have a feeling that Lamason , to put it in a word , has no time for the Germans . ” 
 Lamason died at his home on 19 May 2012 , on the farm outside Dannevirke where he had lived for over 60 years . He was 93 and at the time of his death , survived by two sons and two daughters , his wife ( Joan née Hopkins ) having died in 2009 . In November 2015 , it was announced that a book recounting and honouring Lamason 's life would be written by <unk> author Hilary Pedersen by September 2018 ( what would have been Lamason 's 100th birthday ) . 
 = Cyclone Jasmine = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Jasmine ( RSMC Nadi designation : 12F , JTWC designation : 10P ) was a long @-@ lived annular tropical cyclone that affected several countries , particularly Vanuatu and Tonga , over a 19 @-@ day span in February 2012 . The system was the second cyclone and the only severe tropical cyclone of the relatively quiet 2011 – 12 South Pacific cyclone season . Cyclone Jasmine developed from an area of disturbed weather on 1 February in the Gulf of Carpentaria . Initially , the storm moved towards the east and across the Cape York Peninsula . As it moved across the South Pacific , earlier existing wind shear conditions lessened , and Jasmine began to strengthen at a faster rate . Steadily intensifying , Jasmine reached peak intensity on 8 February as a Category 4 equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , while beginning to show annular characteristics . 
 The next day Jasmine entered an area of vertical wind shear , which consequently weakened the cyclone and caused its eye to expand . A high pressure area south of Jasmine later steered the weakening cyclone to the northeast on 12 February . Although it entered an area of warmer sea surface temperatures , Jasmine subsequently entered extratropical transition and later degenerated into an extratropical cyclone on 16 February , and later dissipated completely on 19 February . 
 Cyclone Jasmine affected five countries during its existence . The predecessor to Jasmine brought heavy rainfall to areas of extreme northern Queensland . Jasmine also brought rainfall to areas of the Solomon Islands . As a result , pest infestations occurred across the region . In Vanuatu , heavy rains and wind from Jasmine destroy numerous crops . Banana trees in particular are affected by the cyclone . Jasmine inundated areas of Tonga that had already been affected by Cyclone Cyril just a week prior . Nuku 'alofa recorded half of its average monthly rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour span due to rains associated with the cyclone . After the season , the name Jasmine was retired from the Australian list of tropical cyclone names . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During 31 January the Australian Bureau of Meteorology started to monitor a tropical low , that had developed within the monsoon trough over the western Cape York Peninsula . Over the next day the system moved into the southeastern part of the Gulf of Carpentaria , before it moved back over the Cape York Peninsula during 2 February . The system subsequently emerged into the Coral Sea to the north of Cairns later that day , where a strong northwest monsoon flow with gales developed to the north of the low . The system subsequently moved eastwards and intensified into a category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . 
 On 1 February , the Australian Bureau of Meteorology 's Brisbane tropical cyclone warning centre ( TCWC Brisbane ) and the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began to monitor a tropical low that had developed within a monsoon trough about 135 km ( 85 mi ) to the north of Mornington Island . Over the next two days the low moved eastwards and passed over the Cape York Peninsula before it emerged into the Coral Sea to the north of Cairns . After emerging into the Coral Sea the low continued to develop , and on 4 February , the JTWC and TCWC Brisbane reported that the system had become a tropical cyclone with the latter naming it as Jasmine while it was located about 420 km ( 260 mi ) to the east of Cairns . 
 Tracking eastward , Jasmine entered a flow of dry air , which prevented the storm from strengthening quickly at the time . On 5 February , the low – level atmospheric circulation center of Jasmine became exposed due to the presence of strong vertical wind shear . However , the cyclone was able to maintain its intensity due to the existence of an area of moisture over Australia . Throughout the rest of the day , the wind shear subdued , and the system began to organize as convective banding wrapped around the center . As a result , Cyclone Jasmine intensified into the equivalent of a Category 2 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale , with winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , sustained for 10 minutes . The next day , Cyclone Jasmine began to track to the east – southeast in response to a strengthening subtropical ridge . The cyclone continued to steadily intensify as convection continued to wrap tightly around the center of Jasmine . At the same time , the storm moved out of the BOM 's area of responsibility and into the area of responsibility of the Fiji Meteorological Service 's ( FMS ) tropical cyclone warning center at Nadi , Fiji ( RSMC Nadi ) . 
 Late on 7 February , while still tracking to the east – southeast , Jasmine rapidly intensified , with wind speeds increasing to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , sustained for one minute . The cyclone developed a ragged eye stretching 40 km ( 25 mi ) across . Later that day , Jasmine reached its peak intensity as it passed 280 km ( 175 mi ) to the north – northeast of New Caledonia , with wind speeds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 4 cyclone on both the Australian and Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scales ( SSHS ) . Throughout 8 February , Jasmine began to show characteristics of an annular hurricane , maintaining a large , asymmetric eye and rather shallow convective features . In addition , multiple eyewall <unk> developed within the eye . 
 However , Jasmine did not maintain its peak intensity for an extended period of time . By 9 February , the cloud tops surrounding Jasmine began to warm , and thus weakened . In addition , the cyclone began to enter cooler SSTs . Although Jasmine 's convective bands continued to thin out , the cyclone maintained a gradually expanding eyewall and remained a compact system . By 10 February , the eyewall of Cyclone Jasmine measured 95 km ( 60 mi ) in diameter . The next day , the subtropical ridge that had been forcing Jasmine toward the southeast had weakened , and as a result the cyclone began to track east – northeast , toward a weakness in the ridge . The storm continued to disorganize , with its eye later becoming cloud – filled . By the end of 11 February , Jasmine had already weakened to a cyclone with wind speeds of just 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , sustained for one minute , due to the presence of strong vertical wind shear . The low – level circulation center of Jasmine became partly exposed for a period of time on 12 February , before convection redeveloped over the center . As a weakening cyclone , Jasmine only maintained an area of weak convection displaced to its east as it approached Tonga . 
 On 13 February , convection re @-@ developed and later strengthened over Jasmine 's center of circulation due to the presence of the South Pacific convergence zone and warm SSTs . Cyclone Jasmine was able to attain a secondary peak intensity of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , sustained for one minute , as the system 's banding features became better defined . Due to Jasmine 's position between two anticyclones , the cyclone erratically moved in a loop in the vicinity of Tonga from 14 to 15 February , before moving to the southeast . The system later exited the favorable conditions and moved into an area of strong wind shear once again . Convection became sheared apart and Jasmine 's center of circulation once again became ill – defined and exposed . Late on 15 February , the JTWC issued their last advisory on the system , and on the next day , RSMC Nadi reported that Cyclone Jasmine had degenerated into an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 During its existence , parts of Queensland , the Solomon Islands , Vanuatu , New Caledonia , Fiji and Tonga were affected by Cyclone Jasmine . The name Jasmine was retired from the Australian list of tropical cyclone names after the season by the World Meteorological Organization , and was replaced by the name Jenna . 
 = = = Queensland = = = 
 Early in its existence , Jasmine produced numerous rain showers over northern areas of Queensland . Gusty winds in Weipa , Queensland from Jasmine damaged trees on 2 February . A strong rainband associated with the cyclone produced heavy rainfalls over southern parts of Queensland . After Jasmine entered the Coral Sea , a surface trough extending from the cyclone produced rainfall over coastal areas of eastern Australia . In Cairns , Queensland , several roads were closed due to severe weather associated with the cyclone , and trees were uprooted by strong winds . Power lines in the northern suburbs of Cairns were also damaged due to strong winds . Other areas of Queensland recorded rain totals in excess of 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 = = = Vanuatu = = = 
 Prior to Cyclone Jasmine , the Vanuatu National Disaster Management Office was preparing for the cyclone after the storm was forecast to impact the country . The aid agency Oxfam prepared for food and water shortages , using the previous year 's severe weather to gauge potential impacts from Cyclone Jasmine . The Save the Children Fund prepared materials prior to the cyclone that could supply area schools with materials , known as a " school @-@ in @-@ a @-@ box . " People in affected areas were evacuated to care centers prior to the storm . 
 Within Vanuatu , gale force winds caused damage to crops , houses and water systems . Across the southern islands of Vanuatu , Jasmine impacted the area with winds of 165 km / h ( 103 mph ) . Warnings for maritime activities including small craft warnings were issued for areas offshore the islands . The cyclone produced rough seas at Port Vila , Vanuatu . Damage associated with Jasmine was mostly of agricultural nature , primarily to crops and fruit trees . <unk> and banana crops were hampered by the storm , but did not pose any threat to food security . Damage to infrastructure was reported in Tanna , though the island suffered from primarily losses to food crops . Areas that had traditions of not consuming severed crops were especially impacted by the damage to food crops . Water sources in southwest Tanna were destroyed , and other sources were contaminated from mud from runoffs . In addition , three classrooms at <unk> Primary School were destroyed by Jasmine . <unk> Island also suffered from food damage , especially to banana and manioc crops , as well as orange trees . At <unk> Airport , high frequency radio services were cut off . Futuna Island was also cut off due to loss of communication . At Dillon 's Bay , one of <unk> 's primary water sources , water became contaminated . In addition , several air strips were closed due to water logging and debris . An aerial and ground damage survey began in the southern areas of the island chain after cyclone effects had subsided . 
 = = = Solomon Islands = = = 
 Jasmine caused intense rain showers across the island chain . The Solomon Islands Meteorological Service ( SIMS ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Watch Advisory throughout the day for affected areas . Isabel Province reported damage to <unk> vines after three days of rain from the cyclone . Pest infestations also resulted from the rains . Most of the damage in the province resulted from overflowing rivers and inundated gardens . Makira @-@ <unk> Province also suffered from damaged food gardens . Cocoa bean , coconut , nut , and banana crops and plantations were damaged . In addition , bridges were washed out by flooding . The ship MV <unk> was grounded in Maro ’ u Bay due to high waves offshore . 
 = = = Tonga = = = 
 Jasmine brought heavy rains and flooding to Tonga , which had already been impacted by heavy rains from Cyclone Cyril just a week prior . Power outages occurred across Tonga due to the storm , but power was quickly restored . International and domestic flights in Tonga were disrupted for two days due to Jasmine . Tongatapu suffered from severe flooding . Affected families were sent to evacuation shelters . Some houses reportedly collapsed and fell into creeks due to the flooding . In Nuku 'alofa , a total of 400 people were evacuated . In a 24 – hour period extending from 14 February to 15 February , 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of rain was recorded in Nuku 'alofa , equal to more than half of the city 's average recorded rainfall in the month of February . On <unk> Island , a resort was closed for two weeks due to damage sustained from the storm . An offshore South Korean fishing boat sunk during the storm . However , its three crew members were rescued by Tongan police . An additional two fishing boats broke away from Nuku 'alofa Harbor and washed up on a nearby reef . The Tongan Ministry of Health monitored the potential for diseases after the storm , particularly in low – lying areas of the island chain , where septic leakage was a potential health threat . 
 = Boy Scouting ( Boy Scouts of America ) = 
 Boy Scouting is a membership level of the Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) for boys and young men . It provides youth training in character , citizenship , and mental and personal fitness . Boy Scouts are expected to develop personal religious values , learn the principles of American heritage and government , and acquire skills to become successful adults . 
 To achieve these , Boy Scouting applies eight methods of Scouting : Ideals ( viz . , the Scout Oath , the Scout Law , the Scout Motto , and the Scout Slogan ) , the patrol method , participation in outdoor programs , advancement , adult association , personal growth , leadership development , and the uniform . 
 Boy Scouting is generally available to boys between the ages of 10 and eighteen . They are organized in Scout troops , administered by volunteers with support of paid professional staff . Youth and adult members are Scouts , the boys are referred to as Boy Scouts , and the adults as Scouters . 
 In 1994 , the Chronicle of Philanthropy , an industry publication , released the results of the largest study of charitable and non @-@ profit organization popularity and credibility . The study showed that the Boy Scouts was ranked as the 7th " most popular charity / non @-@ profit in America " of over 100 charities researched with 42 % of Americans over the age of 12 choosing Love and Like A lot for the Boy Scouts . 
 = = Program and activities = = 
 The troop program and activities are determined by the senior patrol leader and the patrol leaders council under the oversight of the Scoutmaster . Troops generally hold meetings weekly , although they can be irregular during the summer . Troop meeting activities may vary from training in Scout skills to planning camping trips or playing games . 
 Troops may plan outings and activities outside the troop meeting . These may involve camping , backpacking , hiking , canoeing , rafting , climbing , caving , rappelling , and other activities . These outings are an important place for Scouts to work on skills and rank advancement , have fun , and engage in productive outdoor activities . 
 Most councils own and operate one or more permanent camps . These camps may host a variety of activities throughout the year . The summer camp program provides a week @-@ long session for troops that includes merit badge advancement and adventure activities . Facilities may include ranges for shooting sports — archery , rifle , and shotgun — and for climbing and rappelling . 
 It is common for several troops within a district or council to gather at least once a year at a special weekend <unk> called a camporee . A camporee is a <unk> or council @-@ wide event where several units camp and engage in activities , Scoutcraft competitions and learn specialized skills . 
 The national Scout jamboree usually occurs every four years , and draws more than 30 @,@ 000 Scouts from across the country and the world . The last jamboree took place in 2013 at the BSA 's new property , The Summit in West Virginia . The Summit is to be a permanent place for the Jamboree and an opportunity to construct a new high @-@ adventure base . 
 = = = Ideals = = = 
 The Scout Law , Scout Oath , Scout Motto , Scout Slogan , and Outdoor Code are the cornerstones of Boy Scouting . Each Scout learns to make these ideals a part of their way of life and personal growth . Boy Scouts must memorize and understand these ideals . They also represent these ideals symbolically in official emblems . 
 The Scout Sign is used when giving the Scout Law or the Scout Oath and as a signal for silence . The Scout Salute is used when saluting the flag of the United States . The left @-@ handed handshake is used as a token of friendship and as an identity with Scouts worldwide . 
 = = = Emblems = = = 
 Boy Scouting uses a series of medals and patches as emblems . The badge for the Scout rank consists of a simple fleur @-@ de @-@ lis , which symbolizes a compass needle . The needle points the Scout in the right direction , which is onward and upward . The Tenderfoot badge takes the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis of the Scout badge and adds two stars and an eagle with an American shield . The stars symbolize truth and knowledge ; the eagle and shield symbolize freedom and readiness to defend it . The Second Class badge features a scroll inscribed with the Scout Motto , with the ends turned up and a knotted rope hanging from the bottom . The knot reminds each Scout to remember the Scout slogan , and the upturned ends of the scroll symbolize cheerfulness in service . The First Class badge combines the elements of the Tenderfoot and Second Class badges . For years , the First Class badge was used as the emblem of the BSA . Star has a First Class symbol on a five @-@ pointed yellow star , and initially indicated the five merit badges required to earn the rank . Life has a First Class emblem on a red heart , and initially symbolized the first @-@ aid and health @-@ related merit badges that the rank required . Now it signifies that the ideals of Scouting have become a part of the Scout 's life and character . 
 = = = Uniform and insignia = = = 
 The uniform and insignia of the Boy Scouts of America gives a Scout visibility and creates a level of identity within both the unit and the community . The uniform is used to promote equality while showing individual achievement . While uniforms are similar in basic design , they do vary in color and detail to identify the different divisions of Cub Scouts , Boy Scouts , Varsity Scouts , Venturers , and Sea Scouts . 
 Scouts and adult leaders wear the Boy Scout uniform . It generally consists of a khaki button @-@ up shirt , olive green pants or shorts , belt , and neckerchief . The Scouter dress uniform is appropriate for professional Scouters and Scouting leaders on formal occasions . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Troop and patrols = = = 
 The troop is the fundamental unit of Boy Scouting . The troop size can vary from a minimum of five Scouts to several dozen . Each troop is sponsored by a community organization such as a business , service organization , private school , labor group or religious institution . The chartered organization is responsible for providing a meeting place and promoting a good program . A chartered organization representative manages the relationship between the troop , the chartered organization , and the BSA . 
 Each troop is divided into patrols of eight or so Scouts led by a patrol leader elected from within the patrol . Patrol meetings are generally held during the weekly troop meeting . The patrol 's independence from the troop varies among troops and between activities . Patrols ' autonomy becomes more visible at <unk> , where each patrol may set up its own camping and cooking area . Divisions between patrols may disappear during an event which only a small part of the troop attends . Patrols may hold meetings and even excursions separately from the rest of the troop . 
 Troops mix older and younger Scouts in the same patrols , so that the older boys can teach the younger ones more effectively . When a Webelos den crosses over from Cub Scouting to Boy Scouting , the " new Scout patrol " method may be used . The new Boy Scouts are kept together as a group , elect their own patrol leader , and are assigned a troop guide — an older Scout who acts as a mentor . 
 Some troops establish Venture patrols as an optional program for boys thirteen through seventeen years old . Venture patrols experience more autonomy from the troop than ordinary patrols , and provide older Scouts with expanded social contact and physical challenges . The Venture patrol is guided by the assistant Scoutmaster @-@ Venture who is responsible for Venture patrol activities . Venture patrol members wear the standard Boy Scout uniform with the Venture strip over the right pocket . Patrol members are Boy Scouts and should never be referred to as Venture Scouts . 
 = = = Other sections = = = 
 The Lone Scout program serves boys who cannot take part in a nearby troop on a regular basis because of distance , weather , time , disability , or other difficulties . While the Scout does not participate in troop or patrol activities , he does learn the fun , values , and achievements of Scouting . 
 Varsity Scouting is part of the Boy Scouting division of the BSA . It is an alternative available to boys ages fourteen through seventeen that takes basic Boy Scouting and adds high adventure , sporting , and other elements that are more appealing to older youth to accomplish the aims of character development , citizenship training , and personal fitness . Varsity Scouts are organized into teams , which are separate chartered units from a Boy Scout troop . Varsity Scouts participate in the standard Boy Scouting advancement program along with programs unique to Varsity Scouting . 
 The Order of the Arrow ( OA ) is a program of the Boy Scout division of the BSA . It is the BSA 's national honor society for experienced campers , based on Native American traditions , and dedicated to the ideal of cheerful service . Scouts and Scouters must belong to a troop or team to become OA members . The OA is run by youths under the age of 21 with adult Scouters serving as advisers . 
 = = Advancement and recognition = = 
 = = = Youth advancement = = = 
 Boy Scouts has seven ranks , grouped into two phases . The first phase of Scout , Tenderfoot , Second Class , and First Class is designed to teach the boy Scoutcraft skills , teamwork , and self @-@ reliance . Scout is the first rank , awarded when a boy first joins the Scouts , and requires just a rudimentary knowledge of Scouting 's ideals . Further ranks have progressive requirements in the areas of Scoutcraft , physical fitness , citizenship , personal growth , and Scout Spirit . Scouts with a permanent mental or physical disability may use alternate requirements , based on their abilities and approved by the council . 
 The second phase of Star , Life , and Eagle is designed to develop leadership skills and encourage the Scout to explore potential vocations and avocations through the merit badge program . These ranks require that the boy serve in a position of responsibility and perform community service . 
 The Eagle Scout requires , in addition to merit badges and a position of responsibility , a community service project planned and led entirely by the Eagle Scout candidate . After attaining the rank of Eagle , a Scout may earn Eagle Palms for additional tenure and merit badges . 
 Although Eagle is the highest rank , for which Scouts should strive , the number of Scouts achieving First Class within one year of joining is still one of the key measures of unit effectiveness . Studies have shown that if a Scout achieves First Class within a year of joining , he typically stays in Scouting for at least three years . Scouts who do so are more likely to retain Scout values as an adult and achieve the BSA primary mission of " producing useful citizens " . 
 Ranks and other recognitions are presented in a troop awards ceremony called the court of honor . The Eagle Scout rank is usually presented in a separate and special court of honor . 
 = = = Adult recognition = = = 
 Boy Scout leaders who complete training , tenure , and performance requirements are recognized by a system of awards . The Scouters Training Award is available to leaders , while the Scouter 's Key and Scoutmaster Award of Merit are only available to the Scoutmaster . The pinnacle of Scout leader training is Wood Badge , for which successful participants receive a special neckerchief , woggle and wooden beads on a thong . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Several religious emblems programs are administered by various religious institutions and recognized by the BSA . These are generally recognized by a medal and an embroidered square knot . Other advancement and recognitions — such as the 50 @-@ <unk> award , Crime Prevention Awards , Emergency Preparedness Award and World Conservation Award — are available to Scouts who show proficiency in special areas . BSA 's National Court of Honor is responsible for lifesaving and meritorious awards . All Courts of Honor for Eagle Scout rank are convened as National Courts of Honor also . 
 = = Leadership in the troop = = 
 Every troop has two separate leadership structures : one consisting of Scouts and another consisting of adults . The adult leadership manages the logistics of troop activities , administers rank advancement and awards , maintains troop records and finance , and recruits new Scouts and adult leaders . The youth leadership keeps order and coordinates labor at activities . Scouts and adults cooperate to plan agendas for troop meetings , as well as the troop 's schedule of outings . 
 = = = Adult leadership = = = 
 The troop committee is made up of responsible adults who are approved by the local council and the chartered organization . The committee chairman leads the committee and appoints its members to specific tasks such as treasurer , secretary , advancement , activities , equipment and membership . The committee and the chartered organization representative are responsible for the selection of the Scoutmaster and assistant Scoutmasters . The Scoutmaster must be at least twenty @-@ one and is directly responsible for training and guiding the boy leaders , working with other adults to bring Scouting to boys , and for using the methods of Scouting to achieve the aims of Scouting . A troop may have a chaplain who helps to provide a spiritual element in the unit program , provides spiritual counseling as needed , and encourage Scouts to participate in the religious emblems program . 
 = = = Youth leadership = = = 
 The youth leader of the troop is the senior patrol leader ( SPL ) , elected by the Scouts in the troop . He is responsible for the overall performance of the troop , runs troop meetings and ensures that the program for troop meetings and other activities is carried out . He is advised by the Scoutmaster . There may also be one or more assistant senior patrol leaders . Each patrol elects a patrol leader who then appoints an assistant patrol leader and other positions within the patrol . Together , the senior patrol leader , assistant senior patrol leader and patrol leaders make up the patrol leaders council ( PLC ) , the group of Scouts that is responsible for developing the troop 's program with the advice of the Scoutmaster . 
 There are other youth positions of responsibility in a troop ; the use of these positions is dependent on the size of the troop and the program . The junior assistant Scoutmaster ( <unk> ) is a 16- or 17 @-@ year @-@ old Scout who performs the same duties as an assistant Scoutmaster ; the scribe takes minutes at patrol leaders council meetings and troop meetings and is often responsible for taking attendance and collecting money or dues ; the quartermaster maintains the troop 's equipment ; the librarian maintains the troop library ; the chaplain aide works with the troop chaplain and promotes the religious program in the troop ; the troop historian maintains photos and records of troop functions , meetings and outings ; a den chief works with a den of Cub Scouts , assisting the den leaders and helps retain Cub Scouts when they cross over into Boy Scouts ; the troop guide is a senior Scout who provides guidance to new Scout patrols ; the Leave No Trace Coordinator ensures the Scouts are trained in and follow Leave No Trace Guidelines ; the Order of the Arrow representative provides a line of communication between the Order of the Arrow and the troop ; the bugler provides music as needed ; the instructor teaches Scout skills . These troop positions are appointed by the senior patrol leader with the advice and counsel of the Scoutmaster , except for the Junior Assistant Scoutmaster , who is appointed by the Scoutmaster . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The BSA has a defined Youth Leadership Training Continuum to provide a growth path for youth leaders . The Scoutmaster provides Troop Leadership Training ( TLT ) at the troop level . Youth leaders are encouraged to attend National Youth Leadership Training ( NYLT ) at the council level and a select few may progress to National Advanced Youth Leadership Experience ( <unk> ) at the national level . Those interested in staffing these courses may complete the Youth Staff Development Course ( <unk> ) at the regional level . 
 New adult leaders are encouraged to attend training for their position . Completion of such training becomes mandatory for Scoutmasters in January 2011 and for Assistant Scoutmasters in January 2012 . This training provides the essential information they need to provide a safe and successful quality program . Fast Start Training is the introduction for adult leaders new to the Boy Scout program ; it is self pace and provided as a video or online . " This is Scouting " is common online core training for adult leaders in BSA and gives an overview of the Scouting . 
 Youth Protection Training ( YPT ) covers the BSA policies on preventing child abuse , including types and signs of abuse , how to respond to disclosed abuse and how to report suspected abuse . All Adult leaders are required to complete the Youth Protection Program before becoming registered . YPT re certification is required every two years . At least one person with current YPT certification must be preset on outings . 
 Scoutmasters and assistants should then attend Scoutmaster and Assistant Scoutmaster Specific Training and Introduction to Outdoor Leader Skills for further instruction in Scouting and outdoor skills . This completes Basic Leader Training for these positions and the Trained emblem may be worn . The troop committee chairman and members should attend the Troop Committee Challenge for instruction in administering the program . This completes Basic Leader Training for these positions and the Trained emblem may be worn . 
 Supplemental training modules are designed to provide orientation beyond Basic Leader Training . These shorter training sessions are often provided at the Roundtable , a monthly meeting of leaders from the district , at a University of Scouting offered by the local councils , and at National Training Conferences held at the Philmont Training Center and the Florida National High Adventure Sea Base . 
 At least one leader with current Safe Swim Defense training is required for swimming activities . Boating activities require Safety Afloat and CPR training . Climb On Safely training and CPR certification are required for climbing and rappelling events . 
 Wood Badge is advanced training for leadership skills for adults in the BSA . Wood Badge consists of six days of training ( usually presented as two three @-@ day weekends ) and an application phase of several months . When training is complete , leaders are recognized with the Wood Badge beads , neckerchief , and woggle . Powder Horn is a high adventure resource course designed to help Scout leaders to safely conduct outdoor activities of a fun and challenging nature , provide an introduction to the resources necessary to successfully lead their youth through a program of high adventure and to understand what is involved in different high adventure disciplines . 
 = A Night in Sickbay = 
 " A Night In Sickbay " is the thirty @-@ first episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the fifth episode of season two . It first aired on October 16 , 2002 on the UPN network within the United States . The episode was written by executive producers Brannon Braga and Rick Berman , and directed by David Straiton . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , after visiting the planet <unk> , Captain Archer 's ( Scott Bakula ) dog Porthos falls ill with an unknown pathogen . Archer stays overnight in sickbay to look after his dog with Doctor Phlox ( John Billingsley ) knowing that afterwards he must take part in an elaborate apology display to the Kreetassans . 
 The episode featured Vaughn Armstrong , who reprised his role of the Kreetassan Captain from the episode " Vox Sola " . Several scenes also proved challenging for the main dog actor who portrayed Porthos , who was named Breezy . She was required to lie still for long periods , jump into Bakula 's arms on command and also act on her own whilst her trainer was not on set . Berman compared the relationship between Archer and Phlox to The Odd Couple , saying that the episode was " a lot of fun " . The episode was nominated for the 2003 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( short form ) and received the highest Nielsen ratings for any episode of Enterprise during season two at that point . However , the critical reception was mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a five @-@ day away mission spent apologising on the planet <unk> , the away team consisting of Captain Archer , Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol , Ensign Sato , and Archer 's dog , Porthos , return to the ship to decontaminate . Porthos has acquired a pathogen on the planet surface and must be quarantined . Archer learns from Commander Tucker of the ship 's need for an extra plasma injector from the Kreetassans , but negotiations break down after it is discovered that Porthos had urinated on a sacred tree , insulting the Kreetassans . Archer reacts poorly to the news and is given a list of requirements he must meet in order to apologise . 
 He and Doctor Phlox then tend to Porthos , and Archer spends the night in Sickbay to be with his pet . Throughout the night , as Porthos ' immune system weakens , Archer experiences Phlox 's side of life in Sickbay . During the night , as he dreams of Porthos ' funeral , Archer also deals with unresolved and suppressed sexual tension with T 'Pol . He also relates to Phlox how he met Porthos , and how he was the last in a litter of four male puppies , the ' Four Musketeers ' . Through it all , Archer struggles to reach an emotional understanding with Phlox and T 'Pol , as the two alien senior @-@ crew members have little grasp of the human @-@ pet relationship , and Phlox keeps offering Archer unsolicited advice about dealing with his apparent feelings for T 'Pol . 
 T 'Pol , working out in the gym , also keeps urging Archer to apologize to the Kreetassans for Porthos ' behavior , but Archer resists because he blames them for Porthos ' illness . In the end , Porthos recovers following a pituitary transplant from an alien chameleon . Finally swallowing his pride , Archer then goes down to the Kreetassan capital and delivers an intricate ritual apology which involves slicing a tree trunk with a chainsaw , arranging the pieces of wood in a complex pattern on the ground , and chanting phrases in the Kreetassan language . Having successfully apologised to the Kreetassans , the crew finally manage to procure three plasma injectors prior to their departure . 
 = = Production = = 
 Executive producers Rick Berman and Brannon Braga had worked together to write a series of episodes for Star Trek : Enterprise , with " A Night in Sickbay " amongst them . Berman originally described the episode as a press junket when talking about season two at an event held by UPN for the Television Critics Association . He said it was a " very humorous episode that has our good captain going and spending some time in sickbay , because his dog gets sick . He moves into sickbay the same way a mother will move into the hospital when her child gets sick , and it ends up being an ' Odd Couple ' kind of an episode between the captain and Dr. Phlox . It 's a lot of fun . " Bakula also explained in an interview with the website <unk> that the episode featured Archer 's dog Porthos as a background character and that it was also about Archer spending a night in sickbay with Phlox . He said that this meant that the viewer will " find out a lot of stuff about [ Phlox ] that we may not have wanted to know ; like what he does when he 's in his off hours ... he has things to cut and trim ! " Billingsley said later that he enjoyed working with Bakula on this episode and called " A Night in Sickbay " one of his favourites . 
 The episode was directed by David Straiton , who had previously directed " Desert Crossing " . The shoot took six and a half days , which concluded on August 8 , 2002 . " A Night in Sickbay " was intended to be a low @-@ cost episode as the majority of scenes required only the use of the standing sets for the series . The only credited guest star in " A Night in Sickbay " was Vaughn Armstrong , who played the Kreetassan Captain once again . Armstrong is better known for his recurring role in Enterprise as Admiral Maxwell Forrest , but had previously played the Kreetassan Captain in the first season episode " Vox Sola " . In order to appear as the Captain , some three and a half hours of make @-@ up time was required , with the actor needed to arrive to have his make @-@ up applied at 5 : 30am for his one day of shooting . Armstrong appeared in a variety of different roles in several different Star Trek programs , dating back to the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one episode " Heart of Glory " . Other make @-@ up effects during this instalment of Enterprise included a pair of prosthetic feet for Dr. Phlox , although other effects for the character were added in post @-@ production . 
 = = = Porthos = = = 
 There were two Beagles portraying Porthos , who were supplied by Performing Animal Troupe , an animal supply company for film and television . These dogs included a female Beagle called Breezy , who was the main dog actor who played Porthos during season two . Breezy was the original double for male dog actor Prada who appeared in the first season episodes of Enterprise up until " Two Days and Two Nights " , when Breezy became the main dog . She had also previously appeared as Lou in the 2001 film Cats & Dogs . 
 More than one scene proved problematic for Breezy during the filming of the episode , as the decontamination room set was an enclosed four wall set , meaning that in the scene where Archer rubs down Porthos with decontamination gel , Breezy 's trainer Scott Rowe couldn 't be on the set with her . Normally he would have been behind the camera assisting the director by ensuring the dog is looking wherever the scene required . He hoped that with him off the set , that Breezy would look where required and not directly at the camera . In order to prepare for the scene where Porthos leaps out of an immersion tank and into Archer 's arms , Rowe had a mock @-@ up created so he could practice it with Breezy . He said that " By the time we went into it on that one day to prep on set with Scott , she was jumping out of it into my arms , but I had to make sure that she 's going to jump out and do it into Scott 's arms . " In the final scene , not only did Breezy leap into Bakula 's arms , but she also licked him repeatedly on the face . This wasn 't due to training , but because they wiped food on Bakula 's face . 
 A further challenge for the dog actor was to lie still in an isolation tank and not move even when petted by Bakula or Billingsley during some long scenes whilst on screen . At times a stunt dog was used , but Breezy was required for any close @-@ ups . A prosthetic Beagle was also created for the scenes in the isolation tank and to be submersed in a super @-@ hydration tank . The prop was created by Joel Harlow , who had also created make @-@ up designs for the television series Carnivàle and the film The Chronicles of Riddick . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " A Night in Sickbay " was first aired in the United States on the UPN network on October 16 , 2002 . It received Nielsen ratings of a 3 @.@ 9 / 6 percentage share among all adults , including 6 percent of all adults watching television at the time of the broadcast . Although overnight figures had shown a slight decrease from the previous episode , the final numbers showed that the ratings were the highest seen so far during season two and the third week of increased ratings for Enterprise in succession . This meant that 6 @.@ 26 million viewers watched the episode , an increase of 860 @,@ 000 viewers from the previous week 's episode , making it the highest viewed episode since season one 's " Sleeping Dogs " . Alexander Chase at USA Today said the numbers " confirm a ratings turnaround for the newest Trek series " . The episode placed Enterprise fourth in a list of the most highly rated science fiction / fantasy shows on television for that week , behind Alias , Smallville , and John Doe . 
 The review by " Herc " for the website Ain 't It Cool News , praised the story about how Porthos was named and the elements of sexual tension between Archer and T 'Pol . However , he didn 't think the Odd Couple type relationship between Archer and Phlox worked all the time with some misfires amongst the comedic elements . He gave the episode a rating of three out of five , describing it as " actually worth your valuable time " . Michelle Erica Green watched the episode for TrekNation , saying that she enjoyed the episode on the whole and enjoyed the characterisation . However , she criticised the non @-@ moving Beagle prop as it made her son think the dog was dead , which was then followed by " what looks like a drowned dog in formaldehyde " . Jamahl Epsicokhan reviewed the episode for his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , giving it a score of one out of four . He called it " easily the dumbest concept for an episode of Star Trek since Voyager 's holodeck was hijacked by the residents of Fair Haven " . He felt that the episode made a mockery out of the characters and that some of the situations they were placed in were just ridiculous . 
 The episode was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( short form ) at the 2003 awards alongside " Carbon Creek " and episodes of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Angel , and Firefly . The award went to the Buffy episode " Conversations with Dead People " . 
 The first home media release of " A Night in Sickbay " was part of the season two DVD box set , released in the United States on August 7 , 2005 . The release featured deleted scenes from the episode as well as a special feature on the episode entitled " Inside A Night in Sickbay " . A release on Blu @-@ ray Disc for season two occurred on August 20 , 2013 . 
 = Lyman Linde = 
 Lyman Gilbert Linde ( September 30 , 1920 – October 24 , 1995 ) was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played for the Cleveland Indians in the American League for two seasons . In four career games , Linde pitched 10 ⅔ innings and had a 6 @.@ 75 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 Born and raised in Wisconsin , Linde first played professionally with the Green Bay Bluejays . After a season with them , he enlisted in the armed forces for World War II , and joined the Greenville Spinners upon his return to baseball . During the next two seasons he spent some time with the Cleveland Indians , but mainly remained with the Indians ' minor league teams . After a year each in Oklahoma City , Baltimore , and San Diego , he spent the last four years of his career pitching for the Portland Beavers . He retired at the end of the 1953 season and died in 1995 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Linde attended high school at Beaver Dam High School in Beaver Dam , Wisconsin . While there , he played basketball as well as baseball , and was part of the state champion Beaver Dam High School basketball team in 1937 . After graduating , he played amateur baseball in Wisconsin for several years . In a state amateur baseball tournament in 1941 , Linde , representing the Beaver Dam Beavers , pitched a one @-@ hitter to help lead his team to a 9 – 1 win over the representatives from Fond du Lac County , Wisconsin . Linde attended the University of Wisconsin @-@ Madison on and off between 1939 and 1947 . 
 = = Minor leagues = = 
 Linde 's first taste of minor league action came in 1942 , when he signed with the Green Bay Bluejays of the Wisconsin State League . His performances that season included a near @-@ no @-@ hitter that was lost in the ninth inning in a 5 – 2 victory over the Fond du Lac Panthers . Linde was also given the most valuable player award for a week in July after a pitching performance , also against Fond du Lac , in which he struck out 14 batters in a 5 – 0 shutout victory . He finished the season with 13 wins , eight losses , and a 2 @.@ 91 ERA in 22 pitching appearances . After the season ended , the league folded temporarily , and Linde enlisted with the United States Army Air Forces to serve in World War II . 
 After returning from military service , Linde joined the Greenville Spinners , the Chicago White Sox minor league affiliate of the Sally League . He tried out for the Milwaukee Brewers , but was unable to make the team , and as a result was sent to Greenville to gain experience . Linde pitched in 29 games for the Spinners . In those 29 games , he had ten wins , eight losses , a 3 @.@ 50 ERA , and 121 innings pitched . After the conclusion of the season , in early November , Linde was drafted by the Cleveland Indians in the rule 5 draft . 
 The following season , Linde pitched for the Oklahoma City Indians , the Indians minor league affiliate of the Texas League . He spent most of the season with Oklahoma City , and in a pitching appearance in August , threw a no @-@ hitter and narrowly missed pitching a perfect game . In 32 appearances for Oklahoma City , Linde won 14 games , lost 13 , and had an ERA of 2 @.@ 85 in 202 innings pitched . At the end of the minor league season , Linde was called up to the Indians ' major league roster along with Ernest Groth in order to build up the end of the bullpen . 
 = = Cleveland Indians and Portland = = 
 Linde made his major league debut with the Indians on September 11 , 1947 , which ended up being his only appearance of the season . In that one appearance , he pitched ⅔ of an inning and allowed two earned run , finishing the game and season with an ERA of 27 @.@ 00 . During the off @-@ season , Linde played basketball with the <unk> Soaps , a team located in his native Beaver Dam . He took part in spring training with the rest of the Indians roster for the 1948 Cleveland Indians season . In late March , however , he was struck on the chin from a line drive hit by Indians manager Lou Boudreau , causing him to be sidelined for several days . By the end of spring training , Linde remained a part of the Indians roster . He pitched three games for the Indians early on in 1948 , pitching ten innings , allowing six earned runs and finishing the season with a 5 @.@ 40 ERA . After three games , he was demoted to the Baltimore Orioles of the International League . He spent the rest of the 1948 season as a starting pitcher for Baltimore . His performances included a one @-@ hit victory in his first appearance for the club . Linde finished the season with a 5 – 9 record and a 4 @.@ 50 ERA . 
 Linde spent 1949 with the San Diego Padres of the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) . He tried to earn a spot with the Indians during spring training but was unable to . He spent the season as a starting pitcher for San Diego , and threw three shutouts over the course of the season , allowing only three hits to the Los Angeles Angels in his third one . He finished the season with a 14 – 15 record in 35 pitching appearances ( 32 starts ) , a 4 @.@ 41 ERA , 105 strikeouts , and 226 ⅓ innings pitched . He brought the Padres to the playoffs , and pitched in game six of the championship against the Hollywood Stars , where he earned the 8 – 4 loss as the Stars won the PCL pennant and the Governors ' Cup . 
 At the start of the 1950 season , Linde signed a new contract with the Indians , but was released in February and sent to the Portland Beavers in the PCL . Over the course of the season , Linde won 5 games and lost 13 in 47 appearances , 18 of them starts , and amassed an ERA of 4 @.@ 66 . The following year , in 1951 , Linde became a regular starter on the team , and before the end of April he had won as many games as he had won all of last year . He finished the season with a 12 – 12 record and a 4 @.@ 29 ERA in 32 starts . In 1952 , Linde remained part of the core starting rotation of the past couple years alongside Red Adams and Marino <unk> . His performances included one against the Angels in which Linde kept the team to five hits as the Beavers won 4 – 3 in 11 innings . He won 11 games , lost 15 , threw 119 strikeouts , and brought his ERA down to 3 @.@ 10 in 41 season appearances , 28 of them starts . In 1953 , Linde started the season strong unlike his fellow pitchers , opening his season with a 2 – 1 victory against the Angels on April 3 . In early May , he ended Ted Beard 's streak of hitting safely in 12 straight at @-@ bats , which tied the PCL record at the time . Shortly afterward , Linde won what was considered an odd performance as he allowed 15 hits and 20 runners on base , yet won a game against the Sacramento Solons 8 – 3 . In his final professional season , Linde pitched in 36 games and finished with a 13 – 10 record and a 3 @.@ 36 ERA . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the 1953 season , Linde retired from baseball to tend to his wife , who was seriously ill . He died in Beaver Dam on October 24 , 1995 . 
 = James Morris III = 
 James Morris III ( ( 1752 @-@ 01 @-@ 19 ) January 19 , 1752 – April 20 , 1820 ( 1820 @-@ 04 @-@ 20 ) ) was a Continental Army officer from Connecticut during the American Revolutionary War and founder of the Morris Academy , a pioneer in coeducation . 
 Born in Litchfield County , Connecticut , James Morris spent his early life hoping and training to be a minister . However , after graduating from Yale College , Morris accepted a commission of First Lieutenant from the Continental Army and joined the fight for American Independence . Morris was captured during the Battle of Germantown and spent most of the remaining war in captivity . Upon his release , Morris was promoted to the rank of Captain and supported Alexander Hamilton in the Siege of Yorktown . When he returned from the war , Morris began and ran an academy that trained both boys and girls together , a rarity at the time . 
 James Morris died in 1820 . In 1859 , Morris 's hometown of South Farms , Connecticut was renamed Morris in his honor . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 James Morris was born to Deacon James Morris Jr. and Phebe Barns Morris in South Farms , Connecticut on January 19 , 1752 . 
 Even as a young man , Morris displayed a disposition for education , borrowing often from the library in nearby Bethlehem , where his father was a member . Through these studies , Morris hoped to eventually become a minister . When Morris was eighteen , his father sent him to live full @-@ time in Bethlehem and study under Dr. Joseph Bellamy . Morris continued with Bellamy until the spring of 1770 , when he spent the season studying under the South Farms minister Dr. Salmon Hurlburt . That fall Morris found yet another instructor in Mr. Nathan Hale , saying of him , " Mr. Hale was an accurate scholar and an able instructor . " 
 In September 1771 , Morris began more formal studies at Yale College . For his tutor at Yale , Morris was assigned future Yale president Timothy Dwight IV , who would be an influential force in coeducation in his own right . Morris was awarded his degree in July , 1775 , noting in his memoirs , " having had my share of honorary appointments . " 
 Upon graduation Morris returned to South Farms , where he helped his father with the harvest and took a post teaching grammar school in nearby Litchfield , where he received his first opportunity to teach and was paid " ' handsome wages ' hoping to reimburse his father for the heavy expenses of his college education . " 
 = = The War = = 
 = = = Commission and early service = = = 
 Morris 's tenure as an instructor in Litchfield was cut short when , within months of arriving , he received an unsolicited ensign 's commission in the Connecticut militia , which he accepted . While in the service of the Connecticut militia Morris saw his first action , fighting battles in both Long Island and White Plains . In his memoirs , Morris wrote of this time , stating that " The soldiers universally manifested a great respect for me , for my care of the sick and my attention to their wants , and for my sympathies in their distresses . " 
 In late December 1776 , Morris completed his commitment to the Connecticut militia and immediately accepted a commission in the Continental Army as a first lieutenant . After serving as a recruiting officer in Litchfield , Morris joined General George Washington and the army at Peekskill . On October 3 , 1776 , General Washington commanded this army in the Battle of Germantown . The American forces were ultimately unsuccessful in this battle and Morris was taken as a prisoner of war on October 4 , 1776 . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 The early part of Morris 's confinement were the most trying . He was taken to the " New Jail " in Philadelphia where he " was locked in a cold room ... destitute of everything by cold stone walls and bare floors — no kind of a seat to sit on — all total darkness , no water to drink or a morsel to eat ; without a blanket to cover [ him ] . " 
 Despite his meager accommodations , Morris decided to make the best of his imprisonment in Philadelphia by negotiating with his <unk> to borrow books from the so @-@ called circulating library recently established by Benjamin Franklin in that city . One historian points to this time as when Morris was exposed to the philosophers that would be so influential in his later life as an educator : " From Milton , James Morris absorbed ideas in favor of healthy exercises to develop both body and mind at the same time ; from Rollin , the danger of following custom blindly rather than reason ; and form Locke , the novel idea that the English language was as important as Latin and Greek . " 
 In May 1778 , Morris convinced his captors to admit him to parole and was sent to Flatbush , Long Island , where he stayed with a Mr. Clarkson . In his memoir , Morris noted that Clarkson was " a man of science and large property , ... who owned the most extensive private library that [ Morris ] had ever known in the United States . " While still in captivity Morris found this situation rather comfortable and took every advantage of the library he so admired . 
 On January 3 , 1781 , Morris was freed as part of a prisoner exchange . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Upon his release , Morris returned to Peekskill where he discovered that he had been promoted to the rank of captain while in the custody of the British . Morris commanded a company back to White Plains until he received orders to head south to Virginia . Upon arrival , Morris 's company , under the overall command of General George Washington , aided in Siege of Yorktown , the last major battle of the American Revolution . Specifically , Morris 's company of light infantry provided support to the forlorn hope commanded by Colonel Alexander Hamilton . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 James Morris returned to South Farms in December 1781 . Days after his return , on December 20 , he married Elizabeth Hubbard . Shortly thereafter , the people of South Farms made Morris both the Justice of the Peace and a Selectman . In the summer of 1782 Morris briefly returned to service , but was ultimately released from service in November of that year . 
 In the following years James and <unk> had five children : 
 Abigail Morris ( b . 8 / 2 / 1783 ) 
 James Morris , IV ( b . 12 / 4 / 1784 ) : 1803 Yale graduate , Tutor of the University of Georgia , Head of the Academy in <unk> , <unk> . 
 Reuben Smith Morris ( b . 5 / 24 / 1786 ) : 1804 Yale graduate , attorney in Cayuga , New York . 
 Samuel Hubbard Morris ( b . 2 / 6 / 1788 ) ( d . 12 / 22 / 1793 ) 
 Robert Hubbard Morris ( b . 7 / 25 / 1789 ) : " endowed with ' good academic education , ' " settled at Cayuga . " 
 In between the birth of James and Reuben , Morris became severely ill . During his illness , a man named Gad Farnam moved into the Morris 's home to care for him day and night . The two families became very close and Gad 's daughter Rhoda , only five years old at the time of the illness , later became Morris 's second wife . It was at this point in Morris 's life that he accepted that he would never realize his early dream of becoming a minister . 
 = = The Morris Academy = = 
 By 1790 , it had become common for children to come to Morris 's house for instruction and access to his library . Morris welcomed all of these students , both male and female . Morris 's coeducation caused some stir within the community when some claimed that his education of women was " ' blowing up their pride ' so that ' they would feel themselves above their mates and they would feel above labour . ' " In 1794 , these frustrations were brought to fruition when a hearing was held in the church . The charges were dismissed and the publicity from the controversy brought so much attention , that , by 1803 , he had instructed students " from all the New England States except Rhode Island , and from the States of New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Maryland , Virginia , South Carolina and Georgia . Also from the Island of St. Thomas in the West Indies , and from the Island of Bermuda . " 
 By the turn of the century , Morris found it necessary to formalize his instruction and construct a proper Academy building . The estimated cost was $ 1200 , so Morris enlisted wealthy residents of Litchfield and South Farms . 
 On November 28 , 1803 , The Morris Academy moved out of James Morris 's home and into the brand new building . For the period from 1803 to 1812 , the Morris Academy grew to an average of 50 @-@ 75 students . 
 The Academy was handed to several other heads of school , until , on April 12 , 1888 , the Morris Academy was closed for good . 
 In the introduction to her book on the academy , Barbara Nolen Strong noted : 
 The Morris Academy is entitled to be called a pioneer institution because of its ' open door ' policy in coeducation . It was not the first in the United States , not even in Connecticut , but none of the other early academies opened their doors as wide and kept them open as long . No other coeducational academy spread its influence so far . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In September 1814 Morris 's wife Elizabeth died . The following March , Morris married Rhonda Farnam and the marriage bore two children . 
 Jane Elizabeth Morris ( b . 1 / 30 / 1816 ) 
 Timothy Dwight Morris ( b . 11 / 22 / 1817 ) 
 During the " second war with Great Britain " , at the age of 61 , Morris was commissioned as a First Major of the Second Regiment of Volunteers in the State of Connecticut . 
 Toward the end of his life , Morris compiled his memoirs , which were subsequently published as Memoirs of James Morris of South Farms In Litchfield . 
 James Morris died on April 20 , 1820 and was buried in the graveyard at what is now commonly referred to as the East Morris cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In June , 1859 , South Farms was incorporated as Morris , Connecticut in his honor . 
 The James Morris Museum is located in the center of the town of Morris and contains original artifacts and writings of James Morris . 
 The foundation of The Morris Academy remains intact on the grounds of James Morris Elementary School , in Morris . 
 = Arbogast & Bastian = 
 Arbogast & Bastian ( also A & B Meats ) was the name of a slaughterhouse and meat packing plant located in Allentown , Lehigh County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . Once a national leader in hog slaughtering , the company had the capacity to process most of the 850 @,@ 000 hogs raised annually in Pennsylvania for slaughtering . In its heyday , Arbogast & Bastian slaughtered an average of 4 @,@ 000 hogs daily . 
 Arbogast & Bastian , which was founded in 1887 , operated for nearly one hundred years before filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1984 , citing cash flow issues brought about by market turmoil and labor disputes . The company filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy the following year . 
 With the sole exception of the company 's offices , the Arbogast & Bastian plant was demolished in the late 1990s . These surviving offices were later incorporated into the America On Wheels museum , which was opened on the site of the former Arbogast & Bastian plant in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Arbogast & Bastian Company was founded in 1887 by Wilson Arbogast and Morris Clinton Bastian . Arbogast , who was born in <unk> , Snyder County , Pennsylvania , in 1851 , was a school teacher by training who entered the wholesale provisioning business in the early 1880s in Phillipsburg , New Jersey . Bastian , who was born in Lower <unk> Township , Lehigh County , Pennsylvania , in 1859 , operated a general store in Allentown . 
 The two partners built a two story building and stable at 25 Hamilton Street in Allentown , purchased two horses , and started supplying provisions and lard to local businesses and distributors . They used their building as a smoke house , and offered " freshly @-@ smoked " hams and bacon that were prepared using meat purchased ready @-@ cured from other suppliers . Ready @-@ cured meat is that which , after slaughter and butchery , has been treated by curing in order to prevent the growth of bacteria and to reduce the opportunity for botulism to grow , allowing for much safer transport and storage . This grew into a strong business for Arbogast & Bastian , as previously these goods had to be imported from larger cities , such as New York City and Philadelphia , and suffered in freshness and quality because of the additional time and handling required to get the finished product to Allentown . 
 In 1890 , the company added a hog slaughtering department , in order to offer fresh pork and sausages to their customers . The capacity of the plant increased from 150 hogs per week at inception , to over 1 @,@ 500 hogs per week in 1905 . Pork brands offered included " Pure Home Rendered Lard " and " Old Dutch " hams and bacon . With their venture in pork successful , Arbogast & Bastian soon expanded in a similar manner with beef , lamb , and mutton , first by purchasing ready @-@ cured meat from suppliers in the West to learn the trade , then by building a full @-@ scale <unk> and cold @-@ storage facilities on @-@ site . By 1905 , the company was processing over 150 head of cattle , and a similar number of lambs and sheep , weekly . 
 Arbogast & Bastian Company was formally incorporated in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , with $ 200 @,@ 000 in capital ( $ 5 @.@ 47 million in 2016 dollars , adjusted for inflation ) , on June 19 , 1902 . The additional capital raised by the corporation was used to purchase more land and to build larger refrigeration facilities and a power plant . By 1905 , Arbogast & Bastian 's revenues exceeded $ 1 million per year ( $ 26 @.@ 3 million in 2016 dollars , adjusted for inflation . ) 
 The large Arbogast & Bastian facility now occupied a prominent location at Hamilton and Front streets in Allentown , along the Lehigh River . The facility received livestock and transported goods via tracks run to the plant by the Lehigh Valley Railroad . On July 14 , 1905 , a large fire destroyed the original Arbogast & Bastian plant and the company rebuilt a larger , more modern facility . It was the first reinforced concrete meat packing plant in the United States . The Arbogast & Bastian plant , which allowed for more sanitary and safer operations , was designed and built in direct response to the unsanitary conditions in Chicago 's meat packing plants exposed by Upton Sinclair in his book , The Jungle , which led to the passage of the Meat Inspection Act and the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 . 
 During World War II , 70 percent of Arbogast & Bastian 's output went to the United States armed forces and through the Lend @-@ Lease program to the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union , China , France and other Allied nations . By 1973 , Arbogast & Bastian had 700 employees processing 160 million pounds ( 73 million kg ) of meat a year , and the company had the capacity to butcher 7 @,@ 200 hogs and 1 @,@ 000 cattle a week . 
 Arbogast & Bastian filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on May 11 , 1984 , citing cash flow issues brought about by " two years of turbulent market conditions in the pork industry , " a labor dispute with the Teamsters labor union and the recent shutdown of A & B 's slaughtering operations . The bankruptcy was immediately triggered because one of the company 's customers had issued a stop @-@ payment on $ 800 @,@ 000 worth of checks paid to Arbogast & Bastian . The firm 's financial woes were further complicated by four large meat packing companies - Pork Cutters , Inc . , <unk> Pork Packers , Inc . , Otto <unk> and Son , Inc. and <unk> , Inc . - who collectively failed to pay for nearly $ 5 million worth of pork carcasses and meat products purchased from Arbogast & Bastian in 1983 and 1984 , according to charges made by the United States Department of Agriculture . In total , about 380 workers lost their jobs . Within months of filing for bankruptcy , Purity Bacon Products Corp. , one of A & B 's most profitable divisions , was sold for $ 1 million to an investor group led by Richard A. <unk> , the president of Arbogast & Bastian at the time it filed for bankruptcy . 
 The corporation filed for Chapter 7 liquidation on January 9 , 1985 . With the closure of Arbogast & Bastian , only two major meat processing facilities remained operating in the state of Pennsylvania - Hatfield Quality Meats of Hatfield , Pennsylvania , and Martins Abattoir & Wholesale Meats , Inc . , with headquarters in Godwin , North Carolina . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As early as 1989 , city officials in Allentown had announced plans to revitalize brownfield land along the Lehigh River , which included the abandoned Arbogast & Bastian plant . This redevelopment , which was to be known as " Lehigh Landing , " was originally to include a museum , a brewery , walking trails , a footbridge across the river , and a promenade for festivals . Allentown businessman Raymond E. Holland , former president of Holiday Hair Fashions , had purchased the abandoned Arbogast & Bastian plant for $ 250 @,@ 000 in 1985 and gave it to the Allentown Economic Development Corp. as a charitable contribution in 1990 . Development of " Lehigh Landing " was hindered by fundraising problems , environmental remediation issues , and even a national debate on pork barrel government spending . The iconic Arbogast & Bastian plant remained vacant for over a decade , often the victim of vandalism and suspicious fires . The plant was finally dismantled in late 1990s , and the company 's large heart @-@ shaped sign , long a fixture of the Allentown skyline , was taken down on June 30 , 1998 . The offices of Arbogast & Bastian , which had not been torn down , were later incorporated into the America On Wheels museum , which was opened on the site of the former Arbogast & Bastian plant in 2008 . 
 = Prince John of the United Kingdom = 
 Prince John of the United Kingdom ( John Charles Francis ; 12 July 1905 – 18 January 1919 ) was the fifth son and youngest of the six children born to King George V and his wife , Queen Mary . At the time of John 's birth , his father was the Prince of Wales and heir apparent to the reigning monarch of the United Kingdom , Edward VII . In 1910 , George succeeded to the throne upon Edward 's death and John became the fifth in line of succession . 
 In 1909 , John was discovered to have epilepsy and was also believed to have some form of intellectual disability and possibly autism . As his condition deteriorated , he was sent to live at Sandringham House and was kept away from the public eye . There , he was cared for by his governess , " Lala " Bill , and befriended local children whom his mother had gathered to be his playmates . Prince John died at Sandringham in 1919 , following a severe seizure , and was buried at nearby St Mary Magdalene Church . His illness was released to the wider public only after his death . 
 Prince John 's alleged seclusion has subsequently been brought forward as evidence for the inhumanity of the royal family . However , records show that the Prince was in some ways given favourable treatment by his parents , in comparison to his siblings , and contrary to the belief that he was hidden from the public from an early age , John for most of his life was a " fully @-@ fledged member of the family " , appearing frequently in public until after his eleventh birthday . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Prince John was born at York Cottage on the Sandringham Estate on 12 July 1905 , at 3 : 05 a.m. He was the youngest child and fifth son of George Frederick , Prince of Wales and Mary , Princess of Wales ( née Mary of Teck ) . He was named John despite that name 's unlucky associations for the royal family , but was informally known as " Johnny " . At the time of his birth , he was sixth in the line of succession to the throne , behind his father and four older brothers . As a grandchild of the reigning British monarch in the male line , and a son of the Prince of Wales , he was formally styled His Royal Highness Prince John of Wales from birth . 
 John was christened on 3 August in the Church of St Mary Magdalene at Sandringham , the Reverend Canon John Neale Dalton officiating . His godparents were King Carlos I of Portugal ( his third cousin once removed , for whom the Prince of Wales stood proxy ) , the Duke of Sparta ( his first cousin once removed ) , Prince Carl of Denmark ( his uncle by marriage and first cousin once removed , for whom the Prince of Wales stood proxy ) , Prince John of Schleswig @-@ Holstein @-@ Sonderburg @-@ Glücksburg ( his great @-@ great @-@ uncle , for whom the Prince of Wales stood proxy ) , Alexander Duff , 1st Duke of Fife ( his uncle by marriage , for whom the Prince of Wales stood proxy ) , the Duchess of Sparta ( his first cousin once removed , for whom Princess Victoria of the United Kingdom stood proxy ) , and Princess Alexander of Teck ( his first cousin once removed , for whom Princess Victoria stood proxy ) . 
 = = = Early life and illness = = = 
 Much of John 's early life was spent at Sandringham with his siblings — ​ Prince Edward ( known as David to the royal family ) , Prince Albert , Princess Mary , Prince Henry and Prince George — ​ under the care of their nanny Charlotte " Lala " Bill . Though a strict disciplinarian , the Prince of Wales was nonetheless affectionate toward his children ; the Princess of Wales was close to her children and encouraged them to confide in her . In 1909 , John 's great @-@ aunt , the Dowager Empress of Russia wrote to her son , Emperor Nicholas II , that " George 's children are very nice ... The little ones , George and Johnny are both charming and very amusing ... " Princess Alexander of Teck described John as " very quaint and one evening when Uncle George returned from stalking he bent over Aunt May and kissed her , and they heard Johnny <unk> , ' She kissed Papa , ugly old man ! ' " George once said to U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt that " all [ his ] children [ were ] obedient , except John " — ​ apparently because John alone , among George 's children , escaped punishment from their father . 
 Though a " large and handsome " baby , by his fourth birthday John had become " winsome " and " painfully slow " . That same year he suffered his first epileptic seizure and showed signs of a disability , probably autism . When his father succeeded as George V upon Edward VII 's death in 1910 , John was awarded the title " His Royal Highness The Prince John " . John did not attend his parents ' coronation on 22 June 1911 , as this was considered too risky for his health ; nonetheless , cynics said that the family feared their reputation would be damaged by any incident involving him . Although John was deemed not " presentable to the outside world , " George nonetheless showed an interest in him , offering him " kindness and affection " . 
 During his time at Sandring ­ ham , John exhibited repetitive behaviour , which can be a sign of autism ; this is possibly a reason for his constant misbehaviour : " he simply didn 't under ­ stand he needed to [ behave ] . " Nonetheless there was hope his seizures might lessen with time — ​ . Contrary to the belief that he was hidden from the public from an early age , John for most of his life was a " fully @-@ fledged member of the family " , appearing frequently in public until after his eleventh birthday . 
 In 1912 Prince George , who was nearest in age to John and his closest sibling , began St. Peter 's Court Preparatory School at Broadstairs . The following summer , The Times reported that John would not attend Broadstairs the following term , and that George and Mary had not decided whether to send John to school at all . After the outbreak of World War I , John rarely saw his parents , who were often away on official duties , and his siblings , who were either at boarding school or in the military . John slowly disappeared from the public eye and no official portraits of him were commissioned after 1913 . 
 = = = Wood Farm = = = 
 In 1916 , as his seizures became more frequent and severe , John was sent to live at Wood Farm , with Bill having charge of his care . Though John maintained an interest in the world around him and was capable of coherent thought and expression , with his lack of educational progress the last of his tutors was dismissed and his formal education ended . Physicians warned that he would likely not reach adulthood . 
 At Wood Farm , John became " a satellite with his own little household on an outlying farm on the Sandring ­ ham estate ... Guests at Balmoral remember him during the Great War as tall and muscular , but always a distant figure glimpsed from afar in the woods , escorted by his own retainers . " His grandmother Queen Alexandra maintained a garden at Sandring ­ ham House especially for him , and this became " one of the great pleasures of [ John ] ' s life . " 
 After the summer of 1916 , John was rarely seen outside the Sandring ­ ham Estate and passed solely into Bill 's care . After Queen Alexandra wrote that " [ John ] is very proud of his house but is longing for a companion , " Queen Mary broke from royal practice by having local children brought in to be playmates for John . One of these was Winifred Thomas , a young girl from Halifax who had been sent to live with her aunt and uncle ( who had charge of the royal stables at Sandring ­ ham ) in hopes her asthma would improve . John had known Winifred years earlier , prior to the outbreak of World War I. Now they became close , taking nature walks together and working in Queen Alexandra 's garden . John also played with his elder siblings when they visited : once , when his two eldest brothers came to visit John , the Prince of Wales ( formerly Prince Edward ) " took him for a run in a kind of a push @-@ cart , and they both disappeared from view . " 
 = = = Death = = = 
 As John 's seizures intensified ( Bill later wrote ) " we [ dared ] not let him be with his brothers and sister , because it upsets them so much , with the attacks getting so bad and coming so often . " Biographer Denis Judd believes that " [ John ] ' s seclusion and ' abnormality ' must have been disturbing to his brothers and sister " , as he had been " a friendly , outgoing little boy , much loved by his brothers and sister , a sort of mascot for the family " . He spent Christmas Day 1918 with his family at Sandring ­ ham House but was driven back to Wood Farm at night . 
 On 18 January 1919 , after a severe seizure , John died in his sleep at Wood Farm at 5 : 30 p.m. It is now known , due to modern autopsy techniques , that people with epilepsy may die of it , with no other illness or injury contributing to death nor to the etiology of the condition . 
 Queen Mary wrote in her diary that the news was " a great shock , tho ' for the poor little boy 's restless soul , death came as a great relief . [ She ] broke the news to George and [ they ] motored down to Wood Farm . Found poor Lala very resigned but heartbroken . Little Johnnie looked very peaceful lying there . " 
 Mary later wrote to Emily Alcock , an old friend , that " for [ John ] it is a great relief , as his malady was becoming worse as he grew older , & he has thus been spared much suffering . I cannot say how grateful we feel to God for having taken him in such a peaceful way , he just slept quietly into his heavenly home , no pain no struggle , just peace for the poor little troubled spirit which had been a great anxiety to us for many years , ever since he was four years old . " She went on to add that " the first break in the family circle is hard to bear , but people have been so kind & sympathetic & this has helped us much . " George described his son 's death simply as " the greatest mercy possible " . 
 On 20 January the Daily Mirror said that " when the Prince passed away his face bore an angelic smile " ; its report also made the first public mention of John 's epilepsy . His funeral was the following day at St Mary Magdalene Church , John Neale Dalton officiating . Queen Mary wrote that " Canon Dalton & Dr Brownhill [ John 's physician ] conducted the service which was awfully sad and touching . Many of our own people and the villagers were present . We thanked all Johnnie 's servants who have been so good and faithful to him . " Though nominally private , the funeral was attended by Sandring ­ ham House staff ; " every single person on the estate went and stood around the gates and his grave was absolutely covered in flowers . " Queen Alexandra wrote to Queen Mary that " now [ their ] two darling Johnnies lie side by side " She was referring to her youngest son and John 's uncle , Prince Alexander John of Wales , who had died in 1871 one day after birth , and who was also buried at St Mary Magdalene . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Prince Edward had hardly known John and consequently , saw his death as " little more than a regrettable nuisance . " He wrote to his mistress of the time that " [ he had ] told [ her ] all about that little brother , and how he was an epileptic . [ John ] ' s been practically shut up for the last two years anyhow , so no one has ever seen him except the family , and then only once or twice a year . This poor boy had become more of an animal than anything else . " He also wrote an insensitive letter to Queen Mary , which has since been lost . She did not reply , but he felt compelled to write her an apology , in which he stated that " [ he felt ] like such a cold hearted and unsympathetic swine for writing all that [ he ] did ... No one can realize more than [ she ] how poor little Johnnie meant to [ him ] who hardly knew him ... " He went on to state " I feel so much for you , darling Mama , who was his mother . " In her final mention of John in her diary , Queen Mary wrote simply " miss the dear child very much indeed . " She gave Winifred Thomas a number of John 's books , which she had inscribed , " In memory of our dear little Prince . " " Lala " Bill always kept a portrait of John above her mantelpiece , together with a letter from him which read " nanny , I love you . " 
 In recent years , Prince John 's seclusion has been brought forward as evidence towards the " heartlessness " of the Windsor family , According to a 2008 Channel 4 documentary , much of the existing information about John is " based on hearsay and rumour , precisely because so few details of his life and his problems have ever been disclosed , " and the British Epileptic Association has stated , " There was nothing unusual in what [ the King and Queen ] did . At that time , people with epilepsy were put apart from the rest of the community . They were often put in epilepsy colonies or mental institutions . It was thought to be a form of mental illness , " adding that it was another twenty years before the idea that epileptics should not be locked away began to take hold . The royal family believed that these afflictions flowed through their blood , which was believed to be purer than the blood of a commoner , and , as such , wished to hide as much as possible in regard to John 's illness . Others have suggested that John was sent to Wood Farm to give him the best environment possible under the " austere " conditions of World War I. Undoubtedly the royal family were " frightened and ashamed of John 's illness " , and his life is " usually portrayed either as tragedy or conspiracy " . At the time that Edward VIII ( formerly Prince Edward ) abdicated , an attempt was made to discredit Prince Albert , who had succeeded as George VI , by suggesting that he was subject to falling fits , like his brother . In 1998 , after the discovery of two volumes of family photographs , John was briefly brought to public attention . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 In 2003 , The Lost Prince , a biographical film about John 's life , directed by Stephen Poliakoff , was released . 
 In the 2007 film My Boy Jack , the death of Prince John is referred to in the conversation between George V and Rudyard Kipling at the end of the story . 
 In 2008 , a documentary about John , titled Prince John : The Windsors ' Tragic Secret , was released by Channel 4 . 
 John is also briefly mentioned in the 2010 film The King 's Speech , which depicts Prince Albert and his struggle to overcome a childhood stammer . Lionel Logue , portrayed by Geoffrey Rush , asks the future George VI of the United Kingdom , played by Colin Firth , to describe his relationship with his youngest brother , called Johnny . George VI replies that Johnny was a " sweet boy " , leading the audience to believe that they had a good relationship , though when he died at thirteen , he was hidden from view , a common occurrence for diseased children in those days . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 12 July 1905 – 6 May 1910 : His Royal Highness Prince John of Wales 
 6 May 1910 – 18 January 1919 : His Royal Highness The Prince John 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
