 Over the course of the design process that continued through 1916 , the size of the projected cruisers increased as the navy added new design requirements . This resulted in the FK 2 design . The length increased to 144 m ( 472 ft ) overall and 139 m ( 456 ft ) at the waterline . Their beam increased to 13 m ( 43 ft ) , as did their draft , to 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) . Their displacement correspondingly rose to 4 @,@ 500 t ( 4 @,@ 400 long tons ; 5 @,@ 000 short tons ) at normal load and 5 @,@ 350 t ( 5 @,@ 270 long tons ; 5 @,@ 900 short tons ) at combat load , significantly greater than the original design . The FK 2 design was armed with five 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . It was to carry the same 60 cm torpedo tubes in twin mounts as the earlier designs . The design retained the same propulsion system as the earlier designs , but with an improved engine type and an additional boiler , which produced an estimated 60 @,@ 000 shp ( 45 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 32 knots . Range was to have been 2 @,@ 800 miles at 17 knots , as in the original design . 
 The next iteration , FK 3 , brought even more increases . Displacement rose to 6 @,@ 000 t ( 5 @,@ 900 long tons ; 6 @,@ 600 short tons ) normal and 6 @,@ 900 t ( 6 @,@ 800 long tons ; 7 @,@ 600 short tons ) full load , double that of the original FK design . Length was 155 m ( 509 ft ) at the waterline and 159 m ( 522 ft ) overall , and the beam was 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) . The armament was also augmented by an additional two 15 cm and 1 8 @.@ 8 cm gun . Since the size of the ship had increased , a more powerful propulsion system was necessary ; a third set of turbines was added , and the number of boilers was increased to thirteen . This produced 70 @,@ 000 shp ( 52 @,@ 000 kW ) , for the same speed and range figures as in the previous designs . 
 The final design , FK 4 , was larger still . The standard displacement was 7 @,@ 500 t ( 7 @,@ 400 long tons ; 8 @,@ 300 short tons ) , and at combat load , this rose to 8 @,@ 650 t ( 8 @,@ 510 long tons ; 9 @,@ 530 short tons ) . The projected cruiser would have been 170 m ( 560 ft ) long at the waterline , with a beam of 15 @.@ 4 m ( 51 ft ) and a draft of 6 m ( 20 ft ) . The armament was increased again , with an additional 15 cm gun . The ship 's propulsion system would have included six coal @-@ fired boilers and nine oil @-@ fired models . 
 Ultimately , none of these designs were ever built , much like other late @-@ war German warship designs , such as the L 20 α @-@ type battleships and the Ersatz Yorck @-@ class battlecruisers . The German shipbuilding effort largely abandoned surface warship construction and instead focused on U @-@ boat construction in the final years of the war . 
 = 2009 UEFA Champions League Final = 
 The 2009 UEFA Champions League Final was played on 27 May 2009 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome , Italy . The match determined the winners of the 2008 – 09 season of the UEFA Champions League , a tournament for the top football clubs in Europe . The match was won by Barcelona of Spain , who beat England 's Manchester United 2 – 0 . Samuel Eto 'o opened the scoring in the 10th minute , and Lionel Messi added another goal 20 minutes from the end to earn Barcelona a historic treble of La Liga , the Copa del Rey and the Champions League , a feat never before achieved by a Spanish club . The match was refereed by Swiss referee Massimo Busacca . 
 This was Barcelona 's third victory in the competition , 17 years after they first won the European Cup in 1992 . Manchester United went into the match as the competition 's defending champions , the first defending champions to reach the final since Juventus in 1997 . Manchester United also sought to be the first team to retain the European Cup since Milan in 1990 . It was the fifth year in a row in which the final involved at least one English team . The Stadio Olimpico had hosted three previous Champions League finals , following the 1977 , 1984 and 1996 matches . 
 As winners of the 2008 – 09 Champions League , Barcelona later played against 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup winners Shakhtar Donetsk in the 2009 UEFA Super Cup , and they represented UEFA at the 2009 FIFA Club World Cup . Despite winning the Champions League final , Barcelona won € 8 million less prize money from the tournament than Manchester United . 
 = = Background = = 
 Barcelona and Manchester United had previously faced each other nine times in European competitions : three times in the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup and six times in the UEFA Champions League . Of those nine matches , Manchester United had recorded three wins to Barcelona 's two , with the remaining four matches finishing in draws . The only time that the two teams met in a final came in 1991 , when they contested the 1991 Cup Winners ' Cup final . The first meeting between the two sides came in the third round of the 1983 – 84 Cup Winners ' Cup ; Barcelona won the first leg at the Camp Nou 2 – 0 , but Manchester United won the return leg 3 – 0 at Old Trafford to reach the semi @-@ finals . That result marked Manchester United 's biggest win over Barcelona ; Barcelona 's biggest win was a 4 – 0 home victory in the group stage of the 1994 – 95 Champions League . The most recent meeting between the teams came in the semi @-@ finals of the 2007 – 08 Champions League , when United held Barcelona to a 0 – 0 draw at the Camp Nou before beating them 1 – 0 at Old Trafford . Despite their record against Manchester United , Barcelona had an overall winning record against English clubs , having won 20 and lost 15 of their 52 matches against English opposition . Manchester United , on the other hand , had a losing record against Spanish teams ; they had lost 11 and won 10 of their 37 matches . 
 Both teams had won the UEFA Champions League before ; Manchester United had three titles , while Barcelona had two . The most recent of these had come only the season before , when Manchester United beat Chelsea on penalties in the Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow . They won the first of their European Cups in 1968 , beating Benfica 4 – 1 at Wembley Stadium , while their second was achieved in 1999 via a last @-@ gasp 2 – 1 win over Bayern Munich at Barcelona 's home ground , the Camp Nou . Barcelona 's first European Cup was won as recently as 1992 , when they beat Sampdoria 1 – 0 after extra time at Wembley ; their only other title came in 2006 with a 2 – 1 win over another English side , Arsenal . Prior to 2009 , unlike Barcelona , Manchester United had never lost a European Cup final ; Barcelona had lost three – in 1961 , 1986 and 1994 , to Benfica , Steaua București and Milan respectively . 
 Both teams went into the match as the champions of their respective countries – the first time that the final had been contested by domestic champions since 1999 , when Manchester United beat Bayern Munich 2 – 1 at Barcelona 's home , the Camp Nou – both winning with games to spare . Manchester United won their 11th Premier League title with a 0 – 0 draw at home to Arsenal on 16 May , while Barcelona were confirmed as La Liga champions for the first time in three years when Real Madrid lost to Villarreal on the same day . Both Manchester United and Barcelona were also looking for another Champions League title to cap a season in which they had won multiple trophies : Manchester United had already won four out of a possible seven trophies in 2008 – 09 and were playing for the possibility of becoming the third team to retain the European Double ( the domestic league and the European Cup ) , while Barcelona were aiming to become the first Spanish club to win a Treble of La Liga , the Copa del Rey and the UEFA Champions League . 
 = = Road to Rome = = 
 = = = Barcelona = = = 
 By virtue of their third @-@ place finish in the 2007 – 08 Primera División , Barcelona entered the 2008 – 09 Champions League at the third qualifying round . Based on their UEFA coefficient , Barcelona were seeded for the third qualifying round draw , and drawn against Polish champions Wisła Kraków . A 4 – 0 win in the first leg at the Camp Nou made defeat in the second leg immaterial and Barcelona were entered into the group stage draw . 
 Barcelona 's UEFA coefficient placed them in the top eight seeds for the draw , meaning that they would avoid having to play against Internazionale , Liverpool , Chelsea or holders and their semi @-@ final opponents from 2007 – 08 , Manchester United . However , they could still draw Bayern Munich , Roma or Juventus . In the end , Barcelona were drawn into Group C against Sporting CP , Basel and Shakhtar Donetsk . 
 Four wins and a draw at home to Basel placed Barcelona on top of their group with a game to spare , and despite defeat to Shakhtar Donetsk on Matchday 6 , they still had the third @-@ best record amongst the qualifiers for the first knockout round . As group winners , Barcelona would avoid being drawn with other group winners , including Manchester United , Liverpool , Juventus and Bayern Munich , but they could still be drawn against runners @-@ up such as Chelsea , Internazionale and Arsenal . The draw eventually paired them with Olympique Lyonnais and , as group winners , they were given the right to play the second leg at home . 
 In the first leg in Lyon , Barcelona fell behind to a seventh @-@ minute free kick from Juninho , only for Thierry Henry to equalise halfway through the second half , giving Barcelona an away goal to take back to the Camp Nou . They needed a win or a no @-@ score draw to guarantee passage , but a 4 – 1 half @-@ time lead set the stage for a convincing 5 – 2 win . Two first @-@ half goals from Henry and one each from Lionel Messi and Samuel Eto 'o were followed by goals from Jean <unk> and Juninho either side of the interval to reduce Lyon 's deficit . However , a goal from <unk> Keita in the fifth minute of injury time secured a 6 – 3 aggregate win and passage to the next round . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Barcelona were drawn against their fellow leading @-@ scorers in the competition , Bayern Munich , who had beaten Barcelona 's group stage opposition , Sporting CP , 12 – 1 on aggregate in the previous round . However , despite Bayern 's impressive scoring record , goals from Messi and Eto 'o gave Barcelona a 2 – 0 lead within the first 12 minutes . Messi and Henry also scored to seal a 4 – 0 home victory before half @-@ time . The lack of an away goal meant that Bayern Munich would have to win by five clear goals to qualify for the semi @-@ finals ; after a goalless first half , they took the lead through Franck Ribéry in the 47th minute , but it was not enough for Bayern as Keita equalised in the 73rd minute to clinch a 5 – 1 aggregate win for the Spanish side . 
 The quarter @-@ final draw also determined the teams ' routes to the final , with Barcelona facing the prospect of meeting either Chelsea or Liverpool in the semi @-@ finals . After a 3 – 1 win at Anfield , Chelsea qualified for the semi @-@ finals with a 4 – 4 draw at Stamford Bridge . The semi @-@ final first leg was played at the Camp Nou ; although Barcelona enjoyed the majority of the possession , Chelsea 's defence was resolute and they became the first side to keep a clean sheet in Barcelona in this season 's competition , coming away with a goalless draw . Barcelona needed to avoid defeat to reach the final , but they found themselves a goal down within 10 minutes ; after they failed to clear Frank Lampard 's pass into the penalty area , Michael Essien fired a left @-@ footed volley past Víctor Valdés into the roof of the net . The rest of the match continued much the same as the first leg , with Barcelona retaining most of the possession . Despite this , they found themselves guilty of several fouls , while Chelsea made four unsuccessful penalty appeals during the match . Meanwhile , Dani Alves received his third yellow card of the knockout phase , ruling him out of Barcelona 's next match , and Éric Abidal was given a straight red card for a foul on Nicolas Anelka as the French forward was through on goal . However , television replays after the incident showed that there was little contact between Abidal and Anelka . Norwegian referee Tom Henning <unk> allowed a minimum of four minutes of injury time at the end of the second half ; in the third of those four minutes – just when it looked like Chelsea were about to secure a repeat of the 2008 final – Messi played the ball across the edge of the penalty area to Andrés Iniesta , who shot just past Petr Čech 's outstretched hand for the away goal that would send Barcelona to the final . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 As the reigning champions of the UEFA Champions League , Manchester United began their title defence at the group stage , for which they were given the top seed . This position amongst the top eight European clubs meant that they would avoid drawing former European champions Barcelona , Internazionale and Real Madrid until at least the first knockout round , although they were faced with the prospect of drawing Bayern Munich or Roma . Nevertheless , United ended up being drawn into Group E with two teams they had played against before : Villarreal ( whom they had drawn in 2005 – 06 ) and Celtic ( 2006 – 07 ) ; and one they had not : Aalborg BK . 
 Two victories – away to Aalborg and at home to Celtic – and four draws were enough to secure passage to the knockout phase of the competition . Following a Celtic victory over Villarreal in the final group match , United went through as group winners . This meant that they would avoid Roma , Barcelona , Bayern Munich , Porto and Juventus in the first knockout round ; however , their potential opposition still included Internazionale , Lyon and Real Madrid . The draw paired Manchester United with José Mourinho 's Internazionale , but since United had won their group , they were rewarded by having the second leg at home . 
 United started the first leg the better of the two sides , and although Inter improved in the second half , neither side was able to find the net during the match , and United took a 0 – 0 draw back to Old Trafford . The draw was also United 's 20th match since their last defeat in the UEFA Champions League , breaking Ajax 's 19 @-@ match record that had stood for 13 years . The lack of an away goal at the San Siro meant that United could not afford to concede a goal in the event of a draw . A fourth @-@ minute headed goal from Nemanja Vidić , however , got the home side off to a good start , and Cristiano Ronaldo doubled United 's lead four minutes into the second half . Shots from both Zlatan Ibrahimović and Adriano hit the frame of the Manchester United goal in either half of the match , but they were unable to find the back of the net , and the 2 – 0 result sent the English champions through to the next stage of the competition . 
 The draw for the quarter @-@ finals paired United with Porto , against whom they had played in the first knockout round of the 2003 – 04 competition . The draw also determined the semi @-@ final pairings , with United or Porto drawn to play against Arsenal or Villarreal . The first leg of the quarter @-@ final was played at Old Trafford , giving Porto the chance to put the pressure on Manchester United with an away goal . That away goal came in the fourth minute of the game , but Wayne Rooney equalised ten minutes later and Carlos Tevez gave United the lead in the 85th minute . However , with only one minute left in the game , United suffered a defensive lapse , allowing Mariano González to score Porto 's second away goal . Those away goals meant that United travelled to the Estádio do Dragão in Porto needing a win or a score @-@ draw of 2 – 2 or higher to remain in the competition . A 40 @-@ yard goal from Ronaldo in the sixth minute put United into the lead , and although both sides pressed for another goal , it proved to be the only one of the game , making Manchester United the first English side to win in Porto . 
 Meanwhile , a 1 – 1 draw in Villarreal and a 3 – 0 win at the Emirates Stadium secured Arsenal 's status as United 's semi @-@ final opponents . The draw had determined that United would play the first leg at home , and after Rooney , Tevez and Ronaldo had early chances , John O 'Shea opened the scoring , firing home a Michael Carrick cross after Arsenal had failed to clear a corner . United continued to make chances throughout the game , but despite Arsenal making a couple of chances themselves , the match finished at 1 – 0 and United travelled to the Emirates Stadium a week later needing only to avoid defeat to become the first defending champions to reach the final since Juventus in 1997 . Although Arsenal only needed to overturn a one @-@ goal deficit , their chances of victory were drastically reduced within the first 11 minutes of the match ; Park Ji @-@ sung took advantage of a slip by Kieran Gibbs to double United 's aggregate lead in the eighth minute , before Ronaldo fired home a 41 @-@ yard free kick in the 11th . With two away goals on the United scoreboard , Arsenal now had to score four goals to reach the final . However , it was United who scored the next goal , as they hit Arsenal on the break and Ronaldo scored within 15 seconds of Arsenal losing the ball at the other end of the pitch . 15 minutes from time , Arsenal were awarded a penalty kick after Darren Fletcher brought Cesc Fàbregas down in the penalty area , a foul for which Fletcher was sent off – although replays showed that Fletcher knocked the ball away from Fàbregas immediately before bringing him down , resulting in some controversy as to whether Fletcher deserved a red card for the foul . Robin van Persie scored the penalty to make the score 3 – 1 , but it was not enough to prevent United from reaching the final unbeaten for the third time in their history . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 The Stadio Olimpico in Rome was selected as the venue for the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final at a meeting of the UEFA Executive Committee in Ljubljana , Slovenia , on 4 October 2006 . The committee – who decided the venue for the 2008 final and the 2008 and 2009 UEFA Cup Finals at the same meeting – based their decision on a number of factors , including stadium capacity , safety and security facilities , and accessibility . 
 The Stadio Olimpico in Rome had hosted three European Cup finals before 2009 : the 1977 and 1984 finals , both of which were won by Liverpool – Liverpool beat Borussia Mönchengladbach 3 – 1 in 1977 before beating home side Roma 4 – 2 on penalties after the match finished 1 – 1 after extra time ; the most recent final to be held at the Stadio Olimpico was the 1996 final , which Juventus also won 4 – 2 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw with Ajax . 
 The construction of the stadium was commissioned by Italian dictator Benito Mussolini in the mid @-@ 1930s as the centrepiece of a new sports complex in the city , to be named Foro Mussolini . After the Second World War , the complex was renamed Foro Italico and the stadium was radically redesigned as a 54 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity arena for the 1960 Summer Olympics . After hosting the 1987 World Athletics Championships , the stadium was redeveloped in time for the 1990 FIFA World Cup , at which West Germany 's 1 – 0 win over Argentina in the final was played there . The stadium 's most recent renovation , in 2008 , brought the capacity to 72 @,@ 689 . 
 Since 1999 , the UEFA Champions League final has been given a unique visual identity in order to increase the marketing appeal of the event . Designed by London @-@ based design and branding agency Radiant , the theme for the 2009 final was revealed on 25 October 2008 , and it incorporated several typically Roman images ; the logo was centred around an outline of the European Champion Clubs ' Cup , upon which was written " <unk> " – " 2009 " in Roman numerals ; around the base of the trophy was a stylised laurel wreath , and in the background was a simplified image of the interior of the Colosseum . An alternative logo consisting of the UEFA Champions League logo surrounded by a laurel wreath was also released . The entire theme was based on a colour scheme of deep red and silver @-@ white . 
 A trophy handover ceremony was held in Rome on 21 April 2009 , at which Ole Gunnar Solskjær , representing Manchester United as the previous season 's champions , returned the trophy to UEFA president Michel Platini . Platini then presented the trophy to Gianni <unk> , the Mayor of Rome , that it might be put on display in and around the city until the day of the final . Also present at the ceremony were the president and vice @-@ president of the Italian Football Federation , Giancarlo <unk> and Demetrio Albertini , the ambassador for the final , Bruno Conti , and Emilio Di Toro on behalf of the Italian National Olympic Committee . 
 = = = Ticketing = = = 
 Although the usual capacity of the Stadio Olimpico is over 72 @,@ 000 , this was reduced to approximately 67 @,@ 000 for the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final . Approximately 10 @,@ 000 tickets were made available to the general public , with recipients determined by a random ballot following an application period that ran from 2 to 16 March 2009 . Each club was also allocated approximately 20 @,@ 000 tickets for distribution to fans . Manchester United chose to limit ticket applications to season ticket holders , with preference given to those who had attended more of the club 's Champions League away fixtures that season . Barcelona , meanwhile , allotted 80 % of their ticket allocation to fans , with the remaining 20 % going to the club 's corporate sponsors . Unlike United , however , Barcelona opened ticket applications to all 150 @,@ 000 of their members . The remaining 17 @,@ 000 tickets were retained by UEFA for the " European football family " , which comprises UEFA itself , the local organising committee , UEFA 's member associations and its commercial partners . 
 Tickets for the 2009 final were similar to ATM cards , with an integrated chip storing the ticket holder 's personal information in order to ensure that the ticket is being presented by its legitimate owner . As further security , tickets also had to be presented with an adequate form of photographic identification . However , despite these security measures , counterfeit tickets were still produced , forcing UEFA to issue a statement warning people against buying tickets from touts . 
 Despite only receiving 20 @,@ 000 tickets for fans , it was expected that around 30 @,@ 000 Manchester United fans would be travelling to Rome for the final , leading to police warning ticketless fans not to travel amidst fears of potential hooligans making the trip . Fans were also warned to avoid certain areas of the city that are known to be frequented by members of Rome 's Ultra fan groups . Despite Rome 's reputation as a hotbed for knife @-@ related crime , dubbed " Stab City " by some , UEFA was confident that the 2009 final would pass without incident , but on the morning of the final , there were reports that a Manchester United fan had been stabbed in the leg the previous evening . It was also expected that a similar number of Barcelona fans would be arriving in Rome in the lead @-@ up to the match . After the match , UEFA president Michel Platini praised the Rome police for their arrangement of security for the final . 
 More than 3 @,@ 000 Manchester United fans congregated just outside the city in a field that came to be known as " Fergie 's Field " . The venue provided ticketless fans with the opportunity to watch the match on a giant screen , and kept them away from the streets of Rome 's city centre , although the alcohol ban that came into effect in the city at 17 : 00 ( Central European Summer Time ) on 26 May was still in force . 
 = = = Match ball = = = 
 The official match ball for the 2009 Champions League final was the adidas Finale Rome . Based on the " <unk> " design that has been used for the Champions League final since 2001 and become synonymous with the UEFA Champions League , the Finale Rome was unveiled on 16 March 2009 . The colour scheme was a traditional Roman burgundy with a gold border around the stars . The ball used the same panel configuration as the Adidas Europass and the Adidas <unk> before it , and the same thermal bonding process was used to adhere the panels to each other , while the surface of the ball featured the same " PSC @-@ Texture " as was debuted with the Europass ; the surface of the ball was covered with thousands of tiny pimples , which was designed to improve the grip between boot and ball . 
 = = = Officials = = = 
 The referee for the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final was Massimo Busacca , representing the Swiss Football Association . Having been on FIFA 's list of internationally accredited referees since 1999 , Busacca had experience of officiating 32 UEFA Champions League matches , six of them during the 2008 – 09 season , and most recently the second leg of Manchester United 's quarter @-@ final against Porto on 15 April 2009 . He also took charge of the first leg of the semi @-@ final between Manchester United and Barcelona in the 2007 – 08 competition . Busacca also refereed at both the 2006 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2008 , and took charge of the 2007 UEFA Cup Final between Espanyol and Sevilla at Hampden Park , Glasgow , on 16 May 2007 . 
 As usual , the referee was supported by assistant referees and a fourth official from the same country ; in the 2009 final , Massimo Busacca was assisted by Matthias <unk> and Francesco <unk> , with Claudio <unk> as the fourth official . 
 = = = Kits = = = 
 Having been designated as the official " home " team , Barcelona were given the first choice of kits for the final and opted to wear their traditional red and blue halved shirts . Since the Barcelona home kit clashed with both Manchester United 's home and European away kits , the Red Devils wore their white domestic away kit for the first time in a European Cup final . They wore blue for their first European Cup final against Benfica in 1968 , but wore red for both of their most recent finals in 1999 and 2008 . Manchester United had previously worn white against Barcelona in five matches , losing just one of them – a 2 – 0 defeat in 1984 – while the only win in white came in the 1991 Cup Winners ' Cup Final . The other three matches finished in draws : two 3 – 3 and one 0 – 0 . Barcelona , on the other hand , had won two of their five European Cup finals – they wore orange for their win over Sampdoria in 1992 but wore their usual blue and red stripes for their most recent win in 2006 against Arsenal . However , two of their European Cup final defeats came against teams wearing white – against Steaua București in 1986 and against Milan in 1994 . 
 = = = Opening ceremony = = = 
 The 2009 UEFA Champions League Final officially opened with the opening of the UEFA Champions Festival at Rome 's Arco di Constantino and the Parco di Colle <unk> above the Colosseum . The Champions Festival was opened by former Italian international goalkeeper Luca <unk> on 23 May 2009 and ran until the afternoon on the day of the final , culminating with a football match between a European side coached by Ruud Gullit and an all @-@ Italian team featuring Alessandro <unk> and final ambassador Bruno Conti . Other attractions at the Champions Festival included appearances by representatives from both clubs ( Bryan Robson and Ole Gunnar Solskjær for Manchester United and Hristo Stoichkov for Barcelona ) , exhibitions featuring memorabilia from past UEFA Champions League tournaments and the European Champion Clubs ' Cup on display . 
 Immediately prior to the match itself came the opening ceremony for the final . The ceremony began with 64 members of the <unk> Ensemble dance group performing a choreographed routine to a variation of the UEFA Champions League Anthem . At the culmination of the routine , the players emerged from the tunnel , accompanied by Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli singing Il <unk> – a song based on Earth from the soundtrack to the film Gladiator – before Bocelli sang supporting vocals to the UEFA Champions League Anthem . Before they emerged from their dressing room , manager Pep Guardiola played the Barcelona team a specially commissioned seven @-@ minute film showing their best moments from the season interspersed with clips from the film Gladiator . The film culminated with the late Luciano Pavarotti 's version of Nessun Dorma , and it left several of the players in tears . With his players motivated for the game , Guardiola said nothing as they emerged into the tunnel . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Two Barcelona players missed the final through suspension : right back Dani Alves , who picked up his third yellow card of the tournament in Barcelona 's semi @-@ final second leg against Chelsea on 6 May 2009 ; and left back Éric Abidal , who was sent off in the same game for a professional foul on Nicolas Anelka . Defender Rafael Márquez also missed the match after he picked up a knee injury in the first leg of the semi @-@ final , ruling him out for the rest of the season . Forward Thierry Henry and semi @-@ final @-@ winning midfielder Andrés Iniesta were also doubts for the final ; Henry damaged his right posterior cruciate ligament in Barcelona 's 6 – 2 league win over Real Madrid on 2 May 2009 , while Iniesta was discovered to have suffered a tear in his right thigh following Barça 's 3 – 3 draw with Villarreal on 10 May . Both Henry and Iniesta returned to light training on 22 May , but they had not yet resumed training with the main squad and remained doubts for the final . Carles Puyol , however , was available for selection after he served a one @-@ match suspension in the semi @-@ final second leg . In all , FC Barcelona started with seven players who had come up through the youth system , of whom five were Catalans . 
 Manchester United 's starting right @-@ winger from the 2008 final , Owen Hargreaves , missed the match as he was still in rehabilitation after a double knee operation to cure his tendinitis problems that had seen him play little part in the 2008 – 09 Champions League campaign . It had been expected that defender Wes Brown would also miss the match after suffering a recurrence of a foot injury , but he returned to training quicker than expected and was involved in United 's match against Hull City on 24 May , although he picked up a slight knock during the game . Rio Ferdinand was also a doubt following a calf injury that has kept him out of the United side since the semi @-@ final second leg against Arsenal ; Alex Ferguson had said that Ferdinand might not start in Rome if he was not fit to play against Hull , but he later admitted that Ferdinand was on course to recover in time to play in the match . Second @-@ choice goalkeeper Ben Foster also missed the match after requiring surgery to repair a ruptured ligament in his right thumb in May 2009 . On the other hand , following John O 'Shea 's winning goal in Manchester United 's semi @-@ final first leg victory over Arsenal , United manager Alex Ferguson suggested that the Irish utility player would be guaranteed a place in the starting line @-@ up were United to reach the final . O 'Shea 's place in the team was confirmed at Manchester United 's media day the week before the final . South Korean midfielder Park Ji @-@ sung was also promised a place in the team after he missed the 2008 final , finally making him the first Asian to appear in a European Cup final . Cristiano Ronaldo suffered a slight injury scare in training the night before the final , requiring a bandage on his lower right leg , but he was eventually fit enough to play in the match . 
 Meanwhile , midfielder Darren Fletcher was forced to miss the final after picking up a red card in the second leg of the semi @-@ final . While replays showed that Fletcher played the ball before felling Cesc Fàbregas in the penalty area , the UEFA appeals process only allows for cards to be rescinded in the case of mistaken identity . Despite this , an appeal was submitted by Manchester United on " compassionate " grounds . Barcelona decided to appeal against the suspensions of Abidal and Alves after United lodged an appeal against Fletcher 's red card . Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola came out in support of overturning all three players ' suspensions . The appeals were declared unsuccessful on 11 May , with UEFA saying in a statement that the appeals were not submitted within the required 24 @-@ hour deadline of the matches and that even if they had been submitted on time then " they would have been rejected as unfounded as there were no grounds for contesting the referees ' original decisions . " By upholding the suspensions , UEFA made Abidal , Alves and Fletcher the first players to miss a Champions League final through suspension since Juventus ' Pavel Nedvěd sat out the 2003 final at Old Trafford . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 = = = = First half = = = = 
 Barcelona kicked the match off , but Manchester United showed their intent from the outset , forcing goalkeeper Víctor Valdés to concede a throw @-@ in after just 10 seconds . Further pressure on the attack resulted in Yaya Touré fouling Anderson within Cristiano Ronaldo 's shooting range . Ronaldo fired the free kick directly at Valdés , but the Spanish goalkeeper could only parry the ball and Gerard Piqué did well to divert Park Ji @-@ sung 's follow @-@ up effort over the bar . The resulting corner was cleared , but only as far as Wayne Rooney , whose snap @-@ shot was wayward and went out for a goal kick . 
 Both teams struggled to put a flowing move together in the opening exchanges , but it was United who had the better chances , both falling to Ronaldo . The first came in the seventh minute : having been played the ball by Michael Carrick , Ronaldo turned away from Piqué on the edge of the centre circle , before hitting a shot just wide from almost 40 yards ; the second saw the ball break to Ronaldo after Anderson and Patrice Evra had linked up well down the left flank . The Portuguese winger controlled the ball on the chest before hitting the ball just past the far post . 
 Despite United 's early pressure , it was Barcelona who scored the first goal of the match . Edwin van der Sar cleared the ball downfield for Manchester United , but it was headed away by Barcelona 's midfield anchor Sergio Busquets . Carrick was first to the ball for Manchester United , but he could only head it as far as Xavi , who passed to Andrés Iniesta . The Manchester United defence backed away from the Spaniard , who – after exchanging passes with Lionel Messi – played the ball into the path of Samuel Eto 'o in the Manchester United penalty area . Nemanja Vidić attempted to shepherd the Cameroonian striker towards the goal line , but Eto 'o easily stepped inside him and toe @-@ poked the ball past Van der Sar to make it 1 – 0 to Barcelona inside 10 minutes . 
 The goal shifted the balance of the game in Barcelona 's favour , as United had been on top in terms of shots and possession up to that point . Almost immediately after the restart , Vidić gave away an unnecessary corner . In a rehearsed corner move , Xavi played the ball back to the edge of the penalty area towards Messi , but the tournament 's top scorer was unable to make a proper connection . Nevertheless , Barça retained possession through some sharp inter @-@ passing involving Xavi and Iniesta . When United did manage to regain the ball , however , it was quickly given away by a poor pass from Carrick , while Anderson mis @-@ timed a kick and completely missed the ball . It was now Barcelona 's turn to pressurise the United players , forcing them into backward passes or long , hopeful balls forward . 
 The quality of the teams ' passing remained the main difference between them ; however , in the 16th minute , Barcelona lost the ball and Ryan Giggs sent a long ball forward to Ronaldo . Ronaldo 's first touch took him inside Piqué before going back outside the former Manchester United defender , who cynically blocked Ronaldo 's run , earning himself the first yellow card of the match . Ronaldo shaped to take the free kick himself , but it was Giggs who shot for goal , only to curl the ball just over the bar . 
 Barcelona responded quickly , as Carles Puyol found Eto 'o with a long throw @-@ in down the right wing . The Cameroonian then found Messi , who cut inside and hit a curling 25 @-@ yard shot that just shaved the top of the crossbar . A quick @-@ passing move from United followed , culminating with a through @-@ ball to Park in the inside right channel , only for Valdés to cut out the pass , taking out the South Korean in the process . The resulting throw @-@ in eventually broke to Ronaldo , whose 30 @-@ yard shot went just wide . Valdés ' clash with Park , however , left him requiring treatment , and although the injury was not sufficient to necessitate a substitution , Valdés chose to leave his next few goal kicks to Piqué . 
 In the 22nd minute , a lofted through @-@ pass from Carrick found Rooney on the left wing , but the Liverpudlian 's cross was blocked by Touré and went out for a corner kick . The corner , taken by Giggs , found Ronaldo , but the Portuguese got too far under the ball and headed over . Precise passing from the Barcelona midfield got the Catalans moving upfield until a shoulder charge from Anderson sent Iniesta stumbling to the ground in the inside @-@ left channel 30 yards from goal . The consequent free kick was taken by Xavi , who sent the ball just wide of the near post . Another free kick followed , as Messi was bundled over by a double @-@ challenge from Vidić and Carrick , but it came to nothing . 
 With ten minutes left until half @-@ time , the Manchester United defence effectively switched off and allowed Touré to dribble unopposed to within 15 yards of their penalty area before slipping the ball out wide to Puyol , whose low cross was diverted behind by Vidić . The corner kick was taken short and the eventual cross was headed behind for another corner on the opposite side by Evra . The second corner was crossed in towards Piqué , but he was unable to make contact with the ball . 
 With half @-@ time fast approaching , Barcelona 's confidence began to show : first , Messi attempted to flick a pass over the top of the United defence to Thierry Henry , which Rio Ferdinand intercepted ; Iniesta then tried an ambitious back @-@ heel that Van der Sar collected ; and finally Messi sped through three Manchester United defenders towards the by @-@ line , only for his cut @-@ back cross to be pounced upon by Van der Sar and then cleared by Vidić . On the stroke of half @-@ time , Iniesta himself then attempted to flick the ball through to Henry , but it was just too high for the French striker , and referee Massimo Busacca took that cue to blow the whistle for the interval . 
 = = = = Second half = = = = 
 After bringing on Carlos Tevez in place of Anderson at half time , Manchester United kicked off the second half in a different formation , with Tevez joining Ronaldo up front in a familiar 4 – 4 – 2 . Both teams attempted to settle into their customary passing rhythms , but – unlike the first half – it was Barcelona who settled first ; Manchester United 's passes in their attacking third of the field failed to find their targets , and Iniesta eventually came away with the ball before flicking a pass through to Xavi , who played a through @-@ ball to Henry on the left wing . The French forward turned Ferdinand inside @-@ out , but his shot from a narrow angle was straight at Van der Sar and ended up going out for a throw @-@ in . Xavi then again passed the ball out to the left flank , where Henry nonchalantly left it for the on @-@ rushing Sylvinho ; the Brazilian full @-@ back whipped in a cross for Eto 'o , but it was caught on the edge of the six @-@ yard box by Van der Sar . 
 Pressure high up the pitch from Barcelona kept Manchester United in their own half , forcing them into attempting long balls downfield . A scrappy few moments in and around the centre circle followed , but Manchester United eventually came away with the ball . However , a lapse in communication between Giggs and Evra on the left wing allowed Eto 'o to steal in and advance on the Manchester United goal . He cut in from the right wing and played a through @-@ ball just out of reach of Messi , who went to ground after O 'Shea had put his hand on Messi 's shoulder . A period of sustained pressure from Barcelona followed , culminating with a run from Iniesta , who could only be stopped by a foul from Tevez on the edge of the Manchester United penalty area . The consequent free kick was taken by Xavi , who curled the ball around the defensive wall and onto the post with Van der Sar beaten . 
 United responded with their first extended period of possession of the half , working the ball into wide areas to be crossed into the middle , but Rooney 's first couple of attempted centres were well cleared by Piqué . At the third attempt , though , Rooney 's cross evaded the Barcelona defence as Touré kicked at thin air ; however , it also failed to find a Manchester United player in the penalty area , both Ronaldo and Park going close . After Ronaldo was called offside in the 59th minute – despite appearing to be level with the last defender – Giggs stole the ball mid @-@ way inside the Barcelona half before playing the ball to Ronaldo on the left wing . The Portuguese forward stepped over the ball several times in an attempt to wrong @-@ foot Puyol , before cutting inside and playing the ball across the edge of the area towards Carrick . A sliding challenge from Busquets prevented a shot , only for the English midfielder to slide the ball out for a Barcelona goal kick while attempting to play Rooney through . Rooney was again played down the right wing a few moments later , but his low cross was diverted behind by Piqué , and the resulting corner came to nothing . A left @-@ wing attack from Ronaldo followed , but after cutting inside , he gave the ball away cheaply . Barcelona immediately went on the attack down the other end , but Henry was unable to get past O 'Shea and his shot was well saved by Van der Sar low at the near post . 
 In the 66th minute , Alex Ferguson completed his attacking quartet by bringing Dimitar Berbatov on in place of Park . Ronaldo was penalised for a high elbow when challenging for a header with Puyol a minute later , before Rooney forced another corner off Piqué in the 69th minute . However , United 's numbers up front in search of another goal left them wanting in defence ; a weak clearance from Van der Sar was cut out by Puyol who played the ball to Eto 'o on the right side of the penalty area . The ball broke to Xavi on the edge of the area , who crossed for Messi to send a looping header over the United goalkeeper and into the far side of the goal for a two @-@ goal lead . Immediately after the goal , Henry was replaced by <unk> Keita , allowing Barcelona to adopt a more defensive stance . 
 United responded to the goal immediately , as Giggs made a surging run through the Barcelona defence before playing the ball to Berbatov in the inside @-@ right channel . The Bulgarian forward 's low cross found Giggs in the centre , and the United captain 's shot was deflected to Ronaldo on the far side of the goal , only for the Portuguese 's shot to be blocked by Valdés . The resulting corner reached Berbatov on the far side of the goal , but it was deemed to have crossed the goal line first and Barcelona were awarded a goal kick , from which they launched another attack . Messi played a through @-@ ball to Puyol on the right flank , but as the Barcelona captain reached the goal line , he was fouled by Ronaldo , who – despite going in two @-@ footed – escaped the referee 's book . Puyol himself rose to head Xavi 's free kick towards goal , but it was directly at Van der Sar , who claimed the ball easily . 
 Manchester United used their third and final substitute in the 75th minute , replacing Giggs with Paul Scholes , who took over as team captain . Ronaldo and Scholes each received yellow cards in the 78th and 80th minutes , respectively ; Ronaldo 's yellow card was awarded for a robust shoulder @-@ charge on Puyol as the Barcelona right back shepherded the ball out for a goal kick , while Scholes was booked for a late challenge on Busquets . While the referee played advantage after Scholes ' foul , Iniesta cut inside from the left wing and hit a shot that was saved above the head of Van der Sar . An extended spell of Barcelona possession followed , as they strung a series of around 20 passes together , culminating with Puyol attempting to clip the ball over the onrushing Van der Sar , who blocked the shot . Both players went for the follow @-@ up , but the Dutch goalkeeper was first to the ball and sent Puyol sprawling . 
 In the 85th minute , Scholes clipped the ball over the top of the Barcelona defensive line to Rooney , who chested the ball down for Tevez , only to be given offside . Scholes then found Rooney again on the left wing with a raking ball from deep inside his own half , but Rooney 's first touch was heavy , allowing Puyol to get back and put the ball out for a corner . Rooney took the corner short to Tevez , whose cross was just beyond the reach of Berbatov and diverted behind again by Puyol . Rooney also took the second corner , which was met by Berbatov , but he put the ball high over the crossbar . 
 As the match entered its closing stages , the referee allotted a minimum of three minutes of injury time . The first of these saw Van der Sar make a poor pass after the ball was played back to him by Ferdinand , allowing Iniesta to steal in and play the ball towards Messi in the United penalty area , only for Vidić to get there ahead of the Argentine and knock the ball out for a corner . Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola brought Pedro Rodríguez on for Iniesta in the second minute of added time , before Vidić was immediately shown a yellow card for a clash of heads with Messi when going for a header . That was to be the final act of the match , as referee Massimo Busacca blew for full @-@ time as soon as Xavi took the free kick . 
 = = = = Trophy presentation = = = = 
 At the final whistle , Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola offered his commiserations to each of Manchester United 's players , while former Manchester United defender Gerard Piqué talked with his erstwhile team @-@ mates . Both teams then retreated to either end of the stadium to applaud their fans . 
 While match referee Massimo Busacca and his assistants collected their mementoes of the final , the Barcelona team formed a guard of honour for the Manchester United players , just as the English side had done for Chelsea in 2008 . Led by their manager , Alex Ferguson , and team captain , Ryan Giggs , the Manchester United team then ascended the specially constructed rostrum to collect their runners @-@ up medals from UEFA president Michel Platini and secretary David Taylor . Other dignitaries present included Manchester United chief executive David Gill ; The Football Association 's president Prince William , and chairman Lord <unk> ; Barcelona president Joan Laporta ; Juan Carlos I of Spain ; Royal Spanish Football Federation president Ángel María Villar ; and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi . Ferguson also collected a commemorative plaque from Platini , but immediately handed it to Giggs . 
 After offering his commiserations to Manchester United 's players , Joan Laporta then joined the Barcelona team to lead them up the podium , closely followed by manager Guardiola . Laporta himself collected Barcelona 's commemorative plaque before accepting a medal from Platini . Once the entire Barcelona team had collected their medals , Platini made his way to the front of the podium to present Carles Puyol with the European Champion Clubs ' Cup . The Barcelona captain promptly held the trophy aloft with accompaniment from the UEFA Champions League Anthem and explosions of golden confetti , before leading his team on a lap of honour . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Reaction = = 
 During the match , <unk> users were able to vote for their man of the match ; the public vote went to the scorer of Barcelona 's second goal , Lionel Messi . The UEFA Technical Study Group , however , chose the man who provided the cross for Messi 's goal , Xavi , as their man of the match , citing his control of the tempo of the match as the reason for their decision . Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola took the time to give special praise to Messi , whom he said he moved back into the midfield in order to increase the team 's effectiveness when in possession of the ball . Messi had been withdrawn from his usual right @-@ wing role into a more central position , while Samuel Eto 'o , who had started the match as Barcelona 's lone centre @-@ forward , was moved out to the right . Guardiola also lauded the bravery of his entire team , stating that he believed that his team 's victory hinged on their hard work and propensity for taking risks in attack , but he admitted that although his side had had the best season in the history of the club , they were not yet the best Barcelona team . 
 In the Manchester United camp , manager Alex Ferguson admitted that his team had been beaten by the better side and that the game was all but lost after the first goal . United forward Cristiano Ronaldo , however , criticised his team 's tactics , saying that " everything went wrong " . Ferguson paid tribute to Messi and the midfield partnership of Xavi and Iniesta , while Wayne Rooney lauded Iniesta as " the best player in the world " . Ferguson also expressed his regret at the unavailability of midfielder Darren Fletcher , who was suspended for the match , and lamented at his side 's " shoddy " defending and ineffectiveness when in possession . Nevertheless , Ferguson paid tribute to Guardiola 's achievement of winning the Treble in his first season of management . Barcelona 's victory also made Guardiola only the sixth man to win the competition as both a player and a manager , following in the footsteps of Miguel Muñoz , Giovanni <unk> , Johan Cruyff , Carlo Ancelotti and , most recently , Frank Rijkaard , who also won the Champions League as Barcelona manager . 
 The match turned out to be the last for Cristiano Ronaldo and Carlos Tevez as Manchester United players , as Ronaldo completed a world record £ 80 million transfer to Real Madrid on 1 July , while Tevez chose not to make his loan spell with the club permanent and joined their local rivals , Manchester City . After announcing his intention to leave Manchester United , Tevez criticised Ferguson 's team selection for the 2009 Champions League final , saying that Ferguson should have included him in the starting line @-@ up , with the rationale that the match was the only final that Manchester United had lost in his time at the club . 
 Television audiences for the final reached more than 10 million in both Spain and the United Kingdom . 11 @.@ 3 million people watched the match on Spain 's Antena 3 network – the largest viewing figures for that station in the past year – while another 600 @,@ 000 watched on Canal + Spain . In the United Kingdom , however , although the match received the highest ratings of any programme that evening , viewing figures were down by 1 @.@ 5 million on the previous year 's final , with just 9 @.@ 6 million watching on ITV1 , although an additional 1 @.@ 79 million watched on Sky Sports 1 . Despite there being no Italian or French representative in the final , the figures were much the same in those two countries as they were in Spain and the United Kingdom , with Italy 's Rai Uno garnering an average viewership of 9 @.@ 63 million and France 's TF1 receiving 8 @.@ 25 million . Only 6 @.@ 55 million people watched the match on Germany 's Sat.1 channel . According to a survey , global viewing figures for the match averaged 109 million ; this put the UEFA Champions League final above the Super Bowl ( 106 million viewers in 2009 ) as the most @-@ watched annual sporting event in the world . Total figures , which included viewers who watched only part of the match , put the Champions League final even further ahead of the Super Bowl , with 206 million viewers compared to 162 million . 
 In the United Kingdom , bookmakers made a profit out of patriotic Britons placing bets on a Manchester United victory . William Hill reported two bets of around £ 20 @,@ 000 placed on Manchester United , while Paddy Power received one of £ 5 @,@ 500 and Ladbrokes one of £ 3 @,@ 000 . Ladbrokes also took a bet of £ 10 @,@ 000 on a Barcelona win , but bookmakers reported that most of the money was put on Manchester United . <unk> paid out £ 12 @,@ 000 to a £ 3 @,@ 000 bet on Samuel Eto 'o to score the first goal at odds of 4 – 1 . 
 = = Rewards = = 
 Both teams received significant financial rewards for reaching the Champions League final . However , despite losing the match , it was Manchester United who earned the most money from their 2008 – 09 Champions League campaign , receiving € 38 @.@ 281 million compared to Barcelona 's € 30 @.@ 968 million . All 32 teams in the group stage of the competition received € 3 million for taking part in the competition and € 2 @.@ 4 million for their participation in the group stage matches , as well as further bonuses based on their performances in each match ( € 600 @,@ 000 for each win and € 300 @,@ 000 for each draw ) . For their four wins and one draw , Barcelona received a performance bonus of € 2 @.@ 7 million , while Manchester United earned € 2 @.@ 4 million for their two wins and four draws . Both teams then also received a total of € 7 @.@ 7 million for their participation in the rounds leading up to the final ; however , Barcelona received a win bonus of € 7 million for winning the final , while Manchester United received € 4 million for finishing as runners @-@ up . The biggest difference between the teams ' financial rewards came as a result of their share of the market pool , based on the value of the television market in their home countries . As the most successful of the English teams in the competition , Manchester United received the greatest share ( € 18 @.@ 781 million ) of approximately € 55 @.@ 5 million reserved for the English teams . However , although Barcelona were the most successful of the Spanish teams in the competition , they had finished in third place in La Liga the previous season , and so received the second @-@ smallest share of the € 33 @.@ 8 million given to the four Spanish clubs , taking home € 8 @.@ 168 million . 
 In addition to receiving almost € 31 million in prize money , as winners of the UEFA Champions League , Barcelona competed in the 2009 UEFA Super Cup , in which they beat 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup winners Shakhtar Donetsk 1 – 0 at Stade Louis II in Monaco on 28 August 2009 , and in the 2009 FIFA Club World Cup in Abu Dhabi , where they beat Estudiantes of Argentina in the final . 
 = Clara Ng = 
 Clara Ng ( born 28 July 1973 ; née Clara Regina Juana , last name pronounced [ ŋ ̍ ] ) is an Indonesian writer who is known for both adult fiction and children 's literature . 
 During her childhood in Jakarta , Ng enjoyed reading and read at an advanced rate . After finishing her primary and secondary education in Indonesia , during which time she took up writing , Ng went to the United States to study at Ohio State University . After her graduation in 1997 , she worked in the US for a year before returning to Indonesia to work at a shipping company . After three years working there , in which time she married and had two miscarriages , Ng quit to become a professional writer . Her first novel , Tujuh Musim Setahun ( Seven Seasons in a Year ; 2002 ) , sold poorly , but her subsequent trilogy Indiana Chronicle was better received . Since then , she has released several novels , as well as numerous short stories ( including one anthology ) and twenty @-@ one children 's books , and some collections of fairytales . 
 Ng , who is a stay at home mother , writes in her spare time at home . Her topics are different depending on the genre she is writing in ; her adult @-@ oriented works often deal with minority groups , while her children 's books are meant to teach empathy . Her children 's works have won three Adhikarya Awards from the Indonesian Publishers Association , and LGBT groups have praised her novel Gerhana Kembar ( Twin Eclipse ; 2007 ) for avoiding stereotyping the group . However , some educators have protested the lack of an explicit moral message in her children 's books . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Ng was born in Jakarta on 28 July 1973 with the name Clara Regina Juana and raised in the Kemayoran sub @-@ district . She took up reading at a young age , reportedly capable of reading translations of The Adventures of Tintin by kindergarten . She also enjoyed Hans Christian Andersen 's fairytale The Snow Queen , which influenced her writing . By age 11 she was reading adult @-@ oriented works by Mira W. Ng attended Budi Mulia Elementary School from 1979 until 1986 , then attended Van Lith Middle School until 1989 ; it was while in middle school that she taught herself creative writing and began creating works . She completed her high school education at Bunda Hati Kudus , graduating in 1992 . While in high school , she became interested in social issues , including discrimination faced by ethnic Chinese , LGBT , and women . 
 After high school , Ng went to the United States and began studying at Ohio Dominican University in Columbus , Ohio , but later transferred to Ohio State University ; she graduated with a bachelour 's degree in interpersonal communications in 1997 . While in the US , she read numerous children 's books ; these later influenced her own writings . After graduating , she spent a year working in the US before returning to Indonesia in 1998 . Upon her return to Indonesia , she spent three years working in the human resources department of Hanjin Shipping but left after she had two miscarriages , the first when she was seven months pregnant and the second at seven weeks . While staying at home , she took up writing . 
 = = = Writing career = = = 
 Ng made her debut as a novelist with Tujuh Musim Setahun ( Seven Seasons A Year ) in 2002 , which sold poorly . She gained recognition with her Indiana Chronicle trilogy , which consists of Blues ( 2004 ) , Lipstick ( 2005 ) and Bridesmaid ( 2005 ) . These works were classified as pop literature , but readers identified with the main characters — urban working women . Tempo magazine notes that the trilogy pioneered the <unk> genre in Indonesia . Between <unk> and Bridesmaid , another novel , The ( Un ) Reality Show , was released in 2005 . 
 In 2006 , Ng 's short story " Rahasia Bulan " ( " The Moon 's Secret " ) was included in a lesbian and gay themed short story collection of the same name . The work also included stories by Alberthiene Endah , Djenar Maesa Ayu , and Indra Herlambang . That year , she published two novels : <unk> Terakhir ( The Last Dim Sum ) and Utukki : <unk> Para Dewa ( Utukki : Wings of the Gods ) . The following year Ng published another two novels , Tiga Venus ( Three Venuses ) and Gerhana Kembar ( Twin Eclipse ) . The latter , which was initially run as a serial in the newspaper Kompas and later picked up by Gramedia , was about lesbianism . The title was a result of Ng combining the Sun ( commonly representative of men ) and the Moon ( commonly representative of women ) to create a united symbol to represent homosexuality . Ng launched a short story collection , <unk> Jatuh ( Fallen Angel ) in 2008 . The collection dealt mainly with death . The collection was followed in 2009 by the novel Tea For Two , which was first published as a serial in Kompas . 
 Ng 's short story " Barbie " was adapted as a film by actor @-@ cum @-@ presenter Raffi Ahmad in 2010 , with Yuni Shara in the titular role . Barbie followed the story of a night @-@ club singer and her lover , a security guard at the club . The film premiered at the LA Lights Indie movie festival . That same year she released two other books , Dongeng Tujuh Menit ( The Seven @-@ Minute Fairytale ) and <unk> @-@ <unk> Varaiya ( Varaiya 's Incantations ) . Another one of her short stories , " Mata Indah " , was included in the lesbian @-@ themed anthology Un Soir du Paris ( An Evening in Paris ) ; other writers in the anthology included Seno Gumira Ajidarma , Ucu Agustin , and Noor . 
 In 2010 , Ng , Agus Noor , and Eka Kurniawan established the Fiksimini community on Facebook as a way to critique each other 's work , later branching out to Twitter . As of 2011 the community , with approximately 70 @,@ 000 followers , allows writers , both professional and aspiring , to tweet an idea within the 140 @-@ character technical limitations of the software which could make the reader think . On 1 July 2011 , Ng published <unk> Drama Cinta ( Love Potion Drama ) , and in November she released Dongeng Sekolah <unk> ( Fairytales from the School on the Cliff ) , a collection of 53 stories about children who attend a school on a cliff . 
 Aside from writing novels and short stories , she also writes children 's books , a genre which she entered due to a lack of Indonesian @-@ language works . As of 2008 , Ng has written 21 such books in three series : Berbagi Cerita Berbagi Cinta ( Sharing Stories , Sharing Love ; started in 2006 and numbering seven books ) , Sejuta Warna Pelangi ( A Million Colours of the Rainbow ; started in 2007 and numbering nine books ) , and Bagai Bumi <unk> <unk> ( As If the Earth Stopped Rotating ; started in 2008 and numbering five books ) . 
 = = Style = = 
 Ng 's main characters are generally female . These characters generally do not hold the same employment ; some occupations held by her characters include office worker , animal nursery employee , and automotive repair shop owner . Her children 's stories are written simply , illustrated , and deal with children 's feelings ; they are intended to give children more empathy . The characters ' names are chosen to be easy to remember . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ng has received several awards . Her 2006 children 's story <unk> Pascal ( Pascal 's Hair , from the Berbagi Cerita series ) won an Adhikarya Award for Best Children 's Book from the Indonesian Publishers Association ( <unk> Penerbit Indonesia , or <unk> ) . The following year she won the same award for Sejuta Warna Pelangi . Another followed suit in 2008 for Jangan Bilang Siapa @-@ Siapa ( Don 't Tell Anybody ) . 
 A. Junaidi , writing for The Jakarta Post , notes that Gerhana Kembar was well received by Indonesia 's LGBT community as it did not link homosexuality to negative issues like drug use . 
 Ng notes that her children 's stories have been generally well received . However , some educators disagree with the lack of an explicit moral message ; Ng argues that her books have multiple interpretations : those by children and those by adults . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As of 2010 , Ng is married to Nicholas Ng , a Malaysian citizen whom she met while working at Hanjin Shipping ; the couple married in 2000 . Together they have two children . She lives in Tanjung Duren , West Jakarta . According to an interview with Kompas , Ng is a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother and writes in an office in her house . She writes in her spare time , usually in the morning , as in the afternoon she must pick up her children . 
 = Lena Meyer @-@ Landrut = 
 Lena Johanna Therese Meyer @-@ Landrut ( born 23 May 1991 ) , known professionally as Lena ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) , is a German singer @-@ songwriter . She represented Germany in the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 in Oslo and won the contest with the song " Satellite " . With her three entries from the German national final Unser Star für Oslo ( Our Star for Oslo ) , Meyer @-@ Landrut set an all @-@ time chart record in her home country by debuting with three songs in the top five of the German singles chart . Both " Satellite " and her first album My Cassette Player debuted at number one in Germany , while the former has been certified double Platinum since , the album has been certified five times Gold for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 units . Meyer @-@ Landrut represented Germany for the second consecutive time in the Eurovision Song Contest at Düsseldorf in 2011 with the song " Taken by a Stranger " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lena Meyer @-@ Landrut was born in Hanover , Germany . She is the granddaughter of Andreas Meyer @-@ Landrut , the Estonian @-@ born West German ambassador to the Soviet Union in Moscow from 1980 to 1983 and 1987 to 1989 and Hanna <unk> von <unk> who was of Hungarian nobility . She grew up as an only child , and started taking dancing lessons at the age of five ; initially doing ballet and later practising various modern styles , including hip @-@ hop and jazz dance . Meyer @-@ Landrut grew fond of singing and appeared as an extra in a number of German television series ; however she never received any formal acting or vocal training . In June 2010 she graduated from IGS <unk> Hannover , a comprehensive school , receiving her Abitur diploma . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2009 – 2012 : Unser Star für Oslo and Eurovision Song Contest = = = 
 Meyer @-@ Landrut decided to take part in the talent show Unser Star für Oslo ( Our Star for Oslo ) , a newly created national television programme to select the German entry for the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 in Oslo . The show was organised by public broadcaster ARD and private television station ProSieben , as well as entertainer , music producer and former Eurovision entrant Stefan Raab . Among 4 @,@ 500 entrants , Meyer @-@ Landrut was picked as one of the 20 contestants for the show . Asked about her motivation to apply , she stated , " I like to test myself . I wanted to see how I am perceived , and I wanted to hear what people with knowledge have to say about it . I personally can 't judge myself at all . " 
 After her first appearance , performing " My Same " by British singer Adele , Meyer @-@ Landrut received much praise from the show 's jury panel and was instantly considered the favourite . The following week , Adele 's " My Same " entered the German singles chart at position number 61 . Meyer @-@ Landrut reached the final of Unser Star für Oslo , mainly performing lesser known songs of international artists such as The Bird and the Bee , Kate Nash , Paolo Nutini and Lisa Mitchell . Out of her eight cover performances , five of the original songs subsequently charted in Germany , with all but " Foundations " reaching their peak chart position . In the final on 12 March 2010 , Meyer @-@ Landrut sang three songs specifically written for the contest , " Bee " , " Satellite " and " Love Me " . Through televoting , the audience chose " Satellite " , written by American Julie Frost and Dane John Gordon , to be her designated song in case she won the show . In a second round of voting , Meyer @-@ Landrut was chosen as Germany 's entry for the 55th Eurovision Song Contest , beating the last remaining contestant , Jennifer Braun . The music video for " Satellite " was shot during the night of the final and premiered on German television stations four days later . 
 Throughout the show , Meyer @-@ Landrut was seen as the clear favourite . One day after winning Unser Star für Oslo , all three of her songs from the finals topped the German iTunes Store sales chart , making her the first singer to achieve that . " Satellite " sold over 100 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week , becoming Germany 's fastest selling digital release ever . Her three songs all entered the top five of the German singles chart , reaching positions number one , three and four , which no artist had ever achieved since charts were first established in Germany in 1959 . " Satellite " was certified gold after the first week and platinum after the fourth week of its release . The song has remained at number one for five consecutive weeks in Germany . 
 While competing at Unser Star für Oslo , Meyer @-@ Landrut continued to attend school . The last show was held one month before the start of her final exams . Following her exams , she released her debut album , My Cassette Player , on 7 May 2010 . Produced by Stefan Raab , it includes the singles " Satellite " , " Love Me " and " Bee " , as well as two cover songs and eight unreleased titles . Meyer @-@ Landrut is credited as a co @-@ writer for the lyrics of five songs . The album debuted at number one in the German albums chart . It peaked at number one in the Austrian albums chart , number three in the Swiss albums chart . 
 Following her success in Germany , Meyer @-@ Landrut has said she would enjoy pursuing a singing or acting career , but explained , " I 'm not fixated on doing music my whole life . " She stated she originally planned to study acting after graduating school , but now is unsure " if time allows " . She has said her musical influences include Adele , Kate Nash , Vanessa Carlton , as well as the singer <unk> and German pop rock band Wir sind Helden . 
 Representing a " big four " country , Meyer @-@ Landrut automatically qualified for the final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 . Germany received a wild card during the running order draw , allowing the German representatives to pick the country 's position for the final . They chose position 22 out of the 25 spots . Meyer @-@ Landrut arrived one week before the show in Oslo , where she completed five rehearsals of her song " Satellite " . Prior to the final , she was considered one of the favourites . Bookmakers regarded her second favourite behind Azerbaijan 's <unk> , while Google projected she would win based on search volume in the participating countries . According to Norway 's Aftenposten she received the most media attention of all participants . 
 The final was held on 29 May 2010 at Oslo 's Telenor Arena . Appearing fourth from last , Meyer @-@ Landrut wore a simple black dress and performed on a bare stage with four backing singers . Her pared @-@ back presentation was a break from recent Eurovision trends , as it did not feature any form of choreography , dancers or elaborate stage show . " Satellite " received a total of 246 points , giving Germany its first win since 1982 , and the first victory as a unified country . The song won over Turkey 's entry " We Could Be the Same " with a margin of 76 points , at that time the second @-@ biggest in Eurovision history , second only to Alexander Rybak 's margin of 169 points in the 2009 contest ( it would later be beaten by Loreen 's victory in 2012 , sporting a margin of 113 points ) . " Satellite " was awarded the maximum of 12 points nine times and received points from all but five countries . 
 The BBC called " Satellite " the first " contemporary pop hit Eurovision has produced in decades " , ushering in " a new era for the annual music jamboree " . Meyer @-@ Landrut 's victory received much attention in Germany and the show was seen by 15 million viewers on German television ( a 49 @.@ 1 percent market share ) . She returned to Hanover the following day , where she was greeted by 40 @,@ 000 people . In June , " Satellite " regained the top spot in the German singles chart for one week and also peaked at number one in Denmark , Finland , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland . It also topped European Hot 100 singles chart , being the first Eurovision song to achieve this . 
 In June 2010 in the German dubbed version of the computer @-@ animated film Sammy 's Adventures : The Secret Passage , Meyer @-@ Landrut provided the voice for the character originally spoken by Isabelle <unk> . 
 In January 2011 , the TV @-@ Show " Unser Song für Deutschland " was held and Meyer @-@ Landrut 's 2011 Eurovision song was determined via televoting . All twelve songs Meyer @-@ Landrut performed during that show were recorded on her second studio album Good News which was released on 8 February 2011 . The album reached Gold status in Germany within one week after its release . 
 On 18 February 2011 , the " Unser Song für Deutschland " final was held and it was decided through televoting that Meyer @-@ Landrut would perform the entry " Taken by a Stranger " in the final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2011 . 
 In April 2011 , she went on her first German tour in the largest concert halls in Berlin , Hanover , Frankfurt , Dortmund , Leipzig , Hamburg , Munich , Stuttgart and <unk> though the concerts were not sold out . 
 In May 2011 , Meyer @-@ Landrut attempted to defend her title in the 2011 Eurovision Song Contest . She was the third winner to do so , and the first in over 50 years . She also appeared in the opening performance of the show , less than an hour before she came on stage to represent Germany . 
 = = = 2012 – 2014 : Stardust and The Voice = = = 
 On 24 May 2012 , Meyer @-@ Landrut performed as part of the interval act during the second semi @-@ finals of the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku , Azerbaijan . She was joined by the last five Eurovision winners from 2007 to 2011 which included Marija Šerifović , Dima Bilan , Alexander Rybak , and Ell & Nikki . Meyer @-@ Landrut , Marija , Dima and Alexander performed their winning song entry accompanied by traditional Azeri instruments , being joined by Ell & Nikki for a rendition of " Waterloo " . 
 On 1 August , Meyer @-@ Landrut announced via her Twitter account that " Stardust " will be the first single from her new album with the eponymous title . The single was released on 21 September and was certified Gold for selling 150 @,@ 000 copies The album was released on 12 October and it debuted at No. 2 on German Albums chart . In late July and early August she went on a promotion tour called " <unk> <unk> " ( Lena ′ s Lounge ) , which led her to Munich , Cologne , Hamburg and Berlin and presented several of her new songs . Since October 2012 she performed the theme song in the opening credits of Sesamstraße , the German version of Sesame Street . In November 2012 she covered the Pippi Longstocking song <unk> <unk> ( <unk> @-@ Opa Fabian ) for the compilation album Giraffenaffen . 
 On 18 January 2013 , it was announced that the second single from Lena 's album will be Neon . The music video for the single was shot in early February , by director Bode <unk> , who also directed Lena 's video for her first single from the third album , " Stardust " . It was shot in <unk> @-@ Hallen . On 1 March , Lena 's video for Neon ( Lonely People ) premiered on Universal Music page . Lena 's sixth single was released on 15 March . The same day , video was also uploaded on Lena 's VEVO channel on YouTube . The single version is different from the original song version on her Stardust album . The single version is more of a dance record , remixed and a bit faster . 
 On 21 March , Lena Meyer @-@ Landrut attended to ECHO awards . She was nominated for two categories this year , " Best National Video " for " Stardust " and as " Best National Female Artist " . During the show , Lena received an only one award for " Best National Video " for her first single from same titled album , " Stardust " . Later during the show , Lena lost the " Best Female National Artist " award to singer Ivy <unk> . 
 In April 2013 , Lena went on a club tour through thirteen German cities started in Stuttgart on 2 April and finished in Offenbach on 21 April . The last concert was streamed live in the Internet . The title " No One Can Catch Us Tour " was taken from a line from her first single from the album , " Stardust " . 
 In April and May 2013 she was one of the three judges on the show The Voice Kids alongside Tim <unk> and Henning <unk> . 
 On 17 May 2013 " Mr. Arrow Key " , was released as third single from the Album " Stardust " and as seventh single overall . The song was written by Lena Meyer @-@ Landrut , Linda Carlsson and Sonny Boy Gustafsson , and the original track for album was produced by Sonny Boy Gustafsson . 
 Lena was president of the German jury ( including Carolin <unk> , Alina <unk> , Tim <unk> and Florian <unk> ) and the spokesperson for Germany , revealing the countries voting results at the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 final on 18 May . 
 In July 2013 , it was announced that she will be the German voice of Jane in the motion capture animated film Tarzan 3D which was released in German cinemas in February 2014 . In the same month she dubbed the voice of three characters in the two audiobooks Giraffenaffen – Wir sind da ! ( Giraffe @-@ monkeys – We are here ! ) and Giraffenaffen – Die <unk> ( Giraffe @-@ monkeys – Treasure hunt ) , which were both published in October 2013 . 
 In October 2013 Lena re @-@ united with her Eurovision mentor Stefan Raab when she featured in " Revolution " , a single from Raab 's band Dicks on Fire . In June 2013 , this song was already used for a video about the shower head <unk> invented by Stefan Raab where Lena is posing as Lara Croft under the shower . In 2013 Lena became a L 'Oréal testimonial for hair coloring and skin care product series . 
 From March to May 2014 she returned as coach in the second season of The Voice Kids along with Henning <unk> ( from the band Söhne <unk> ) and Johannes Strate ( from the band <unk> ) . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Crystal Sky = = = 
 In early 2014 , Meyer @-@ Landrut began principal work on her fourth studio album Crystal Sky . Taking her sound further into the electro and dance pop genre , she worked English production and songwriting team Biffco and Berlin @-@ based collective <unk> on most of the album . In November 2014 , one of their collaborations , the children 's song " <unk> alle " , appeared on the compilation album Giraffenaffen 3 . The same month , Meyer @-@ Landrut 's rendition of the Aladdin song " A Whole New World " was included on the compilation album I Love Disney . From February to April 2015 Meyer @-@ Landrut reprised her role as a coach in the third season of The Voice Kids along with singers Johannes Strate and Mark Forster . After four press concerts in Hamburg , Berlin , Munich , and Cologne from late February to early March 2015 she released Crystal Sky 's first single " Traffic Lights " to radios in March 2015 . It reached the top twenty of the German Singles Chart . 
 Crystal Sky was released in May 2015 . It marked her fourth consecutive album to reach the top two of the German Albums Chart , but was less successful in Austria and Switzerland , where it failed to reach the top twenty on both music markets . In September 2015 , Meyer @-@ Landrut released " Wild & Free " , the theme song for the motion picture <unk> ju <unk> 2 as a single . The song peaked at number eight on the German Singles Chart , becoming her highest @-@ charting single in three years . 
 = = Media image = = 
 Meyer @-@ Landrut has been noted for her unconventional way of handling the press , which has been labelled " aloof " as well as " quick @-@ witted " and " intuitive " . She usually refuses to answer questions about her private life , including her family , friends and personal beliefs , sometimes calling questions " stupid " or responding with <unk> instead . This has drawn praise as well as criticism , including allegations of being arrogant and disrespectful . 
 Meyer @-@ Landrut 's demeanour has been described as " carefree " , " laid @-@ back and self @-@ effacing " . She has been said to possess an " adequate youthful megalomania " , to " cultivate her forwardness " and to stand for " unadorned genuineness " and " sincerity " . She has also been said to give " infatuation a rhythm " and blur the " fine line between puppy love and psychotic obsession " . Her vocals have been both lauded and criticised . In an attempt to explain Meyer @-@ Landrut 's success , her appearance has been called a " mix of loveliness , professionalism and a little craziness " . She has also been lauded for her stage presence and charisma . 
 = = Appearances on Unser Star für Oslo = = 
 Jennifer Braun and Meyer @-@ Landrut both sang different versions of " Bee " and " Satellite " in the final 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = Film and television = = 
 2016 <unk> Contest 19 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 2010 : My Cassette Player 
 2011 : Good News 
 2012 : Stardust 
 2015 : Crystal Sky 
 = Death Cab for Cutie = 
 Death Cab for Cutie is an American alternative rock band , formed in Bellingham , Washington in 1997 . The band comprises Ben Gibbard ( vocals , guitar , piano ) , Nick Harmer ( bass ) and Jason McGerr ( drums ) . In 2014 , founding guitarist and producer Chris Walla announced that he would be departing from the band after recording their eighth studio album , Kintsugi . 
 The band was originally a solo project by Ben Gibbard , when he released the demo album , You Can Play These Songs with Chords , to positive reception . This led to a record deal with Barsuk Records . Gibbard decided to expand the project into a complete band , releasing their debut album Something About Airplanes in 1998 , and their second album , We Have the Facts and We 're Voting Yes , in 2000 ; both records were positively received in the indie community . Their third album , 2001 's The Photo Album , gave the band their first charting single , and the release of the group 's fourth album Transatlanticism , in 2003 , gained the band mainstream critical and commercial success . After signing with Atlantic Records , Death Cab For Cutie released their fifth album and major @-@ label debut Plans in 2005 , which received platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America . The band released their sixth album Narrow Stairs in 2008 , which served as a stylistic departure for the group . Their seventh album , 2011 's Codes and Keys , featured the band 's first number one single , " You Are a Tourist " . Their eighth studio album Kintsugi , the last to feature Walla , was released on March 31 , 2015 . 
 Death Cab for Cutie 's music has been labeled as indie rock , indie pop , and alternative rock . It is noted for its use of unconventional instrumentation , as well as Gibbard 's distinctive voice and unique lyrical style . Since their formation , the band has released eight full @-@ length studio albums , four EPs , two live EPs , one live album , and one demo album . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1997 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Death Cab for Cutie began as a solo project of Ben Gibbard in 1997 , while he was the guitar player for the band Pinwheel , and was recorded under the name All @-@ Time Quarterback . As Death Cab for Cutie , Gibbard released a cassette titled You Can Play These Songs with Chords the same year . The release was surprisingly successful , and Gibbard decided to expand the project into a complete band , recruiting Chris Walla ( who had also worked on the cassette ) as lead guitarist , Nick Harmer as bass player , and Nathan Good as drummer . Death Cab for Cutie was officially formed at Western Washington University in Bellingham , Washington , and lyrics from early songs include local references that were important to the band 's development . Many of the early songs were recorded in the basement of an Ellis Street home Gibbard lived in with several roommates in Bellingham . 
 The four released their debut full @-@ length studio album , Something About Airplanes , on August 18 , 1998 . The album was favorably reviewed in the independent music scene . In 1998 the band also met their long @-@ term manager Jordan Kurland . Kurland had heard good things about them , and after a failed attempt to see them play at South By Southwest finally hooked up with them when touring with his then client , the band Crumb . 
 The band released their follow @-@ up second album , We Have the Facts and We 're Voting Yes , in March 2000 . Nathan Good left the band at some point during this album 's production , and was briefly replaced by Jayson Tolzdorf @-@ Larson . Gibbard played drums on the majority of the album , with Good 's playing on “ The Employment Pages ” and “ Company Calls Epilogue ” being kept on the final release . Although Tolzdorf @-@ Larson did not contribute to the album , he did appear on the song " Spring Break Broke " , from the " Death Cab for Fiver " 7 @-@ inch record , and also joined the band on two tours , including their first full tour of the United States . Tolzdorf @-@ Larson was later replaced by Michael Schorr , who would first appear on The Forbidden Love EP , released on October 24 , 2000 . 
 In 2001 , Death Cab for Cutie released their third album , The Photo Album . Limited editions of this album contained three bonus tracks , which were later released separately as The Stability EP . The album produced the band 's first charting single " A Movie Script Ending " , which reached number 123 on the UK Singles Chart , and was the first of three songs by the band to be featured on the television show The <unk> .. The Photo Album 's two other singles , " I Was a Kaleidoscope " and " We Laugh Indoors " , also reached numbers 115 and 122 on the UK Singles Chart , respectively . 
 = = = Transatlanticism ( 2003 ) = = = 
 In 2003 there was yet another change of drummer with Jason McGerr , who had previously played in the band Eureka Farm with Gibbard and Harmer , joining the band . McGerr 's debut would be playing drums on Death Cab for Cutie 's next release , their fourth album Transatlanticism , which was released in October 2003 . The album was received to critical acclaim , and launched the band into mainstream commercial success , with the two singles " The Sound of Settling " and " Title and Registration " , appearing in the soundtracks of the television shows The O.C. , Six Feet Under , CSI : Miami and Californication , and the films Wedding Crashers , Easy A , and Mean Creek . 
 = = = Signing to Atlantic and Plans ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In early 2004 the band recorded a live EP , entitled The John Byrd EP , named for their sound engineer was released on Barsuk Records in March . 
 Death Cab for Cutie had been contacted by major labels on @-@ and @-@ off for several years , but it was only after the proven success of Transatlanticism that they decided to start talking to labels about a potential deal . The fact that they had already achieved considerable success allowed the band to negotiate with a lot of creative freedom . According to their manager Jordan Kurland , the band had spoken to " pretty much all of them " , and then decided they were most satisfied with their offer from Atlantic Records . In November 2004 , the band signed a “ long @-@ term worldwide deal ” with Atlantic , leaving their long @-@ time label Barsuk Records . Gibbard stated on the band 's official website that nothing would change , except that " next to the picture of Barsuk holding a 7 " , there will be the letter " A " on both the spine and back of our upcoming albums . " After signing to Atlantic , the band was still nervous about corporate economics , and encouraged fans to download its songs from the Internet . 
 The band released their fifth studio album and debut major @-@ label release , Plans , on August 30 , 2005 , to critical and commercial success . Two singles from the album , “ Soul Meets Body ” and “ Crooked Teeth ” , reached the top ten of the US Billboard Alternative Songs chart , while the single " I Will Follow You into the Dark " became the band 's best @-@ selling single to date . Death Cab for Cutie performed " Crooked Teeth " live on Saturday Night Live on January 14 , 2006 . Plans received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album of 2005 , as well as achieving gold certification in 2006 after being featured on the Billboard Album chart for 47 consecutive weeks , and later was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in early May 2008 . 
 The band released a touring DVD , Drive Well , Sleep Carefully , in 2005 . Copies of the DVD were given away to promote animal rights , and the band are supporters of the activist group PETA . In early 2006 , the band announced the upcoming release of Directions : The Plans Video Album , which features eleven short films inspired by songs from the Plans album , each directed by a different person . The videos were posted one at a time at the band 's website , and the DVD went on sale April 11 , 2006 . The iTunes Store began selling the videos ( formatted for iPod ) early on March 28 , 2006 . Lance Bangs , P.R. Brown , Ace Norton , Jeffrey Brown , <unk> , Autumn de Wilde , Rob Schrab , Laurent Briet and <unk> , as well as Aaron Stewart @-@ Ahn , are among directors that have contributed to the project . An episode of MTV2 's Subterranean played these videos for the whole hour , plus discussion with members of the band . Death Cab for Cutie made their first appearance at Neil Young 's annual Bridge School Benefit , and completed their lengthy 2006 tour of the United States on December 10 , 2006 , finishing with a show at the KeyArena in Seattle , Washington . 
 = = = Narrow Stairs and The Open Door EP ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Walla claimed on October 18 , 2007 , that a new album was " in full swing " and that they had six songs completed . He went on to call the new music " weird , " " spectacular , " and " creepy , " saying that it contained " lots of blood . " He noted that the album had a " Can jam " that lasted 10 minutes , which Walla said that he would have never imagined doing in 1998 . In a Billboard piece in January 2008 , the band promised the album to be a " curve ball " and said that although it would have slower songs , there would be some surprises . Walla said , " I 'm really excited about it . It 's really got some teeth . The landscape of the thing is way , way more lunar than the urban meadow sort of thing that has been happening for the last couple of records . " Walla added that the album was " louder and more dissonant and ... abrasive . " They claimed that they were influenced by " synth @-@ punk band Brainiac . " 
 Their sixth full @-@ length album , Narrow Stairs , was released on May 12 , 2008 . The first single , " I Will Possess Your Heart " , was released on March 18 , 2008 . The album version of the song is over eight minutes in length , leading radio and promotional edits to remove the extended intro to shorten the song to four minutes . The second single , " Cath ... " , was released on July 21 , 2008 , and the third single " Grapevine Fires " , was released on March 3 , 2009 . The two singles " I Will Possess Your Heart " and " Cath ... " both reached the top ten of the Alternative Songs chart , while " Grapevine Fires " reached number 21 . In an album review , MTV writer James Montgomery said " Narrow Stairs is a great album , one that could make them very famous , but could very well also kill their careers , " and although " Death Cab for Cutie had gone insane , " he believed the LP could be " an early contender for the best album of 2008 . " Indeed , Narrow Stairs was nominated for " Best Alternative Music Album " and " I Will Possess Your Heart " received a nomination for " Best Rock Song " at the 51st Grammy Awards . The band lost in both categories , but prompted debate after appearing at the ceremony sporting blue ribbons to protest against what they view as the excessive use of Auto @-@ Tune in the music industry . Narrow Stairs was their first album to reach No.1 on the Billboard 200 chart on May 31 , 2008 . Though the album achieved strong success , Gibbard went on to call it the band 's most " depressing record " . 
 On March 31 , 2009 , the band released The Open Door EP , containing tracks left off Narrow Stairs as well as a demo for " Talking Bird " . The Open Door EP was nominated for Best Alternative Music Album at the 52nd Grammy Awards . In 2009 the band wrote the song , " Meet Me on the Equinox " for the The Twilight Saga : New Moon soundtrack . " Meet Me on the Equinox " was not the first song that Death Cab for Cutie contributed to a soundtrack , as they contributed " Soul Meets Body " to the soundtrack for Catch and Release in 2006 . 
 = = = Codes and Keys ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 The band 's seventh album , Codes and Keys , was released on May 31 , 2011 . Ben Gibbard and Nick Harmer have both been quoted as saying that the album was " a much less guitar @-@ centric album than we ’ ve ever made before " . 
 In March 2011 , Ben Gibbard performed a new Death Cab for Cutie song at a solo concert in San Francisco , which would later be revealed as the title track from Codes and Keys . The tracklist for the album was released on Death Cab for Cutie 's website on March 15 , 2011 . 
 The first single from the album , " You Are a Tourist " , was released on March 29 , 2011 . The song is notable for its music video being first ever live , scripted , one @-@ take music video shoot ever : the group streamed a live performance of the music video as it was being recorded on April 5 , 2011 . The video was accomplished in a single take , using multiple cameras , and no edits or re @-@ takes . The innovative and artistic production employed dancers , actors , and projected images . " You Are a Tourist " is also notable as Death Cab for Cutie 's first ( and to date , only ) single to reach number one , topping the Billboard US Alternative Songs , US Adult Alternative Songs , and Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles charts , as well as reaching number three on the US Rock Songs chart . The band released the video for the song " Home is a Fire " on May 9 , 2011 , featuring street artist Shepard Fairey plastering lyrics from the song around Los Angeles . " Stay Young , Go Dancing " was released as the second single on September 26 , 2011 , reaching number 31 on the Alternative Songs chart . " Underneath the Sycamore " was released as the third single on January 10 , 2012 , but did not chart . Codes and Keys was nominated for Best Alternative Music Album at the 54th Grammy Awards in 2012 . 
 The band was due to play at the Ottawa Bluesfest on July 17 , 2011 , but the outdoor stage collapsed earlier in the evening after sudden severe weather hit the area . On their website , the band posted : " Our hearts go out to those that were injured and we are so thankful that no one was killed . " 
 In 2012 the band toured across the globe , starting in Australia , New Zealand , Southeast Asia . In April and May , the band toured in the United States with members of the Magik * Magik Orchestra , who collaborated on tracks on Codes and Keys . After headlining the inaugural Bunbury Music Festival in Cincinnati , the band played summer festivals in Europe . 
 = = = Departure of Walla and Kintsugi ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 On October 11 , 2013 , the band reportedly began working on their eighth studio album , Kintsugi , produced by Rich Costey . This was then confirmed by the group 's official Instagram profile in which an image was uploaded with the caption " <unk> <unk> begins " . In an interview with Stereogum , Gibbard said of the new album , " I do think from start to finish it 's a much better record than Codes And Keys . If that record turned anybody off , I feel pretty strongly that this one could win them back . There are threads in this one that connect back to our earliest stuff that people love . " 
 On October 29 , 2013 , the band released a remastered tenth @-@ anniversary version of their 2003 album Transatlanticism . The new album included a vinyl LP and MP3 download , with demos for all the songs from the album . 
 As part of the 2014 Record Store Day , the band released its first live album , a vinyl @-@ only double LP recorded during various 2012 tour dates with Magik * Magik Orchestra . Included within the packaging was a code for a digital download of the recording . 
 On August 13 , 2014 , after 17 years as a member of Death Cab for Cutie , guitarist and songwriter Chris Walla decided to part ways with the band , with his last performance occurring on September 13 , 2014 at the <unk> Music Festival in Victoria , British Columbia . Walla states that he plans to " ... continue making music , producing records , and erring on the side of benevolence and beauty whenever possible . " When asked in an interview about Walla 's involvement in the eighth album , McGerr confirmed that Walla " played on everything and has been involved all the way through , even in the mixing . Even though he 's played his last show with us , he 's still been involved in everything involving this record . " 
 An October 2014 Rolling Stone interview with Gibbard revealed new songs entitled " No Room In Frame " , " Black Sun " , " Beverly Drive " , and " Good Help " would feature alongside seven further tracks on the new record . On January 12 , 2015 , the band officially announced the Kintsugi album , which was released on March 31 , 2015 . 
 On January 16 , 2015 , the band announced their first 2015 show at the Crocodile Cafe in Seattle set for later that week , with new touring members Dave <unk> ( guitar / keyboards ) and Zac Rae ( keyboards / guitar ) replacing Walla in the live band . At the show the band debuted several new songs from Kintsugi including first single " Black Sun " , which was later released on January 26 . 
 Kintsugi was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Death Cab for Cutie 's music has been labeled indie rock , indie pop , emo , and alternative rock . Death Cab for Cutie 's early work on You Can Play These Songs with Chords was described by Rolling Stone as " emotion through its lack of emotion " . Pitchfork Media also remarked that the work on the cassette was " ultra @-@ lo @-@ fi " . On Something About Airplanes the band 's style remained similar , with some new instrumental work introduced ; " flute , synth , or cello " were noted by Allmusic 's Nitsuh Abebe . On We Have the Facts and We 're Voting Yes the band again expanded their use of unorthodox instruments , including organ and glockenspiel . Pitchfork Media called them a " gentle niche " in the current rock climate , compared with bands such as Modest Mouse and Built to Spill . 
 Rolling Stone reviewed Transatlanticism and commented that it contained " melodic , melancholy songs about feeling both smart and confused , hopelessly romantic but wary of love . " Gibbard 's voice was described as " plaintive boy @-@ next @-@ door " Entertainment Weekly commented on the music on Plans , saying " The lush arrangements are long on hothouse organs and pianos , but short on the squirmy guitars and <unk> beats that , on Gibbard 's best work , offset his sweet voice and borderline @-@ maudlin poetics with a sense of emotional danger . " The band 's music on Plans was described by the Dallas Morning News as " a literate , whispery style , the kind of stuff that normally sounds better in headphones than in large venues " . 
 In an interview with Shave Magazine , Ben Gibbard commented on his song writing saying that he " never sit [ s ] down to write an album number one . I just kind of sit down and write songs and the theme kind of makes itself apparent . But I would never say I was writing about searching for something as much as just trying to document with every song where I am in that moment when I ’ m writing that song . If a theme kind of makes itself apparent in a record , it has more to do with the fact that just what ’ s been on my mind recently . So I guess clearly I have been and was and am , but it was never a conscious decision . " 
 = = Band name = = 
 Gibbard took the band name from the song " Death Cab for Cutie " written by Neil Innes and Vivian Stanshall and performed by their group the Bonzo Dog Doo @-@ Dah Band . The song was performed by the <unk> in the Beatles film Magical Mystery Tour . The song 's name was in turn taken from an invented pulp fiction crime magazine , devised by the English academic Richard Hoggart in his 1957 study of working class culture , The Uses of Literacy . In a 2011 interview , Gibbard stated , " The name was never supposed to be something that someone was going to reference 15 years on . So yeah , I would absolutely go back and give it a more obvious name . " 
 = = Members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Something About Airplanes ( 1998 ) 
 We Have the Facts and We 're Voting Yes ( 2000 ) 
 The Photo Album ( 2001 ) 
 Transatlanticism ( 2003 ) 
 Plans ( 2005 ) 
 Narrow Stairs ( 2008 ) 
 Codes and Keys ( 2011 ) 
 Kintsugi ( 2015 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Grammy Award 
 MTV Video Music Award 
 = The Technique = 
 The Technique , also known as the " ' <unk> , " is the official student newspaper of the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta , Georgia and has referred to itself as " the South 's liveliest college newspaper " since 1945 . As of the Fall semester of 2011 , the Technique has a weekly circulation of 10 @,@ 000 , distributed to numerous locations on the Georgia Tech campus and a handful of locations in the surrounding area . The first issue of the Technique was published on November 17 , 1911 , and the paper has printed continuously since its founding . The paper publishes weekly throughout the regular school year and primarily covers news , events and issues specific to the Georgia Tech community . In 2004 it was one of 25 collegiate newspapers to receive the Pacemaker award from the Associated Collegiate Press . 
 = = History = = 
 A publication known as The Georgia Tech was Georgia Tech 's first student newspaper . It was established in 1894 and was the second student publication to be established on campus . The Georgia Tech published a " Commencement Issue " that reviewed sporting events and gave information about each class . The " Commencement Issue " was likely similar to the Technique 's Freshman Issue . The Technique was founded in 1911 ; its first issue was published on November 17 , 1911 by editors Albert Blohm and E.A. Turner , and the content revolved around the upcoming rivalry football game against the University of Georgia . The first issue also featured an article by legendary football coach John Heisman . 
 The Technique has been published weekly ever since , except for a brief period that the paper was published twice weekly . This period ran from January 14 , 1948 to September 6 , 1956 . The Georgia Tech and the Technique operated separately for several years following the Technique 's establishment , though the two publications eventually merged in 1916 . Several sources claim that The Technique is among a number of student organizations to be founded by the ANAK Society . 
 = = Present @-@ day publication = = 
 The Technique is published weekly during the Fall and Spring semesters , with the exceptions of " Dead Week , " finals week and Spring Break and is published biweekly during the Summer semester . As of the 2005 @-@ 2006 publication year , the paper has also taken a hiatus the week prior to Spring Break . General staff meetings are held on Tuesdays , when the majority of story assignments are made to a mostly volunteer writing staff . Deadline is on Wednesday nights during weeks when the paper is published , and the copy is sent to the printer on Thursday morning . The paper is then distributed around the campus on the Friday of that week . The Technique 's office is located in the northwest corner of the Student Services Building . 
 The paper is operated by a staff of approximately 50 paid and unpaid students , as well as two permanent , paid , non @-@ student staff members . As Georgia Tech has no journalism school , the Technique welcomes all students within the Institute to contribute to its content . The Technique is funded primarily by advertisements , and to a lesser extent by Tech 's Student Government Association . 
 = = Sections = = 
 The Technique is generally between 16 and 40 pages long , the length of an issue being dependent upon the number of advertisements purchased for a given week . The paper is organized into five sections : 
 News 
 Includes Georgia Tech @-@ specific crime reports and news . 
 Life ( previously Focus ) 
 Includes human interest stories . 
 Entertainment 
 Includes reviews of music , movies , performance arts , and video games , cartoons , a crossword puzzle , and sudoku puzzles . 
 Opinions 
 Includes editorials , an editorial cartoon , op @-@ eds , and letters to the editor . 
 Sports 
 Includes summaries of recent Georgia Tech sports games and sports features . 
 = = Special editions = = 
 = = = To Hell With Georgia = = = 
 The most well @-@ known of the special issues the Technique publishes is a satire of The University of Georgia 's student newspaper ( The Red and Black ) . The tradition of this parody dates back to the very first issue of the Technique , which was published with the intent of taunting Georgia Tech 's rival school , and has its roots in the embittered rivalry between Georgia Tech and the University of Georgia . It is published just before the two schools compete in football and is one of the last issues of the Fall semester . The parody is known as " To Hell With Georgia , " after the school 's popular cheer . On years where the schools play their football match at UGA 's Sanford Stadium , Technique staff distribute the issue across UGA 's campus . In 2009 , the <unk> issue was printed with an incorrect year in the masthead , though the date was corrected in the version posted online . 
 = = = Freshman Issue = = = 
 The Freshman Issue is another special edition of the Technique . It is the first issue published each academic year and is by far the longest issue , with each of the sections about as long as a normal issue . The content usually centers on the themes of welcoming Freshmen and welcoming returning students back to Tech . The Freshman Issue also contains a special section dedicated to helping Freshmen become more acquainted with Tech and its customs . It is generally the only issue in which content from previous issues is reprinted . 
 = = = Other special editions = = = 
 Other special editions include the Homecoming issue , the April Fool 's issue ( historically known as the <unk> , which includes a section of fake news parodying Tech in a similar style to the " To Hell With Georgia " issue ) and the " Best of Tech " issue , which is the final issue of the Spring semester . 
 = = Recurring features = = 
 = = = Two Bits = = = 
 The Technique featured an anonymous humor column called " Two Bits , " which is authored by the mysterious Two Bits Man , a sarcastic , everyday virtuoso who concerns himself with <unk> and university @-@ specific subjects . His articles range from relentless sickly <unk> to school @-@ wide subjects of controversy or interest . Popular targets for his scorn include Georgia Tech 's Parking department and School of Physics , whereas he consistently praises the President Emeritus G. Wayne Clough , who he refers to as " Funk Masta G. Wayne " . The Two Bits column had been discontinued in 2010 , but was brought back in 2012 , to again be discontinued in 2013 . 
 = = = Sliver Box = = = 
 One of the Technique 's most popular features is the Sliver Box , an analogue of the Vent feature of the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , which allows readers to submit any comment they wish . Comments are submitted on the Technique 's website and as many Slivers that will fit appear in the week 's paper , usually in order of submission . Slivers are subject to minimal censorship , with only full names of non @-@ public figures , personal information and strong profanities typically removed or altered . Other entries are occasionally removed or truncated , usually in cases of spamming of the Sliver submission system . According to the paper , the Box is used to fill empty room left between advertisements in order to maintain a modular layout style . It is not uncommon for students to have conversations using the Sliver Box . Slivers were originally comments made by editorial board members during deadline night and were placed in narrow boxes ( " Slivers " ) at the bottom of each page . Comments made on deadline night and opinions of editorial board members still occasionally find their way into the Sliver Box . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 The only recent controversies related to the Technique have occurred when they have accepted or rejected advertisements deemed to be controversial or inappropriate . Their ad policy states , 
 = Boletus subluridellus = 
 Boletus subluridellus is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 1971 by American mycologists , the bolete is found in the eastern United States and Canada . It grows on the ground in coniferous and mixed forests in a mycorrhizal association with deciduous trees , especially oak . The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have orangish @-@ red , broadly convex caps that are up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , with small , dark reddish pores on the underside . The pale yellow stipe measures 4 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) thick . All parts of the fruit body will quickly stain blue when injured or touched . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described by American mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Harry D. Thiers in their 1971 monograph on the bolete fungi of Michigan . The type collection was made by Smith on a golf course near Ypsilanti , Michigan in September 1961 ; it is kept at the University of Michigan herbarium . 
 Boletus subluridellus is classified in the section Luridi of the genus Boletus . Section Luridi is characterized by boletes that immediately turn blue with cutting or bruising , narrow pores that are usually red , and the occasional presence of toxins in the fruit bodies . According to the scheme proposed by Smith and Thiers , the form of the <unk> ( cystidia on the cap cuticle ) is important to species delimitation in section Luridi . In a 1993 study , however , Roland Treu found no major consistent microscopic differences between B. subluridellus , B. <unk> , and B. <unk> . 
 The specific epithet subluridellus refers to its similarity to Boletus <unk> . <unk> means " drab yellow to dirty brown " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruit bodies of Boletus subluridellus have convex caps that measure 5 – 10 cm ( 2 – 4 in ) in diameter . The cap surface is dry and slightly sticky , with a somewhat velvety texture . Its color is reddish to reddish @-@ brown to orange @-@ red . The flesh is bright yellow before staining blue where it has been cut . It has no discernible odor , and a slightly metallic taste . On the cap underside , the tubes comprising the pore surface are 6 – 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 0 @.@ 35 in ) long . Near to where the cap attaches to the stipe , they are either unattached , or slightly depressed . The dark reddish pores are small and round , numbering about 2 – 3 pores per mm . The stipe measures 4 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) thick . It is solid ( i.e. , not hollow or stuffed with a pith ) , and roughly the same width throughout its length . The stipe color is pale yellow , grading to reddish in the base , where it has pressed @-@ down yellow hairs . All parts of the fruit body ( cap surface , flesh , pores , and stipe ) will quickly stain blue when injured or touched . 
 The spore print is olive @-@ brown . Spores are somewhat fuse @-@ shaped in face view , and inequilateral in profile view . They have a smooth surface , a tiny apical pore , and dimensions of 11 – 15 by 4 – 5 @.@ 5 μm , with walls about 0 @.@ 2 μm thick . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 8 – 12 μm thick . Pleurocystidia ( on the tube walls ) are 28 – 42 by 6 – 11 μm with a 3 – μm neck , whereas the cheilocystidia ( on the pore edges ) are narrowly club @-@ shaped and slightly smaller , measuring 26 – 38 by 4 – 8 μm . Pleurocystidia tend to not protrude further than <unk> basidia . The cap cuticle comprises a 150 μm @-@ thick layer of narrow hyphae measuring 3 – 5 μm more or less arranged in a trichodermium ( wherein the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface ) . These hyphae stain red when mounted in Melzer 's reagent and yellow in potassium hydroxide . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Boletus <unk> , known from Mississippi , has a cap that changes color according to its age : it is initially dark reddish to orangish , later reddish brown at maturity , fading to brownish orange or brownish pink with dull yellow tints , and finally turning dull dingy yellow in age . Its pale yellow stipe lacks the reddish coloration and the hairs found on the base of B. subluridellus . Microscopically , it has smaller spores , measuring 8 @.@ 5 – 12 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm . Boletus <unk> is also similar in appearance , but can be distinguished by its yellow stipe that is dotted with orange @-@ cinnamon to brownish dots . Boletus flammans , another blue @-@ bruising lookalike found in the southeastern United States , grows under conifers . It has a reddish stipe with fine reticulations on its upper half . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Boletus subluridellus is a mycorrhizal fungus , and grows in association with deciduous trees , especially oak ( genus Quercus ) . Fruit bodies grow scattered or in groups on the ground in deciduous or mixed forests , and appear from July to October . An eastern North American species , the mushroom is found from New England west to the Great Lakes , north to Quebec in Canada . 
 = Far Cry 4 = 
 Far Cry 4 is an open world action @-@ adventure first @-@ person shooter video game developed and published by Ubisoft for the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows . It is the successor to the 2012 video game Far Cry 3 , and the fourth main installment in the Far Cry series . The game was released on November 18 , 2014 . 
 The game takes place in Kyrat , a fictional Himalayan country that mostly consists of sprawling mountains and forests , vast water systems , and villages . The main story follows Ajay Ghale , a young Kyrati @-@ American , as he is caught in a civil war involving Kyrat 's Royal Army , controlled by tyrannical king Pagan Min , and a rebel movement called the Golden Path . Gameplay focuses on combat and exploration ; players battle enemy soldiers and dangerous wildlife using a wide array of weapons , while completing side missions , collecting useful items , and progressing through the game 's main story . The game features many elements found in role @-@ playing games , such as a branching storyline . In addition to the game 's campaign , the game features a map editor , a co @-@ operative multiplayer mode , and an asymmetrical competitive multiplayer mode which was developed by Red Storm Entertainment . 
 Announced in May 2014 , development on Far Cry 4 began immediately after the shipment of Assassin 's Creed III in late 2012 . The team originally intended to develop a direct sequel to Far Cry 3 that continues 3 's story , but the idea was later scrapped and the team decided to develop a new setting and new story for the game . Certain aspects of Far Cry 4 were inspired by the Nepalese Civil War , and the costume of the game 's antagonist Pagan Min was inspired by Japanese films Ichi the Killer and Brother . 
 Far Cry 4 was met with a mostly positive critical reception upon release . Critics praised the open world design , visuals , soundtrack , and characters , particularly antagonist Pagan Min . There was also praise for the new gameplay additions , such as the grappling hook , and the wealth of content . However , some critics disliked the story and found the game too similar to its predecessor . The game was a commercial success , selling 7 million copies by the end of 2014 , and was the biggest launch in the franchise 's history . Several downloadable content were subsequently released . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Far Cry 4 is a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game . Players assume control of Ajay Ghale , a Kyrati @-@ American who is on a quest to spread his deceased mother 's ashes in the fictional country of Kyrat . Throughout the game , players can run , leap , and crouch , and have the ability to use weapons including shotguns , crossbows , sniper rifles , mines , throwing knives , bows , flamethrowers , and rocket launchers . The game allows players to take cover to avoid gunfights and to perform melee takedowns from above or up @-@ close . Unlike previous installments in the series , Far Cry 4 gives players the ability to kick objects and the ability to hide the corpses of enemies . 
 Players can use a variety of methods to approach missions . For instance , players can utilize stealth to evade enemies and complete objectives without being noticed , or they also have the option to assault enemies with firearms and vehicles . The player @-@ character is equipped with a digital camera , which allows him to mark and highlight all visible enemies , animals , and loots . Players are also able to ride on elephants , which serve as tank @-@ like , offensive weapons for players . Players can throw bait towards enemies , which attracts nearby wildlife that is hostile to both the player and enemies . Players can also hunt and skin animals . 
 The game features an open world environment that is free for players to explore . It features several environments , including forests , rivers , and mountains . To allow players to travel between places faster , the game features various vehicles , including buggies , trucks , and water vehicles like speedboats . Players can drive and shoot at the same time , and can enable auto @-@ drive , in which the game 's artificial intelligence takes over the role of controlling the vehicle and guides players to their objectives . Players can also hijack other vehicles while driving . The Buzzer , an aerial , helicopter @-@ like vehicle , is introduced in the game , allowing players to gain a tactical advantage from the air . Parachutes , <unk> , and grappling hooks are also featured in the game ; these items help players swing across cliffs and quickly navigate the environment . Parts of the game take place in Shangri @-@ La , a mystical dreamland where players battle demons as the Kyrati warrior <unk> . While in Shangri @-@ La , players are accompanied by an injured tiger which serves as their companion . Players can issue commands to the tiger , which assists them in battle . 
 The game world is divided into two halves : North and South Kyrat . Players start in South Kyrat and are free to explore it almost immediately , but can only unlock North Kyrat over the course of the story . The map is progressively opened by liberating bell towers , freeing them from Pagan Min 's influence and allowing the Golden Path to expand . These towers help players reveal new areas and mark new locations of interest on the map . The world is scattered with outposts controlled by Pagan Min , which can be infiltrated by players . Four larger outposts , or fortresses , can also be found , and feature stronger defenses and more difficult combinations of enemies . If players successfully liberate these outposts , they will serve as fast @-@ travel points , allowing quick navigation through the game 's world . Additional missions and quests also become available . There are many side @-@ missions that can be completed , including hostage rescues , bomb disposal quests , and hunting missions . The collected animals ' parts can then be used for crafting new pouches and belts . 
 Like its predecessors , the game features some role @-@ playing elements . Players can earn experience points by completing missions and defeating enemies , and these experience points can then be spent on performance boosts and upgrades . There are two sets of abilities for players to choose from , called The Tiger and The Elephant . The Tiger upgrades mainly improve players ' offensive abilities , while The Elephant upgrades improve players ' defensive skills . A variety of random events and hostile encounters take place throughout the game ; for example , the player may unexpectedly be attacked by an eagle , be hit by a car , or witness an animal attack . Players can accumulate karma by performing kind actions towards the rebels , such as by assisting them in battles when they are attacked by wildlife or enemies . Doing so will give players discounts when purchasing new items at trading posts , and will allow players to call in support and back @-@ up from members of the Golden Path . Players can also gain experience by collecting items like masks , propaganda posters , and mani wheels . There is also an Arena mode , in which players battle human enemies and animals for additional experience points and rewards . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Far Cry 4 features a co @-@ operative multiplayer mode known as " Guns for Hire " , which supports up to two players . The mode is separated from the game 's campaign , and players are free to explore the game 's world , defeat enemies , and infiltrate outposts with their companion . In addition to the co @-@ operative mode , players can gain access to several competitive multiplayer modes which have an asymmetrical structure . Players play as either a Rakshasa or a Golden Path member . The <unk> are equipped with bows and arrows , and have the ability to teleport and to summon wildlife to assist them , while Golden Path members are equipped with guns and explosives , and have access to armored vehicles . Known as " Battles of Kyrat " , players fight against each other in three modes , called Outpost , Propaganda , and Demon Mask . Far Cry 4 also contains a Map Editor that allows users to create and share custom content . Similar to that of Far Cry 3 , players can create their maps by customizing landscapes , and by placing buildings , trees , wildlife , and vehicles . However , the Map Editor did not support competitive multiplayer levels at launch . Multiplayer support was added to the game on February 3 , 2015 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Premise = = = 
 The story was inspired by the ten @-@ year @-@ long Maoist insurgency in Nepal . The game follows Ajay Ghale , a young Kyrati @-@ American who returns to his native country of Kyrat ( a fictional Himalayan country derived from <unk> , a collection of Himalayan people originating from Tibet ) to spread his deceased mother 's ashes . Kyrat was once an autonomous state in the Himalayas ruled by a royal family before being engulfed in a series of civil wars . Ajay finds the country in a state of conflict between Kyrat 's Royal Army , led by the country 's eccentric and tyrannical King Pagan Min , and the Golden Path , a rebel movement fighting to free Kyrat from Min 's oppressive rule . The choices Ajay makes will determine the fate of Kyrat . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 After the death of his mother Ishwari , Ajay Ghale ( James A. Woods ) returns to his home country of Kyrat to carry out Ishwari 's final wish by returning her ashes to Lakshmana . However , his mission is interrupted when the bus he is traveling on is attacked by the Royal Army and he is taken prisoner by Pagan Min ( Troy Baker ) , the country 's eccentric and violent king , who claims to have been romantically involved with Ishwari . After finding his way through Pagan 's mansion , Ajay escapes with the aid of Sabal ( Naveen Andrews ) , a commander in the Golden Path , a rebel movement established by Ajay 's father , Mohan Ghale . Ajay is not able to leave the country as the Royal Army has taken control of Kyrat 's only airport and sealed the borders . 
 In the twenty years since Ishwari and Ajay fled Kyrat , the rebellion has stagnated , with the Golden Path now fighting for their very existence . As the son of Mohan Ghale , Ajay becomes a symbol for the Golden Path to rally around . After freeing a group of hostages and liberating territory held by Pagan , the Golden Path plan on breaking Pagan 's stranglehold on power by targeting his three regional governors : Paul " De Pleur " Harmon ( Travis Willingham ) , who oversees opium production and runs Pagan 's torture chambers ; Noore <unk> ( Mylène Dinh @-@ <unk> ) , who runs poaching and prostitution rings and who became a victim of Pagan 's cruelty herself after he kidnapped her family ; and Yuma Lau ( Gwendoline Yeo ) , Min 's adopted sister and trusted general who is obsessed with uncovering the secrets of the mystical realm of Shangri @-@ La . 
 However the Golden Path 's newfound momentum is threatened by deep divisions between its commanders , Sabal , who favors traditional values , and Amita ( Janina <unk> ) , who argues for progress , which includes relying heavily on drug trade . Ajay is forced to intervene on several occasions , with his decisions influencing the direction the Golden Path takes . The first governor to fall is De Pleur after Noore helps Ajay find a way to infiltrate De Pleur 's stronghold , allowing the rebellion to capture him . Amita and Sabal later task Ajay with confronting and killing Noore . She dies in her fighting arena , either with Ajay killing her , or with Noore committing suicide upon learning Pagan had her family executed years beforehand . 
 As the Golden Path secures Kyrat 's southern provinces , Ajay is contacted by Willis Huntley ( Alain <unk> ) , a CIA agent who offers intelligence for the rebels and pages from his father 's diary in exchange for killing Yuma 's lieutenants . After Ajay kills several of them , Huntley admits they were in fact CIA assets , and that he was sent to clean up after the CIA as the agency did not see Pagan as a threat anymore . Huntley betrays Ajay to Pagan just as the Golden Path prepare to push into Northern Kyrat . 
 Ajay ends up in Yuma 's mountain prison , which he manages to escape from . In the process he finds out that Yuma has started despising Pagan , primarily because of his affections toward Ajay 's late mother . The Golden Path pushes into the north , and while Ajay attempts to reconnect with another faction of the rebels , Pagan , aware of Yuma 's plotting against him , betrays Yuma to the Golden Path . Ajay is drawn into a confrontation with her and prevails , but tensions between Amita and Sabal reach new heights , and Ajay is forced to make a final decision as to who will lead the Golden Path . Whichever leader he chooses then sends Ajay to kill the other to prevent them from starting another civil war , and Ajay can choose to either kill them as ordered or let them go . With the Golden Path now united under a single leader , Ajay joins them for an attack on Pagan 's fortress and pushes on alone to Pagan 's palace while the Golden Path holds off the military . 
 = = = = Endings = = = = 
 Ajay encounters Pagan , who chastises him for fleeing at the start of the game , claiming that he only ever intended to help Ajay . Pagan offers Ajay a final decision : shoot him now , or listen to him . If Ajay shoots Pagan , the game ends immediately and the credits roll . If Ajay instead chooses to listen , Pagan reveals that Ajay 's father sent Ishwari to spy on Pagan in the early days of the Golden Path . They fell in love and had a daughter together , Lakshmana , which would make her Ajay 's half @-@ sister . Ajay 's father , Mohan Ghale , killed Lakshmana for Ishwari 's betrayal , and Ishwari killed him in turn before leaving the country with the infant Ajay . Pagan shows Ajay to a shrine containing Lakshmana 's ashes , and Ajay places Ishwari 's ashes inside . Pagan then boards a helicopter and departs peacefully , leaving the country in Ajay 's hands . 
 Ajay can choose to shoot down Pagan 's helicopter as it flies away , killing Pagan in the process . In that case , Pagan 's body can be found in Kyrat next to the downed helicopter . Upon looting Pagan 's corpse , Ajay finds a golden pen with an inscription " For you my love , Ishwari " , and which he can sell for 300 @,@ 000 rupees . 
 In the aftermath of Pagan 's death or departure , the Golden Path seizes control of Kyrat . If Amita was placed in charge , she begins conscripting children into the group as soldiers to bolster their ranks against the remnants of the Royal Army , and also has her sister Bhadra taken away , " never to come again " , subtly implying she is dead . If Sabal was placed in charge , he brutally executes all of Amita 's supporters and turns Bhadra into Tarun Matara , a religious symbol for the country to rally around . Ajay then has one final choice ; to either kill the Golden Path 's leader or leave them alive . 
 An Easter egg ending can be found at the beginning of the game . To trigger it , Ajay must simply wait at the dinner table during Darpan 's torture ; Pagan returns shortly and thanks Ajay for being a " gentleman " , and leads him to Lakshmana 's shrine , telling Ajay of his family history before he plants his mother 's ashes at the shrine . After Ajay exits the shrine , Pagan then asks Ajay to join him to " finally shoot some goddamn guns " . 
 = = = Escape from Durgesh Prison = = = 
 Escape from Durgesh is an additional chapter of the story available as downloadable content . It expands upon Ajay 's escape from the Durgesh prison and return to the Golden Path , and on Yuma 's planned insurrection against Pagan Min . 
 Following Ajay 's escape , he is left stranded in the snow at high altitude where he is rescued by Pagan Min . After tending to Ajay 's wounds , Min leaves him in a tower in Northern Kyrat , as he is unable to return Ajay to the Golden Path directly . He then leaks news of Ajay 's escape to Sabal and Amita , and allows them to secure a Royal Army helicopter so that they can extract him . However , word of this has spread to Yuma , who marshals the forces loyal to her and plans to attack the landing site once Ajay tries to escape . Because of this , Ajay only has a limited window of opportunity to escape , but can buy more time by attacking Yuma 's forces . In exchange for disrupting Yuma 's plans for a coup , Min promises Ajay support and resources at the landing site . After killing Yuma 's lieutenants , disrupting her supply lines , and thwarting her plans to sabotage Min 's communications , Ajay ventures to the landing site where he is forced to fight off Yuma 's attack long enough for the helicopter to power up . With the landing site secured and Yuma 's forces in disarray , Ajay is successfully airlifted out and evacuated back to Southern Kyrat to rejoin the Golden Path , at which point the main story resumes . 
 = = = Valley of the Yetis = = = 
 Valley of the Yetis is a downloadable additional chapter of content which takes place directly after the events of the main game . The plot itself however is not considered canon or a true continuation of the original story . 
 Following the end of Pagan Min 's rule , Ajay is working with the Golden Path to clean up the last of the forces loyal to Min . While patrolling an isolated corner of Kyrat , his helicopter is shot down by an unknown assailant . Ajay survives the crash , but awakens to discover that the pilot has been abducted and taken deeper into the valley . Ajay follows him intent on rescue , only to discover that the valley is occupied by an aggressive army . Liberating a relay station in a bid to re @-@ establish contact with the Golden Path , he is forced to fight off wave after wave of attackers whilst being taunted by a voice over the radio . Investigating further , Ajay discovers the army is calling themselves the Disciples of <unk> , and is a cult worshiping a demon from Kyrati mythology . The Disciples have harnessed an evil that permeates the valley to transform their followers into " Awakened " , or yetis , and are amassing their forces to attack Kyrat . Realizing that he cannot return to Kyrat without dealing with the cult , Ajay gradually destroys their ranks before scaling a glacier to find the source of <unk> 's influence . After successfully destroying a tree that provides the Disciples with their power , Ajay is transformed into an Awakened himself . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game 's development was led by Ubisoft Montreal , which took over the development of the Far Cry franchise after the release of Far Cry : Instincts in 2005 . Additional development was handled by four other in @-@ house Ubisoft studios , Ubisoft Toronto , Red Storm Entertainment , Ubisoft Shanghai , and Ubisoft Kiev . The Montreal studio worked on the game 's campaign , the Toronto studio worked on the Shangri @-@ La segments of the campaign , Red Storm handled the development of the competitive multiplayer , the Shanghai studio worked on the hunting missions , and the Kiev studio developed the game 's PC version . Development of the game began in late 2012 , after the shipment of Assassin 's Creed III . The game 's creative director is Alex Hutchinson , who had previously worked on Maxis 's Spore as well as Assassin 's Creed III . 
 When brainstorming ideas for the new Far Cry game , the development team originally planned on developing a direct sequel to Far Cry 3 . The sequel would be set on the same tropical island , would extend upon the protagonist 's story , and would bring back characters , such as Far Cry 3 's secondary antagonist , Vaas . However , after four days , the team found that a sequel was not what they wanted to achieve . As a result , they decided to scrap the idea and build a brand new game with a new setting and a new set of characters . The team adapted a “ we want it all ” approach , in which they hoped to experiment with all kinds of ideas . Some team members hoped that the game would allow players to fly , which led to the game 's verticality . The game 's director also hoped that players would be able to ride a rampaging elephant , in a place with " exotic mountainsides " and " unique culture " . This led to the concept of a mountainous setting and the introduction of elephants in the game . The developers aimed for players to consider Far Cry 4 a standalone experience , and therefore they avoided bringing back any characters from Far Cry 3 except for Hurk . The decision to bring Hurk back was made because the team thought that they should provide some references to previous games in the series , as all of the games are set in the same universe even though they are not directly related . 
 Some of the gameplay elements were directly taken from Far Cry 3 . Exotic locations , hunting , and the freedom for players to complete missions through different approaches were maintained in Far Cry 4 . The team hoped that by incorporating and expanding upon on these ideas , while introducing new features , they could make Far Cry 4 an evolution for the series . As a result , the size of the game 's outposts became larger and players were given more options to customize their weapons . The team also realized that players spent a lot of time interacting with the open world of Far Cry 3 , and decided to put more effort and resources into the world 's design and add more quests to the game . 
 The game 's setting , Kyrat , is a fictional country in the Himalayas region . When building Kyrat , the developers merged elements from real @-@ world regions including Nepal and Tibet , but exaggerated those elements . The map 's size is similar to that of Far Cry 3 , but is more dense , diverse , and features more varied environments . The developers hoped that players could experience a sense of exploration when traveling between the different terrains . The team also hoped that the new location could be believable , while remaining interesting for players . As a result , they created an identify for Kyrat by doing such things as adding different signboards to the game and creating a fictional mythology and religion for Kyrat . The game 's world was also designed to accommodate new features such as the helicopter and the grappling hook . In an effort to make the world feel real , the team added improvements to the design of side @-@ quests . Instead of simply being activities for players to complete , the quests are narrative @-@ driven , which was done to increase the connection between them and the world . In order to increase the credibility of the game 's world , the studio sent a team to Nepal to experience and record the local culture , so that they could bring those ideas back to the studio . According to the developer , the trip changed the game 's design ; the focus shifted from the game 's civil war , which is inspired by the real @-@ world Nepalese Civil War , to developing unique and interesting characters . 
 One of the game 's most critically acclaimed characters is Pagan Min , the game 's major antagonist . The team hoped that players would be " shocked , amazed and intrigued " by him in every encounter . Min has a complex relationship with the playable character , Ghale , as the team wanted players to guess Min 's intentions and add a layer of mysteriousness to him . The team originally hoped to have a villain that had a " punk @-@ rock mentality " , but the idea was abandoned as the team thought that the concept was not original . The pink costume Min wears throughout the game was inspired by Beat Takeshi , a character from Brothers , and Ichi , a character from Ichi the Killer . Min is designed to be sadistic yet confident , and the team hired Troy Baker to provide the voice for Min , as they thought that Baker 's voice is charismatic enough to suit Min . According to Baker , Ubisoft gave him a script for the audition but he chose not to follow it , and instead decided to threaten to cut off the face of an assistant using Min 's tone . The interviewer was very pleased with Baker 's performance and decided to sign him for the job . As for Ghale , he was designed to be " thin " , and his backstory was designed to be revealed as players progressed through the game 's story . According to the game 's narrative director , Mark Thompson , Ghale learns the history and culture of Kyrat along with players . The developers also hoped that Ghale could be an accessible character for players . 
 In hindsight , the team considered the story of Far Cry 3 " great " , even though they thought that it was separated from the game 's world . In order to increase players ' agency and make the story to feel more connected to the world for players , the team introduced a branching storyline which required players to make choices that would lead to different results and alter the game 's ending . The team hoped that by adding choices , they could add additional depth and meaning to the game 's campaign . Thompson added that they twisted the story of Far Cry 3 for Far Cry 4 , and made outsiders the villains instead of the heroes . The team considered it a " risk " , but they wanted to try something different . 
 For the Shangri @-@ La mission , the team wanted to have a structure similar to 3 's mushroom missions ; a game within a game . The Shangri @-@ La missions are not related to Kyrat , but play an important role in the game 's narrative . When creating these segments , the team put a lot of emphasis on the use of colors . They hoped that the artistic vision for Far Cry 4 would not feature any resemblance to other typical shooter games . It was originally designed to be a small open world , but was later converted into a linear experience due to time constraints and huge creative differences between developers . The team later decided to simplify it , and re @-@ imagined it into an " ancient , natural world " . It is made up of five different colors . The main color of Shangri @-@ La is gold ; the developers thought that using gold as the foundation added " warmth " to the dreamland . Meanwhile , red was used heavily to add a sense of strangeness , as well as for establishing a tie to the game 's narrative and story . Orange was used as a color of interaction , while white was used to add purity to the world . Blue is the last of Shangri @-@ La 's main colors , and represents dangers and honor . 
 Ubisoft promised that Far Cry 4 would have much more of a multiplayer element than Far Cry 3 . Some elements that were scrapped for Far Cry 3 due to time constraints were featured in Far Cry 4 , such as the " Guns for Hire " co @-@ operative multiplayer mode . Building a co @-@ operative experience was the team 's goal starting from the beginning of the game 's development . Originally intended to be a separate mode , it was later made to be seamlessly integrated into the main campaign . The game 's competitive multiplayer was designed to give players freedom , allowing players to progress and defeat enemies through a variety of different ways . Red Storm Entertainment also considered players ' feedback from the multiplayer aspect of Far Cry 3 , and decided to include vehicles to the game . The company chose an asymmetrical structure for the match , so that players could have different experiences in different matches , as well as to make matches feel more chaotic . The developers originally planned to feature female playable characters , but the plan was scrapped due to animation problems . Ubisoft announced a ' Keys to <unk> ' offer for players that owned a copy of the game for the PlayStation 3 or PlayStation 4 . It allows those owners to send out game keys to up to ten other people who do not own a copy of the game . Players who are offered a key can join the person that sent them the key and play the co @-@ operative mode for two hours . 
 Cliff Martinez was hired to work on the game 's soundtrack . A two disc edition was released that contained 30 tracks heard in the game , and a deluxe edition was released that contained 15 extra tracks . The album was released just before the release of the game , and received positive reviews . Particular praise was directed towards the usage of traditional Nepalese instruments which , combined with electronic samples , suggested high octane action and mystical wondering . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 With Far Cry 3 being a commercial success , Ubisoft considered the Far Cry series one of their most important brands , and they hinted that a sequel was in development in June 2013 . On October 3 , 2013 , Martinez mentioned that he was working on the soundtrack for the game . In March 2014 the game 's setting and features were leaked . The game was officially announced on May 15 , 2014 , and the first gameplay footage was revealed during Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 . The game 's cover art , which shows the light @-@ skinned Pagan Min resting his hand on a dark @-@ skinned person , caused controversy and accusation of racism . Hutchinson later responded and clarified by saying that Pagan Min is not a white person , and that the other person depicted is not the game 's protagonist . Hutchinson added that the reaction of the community regarding the cover art was " uncomfortable " . 
 In addition to the standard version , a Limited Edition of the game could be purchased . This edition features additional in @-@ game missions and an Impaler Harpoon Gun . The Limited Edition was a free upgrade for players who pre @-@ ordered the game . A Kyrat Edition was also announced and it contains a collector 's box , a poster , a journal , a map of Kyrat , a figurine of Pagan Min , and the missions from the Limited Edition . Players can also purchase a season pass for the game , which grants them access to additional content , including a new competitive multiplayer mode , a mission called " the <unk> " , the missions from the Limited Edition , and the two other pieces of downloadable content . 
 A Complete Edition of the game was released in 2015 , containing all purchasable DLC , including the newly released Valley of the Yetis DLC and all other DLC exclusive to specific editions . It is only available for the PC and PS4 in Europe and Asia . 
 Far Cry 4 was released on November 18 , 2014 in North America , November 20 , 2014 in Europe , and November 21 , 2014 in the UK , for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 and Xbox One . The PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and PC versions feature higher visual fidelity , such as having a higher texture resolution and more animal fur . The game was supported by downloadable content upon launch . The first DLC , Escape From Durgesh Prison , featuring a new mission set during the main campaign , was released on January 13 , 2015 . It can be played solo or with another player . The Overrun DLC , which added new maps , a new vehicle , and a new mode to the game 's competitive multiplayer , was released on February 10 , 2015 for the consoles , and February 12 , 2015 for PC . The Hurk Deluxe Pack was released on January 28 , 2015 and added several story missions and weapons . The last downloadable content , Valley of the Yetis , features a new region and new story missions which can be played solo or co @-@ cooperatively with another player . Valley of the Yetis was released on March 10 , 2015 in North America and March 11 , 2015 in Europe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Far Cry 4 received a positive reception upon release . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox One version 85 @.@ 92 % based on 12 reviews and 82 / 100 based on 14 reviews , respectively . The PlayStation 4 version received 83 @.@ 76 % based on 57 reviews on GameRankings and 85 / 100 based on 83 reviews on Metacritic , and the Microsoft Windows version received 81 @.@ 00 % based on 9 reviews and 80 / 100 based on 17 reviews , respectively . 
 The game 's story received mixed responses . Chris Carter from Destructoid praised the personality of Ajay Ghale , which is " less in @-@ your @-@ face " than that of Far Cry 3 's protagonist Jason Brody . He also praised the villain , Pagan Min , who he considered took the spotlight every time he appeared in the game . Josh Harmon from Electronic Gaming Monthly thought that the characters in this game had more depth , and that the choices made by players throughout the game were meaningful . Aoife Wilson from Eurogamer thought that the game 's characters were memorable , but was disappointed by the story . Nick Tan , from Game Revolution , also praised Min 's personality , but he complained that the character appeared too seldom in the game . Edwin Evans @-@ Thirlwell , writing for GamesRadar , thought that the story grew tiresome as players progressed , even though some of its characters were interesting . He further criticized the game 's writing , which he thought was lackluster . Mike Splechta from GameZone praised the game 's voice acting and applauded its storyline , calling it satisfying . 
 The game 's setting received positive responses . Carter thought that the verticality nature of the game 's map created obstacles for players when they were traveling between places . However , he praised the interesting lore and wildlife found within the world , as well as the game 's long draw distance . Harmon had similar comments , praising the game 's graphics and Kyrat 's culture . Harmon thought that the hilly landscape of the game 's world gave players a sense of exploration , and hence made traversal enjoyable . Wilson thought , however , that the game 's setting was not as compelling as the tropical setting of Far Cry 3 . Nevertheless , she praised the Shangri @-@ la section , which she thought had changed the game 's landscape drastically . Matt Bertz from Game Informer praised the game 's setting , which he thought was vibrant , varied and rich . Ludwig <unk> from Joystiq praised the content found within the world , and thought that the world itself was absorbing and interesting . 
 The game 's design also received acclaim . Carter from Destructoid thought that the fortress and the outpost system provided players with a sense of accomplishment and success , and he considered having the freedom to use different ways to approach and complete missions one of the greatest parts of the game . In addition , Carter applauded the game 's driving mechanics and the auto @-@ drive feature , which he considered a significant improvement for the series . However he criticized the upgrade system , which he thought was directly converted from Far Cry 3 and was uninspiring . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Harmon thought that the introduction of the helicopter was dull . Mitch Dyer , from IGN , praised the game 's economy system , which he thought was satisfying . He added that it gives players motivations to complete side @-@ quests . Justin McElroy of Polygon praised the introduction of the grappling hook and the vertical map @-@ design , which he thought had allowed players to develop strategy before taking action . He also praised the game for allowing players to use multiple approaches towards a single objective . 
 The game 's multiplayer mode received mixed response . Carter compared the competitive multiplayer to that of Tomb Raider , and called it " skippable " . He considered the co @-@ operative multiplayer a fun addition to the game , but was disappointed by its limitations . He also added that the game would still be a strong title without these multiplayer elements . Bertz from Game Informer also found the multiplayer shallow and poorly @-@ executed . He also criticized the lack of a large player pool and dedicated servers . Evans @-@ Thirlwell of GamesRadar thought that the game 's co @-@ operative multiplayer were fun to play , but the asymmetrical competitive multiplayer was easy to forget . In contrast , GameZone 's Splechta thought that the competitive multiplayer mode was " a surprise " for him . Dyer echoed similar statement , and he thought that it had successfully captured the scale and freedom offered by both the game 's co @-@ op and campaign . 
 Harmon thought that Far Cry 4 was an improvement over Far Cry 3 , but he thought that the game felt and played too similarly to Far Cry 3 , and he added that the game was unambitious . Bertz thought that Ubisoft Montreal 's vision for Far Cry 4 is not as bold as its predecessors , and also thought that the experience delivered by Far Cry 4 did not stray far away from Far Cry 3 . Tan also noted that the game 's open world design felt not only similar to Far Cry 3 , but also other Ubisoft franchises like Assassin 's Creed and Watch Dogs . Evans @-@ Thirlwell thought that the experience offered by Far Cry 4 was hollow as it had failed to innovate or reinvent its wheel . Dyer thought that the game was not ambitious , but the experience delivered was still gratifying and rewarding . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Ubisoft expected the game to sell at least 6 million copies in its first year of release . Far Cry 4 became the fastest @-@ selling game and the most successful launch in the series in the first week of release . Far Cry 4 was the second best selling game in the United Kingdom for all @-@ formats during the week of its release , only behind Grand Theft Auto V. It was also the sixth best selling game in the US according to The NPD Group . As of December 31 , 2014 , the game has shipped 7 million copies . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The game received the Best Shooter Award from IGN . The game was nominated for Best Artistic Achievement , Best Game Design , Best Music , Best Performer ( Troy Baker ) , and Best Story at the 11th British Academy Games Awards . At the DICE Awards , it was nominated for Game of the Year , Action Game of the Year , Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design , Outstanding Technical Achievement and Outstanding Achievement in Game Design , and won the award for Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition . At the BAFTA Game Awards , Far Cry 4 received five nominations including best game design and best story eventually winning for best music . 
 = Ohio Wesleyan University = 
 Ohio Wesleyan University ( also known as Wesleyan or OWU ) is a private liberal arts college in Delaware , Ohio , United States . It was founded in 1842 by Methodist leaders and Central Ohio residents as a nonsectarian institution , and is a member of the Ohio Five — a consortium of Ohio liberal arts colleges . Ohio Wesleyan has always admitted students irrespective of religion or race and maintained that the university " is forever to be conducted on the most liberal principles . " 
 The 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) site is 27 miles ( 44 km ) north of Columbus , Ohio . It includes the main academic and residential campus , the Perkins Observatory , and the Kraus Wilderness Preserve . 
 In 2010 , Ohio Wesleyan had the eleventh highest percentage of international students among liberal arts colleges for the seventeenth straight year . In its 2015 edition of U.S. college rankings , Niche ( company ) ranked Ohio Wesleyan the 56th ( out of 880 colleges ) most politically liberal college in the U.S. U.S. News & World Report ranked Ohio Wesleyan 99th among U.S. liberal arts colleges in its 2015 edition . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 In 1841 , Ohio residents Adam Poe and Charles Elliott decided to establish a university " of the highest order " in central Ohio . To that end , they purchased the Mansion House Hotel , a former health resort with its Sulfur Spring , using funds raised from local residents . Poe and Elliott wrote a charter emphasizing " the democratic spirit of teaching " , which was approved by the Ohio State Legislature . Early in the following year they opened the college preparatory Academy and formed a Board of Trustees . Ohio Wesleyan University , named ( like several other U.S. colleges and universities ) after John Wesley , founder of Methodism , opened on November 13 , 1844 as a Methodist @-@ related but nonsectarian institution , with a College of Liberal Arts for male students . 
 Ohio Wesleyan 's first president , Edward Thomson , stated in his inaugural address on August 5 , 1846 that the school was " a product of the liberality of the local people . " This liberal philosophy contributed to Ohio Wesleyan 's vocal opposition to slavery in the 1850s . In the annual celebration for George Washington 's birthday in 1862 , second president Frederick Merrick endorsed Ohio Wesleyan 's " ideals of democracy " during his oration . 
 = = = Curriculum growth and fundraising = = = 
 During the mid @-@ 19th century , Ohio Wesleyan focused on attracting students , adding fields of study , and fundraising , by which it significantly increased its endowment . Sturges Hall was constructed as the University 's first library in 1855 . In 1873 , the school added the Department of Natural History housed in Merrick Hall . The Ohio Wesleyan Female College , established in 1853 , merged with the university in 1877 . Between 1876 and 1888 , enrollment tripled and music education greatly increased , yet no major buildings were built in this time . 
 By the end of the 19th century , Ohio Wesleyan had added a School of Music ( 1877 ) , School of Fine Arts ( 1877 ) , School of Oratory ( 1894 ) , and Business School ( 1895 ) to the original College of Liberal Arts ( founded in 1844 ) . To address the need for new departments and specialized instruction , the administration improved the facilities and courses to make them on par with OWU 's new academic position . University Hall , Slocum Library , extensions to the Monnett campus , and athletic facilities were all constructed during that period . 
 Between 1891 and 1895 , Ohio Wesleyan specialized the curriculum by establishing departments for physics , zoology , geology , speech , history , French , English , and economics . This specialization encouraged undergraduates to continue studies at graduate level , allowed professional preparation for the Doctor of Philosophy degree , and promoted exchange study in Europe . Two professional schools for law and medicine were formed in 1896 . 
 In 1905 , the Board of Trustees decided to keep Ohio Wesleyan a college , despite the expansion of the curriculum and campus and the word " university " in the institution 's name . The Bachelor of Science degree was abolished , which left only the Bachelor of Arts . Two students were selected as Rhodes Scholars in 1905 and 1909 . Edwards Gymnasium was built in 1906 . In 1907 , the United Societies of Phi Beta Kappa , the oldest undergraduate honor society in the United States , installed the " Eta of Ohio " <unk> chapter on campus . In 1909 , the school added Sanborn Hall , housing the Music Department . 
 In the 1920s , academic requirements for the bachelor 's degree were reduced , and Latin and mathematics were no longer emphasized . During the presidency of John W. Hoffman ( 1916 – 1928 ) , the Academy and School of Business were closed ; the Academy had started in 1842 as a preparatory school , and throughout its seventy @-@ five years frequently outnumbered the college in enrollment . Also in the 1920s , the chapel service was dropped and sororities were formed . Ohio Wesleyan also increased the number of buildings on campus , including Selby Stadium , Austin Manor , and Perkins Observatory ; another building , Stuyvesant Hall , was in planning ; and Edgar Hall was opened . 
 = = = Years of change , 1930 – 1984 = = = 
 During the Great Depression , both enrollment and alumni donations shrank . While the faculty size remained stable , lack of tuition and alumni revenues precipitated financial problems which threatened the college 's survival in the administrations of Edmund D. Soper ( 1928 – 1938 ) , Acting President Edward <unk> Rice ( 1938 – 1939 ) , and Herbert John <unk> ( 1939 – 1949 ) . 
 The administration adjusted the curriculum during the early 1930s to address these problems . Greek and Latin declined , while business administration and economics thrived and the highest enrollments were in the social sciences , English , pre @-@ medicine , and history . The registrar reported that , in these years , the number of students from New England states , urban Ohio areas , and from international locations increased . By the 1930s , the Methodist students were a minority among the student body ; formal ties to the Methodist church were severed in the 1920s and led to debate among Board members in the 1930s , eventually resulting in the university 's current active but loose historical affiliation with the United Methodist Church . In a study into the relationship between American educational institutions and the Christian denominations they were historically affiliated with , James Tunstead <unk> writes that it was during this period that " in its personnel , its resources , and its students " , Ohio Wesleyan lost its " symbiotic intimacy with the United Methodist Church . " 
 In 1946 , Ohio Wesleyan introduced a new " Centennial Curriculum " , which enacted seven distribution requirements across the sciences and humanities ; the new requirement for a foreign language course was added to the existing humanities requirement . Thomson and Bashford Halls , originally men 's dorms , were built between 1951 and 1954 . In the 1960s , faculty , staff and administrators fought over administrative structure and control . They eventually settled on a new " statement of aims " that stressed values , rather than religious goal statements , and instituted a more internationalized curriculum , a new Women 's Studies Program , and an International Business major ; the faculty senate also introduced a new academic calendar with three 10 @.@ 5 @-@ week terms . 
 Thomas Wenzlau 's presidency ( 1968 – 1984 ) began with the challenge of campus unrest : Ohio Wesleyan students took over the ROTC building , demanded its shut @-@ down , and eventually eliminated ROTC in 1970 . Students also demanded participation in departmental meetings and faculty committees , and the democratic process in the governance of Ohio Wesleyan grew in this period . Wenzlau 's presidency witnessed decline in students ' test scores , an unusually high attrition rate , lack of adequate research to identify potential major donors and a growing " party school " image , leading to a rocky relationship between him and the student body . Between 1979 and 1982 , the campus newspaper The Transcript frequently criticized Wenzlau 's presidency , blaming it for " severely affecting the reputation of the college " . This exchange resulted in a Washington Post report on the school that eventually precipitated the end of Wenzlau 's presidency . 
 = = = 1984 – today = = = 
 The president , David Warren , increased admission standards in 1985 , engaged students in a " live @-@ in " presidency , expanded media exposure and established a National Colloquium focused on the liberal arts . Warren engaged in forty @-@ one interviews on the ABC and NBC networks . The current president is Rock Jones . 
 More recently , Ohio Wesleyan has achieved several academic and athletic recognitions . A 1986 study , titled " Educating America 's Scientists : The Role of the Research Colleges , " identified Ohio Wesleyan as one of 48 highly selective " science @-@ active " liberal arts institutions in the nation . The Battling Bishops won NCAA Division III national championships in men 's basketball ( 1988 ) and men 's ( 1998 , 2011 ) and women 's ( 2001 , 2002 ) soccer . 
 Ohio Wesleyan continues to undertake construction projects . The Hamilton Williams Campus Center opened in 1991 . The Memorial Union Building was renovated in 2001 to accommodate the Economics Department , the Academic Resource Center , the Information Services portion of the combined Libraries and Information Services department , and the <unk> Center for Economics , Business and Entrepreneurship . The Schimmel @-@ <unk> Science Center opened in 2004 to provide 52 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 800 m2 ) of additional space for the science departments . As of 2010 , the university is engaged in a fundraising campaign to improve athletics facilities by adding a new turf facility , a new field house and a pool , and a gateway connecting all sports facilities on campus . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Profile = = = 
 Ohio Wesleyan University is accredited by The Higher Learning Commission , and is a member of the Great Lakes Colleges Association , the Oberlin Group , and the Five Colleges of Ohio , a consortium of Ohio liberal arts colleges which also includes Kenyon College , Oberlin College , The College of Wooster , and Denison University . For 2011 , Ohio Wesleyan accepted approximately 52 % of its regular decision applicants , 33 % of its transfer applicants , and had a yield rate of 26 % . In 2010 , the college accepted 36 % of its international applicants . The middle 50 % range of matriculating students for the class of 2010 was 1125 – 1320 for the SAT ( old scale ) and 24 – 30 for the ACT . Approximately 35 % of accepted applicants were granted internal scholarships . Ohio Wesleyan follows a need @-@ blind admission policy ; financial circumstances are not considered when deciding whether to admit applicants . As of 2010 , OWU 's 1 @,@ 950 students come from 43 states and 57 countries ; 47 % are from Ohio , 11 % are international , and 54 % are female . The student body is about 10 % Asian , 6 % Hispanic , and 9 % Black . Fifty @-@ nine percent of Ohio Wesleyan students claim no religious affiliation . The student @-@ faculty ratio is 11 : 1 and faculty members teach all classes . Excluding independent studies and senior theses , nearly 60 % of Ohio Wesleyan 's class sections have fewer than twenty students enrolled . Ohio Wesleyan is generally known for a strong " left @-@ leaning " student body and an administration with a " permissive " attitude . In 2007 , 60 % of OWU students favored the Democratic Party . In its 2015 edition of U.S. college rankings , Niche ( company ) ranked Ohio Wesleyan 56th ( out of 880 colleges ) most politically liberal college in the U.S. 
 Ohio Wesleyan admits students of all cultures , lifestyles , and socio @-@ economic backgrounds . An index examining gay @-@ friendly policies places OWU among the nation 's gay @-@ friendly colleges , and the university enacts policies to meet the six criteria developed by the Campus @-@ Pride organization for recruiting and supporting students from a lesbian , gay , bi @-@ sexual , and transgender population . Nearly 18 % of students at Ohio Wesleyan receive Federal Pell Grants , which mostly go to students whose family incomes are below $ 40 @,@ 000 . This measure indicates the degree to which economically disadvantaged groups are represented at OWU . 
 The faculty consists of 142 tenured members . As of 2010 , all the university 's tenured or tenure @-@ track faculty members hold a PhD or other terminal degree . The faculty is 37 % female and 63 % male , with 10 % from underrepresented groups . Also as of 2010 , women constitute 37 % of the tenured professors and earn 93 @.@ 8 % of what male professors earn — numbers which suggest favorable gender circumstances . 
 = = = Curriculum , degrees and majors = = = 
 Freshmen are paired early in their first year with academic advisors who oversee their students ' academic progress . Upon completing 34 units of coursework , students may earn diplomas in Bachelor of Arts , Bachelor of Fine Arts , or Bachelor of Music . Ohio Wesleyan has research departments and teaching faculties in most academic disciplines ; as of 2005 , OWU offered 39 majors . 
 In its early days , OWU 's curriculum began with classical studies , for the course catalogue maintained that " the classical course in Greek and Latin and pure mathematics bring correctness in mental processes that an applied art , or a living and slightly inflected language , do not permit . " Scientific courses were added to Ohio Wesleyan 's curriculum in 1849 , and since then , scientific subjects have become a foundation to the liberal arts curriculum . OWU also has a highly respected music department . 
 = = = Emphasis on internationalism = = = 
 Ohio Wesleyan has upheld academic internationalism since its early years ; since the 19th century , the college has established links with several international schools . In 1879 , OWU alumna Elizabeth Russell founded <unk> Women 's College in Nagasaki , Japan , when predominant Japanese culture considered women 's education unimportant . Today , <unk> College is one of the top finishing schools for young women in Japan . In 1899 , William <unk> ( from the class of 1898 ) traveled to Africa and opened a school in Mutare , Zimbabwe , that eventually became the Africa University . In March 1988 , Conrad Kent established the popular Salamanca Spanish Program for Ohio Wesleyan students . The school also manifests international interest in the percentage of international students it recruits and enrolls annually . Since 1983 , Ohio Wesleyan has been listed in U.S. News & World Report among colleges that attract the highest percentage of international students . The percentage of international students grew in the early and mid @-@ 1990s . In a study adjusted for school size , Ohio Wesleyan came ninth among 118 American colleges and universities in total aid awards to international students and 69th in average award per international student among both large universities and small liberal arts colleges . South East Asian students have significantly contributed to this growth . The United Nations flag , along with the flags of more than sixty represented nations and the U.S. flag , flies in University Hall in honor of the ideal of peaceful international relations . 
 High participation in formal exchange programs constitutes a third target of the school 's international focus . Under a Great Lakes Colleges Association agreement , OWU established an exchange program with Waseda University in 1962 to provide approximately 30 American students with opportunities to study in Japan and 30 Japanese students to study at Ohio Wesleyan each year . The Salamanca program , founded by Conrad Kent in 1988 , conducts the exchange of approximately one hundred students and faculty between OWU and the University of Salamanca in Spain . The academic collaboration frequently extends to joint participation in academic symposia : in 1993 , members of the Salamanca faculty participated in a symposium on the Golden Age in Salamanca . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Ohio Wesleyan campus is next to downtown Delaware , and is bisected by Sandusky Street , the main north / south street through the heart of the city . The street informally divides the campus into an eastern sector composed mainly of academic buildings and a western sector composed mainly of residential and administrative buildings . Many facilities have been constructed in the last two years , with substantial benefit to science , art , and athletic programs on campus . 
 = = = Other facilities and off @-@ campus programs = = = 
 OWU operates several facilities outside campus : The Philadelphia Business Center , Wesleyan in Washington , The New York Arts Program for the performing , visual and media arts ( a <unk> arts program ) , Perkins Observatory , The Strand Theatre , and the Kraus Wilderness Preserve . 
 Perkins Observatory is situated in Delaware on land separate to the main campus . The observatory is named after Hiram Perkins , a former professor of mathematics and astronomy at the college . When the observatory was built in 1931 , it housed the third @-@ largest telescope in the world , which has since been moved to Arizona . The Perkins dome now houses a 32 @-@ inch ( 810 mm ) telescope , which is the second @-@ largest in Ohio . 
 The university also maintains offices for study abroad , US domestic study , and internship programs . Such programs include : Wesleyan in Washington , which allows students to study for a semester in Washington , D.C. , in research and internship positions . The Philadelphia Center offers students hundreds of internship and field placement opportunities off @-@ campus and the chance to live <unk> and the New York Arts Program , which allows students of the arts to gain a semester of hands on experience in the arts in New York City . 
 = = = Community relations = = = 
 OWU has strong community ties with the City of Delaware . Students participate in Delaware 's community through a variety of educational , social , and cultural programs . The student @-@ led Columbus Initiative , founded in 1989 , is an experiential learning partnership between OWU and Columbus public schools . More than 150 Ohio Wesleyan students from this program tutor and mentor underprivileged pupils from Columbus . 
 The Ohio Wesleyan Ambassadors Program ( <unk> ) promotes cultural diversity and ethnic awareness within the local community , and exposes international students to American culture through the community . The program 's ambassadors visit local schools to give presentations and participate in events for local non @-@ profit community organizations . 
 Campus organizations cooperate with local residents on issues of civic engagement and activism . Progress OWU allows students from Ohio Wesleyan and local schools to express their voices on politics , public policy , and corporate and social issues , both on campus and in the local community . 
 Cultural programs also take part in community relations . In the 1960s , Ohio Wesleyan donated the Arts Castle , then part of the Fine Arts department , to the City of Delaware . It is now home to the Delaware County Cultural Arts Center . The Arts Castle hosts a variety of community programs in art , and offers classes ranging from ballet to fine arts . In 2004 , the OWU received a donation to rehabilitate the historic Strand Theatre in downtown Delaware . 
 The university and the City of Delaware sponsor several events in town throughout the year : the Delaware Arts Festival , the Little Brown Jug , the Delaware County Fair , and the Castle Arts Affair . The Delaware Arts Festival is an annual event held the weekend after Mother 's Day on the streets of Historic Downtown Delaware . The festival hosts over 170 booths featuring works of local , regional , and other artists . OWU professors chair the committees that select winners . The Little Brown Jug , a harness race , is run during the Delaware County Fair in September . The OWU president and the college mascot traditionally award the trophy for the first division of the first heat of the race . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Organizations and activities = = = 
 Ohio Wesleyan University has 95 student clubs and organizations . The university offers three chapels as well as several Christian and other religious groups for its students . Its social organizations cover a wide range of interests , including chess , ultimate , finance , and medieval sword fighting . There are two a cappella singing groups on campus , " The <unk> , " a student @-@ run group formed in 1999 , and the all @-@ female " Pitch Black " established in 2005 . Another entertainment @-@ related club is " The Babbling Bishops " , an improvisational comedy troupe . The " Babbling Bishops " started in the fall of 1990 when a group of theatre concentration students formed a performance @-@ oriented project for their theatre degrees . The project became an improv comedy troupe , rehearsing in Stuyvesant Hall and performing with other college improv troupes since 1996 . 
 Socially conscious students can join organizations such as the activist group " <unk> " or participate in student government groups , such as the Campus Programming Board and the Wesleyan Council on Student Affairs . The " <unk> " organization offers support to OWU 's LGBT students . 
 Fewer than a third of Ohio Wesleyan 's students are involved in Greek life , but that percentage has fluctuated significantly throughout the university 's history . All twelve fraternities and seven sororities on campus are currently involved in many philanthropic and community programs . 
 Ohio Wesleyan has four religious chaplains : A Protestant minister , a Roman Catholic priest , and a Jewish rabbi . In addition to student groups and services associated with these three religions , there are groups associated with Islam , Buddhism and Unitarian Universalism , and even a group which holds services that are simply " spiritual " and separate from any organized religion . Services are also available for Quakers , Christian Scientists , Hindus , and Baha 'is , and there are many local religious groups in Delaware , Ohio . 
 OWU 's oldest student organizations are its literary clubs , including a number of student journals , magazines , and newspapers . The school 's student @-@ run weekly newspaper , The Transcript , is the oldest continuously published , independent , college newspaper in the United States . The OWL , an annual literary publication , features students ' work and is one of the nation 's oldest college literary magazines . Other student publications include The Civic Arts Review , the electronic <unk> bulletin , and @ Wesleyan , a quarterly online magazine . Radio station <unk> broadcasts from Slocum Hall and is run by students supervised by the journalism department . 
 The university also has a student government , the Wesleyan Council on Student Affairs ( WCSA ) . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Activism as represented in OWU 's founding vision has had a significant role in Ohio Wesleyan 's history . 
 The first president , Edward Thomson , staunchly supported the abolition of slavery and liberalism . Other individuals associated with the university have fought racism . Branch Rickey , an alumnus , broke the racial barrier in baseball . Mary King , a civil rights activist , worked alongside Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the U.S. civil rights movement while she was a staff member of OWU 's Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( SNCC ) . In the 1980s , Ohio Wesleyan 's administration , moved by student activism , pledged and eventually fully divested holdings connected to South Africa . As of September 2007 , Ohio Wesleyan joined a small group of liberal colleges that actively opposed the methodology and usefulness of US News and World Report college rankings , despite the fact that the magazine ranked Ohio Wesleyan among the top national liberal arts colleges . Ohio Wesleyan 's concern intensified with disclosures about institutions flagrantly manipulating data in order to move up in the rankings in U.S. News and other popular college guides . 
 OWU has partisan political groups ranging from liberal to conservative , such the College Republicans and the College Democrats , and several activism awareness groups such as <unk> , Black Men of the Future , Student Union on Black Awareness , <unk> , ECHO , Amnesty International , and Rafiki Wa Afrika . Due to the school 's proximity to Columbus , the Ohio state capital , many politically inclined students serve internships for state representatives . In the 2000s , students have been active on the Iraq war , race , globalization , and women 's reproductive rights . 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 Many Ohio Wesleyan traditions originate from its early years . Monnett Weekend , beginning in 1896 , welcomes female alumni , parents , and friends of the university . Events include a " People 's Parade " with clowns , banners and marching , faculty lectures , Maypole dancing , Choral Arts Society , and an all @-@ campus carnival . It started as a girls ' athletic fête held at the Monnett Athletic Club for Mothers Day . All events were held at the Monnett Campus , where female students danced around the Maypole , while men were barred . The men , in turn , developed their own tradition : they arrived at Monnett Campus early in the morning , and concealed themselves in trees to watch the festivities , discreetly . 
 In 1884 , Ohio Wesleyan held its first Mock Convention , which has recurred in every United States presidential election year since 1920 . Its purpose is to inform participants , students , faculty staff , and Ohio residents about the presidential nominating convention , presidential candidate , and key issues in the upcoming election . 
 Beginning in the 1920s , all freshmen were required to wear " dinks " , red caps with black brims and a black W on the front . <unk> students who refused to wear the " <unk> " were tossed into the Sulphur Spring ( see later reference ) . This tradition ended in the 1960s . The freshman class of 1957 wore dinks for half the first semester . 
 Ohio Wesleyan 's Homecoming takes place in early October , while the Ohio Wesleyan football team plays one of its traditional rivals . New events , such as a bonfire and a five kilometer run , have been added from as recently as 2004 . 
 The President 's Ball , a recent gala organized by the college president , takes place on the first Saturday of December . Other traditions include OWU vs. Denison , which stages a " fierce " athletic rivalry between Ohio Wesleyan and Denison University ; the Sagan Colloquium , spanning the fall semester , recently expanded to include the spring semester , which consists of speeches focusing on an issue of concern to the liberal arts ; and <unk> , an annual celebration of modern dance and the arts , which occurs at the end of the academic year . " Fresh @-@ X " is an optional program for newly admitted students that occurs just before orientation in which students may choose between hiking , backpacking and other outdoor activities to make friends with their new classmates . 
 There are two major musical events , Unity through Music and <unk> . Unity through Music occurs once a year in the fall semester , and covers various musical styles in a carnival atmosphere , during the day ; while , during the evening , a huge dance is held in the Hamilton @-@ Williams Campus Center . <unk> , the second musical event , proceeds in mid @-@ April and in recent years has featured well @-@ known music groups such as Counting Crows , The Roots , Guster , Ben Folds , and most recently , Gym Class Heroes . It is organized by the Campus Programming Board . 
 A rock next to Hayes Hall has been part of the residential campus for the last 50 years , and students continually repaint it with graffiti and slogans . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 The university can house up to 1 @,@ 600 students on campus . First @-@ year students are required to live on campus during their first two semesters . A lottery system matches second to fourth @-@ year students with dormitories and another lottery system determines how many students are allowed to live in off @-@ campus housing . Housing options include dormitories , small living units , fraternities , and cooperative housing . 
 Thomson , Bashford , Stuyvesant , and Smith Halls are large mid @-@ rise dormitories on campus . Welch Hall is designated as a " quiet " dorm for honors students . Hayes Hall is an all @-@ female dorm . 
 Approximately 200 non @-@ freshmen students live in Small Living Units ( <unk> ) , which are co @-@ ops united voluntarily to meet shared economic , social , and cultural needs and aspirations in democratically controlled houses . The houses allow students to live cooperatively with one another by sharing regularly scheduled house chores , participating in the decision process , and , in some , sharing the cooking duties . Each unit houses a group of 10 @-@ 17 students , and is organized to promote a common theme , usually indicated by the co @-@ op 's name . As of the 2013 – 2014 academic year , the <unk> consist of The Peace and Justice House , The Citizens of the World House , The House of Black Culture , The Sexuality and Gender Equality House , The Modern Foreign Language House , The House of Thought , The Tree House , and The Interfaith House . The University owns these houses ; the co @-@ ops , therefore , must follow the University 's living policies . The co @-@ ops do , however , elect their own members and do not have Resident Advisers or faculty in residence like other on @-@ campus residence halls . They have a House Moderator who is selected by Residential Life and undergoes the same training as a Resident Advisor . At the end of each calendar year , every existing and potential co @-@ op must submit a house proposal describing its plans for theme promotion for the next academic year . The University Housing office places co @-@ ops in houses every year on a competitive basis . 
 Off @-@ campus housing is available only to junior and senior students , and students residing in Delaware , OH while living with their spouse or direct family ; 17 % of students live off @-@ campus . Most students assert Ohio Wesleyan 's policy of off @-@ campus housing as one of the " worst things " about Ohio Wesleyan because of the resulting shortage of the number of lottery tickets allowing people to live off due to the off @-@ campus lottery cap . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Ohio Wesleyan participates in the NCAA 's Division III as a member of the North Coast Athletic Conference ( NCAC ) . Known as the Battling Bishops , Ohio Wesleyan competes in 21 sports . The official school colors are red and black . Formal athletics at the college date to 1875 , when the first football teams were organized to play against other institutions . In the late 1880s , Ohio Wesleyan had perhaps the strongest amateur baseball team in the state of Ohio behind the pitching of Phil " Lefty " Saylor . The school joined the Ohio Athletic Conference along with Oberlin College , Kenyon College , Ohio State , and Case Western in 1902 . In 1983 , Ohio Wesleyan joined with nine other colleges in Ohio , Indiana and Pennsylvania to create the North Coast Athletic Conference . The NCAC seeks to bring together a group of liberal arts institutions that value the primacy of the academic mission over the athletic one . 
 The men 's lacrosse , golf and soccer teams are the most historically successful of the varsity teams , and soccer is the university 's most intently followed sport . For seven of the last twelve years , Ohio Wesleyan has won the NCAC conference All @-@ Sports Trophy for excellence in both women 's and men 's sports . In the Sears Director 's Cup standings , OWU is among the top 25 overall collegiate athletics programs in the country . Because of the North Coast Athletic Association athletic agreement , the university is not permitted to offer academic scholarships for athletic recruiting . 
 Ohio Wesleyan has won five NCAA Division III Championships , including men 's basketball ( 1988 ) , men 's soccer ( 1998 and 2011 ) , and women 's soccer ( 2001 and 2002 ) . In addition , Ohio Wesleyan 's varsity athletic teams have been NCAC champions over 100 times , leading the teams of Denison University and Kenyon College . 
 The nickname The Battling Bishops dates to 1925 . This is also the name of the university 's mascot , The Battling Bishop . Due to its ironic name , the mascot has been listed as one of the weirdest college mascots . Due to its red robe , The Battling Bishop looks actually like a Cardinal . Before 1925 , Ohio Wesleyan 's teams were referred to as " The Red and Black " and " The Methodists " . Many schools , including several other Methodist ones , also claimed crimson and black as their colors , so the university decided to change the name . 
 Ohio Wesleyan maintains athletic rivalries with other NCAC institutions . The men 's lacrosse team has a historic rivalry with Denison University , the football team with Wittenberg University , the soccer team with Kenyon College , and the field hockey team with Oberlin College . Both Denison and Ohio Wesleyan issued alerts to their fans specifically for the OWU @-@ Denison lacrosse game about unsportsmanlike behavior and profanity . 
 In addition to the school 's varsity athletics , club sports teams , including ultimate frisbee , chess , hockey , cricket , rugby , ski , and scuba , have been organized as student organizations under the auspices of the Office of Student Activities . Ohio Wesleyan 's intramural program includes 16 sports . Sports such as skiing , squash and water polo have been offered , as well as a sports trivia competition . 
 " Oh we 're from dear old Wesleyan " is Ohio Wesleyan University 's primary fight song . The song 's lyrics were written in 1914 by <unk> <unk> ' 1916 . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Under the charter granted by the State of Ohio , the Board of Trustees possesses the legal authority to operate the college . The charter and bylaws stipulate a board of 34 trustees , of whom one is the president . In general , it is the board that elects the president . Since Ohio Wesleyan 's beginnings , sixteen people have held the title of president , and a few have served as interim president . Former presidents include lawyers , literary scholars , politicians , executives , and clergymen . 
 After several disagreements between Huddleston and the Ohio Wesleyan administration , Huddleston accepted a position as president of the University of New Hampshire and left Ohio Wesleyan on June 30 , 2007 , giving him the second shortest presidency , behind David <unk> , 1959 – 1961 . On May 29 , 2007 , the appointment of current university provost Dr. David O. Robbins as interim president was unanimously endorsed by OWU 's Board of Trustees . Dr. Robbins ' term as Interim President began on July 1 , 2007 . 
 On December 17 , 2007 , Dr. Rockwell " Rock " Jones was elected to serve as the 16th president of Ohio Wesleyan University . Dr. Jones ' inauguration ceremony took place on October 10 , 2008 in Ohio Wesleyan 's Grey Chapel , in University Hall . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Ohio Wesleyan alumni are active in several annual events , organizations , and initiatives . The events and associations with significant alumni involvement are Homecoming , ' W ' Association , and A / PART ( the alumni admission team ) . For the 2005 – 2006 fiscal year , Ohio Wesleyan 's alumni giving rate was 35 % . A number of the school 's alumni have made notable contributions in the fields of government , law , academia , business , arts , journalism , and athletics , among others . 
 In academia , Frank Sherwood Rowland ( class of 1948 ) won the 1995 Nobel Prize for chemistry for his research on the depletion of the Earth 's ozone layer . Ezra Vogel ( 1950 ) is a prominent author on China @-@ Japan issues and was the director of Harvard 's Fairbank Center for East Asian Research from 1995 to 1999 . William Hsiao ( 1963 ) is an economist in the field of international health at Harvard , and the designer of a landmark study to examine the United States ' system of reimbursing physicians for medical services . Dennis R. Appleyard ( 1961 ) is the author of an international economics textbook . 
 In politics , John Wesley Hoyt ( 1849 ) was the third Governor of the Wyoming Territory , Charles Fairbanks ( 1872 ) was the 26th Vice @-@ President of the United States . Jo Ann Emerson ( 1972 ) serves as a U.S. Representative from Missouri . Arthur Flemming ( 1927 ) was a Secretary of Health , Education and Welfare , was known for his commitment to civil rights , was the recipient of two Presidential Medals of Freedom , and served as president of University of Oregon , Ohio Wesleyan University , and Macalester College . Lucy Webb Hayes ( 1853 ) , wife of U.S. President Rutherford B. Hayes , was the first woman to be called First Lady , and the first First Lady to hold a college degree . 
 Notable journalists and media personalities include Frank Stanton ( 1930 ) , a president of CBS known for supporting broadcast journalism before Congress ; Byron Pitts ( 1982 ) , a national correspondent for CBS News ; <unk> Malick ( 1972 ) , an Emmy @-@ nominated actress known for her role on the NBC sitcom Just Shoot Me ! and now as " Victoria Chase " on the TV Land sitcom " Hot in Cleveland " ; Melvin Van Peebles ( 1953 ) , an actor , director , screenwriter , playwright , and composer ; Patricia Wettig ( 1974 ) , the actress who plays vice president Caroline Richards on Prison Break ; and Clark Gregg ( 1984 ) , the actor playing Richard in The New Adventures of Old Christine with Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus . 
 Numerous Ohio Wesleyan alumni have been associated with social justice . Branch Rickey ( 1904 ) was a baseball manager and executive known for signing Jackie Robinson as the first African @-@ American in Major League Baseball . Another graduate , Mary King ( 1962 ) , worked alongside the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr. in the U.S. civil rights movement when she was a young student , and was a member of the staff of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( SNCC ) . Rev. Norman Vincent Peale ( 1920 ) was the author of The Power of Positive Thinking and the winner of a Presidential Medal of Freedom for his theological contributions . Others found fame in other forms : Mildred Elizabeth Sisk ( aka Axis Sally ) was the first American woman to be tried and sentenced for treason , convicted of broadcasting for Nazi Germany during World War II . In 1917 , she majored in dramatic arts , but did not graduate due to her failure to meet all university requirements . After serving a 12 @-@ year sentence , Sisk returned to OWU , where she received a bachelor 's degree in speech in 1973 . 
 = Spin Alternative Record Guide = 
 Spin Alternative Record Guide is a musical reference book compiled by the American music magazine Spin and published in 1995 by Vintage Books . It was edited by rock critic Eric Weisbard and Craig Marks , who was the magazine 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief at the time . The book features essays and reviews from a number of prominent critics on albums , artists , and genres considered relevant to the alternative music movement . Contributors who were consulted for the book include Ann Powers , Rob Sheffield , Simon Reynolds , Michael Azerrad , and Robert Christgau . 
 When Spin Alternative Record Guide was published , it did not sell particularly well and received a mixed reaction from reviewers . The quality and relevance of the contributors ' writing were praised , while the editors ' concept and comprehensiveness of alternative music were seen as ill @-@ defined . Nonetheless , it inspired a number of future music critics and helped revive the career of 1960s folk artist John Fahey , whose entry in the book helped renew interest in his music at the time of its publication . 
 = = Content and scope = = 
 Spanning 468 pages , Spin Alternative Record Guide compiles essays by 64 music critics on recording artists and bands who either predated , were involved in , or developed from the alternative music movement . In the book , each artist 's entry is accompanied by their discography , with albums rated a score between one and ten . The book 's editors , critic Eric Weisbard and Spin editor @-@ in @-@ chief Craig Marks , consulted journalists such as Simon Reynolds , Alex Ross , Charles Aaron , Michael Azerrad , Ann Powers , and Rob Sheffield , who wrote most of the complete discography reviews . The artist entries are also accompanied by song lyrics and album artwork . 
 Although " alternative " had been used as a catchall term for rock bands outside the mainstream , Spin Alternative Record Guide covers approximately 500 artists from a variety of genres considered relevant to alternative music 's development . These include 1970s punk rock , 1980s college rock , 1990s indie rock , noise music , reggae , electronic , new wave , heavy metal , krautrock , synthpop , disco , alternative country , hip hop , grunge , worldbeat , and avant @-@ garde jazz . Most artists associated with classic rock are not covered , while some mainstream pop artists are given entries , including Madonna and ABBA . Other non @-@ rock artists reviewed in the book include jazz composer Sun Ra , country singer @-@ songwriter Lyle Lovett , and Qawwali singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan . Weisbard and Marks have said the book was meant to be " suggestive more than comprehensive " of alternative music . 
 An introductory essay on alternative rock and " alternative sensibilities " was written by Weisbard . In it , he explains alternative music as a category whose principles are " <unk> dystopian , <unk> presuming fragmentation " , and " built on an often neurotic discomfort over <unk> and commodified culture " . He and Marks consulted a number of artists for their top @-@ ten record lists , which were interspersed throughout the book . They also curated a " Top 100 Alternative Albums " list for the appendix , ranking the Ramones ' 1976 self @-@ titled debut album at number one . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 The first edition of Spin Alternative Record Guide was published on October 10 , 1995 , by Vintage Books . It was the first book compiled by Spin . Having edited their book , Weisbard put his pursuit of a PhD at UC Berkeley on hold and accepted a job offer from the magazine , which marked the beginning of his career as a rock critic . Although the book did not sell well , its entry on 1960s folk artist John Fahey , written by Byron Coley , helped renew interest in Fahey 's music . According to Ben Ratliff from The New York Times , this led to substantial interest in Fahey from record labels and the alternative music scene , helping revive his career . 
 In a contemporary review , Adam Mazmanian from Library Journal recommended Spin Alternative Record Guide to " both public and academic libraries " and said that while The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 1992 ) also offers complete discographies of artists ranging from Jonathan Richman to Throbbing Gristle , this book 's reviews are superior in " length and scope " . Mazmanian argued that " this guide fills a gap in the literature of modern music " at a time when " alternative " has developed a ubiquitous presence in the marketing of popular music . In New York magazine , Kim France called it " a well @-@ edited , unpretentious , and comprehensive look at all the crazy stuff the kids are listening to these days " . In a less enthusiastic review , Booklist critic Gordon Flagg was impressed by the accuracy of the artist entries and the quality of the contributors ' reviews , but found Weisbard 's idea of alternative ill @-@ defined and recommended The Trouser Press Record Guide ( 1991 ) as a more comprehensive alternative . Billboard magazine 's Beth Renaud was more critical of the book , calling much of the writing biased and the organization <unk> . She said Weisbard 's " obligatory " essay is outdated and vague in defining alternative rock and that the contributors " gush " over artists usually covered by Spin , with many relevant artists omitted in place of more perplexing additions . 
 American pop culture critic Chuck Klosterman later cited Spin Alternative Record Guide as one of his five favorite books , saying in 2011 , " I fear this might be out of print , but it 's probably my favorite music book of all time . Since its 1995 publication , I doubt a year has passed when I didn 't reread at least part of it . " Robert Christgau , who contributed to the book , wrote that while most music guides and encyclopedia books he has consulted were unremarkable , Spin Alternative Record Guide was one of the few " useful exceptions " because of what he felt was the " sharpest writing " from contributors such as Weisbard and Sheffield . Maura Johnston , on the other hand , said in retrospect that the book 's list of the 100 best albums catered to " hipper , Gen @-@ <unk> tastes " . 
 In 2011 , Spin Alternative Record Guide was included in Pitchfork 's list of their staff 's favorite music books . Contributing writer Matthew Perpetua said the book 's writers — either top critics at the time or those who have since become important figures in music journalism — outline the " alternative sensibility " by recognizing and connecting music from disparate genres in " an inclusive , open @-@ minded survey , but it 's defined as much by what 's left out — pretty much all Boomer @-@ oriented rock — as what it includes . " According to Perpetua , the " number of young readers [ who ] pursued music criticism " because of the book was far greater than the copies it sold . Matthew <unk> , editor of The Fader , bought the book after it was published and said he used it as a consumer guide for 10 years . Along with its influence on future critics , the book was cited by guitarist William Tyler as his only source of music education growing up , having found it in a bookstore around the time it was published : " They had entries for all these different people that I had never heard of : Can , John Zorn , [ John ] Fahey , whatever ... That was before any sort of Internet presence " . 
 = Adam Mickiewicz = 
 Adam Bernard Mickiewicz ( [ mit ͡ <unk> ͡ ʂ ] ; 24 December 1798 – 26 November 1855 ) was a Polish poet , dramatist , essayist , publicist , translator , professor of Slavic literature , and political activist . He is regarded as national poet in Poland , Lithuania and Belarus . A principal figure in Polish Romanticism , he is counted one of Poland 's " Three Bards " ( " Trzej <unk> " ) and is widely regarded as Poland 's greatest poet . He is also considered one of the greatest Slavic and European poets and has been dubbed a " Slavic bard " . A leading Romantic dramatist , he has been compared in Poland and Europe to Byron and Goethe . 
 He is known chiefly for the poetic drama Dziady ( Forefathers ' Eve ) and the national epic poem Pan Tadeusz . His other influential works include Konrad Wallenrod and Grażyna . All these served as inspiration for uprisings against the three imperial powers that had partitioned the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth out of existence . 
 Mickiewicz was born in the Russian @-@ partitioned territories of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania , which had been part of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , and was active in the struggle to win independence for his home region . After , as a consequence , spending five years exiled to central Russia , in 1829 he succeeded in leaving the Russian Empire and , like many of his compatriots , lived out the rest of his life abroad . He settled first in Rome , then in Paris , where for a little over three years he lectured on Slavic literature at the Collège de France . He died , probably of cholera , at Istanbul in the Ottoman Empire , where he had gone to help organize Polish and Jewish forces to fight Russia in the Crimean War . 
 In 1890 , his remains were repatriated from Montmorency , Val @-@ d 'Oise , in France , to Wawel Cathedral in Kraków , Poland . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Adam Mickiewicz was born 24 December 1798 , either at his paternal uncle 's estate in <unk> ( now <unk> ) near Navahrudak ( in Polish , Nowogródek ) or in Navahrudak itself in what was then part of the Russian Empire and is now Belarus . The region was on the periphery of Lithuania proper and had been part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania until the Third Partition of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth ( 1795 ) . The area had earlier been inhabited by ethnic Lithuanians , but by the time of his birth it was largely Belarusian @-@ populated . Its upper class , including Mickiewicz 's family , were either Polish or Polonized . The poet 's father , Mikołaj Mickiewicz , a lawyer , was a member of the Polish nobility ( szlachta ) and bore the hereditary <unk> coat @-@ of @-@ arms ; Adam 's mother was Barbara Mickiewicz , née <unk> . Adam was the second @-@ born son in the family . 
 Mickiewicz spent his childhood in Navahrudak , initially taught by his mother and private tutors . From 1807 to 1815 he attended a Dominican school following a curriculum that had been designed by the now @-@ defunct Polish Commission for National Education , which had been the world 's first ministry of education . He was a mediocre student , although active in games , theatricals , and the like . 
 In September 1815 , Mickiewicz enrolled at the Imperial University of Vilnius ( Polish name : Wilno ) , studying to be a teacher . After graduating , under the terms of his government scholarship , he taught secondary school at Kaunas from 1819 to 1823 . 
 In 1818 , in the Polish @-@ language Tygodnik <unk> ( Wilno Weekly ) , he published his first poem , " Zima <unk> " ( " City Winter " ) . The next few years would see a maturing of his style from sentimentalism / neoclassicism to romanticism , first in his poetry anthologies published in Vilnius in 1822 and 1823 ; these anthologies included the poem " Grażyna " and the first @-@ published parts ( II and IV ) of his major work , Dziady ( Forefathers ' Eve ) . By 1820 he had already finished another major romantic poem , " Oda do młodości " ( " Ode to Youth " ) , but it was considered to be too patriotic and revolutionary for publication and would not appear officially for many years . 
 About the summer of 1820 , Mickiewicz met the love of his life , <unk> <unk> . They were unable to marry due to his family 's poverty and relatively low social status ; in addition , she was already engaged to Count Wawrzyniec Puttkamer , whom she would marry in 1821 . 
 = = = Imprisonment and exile = = = 
 In 1817 , while still a student , Mickiewicz , Tomasz Zan and other friends had created a secret organization , the <unk> . The group focused on self @-@ education but had ties to a more radical , clearly pro @-@ Polish @-@ independence student group , the Filaret Association . An investigation of secret student organizations by Nikolay Novosiltsev , begun in early 1823 , led to the arrests of a number of students and ex @-@ student activists including Mickiewicz , who was taken into custody and imprisoned at Vilnius ' <unk> monastery in late 1823 or early 1824 ( sources disagree as to the date ) . After investigation into his political activities , specifically his membership in the <unk> , in 1824 Mickiewicz was banished to central Russia . Within a few hours of receiving the decree on 22 October 1824 , he penned a poem into an album belonging to Salomea <unk> , the mother of Juliusz Słowacki . ( In 1975 this poem was set to music in Polish and Russian by Soviet composer David <unk> . ) Mickiewicz crossed the border into Russia about 11 November 1824 , arriving in Saint Petersburg later that month . He would spend most of the next five years in Saint Petersburg and Moscow , except for a notable 1824 to 1825 excursion to Odessa , then on to Crimea . That visit , from February to November 1825 , inspired a notable collection of sonnets ( some love sonnets , and a series known as Crimean Sonnets , published a year later . 
 Mickiewicz was welcomed into the leading literary circles of Saint Petersburg and Moscow , where he became a great favorite for his agreeable manners and extraordinary talent for poetic improvisation . The year 1828 saw the publication of his poem Konrad Wallenrod . Novosiltsev , who recognized its patriotic and subversive message , which had been missed by the Moscow censors , unsuccessfully attempted to sabotage its publication and to damage Mickiewicz 's reputation . 
 In Moscow , Mickiewicz met the Polish journalist and novelist Henryk Rzewuski and the Polish composer and piano virtuoso Maria Szymanowska , whose daughter , Celina Szymanowska , Mickiewicz would later marry in Paris , France . He also befriended the great Russian poet Alexander Pushkin and Decembrist leaders including <unk> <unk> . It was thanks to his friendships with many influential individuals that he was eventually able to obtain a passport and permission to leave Russia for Western Europe . 
 = = = European travels = = = 
 After serving five years of exile to Russia , Mickiewicz received permission to go abroad in 1829 . On 1 June that year , he arrived in Weimar . By 6 June he was in Berlin , where he attended lectures by the philosopher Hegel . In February 1830 he visited Prague , later returning to Weimar , where he received a cordial reception from the writer , scientist and politician Goethe . 
 He then continued on through Germany all the way to Italy , which he entered via the Alps ' <unk> Pass . Accompanied by an old friend , the poet Antoni Edward <unk> , he visited Milan , Venice , Florence and Rome . In August that same year ( 1830 ) he went to Geneva , where he met fellow Polish Bard Zygmunt Krasiński . During these travels he had a brief romance with Henrietta Ewa <unk> , but class differences again prevented his marrying his new love . 
 Finally about October 1830 he took up residence in Rome , which he declared " the most amiable of foreign cities . " Soon after , he learned about the outbreak of the November 1830 Uprising in Poland , but he would not leave Rome until the spring of 1831 . 
 On 19 April 1831 Mickiewicz departed Rome , traveling to Geneva and Paris and later , on a false passport , to Germany , via Dresden and Leipzig arriving about 13 August in Poznań ( German name : Posen ) , then part of the Kingdom of Prussia . It is possible that during these travels he carried communications from the Italian Carbonari to the French underground , and delivered documents or money for the Polish insurgents from the Polish community in Paris , but reliable information on his activities at the time is scarce . Ultimately he never crossed into Russian Poland , where the Uprising was mainly happening ; he stayed in German Poland ( historically known to Poles as Wielkopolska , or Greater Poland ) , where he was well received by members of the local Polish nobility . He had a brief liaison with Konstancja <unk> at her family estate . Starting in March 1832 , Mickiewicz stayed several months in Dresden , in Saxony , where he wrote the third part of his poem Dziady . 
 = = = Paris émigré = = = 
 On 31 July 1832 he arrived in Paris , accompanied by a close friend and fellow ex @-@ <unk> , the future geologist and Chilean educator Ignacy <unk> . In Paris , Mickiewicz became active in many Polish émigré groups and published articles in <unk> Polski ( The Polish Pilgrim ) . The fall of 1832 saw the publication , in Paris , of the third part of his Dziady ( smuggled into partitioned Poland ) , as well as of The Books of the Polish People and of the Polish Pilgrimage , which Mickiewicz self @-@ published . In 1834 he published another masterpiece , his epic poem Pan Tadeusz . 
 Pan Tadeusz , his longest poetic work , marked the end of his most productive literary period . Mickiewicz would create further notable works , such as Lausanne Lyrics , 1839 – 40 ) and <unk> i <unk> ( Thoughts and Remarks , 1834 – 40 ) , but neither would achieve the fame of his earlier works . His relative literary silence , beginning in the mid @-@ 1830s , has been variously interpreted : he may have lost his talent ; he may have chosen to focus on teaching and on political writing and organizing . 
 On 22 July 1834 , in Paris , he married Celina Szymanowska , daughter of composer and concert pianist Maria Agata Szymanowska . They would have six children ( two daughters , Maria and Helena ; and four sons , Władysław , Aleksander , Jan and Józef ) . Celina later became mentally ill , possibly with a major depressive disorder . In December 1838 , marital problems caused Mickiewicz to attempt suicide . Celina would die on 5 March 1855 . 
 Mickiewicz and his family lived in relative poverty , their major source of income being occasional publication of his work – not a very profitable endeavor . They received support from friends and patrons , but not enough to substantially change their situation . Despite spending most of his remaining years in France , Mickiewicz would never receive French citizenship , nor any support from the French government . By the late 1830s he was less active as a writer , and also less visible on the Polish émigré political scene . 
 In 1838 Mickiewicz became professor of Latin literature at the Lausanne Academy , in Switzerland . His lectures were well received , and in 1840 he was appointed to the newly established chair of Slavic languages and literatures at the Collège de France . Leaving Lausanne , he was made an honorary Lausanne Academy professor . 
 Mickiewicz would , however , hold the Collège de France post for little more than three years , his last lecture being delivered on 28 May 1844 . His lectures were popular , drawing many listeners in addition to enrolled students , and receiving reviews in the press . Some would be remembered much later ; his sixteenth lecture , on Slavic theater , " was to become a kind of gospel for Polish theater directors of the twentieth century . " 
 But he became increasingly possessed by religious mysticism as he fell under the influence of the Polish philosopher Andrzej Towiański , whom he met in 1841 . His lectures became a medley of religion and politics , punctuated by controversial attacks on the Catholic Church , and thus brought him under censure by the French government . The messianic element conflicted with Roman Catholic teachings , and some of his works were placed on the Church 's list of prohibited books , though both Mickiewicz and Towiański regularly attended Catholic mass and encouraged their followers to do so . 
 In 1846 Mickiewicz severed his ties with Towiański , following the rise of revolutionary sentiment in Europe , manifested in events such as the Kraków Uprising of February 1846 . Mickiewicz criticized Towiański 's passivity and returned to the traditional Catholic Church . In 1847 Mickiewicz befriended American journalist , critic and women 's @-@ rights advocate Margaret Fuller . In March 1848 he was part of a Polish delegation received in audience by Pope Pius IX , whom he asked to support the enslaved nations and the French Revolution of 1848 . Soon after , in April 1848 , he organized a military unit , the Mickiewicz Legion , to support the insurgents , hoping to liberate the Polish and other Slavic lands . The unit never became large enough to be more than symbolic , and in the fall of 1848 Mickiewicz returned to Paris and became more active again on the political scene . 
 In December 1848 he was offered a post at the Jagiellonian University in Austrian @-@ ruled Kraków , but the offer was soon withdrawn after pressure from Austrian authorities . In the winter of 1848 – 49 , Polish composer Frédéric Chopin , in the final months of his own life , visited his ailing compatriot and soothed the poet 's nerves with his piano music . Over a dozen years earlier , Chopin had set two of Mickiewicz 's poems to music ( see Polish songs by Frédéric Chopin ) . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 In the winter of 1849 Mickiewicz founded a French @-@ language newspaper , La Tribune des <unk> ( The Peoples ' Tribune ) , supported by a wealthy Polish émigré activist , Ksawery Branicki . Mickiewicz wrote over 70 articles for the Tribune during its short existence : it came out between 15 March and 10 November 1849 , when the authorities shut it down . His articles supported democracy and socialism and many ideals of the French Revolution and of the Napoleonic era , though he held few illusions regarding the idealism of the House of Bonaparte . He supported the restoration of the French Empire in 1851 . In April 1852 he lost his post at the Collège de France , which he had been allowed to keep ( though without the right to lecture ) . On 31 October 1852 he was hired as a librarian at the Bibliothèque de l 'Arsenal . There he was visited by another Polish poet , Cyprian Norwid , who wrote of the meeting in his poem , " Czarne <unk> " ( " Black Blossoms " ) ; and there Mickiewicz 's wife Celina died . 
 Mickiewicz welcomed the Crimean War of 1853 @-@ 1856 , which he hoped would lead to a new European order including a restored independent Poland . His last composition , a Latin ode Ad <unk> III Caesarem <unk> Ode in <unk> <unk> , honored Napoleon III and celebrated the British @-@ French victory over Russia at the Battle of <unk> in the Åland Islands in August 1854 . Polish émigrés associated with the Hôtel Lambert persuaded him to become active again in politics . Soon after the Crimean War broke out ( October 1853 ) , the French government entrusted him with a diplomatic mission . He left Paris on 11 September 1855 , arriving in Istanbul , in the Ottoman Empire , on 22 September . There , working with Michał <unk> ( <unk> Pasha ) , he began organizing Polish forces to fight under Ottoman command against Russia . With his friend Armand Lévy he also set about organizing a Jewish legion . He returned ill from a trip to a military camp to his apartment on <unk> Street in the Pera ( now Beyoğlu ) district of Istanbul and died on 26 November 1855 . Though Tadeusz Boy @-@ Żeleński and others have speculated that political enemies might have poisoned Mickiewicz , there is no proof of this , and he probably contracted cholera , which claimed other lives there at the time . 
 Mickiewicz 's remains were transported to France , boarding ship on 31 December 1855 , and were buried at Montmorency , Val @-@ d 'Oise , on 21 January 1861 . In 1890 they were disinterred , moved to Austrian Poland , and on 4 July entombed in the crypts of Kraków 's Wawel Cathedral , a place of final repose for a number of persons important to Poland 's political and cultural history . 
 = = Works = = 
 Mickiewicz 's childhood environment exerted a major influence on his literary work . His early years were shaped by immersion in Belarusian folklore and by vivid memories , which he later reworked in his poems , of the ruins of Navahrudak Castle and of the triumphant entry and disastrous retreat of Polish and Napoleonic troops during Napoleon 's 1812 invasion of Russia . The year 1812 also marked his father 's death . Later , the poet 's personality and subsequent works were greatly influenced by his four years of living and studying in Vilnius . 
 His first poems , such as the 1818 " Zima <unk> " ( " City Winter " ) and the 1819 " <unk> " ( " Potato " ) , were classical in style , influenced by Voltaire . His poetry anthologies published in 1822 ( including the opening poem " <unk> " , " Romanticism " ) and 1823 mark the start of romanticism in Poland . Mickiewicz 's influence popularized the use of folklore , folk literary forms , and <unk> in Polish romantic literature . His exile to Moscow exposed him to a cosmopolitan environment , more international than provincial Vilnius and Kaunas in Lithuania . This period saw a further evolution in his writing style , with <unk> ( Sonnets , 1826 ) and Konrad Wallenrod ( 1828 ) , both published in Russia . The <unk> , mainly comprising his Crimean Sonnets , highlight the poet 's ability and desire to write , and his longing for his homeland . 
 One of his major works , Dziady ( Forefathers ' Eve ) , comprises several parts written over an extended period of time . It began with publication of parts II and IV in 1823 . Miłosz remarks that it was " Mickiewicz 's major theatrical achievement " , a work which Mickiewicz saw as ongoing and to be continued in further parts . Its title refers to the pagan ancestor commemoration that had been practiced by Slavic and Baltic peoples on All Souls ' Day . The year 1832 saw the publication of part III : much superior to the earlier parts , a " laboratory of innovative genres , styles and forms " . Part III was largely written over a few days ; the " Great Improvisation " section , a " masterpiece of Polish poetry " , is said to have been created during a single inspired night . A long descriptive poem , " <unk> " ( Digression ) , accompanying part III and written sometime before it , sums up Mickiewicz 's experiences in , and views on , Russia , portrays it as a huge prison , pities the oppressed Russian people , and wonders about their future . Miłosz describes it as a " summation of Polish attitudes towards Russia in the nineteenth century " and notes that it inspired responses from Pushkin ( " The Bronze Horseman " ) and Joseph Conrad ( Under Western Eyes ) . The drama was first staged by Stanisław Wyspiański in 1901 , becoming , in Miłosz 's words , " a kind of national sacred play , occasionally forbidden by censorship because of its emotional impact upon the audience . " The Polish government 's 1968 closing down of a production of the play sparked the 1968 Polish political crisis . 
 Mickiewicz 's Konrad Wallenrod ( 1828 ) , a narrative poem describing battles of the Christian order of Teutonic Knights against the pagans of Lithuania , is a thinly veiled allusion to the long feud between Russia and Poland . The plot involves the use of subterfuge against a stronger enemy , and the poem analyzes moral dilemmas faced by the Polish insurgents who would soon launch the November 1830 Uprising . Controversial to an older generation of readers , Konrad Wallenrod was seen by the young as a call to arms and was praised as such by an Uprising leader , poet Ludwik <unk> . Miłosz describes Konrad Wallenrod ( named for its protagonist ) as " the most committed politically of all <unk> 's poems . " The point of the poem , though obvious to many , escaped the Russian censors , and the poem was allowed to be published , complete with its telling motto drawn from Machiavelli : " <unk> <unk> <unk> come sono due <unk> di <unk> – <unk> essere <unk> e <unk> . " ( " Ye shall know that there are two ways of fighting – you must be a fox and a lion . " ) On a purely literary level , the poem was notable for incorporating traditional folk elements alongside stylistic innovations . 
 Similarly noteworthy is Mickiewicz 's earlier and longer 1823 poem , Grażyna , depicting the exploits of a Lithuanian <unk> against the Teutonic Knights . Miłosz writes that Grażyna " combines a metallic beat of lines and syntactical rigor with a plot and motifs dear to the Romantics . " It is said by <unk> Ostrowski to have inspired Emilia Plater , a military heroine of the November 1830 Uprising . A similar message informs Mickiewicz 's " Oda do młodości " ( " Ode to Youth " ) . 
 Mickiewicz 's Crimean Sonnets ( 1825 – 26 ) and poems that he would later write in Rome and Lausanne , Miłosz notes , have been " justly ranked among the highest achievements in Polish [ lyric poetry ] . " His 1830 travels in Italy likely inspired him to consider religious matters , and produced some of his best religiously @-@ themed works , such as " <unk> " ( " The Master " ) and " Do <unk> <unk> " ( " To <unk> <unk> " ) . He was an authority to the young insurgents of 1830 – 31 , who expected him to participate in the fighting ( the poet Maurycy <unk> wrote a dedicated poem urging him to do so ) . Yet it is likely that Mickiewicz was no longer as idealistic and supportive of military action as he had been a few years earlier , and his new works such as " Do <unk> Polki " ( " To a Polish Mother " , 1830 ) , while still patriotic , also began to reflect on the tragedy of resistance . His meetings with refugees and escaping insurgents around 1831 resulted in works such as " Reduta Ordona " ( " Ordon 's Redoubt " ) , " <unk> " ( " Night Bivouac " ) and " Śmierć <unk> " ( " Death of the Colonel " ) . Wyka notes the irony that some of the most important literary works about the 1830 Uprising were written by Mickiewicz , who never took part in a battle or even saw a battlefield . 
 His <unk> narodu polskiego i <unk> polskiego ( Books of the Polish Nation and the Polish Pilgrimage , 1832 ) opens with a historical @-@ philosophical discussion of the history of humankind in which Mickiewicz argues that history is the history of now @-@ unrealized freedom that awaits many oppressed nations in the future . It is followed by a longer " moral catechism " aimed at Polish émigrés . The book sets out a <unk> metaphor of Poland as the " Christ of nations " . Described by Wyka as a propaganda piece , it was relatively simple , using biblical metaphors and the like to reach less @-@ discriminating readers . It became popular not only among Poles but , in translations , among some other peoples , primarily those which lacked their own sovereign states . The Books were influential in framing Mickiewicz 's image among many not as that of a poet and author but as that of ideologue of freedom . 
 Pan Tadeusz ( published 1834 ) , another of his masterpieces , is an epic poem that draws a picture of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania on the eve of Napoleon 's 1812 invasion of Russia . It is written entirely in thirteen @-@ syllable couplets . Originally intended as an apolitical idyll , it became , as Miłosz writes , " something unique in world literature , and the problem of how to classify it has remained the crux of a constant quarrel among scholars " ; it " has been called ' the last epos ' in world literature " . Pan Tadeusz was not highly regarded by contemporaries , nor by Mickiewicz himself , but in time it won acclaim as " the highest achievement in all Polish literature . " 
 The occasional poems that Mickiewicz wrote in his final decades have been described as " exquisite , gnomic , extremely short and concise " . His Lausanne Lyrics , ( 1839 – 40 ) are , writes Miłosz , " untranslatable masterpieces of metaphysical meditation . In Polish literature they are examples of that pure poetry that verges on silence . " 
 In the 1830s ( as early as 1830 ; as late as 1837 ) he worked on a futurist or science @-@ fiction work , A History of the Future . It predicted inventions similar to radio and television , and interplanetary communication using balloons . Written in French , it was never completed and was partly destroyed by the author . Other French @-@ language works by Mickiewicz include the dramas Les <unk> de Bar ( The Bar Confederates ) and Jacques Jasiński , ous les deux <unk> ( Jacques Jasiński , or the Two <unk> ) . These would not achieve much recognition , and would not be published till 1866 . While Mickiewicz did not write any poems in Lithuanian , and his command of that language has been described as likely limited , on one occasion in the early 1850s he transcribed a short folk song in that language , <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A prime figure of the Polish Romantic period , Mickiewicz is counted as one of Poland 's's Three Bards ( the others being Zygmunt Krasiński and Juliusz Słowacki ) and the greatest poet in all Polish literature . Mickiewicz has long been regarded as Poland 's national poet and is a revered figure in Lithuania . He is also considered one of the greatest Slavic and European poets . He has been described as a " Slavic bard " . He was a leading Romantic dramatist and has been compared in Poland and in Europe with Byron and Goethe . 
 Mickiewicz 's importance extends beyond literature to the broader spheres of culture and politics ; Wyka writes that he was a " singer and epic poet of the Polish people , and a pilgrim for the freedom of nations . " Scholars have used the expression " cult of Mickiewicz " to describe the reverence in which he is held as a " national prophet . " On hearing of Mickiewicz 's death , his fellow bard Krasiński wrote : " For men of my generation , he was milk and honey , gall and life 's blood : we all descend from him . He carried us off on the surging billow of his inspiration and cast us into the world . " Edward Henry Lewinski Corwin described Mickiewicz 's works as Promethean , as " reaching more Polish hearts " than the other Polish Bards , and affirmed Danish critic Georg Brandes ' assessment of Mickiewicz 's works as " healthier " than those of Byron , Shakespeare , Homer , and Goethe . Koropeckyi writes that Mickiewicz has " informed the foundations of [ many ] parties and ideologies " in Poland from the 19th century to this day , " down to the rappers in Poland 's post @-@ socialist blocks , who can somehow still declare that ' if Mickiewicz was alive today , he 'd be a good rapper . ' " While Mickiewicz 's popularity has endured two centuries in Poland , he is less well known abroad though , particularly in the 19th century , he won substantial international fame among " people that dared resist the brutal might of reactionary empires . " 
 Mickiewicz has been written about or had works dedicated to him by many authors in Poland ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Lechoń , Konopnicka , <unk> <unk> , Norwid , <unk> , <unk> , Słonimski , Słowacki , Staff , <unk> , Tuwim , <unk> , Wierzyński , Zaleski and others ) and by authors outside Poland ( Bryusov , Goethe , Pushkin , <unk> , <unk> and others ) . He has been a character in works of fiction , including a large body of dramatized biographies , e.g. , in 1900 , Stanisław Wyspiański 's Legion . He has also been a subject of many paintings , by Eugène Delacroix , Józef <unk> , Aleksander <unk> , Wojciech Stattler and Walenty <unk> . Monuments and other tributes ( streets and schools named for him ) abound in Poland and Lithuania , and in other former territories of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth : Ukraine and Belarus . He has also been the subject of many statues and busts by Antoine Bourdelle , David d 'Angers , Antoni <unk> , Władysław <unk> , Zbigniew <unk> , Teodor <unk> , Wacław Szymanowski and Jakub Tatarkiewicz . In 1898 , the 100th anniversary of his birth , a towering statue by Cyprian <unk> was erected in Warsaw . Its base carries the inscription , " To the Poet from the People " . In 1955 , the 100th anniversary of his death , the University of Poznań adopted him as its official patron . 
 A number of museums in Europe are dedicated to Mickiewicz . Warsaw has an Adam Mickiewicz Museum of Literature . His house in Navahrudak , Belarus , is now a museum ( Adam Mickiewicz Museum , Navahrudak ) ; as is the house where he lived and died in Istanbul ( Adam Mickiewicz Museum , Istanbul ) . There is a Musée Adam Mickiewicz in Paris , France . 
 Much has been written about Mickiewicz , though the vast majority of this scholarly and popular literature is available only in Polish . Works devoted to him , according to Koropeckyi , author of a 2008 English biography , " could fill a good shelf or two " . Koropeckyi notes that , apart from some specialist literature , only five book @-@ length biographies of Mickiewicz have been published in English . He also writes that , though many of Mickiewicz 's works have been <unk> numerous times , no language has a " definitive critical edition of his works . " 
 = = Ethnicity = = 
 Adam Mickiewicz , whose works were written in the Polish language , is generally known as a Polish poet . He is described by some authors as " Polish @-@ Lithuanian " or Belarusian @-@ Polish . The Cambridge History of Russia describes him as Polish but sees his ethnic origins as " Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian ( and perhaps Jewish ) . " According to the Belarusian historian <unk> , Mickiewicz 's mother had Tatar roots . 
 Some sources assert that Mickiewicz 's mother was descended from a converted , <unk> Jewish family . Others view this as improbable . Polish historian Kazimierz Wyka , in his biographic entry in Polski Słownik <unk> ( 1975 ) writes that this hypothesis , based on the fact that his mother 's maiden name , <unk> , was popular among <unk> Jews , has not been proven . Wyka states that poet 's mother was the daughter of a noble ( szlachta ) family of <unk> coat of arms , living on an estate at <unk> in Nowogródek Voivodeship ( Navahrudak Voivodeship ) . 
 The Lithuanian scholar of literature <unk> <unk> writes that Mickiewicz 's family was descended from an old Lithuanian noble family ( Rimvydas ) with origins predating Lithuania 's Christianization . The Lithuanian nobility in Mickiewicz 's time was heavily Polonized and spoke Polish . Mickiewicz had been brought up in the culture of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , a multicultural state that had encompassed most of what today are the separate countries of Poland , Lithuania , Belarus and Ukraine . To Mickiewicz , a splitting of that multicultural state into separate entities , due to trends such as Lithuanian separatism , was undesirable , if not outright unthinkable . According to <unk> @-@ Ross , while Mickiewicz called himself a " Lithuanian " , in his time the idea of a separate " Lithuanian identity " , apart from a " Polish " one , did not exist . This multicultural aspect is evident in his works ; his most famous poetic work , Pan Tadeusz , begins with the Polish @-@ language invocation , " O Lithuania , my country , thou art like good health ... " ( " <unk> ! <unk> <unk> ! ty <unk> jak <unk> ... " . It is generally accepted , however , that Mickiewicz , when referring to Lithuania , meant a historical region rather than a linguistic and cultural entity , and he often applied the term " Lithuanian " to the Slavic inhabitants of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Oda do młodości ( Ode to Youth ) , 1820 
 Ballads and Romances , 1822 
 Grażyna , 1823 
 The Crimean Sonnets , 1826 
 Konrad Wallenrod , 1828 
 The Books of the Polish People and of the Polish Pilgrimage , 1832 
 Pan Tadeusz , 1834 
 Lausanne Lyrics , 1839 – 40 
 Dziady ( Forefathers ' Eve ) , four parts , published from 1822 to after the author 's death 
 L 'histoire d <unk> ( A History of the Future ) , unpublished 
 = Hasta la Raíz ( song ) = 
 " Hasta la Raíz " ( English : " To the Root " ) is a song by Mexican recording artist Natalia Lafourcade . It was released on January 14 , 2015 by Sony Music Mexico . After attaining success from her previous album , Mujer Divina , a tribute to Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Agustín Lara , Lafourcade decided to record an album with original recordings . Lafourcade spent three years in the writing process , searching for inspiration in different cities , resulting in songs with personal feelings regarding love . The song was produced by Lafourcade and enlisted Argentinian musician Cachorro López to assist with the production , and wrote the track with Mexican artist Leonel García . 
 After its release as the lead single from the album of the same title , " Hasta la Raíz " received positive reviews from music critics . The song was also commercially successful , peaking at number 17 on the US Billboard Latin Pop Songs and number five in Mexico . A music video for the track was directed by Alonso Ruizpalacios and recorded at the Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City , gathering 300 fans who responded to an invitation posted by Lafourcade in social networks . The video ranked on the list for the " 10 Best Latin Music Videos of 2015 " by Latin Post . " Hasta la Raíz " earned the accolades for Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Best Alternative Song at the 16th Latin Grammy Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2010 , Natalia Lafourcade joined Mexican orchestra conductor Alondra de la Parra on the album <unk> <unk> , a musical project created to celebrate the Bicentennial of Mexico . Lafourcade analyzed Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Agustín Lara 's catalogue and decided to record a tribute album with his songs , since the singer wanted to give herself the opportunity to perform songs written by another person . In 2014 , Lafourcade wanted to find a balance between heart , mind and body , and traveled to Veracruz , Colombia and Cuba , searching for inspiration to write new music . " This [ new ] album was made parallel to the experience of singing the Lara 's music ... is the result of my need to be proud of my songs . " Lafourcade said to <unk> Hoy . The album Hasta la Raíz is Lafourcade 's sixth studio album and is her first album of original material in six years , since Hu Hu Hu ( 2009 ) and was produced by Argentinean musician Cachorro López , Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Leonel García and herself after another record producer became very expensive . The album version of the track was released as a digital download on January 14 , 2015 and a new version entitled " Canova 's Root Version " was available on May 19 , 2015 . Lafourcade included the song on the live EP Spotify Sessions . " Hasta la Raíz " is featured in the Italian edition of the album series Now Summer Hits 2015 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Lafourcade overcame writer 's block , but felt that the songs she wrote were too similar compared to her previous albums , so she sought inspiration from Lara 's repertoire and her native country , Mexico . " One of the things I wanted to happen with this record was to find the connection with Mexico and its people again . I am Mexican proud of the positive parts that Mexico have , which are many . " Musically , the singer wanted simplicity . Lafourcade forced herself to write " without judgement " , recording voice memos on her phone during the process . The singer was also inspired by the work of Latin American songwriters such as Simón Díaz , Violeta Parra , Mercedes Sosa , <unk> Vargas , and Caetano Veloso . While recording demos , Lafourcade realized that the songs were more direct and emotional than her previous work . The writing process took three years to complete , resulting in approximately 30 songs , from which the singer selected " the strongest ones " , since the album was about her personal life and wanted to record the best of the bunch to represent it , " more than making an album , I wanted to have songs ... songs that could stand on their own . " 
 " Hasta la Raíz " was written by Lafourcade and Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Leonel García , since Lafourcade wanted to experiment with other composers on her music and they became friends while working on her album Mujer Divina and his album Todas <unk> ( 2012 ) . García had an idea about the song , and they finished together the music . <unk> referred to this collaboration as " magical " , with this song being an anthem to the human strength , without forgetting our roots , " It came out of a conversation about maintaining a sense of connection to where you come from . " García played a huapango riff , and Lafourcade started singing along while producer Cachorro López recorded everything , and the final result is from that session . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After its release , " Hasta la Raíz " received positive reviews from music critics . Luis Romero of the website Coffee and Saturday and the music editor of Televisa Espectáculos were in agreement that the song keeps a musical style similar to her previous album , Mujer Divina , with Agustin Lara 's influence being evident . Andrew Casillas of Club Fonograma stated that the song sounds " rich " , but resembles Chilean singer @-@ songwriter Camila Moreno , and that even if it " doesn ’ t sound like a bold step outward for Natalia , there ’ s certainly no need to lower your expectations " . Lissette Corsa , of MTV Iggy , declared that the " staccato strumming " of the track " evokes the huapango rhythm of Veracruz , Mexico , Lafourcade ’ s hometown " . Lafourcade performed the track at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2015 , where it won Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Best Alternative Song . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 " Hasta la Raíz " was released as a promotional single from the same @-@ titled album on January 14 , 2015 , and was later released as the second single , following " Nunca Es Suficiente " . The song peaked at number five in Mexico 's Monitor Latino Pop Songs chart , number nine in the <unk> 's Español Airplay , and 27 in the General Airplay charts , respectively . In the United States , the track peaked at number 17 in the U.S. Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , being the highest peak for a Lafourcade single , after " <unk> , <unk> " and " En el 2000 " reached 19 and 35 , respectively , in 2003 . Following Lafourcade 's performance at the Latin Grammys , the song climbed to number nine on the Billboard Latin Pop Digital Songs , with a sales increase of 86 % , selling 1 @,@ 000 downloads . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Alonso Ruizpalacios , at the Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City , gathering 300 fans who responded to an invitation posted by Lafourcade in social networks . The singer asked her fans to send a thought inspired by the song or a personal story derived from their identification with " Hasta la Raíz " . " I thought that we would get few answers , but received almost 800 responses immediately , and later it turned into a riot and we did not know if they would get out of control , but nothing happened , my fans are super cool , " Lafourcade told Variety Latino . In the video , shot in black and white , Lafourcade is surrounded by several people who lead her to a stage to perform the last part of the song , in the meantime , Lafourcade throws flowers in the air , kisses a guy and plays a guitar . According to Milly Contreras of Latin Post the video " shows off the singer 's individuality and simplicity " and included it at number 7 in the list for the " 10 Best Latin Music Videos of 2015 " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Hasta la Raíz album liner notes . 
 Natalia Lafourcade – producer , vocals , keyboard , electric guitar , percussions 
 Cachorro López – producer 
 Leonel García – acoustic guitar , voice director 
 Alan Ortíz – programming 
 Gustavo Guerrero – electric guitar , percussion 
 Uriel Herrera – drums , percussion 
 José Lugo – percussion 
 Mariana Ruiz – bass guitar 
 = Bath School disaster = 
 The Bath School disaster , sometimes known as the Bath School massacre , was a series of violent attacks perpetrated by Andrew Kehoe on May 18 , 1927 , in Bath Township , Michigan , that killed 38 elementary schoolchildren and 6 adults and injured at least 58 other people . Kehoe killed his wife and firebombed his farm , then detonated an explosion in the Bath Consolidated School , before committing suicide by detonating a final device in his truck . It is the deadliest mass murder to take place at a school in United States history . 
 Andrew Kehoe , the 55 @-@ year @-@ old school board treasurer , was angered by increased taxes and his defeat in the Spring 1926 election for township clerk . He was thought to have planned his " murderous revenge " after that public defeat . He had a reputation for difficulty on the school board and in personal dealings . In addition , in June 1926 , he was notified that his mortgage was going to be foreclosed . For much of the next year , a neighbor noticed Kehoe had stopped working on his farm and thought he might be planning suicide . During that period , Kehoe purchased explosives and discreetly planted them on his property and under the school . 
 Kehoe 's wife was ill with tuberculosis , he had stopped making mortgage payments , and he was under pressure for foreclosure . Some time between May 16 and the morning of May 18 , 1927 , Kehoe murdered his wife . Then on the morning of May 18 at about 8 : 45 a.m. , he set off various incendiary devices on his homestead that caused the house and other farm buildings to be destroyed by the explosives ' blasts and their subsequent fires . 
 Almost simultaneously , an explosion devastated the north wing of the school building , killing 36 schoolchildren and two teachers . Kehoe had used a timed detonator to ignite hundreds of pounds of dynamite and incendiary pyrotol , which he had secretly planted inside the school over the course of many months . As rescuers began working at the school , Kehoe drove up , stopped , and used a rifle to detonate dynamite inside his shrapnel @-@ filled truck , killing himself , the school superintendent , and several others nearby , as well as injuring more bystanders . During rescue efforts at the school , searchers discovered an additional 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) of unexploded dynamite and pyrotol connected to a timing device set to detonate at the same time as the first explosions ; the material was hidden throughout the basement of the south wing . Kehoe had apparently intended to blow up and destroy the entire school . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Bath Township = = = 
 Bath Township is a small community located ten miles ( 16 km ) northeast of Lansing , Michigan , and contains the unincorporated village of Bath . In the early 1920s , the area was primarily agricultural . In the early part of the 20th century , many small one @-@ room schools , where different grades shared the same classroom and teacher , were closed . Educators of the era believed that children would receive a better and more complete education if students could attend a single school at one location . The grades could be age @-@ divided into classes , and the facilities could be of a higher quality . 
 After years of debate , in 1922 Bath Township voters approved creation of the consolidated school district , and the increase in property taxes to pay for the new school . When the school opened , it had 236 students enrolled in grades 1 @-@ 12 . All area landowners had to pay higher property taxes . At the time of the bombing , the village had about 300 residents . 
 = = = Andrew Kehoe = = = 
 Andrew Philip Kehoe was born in Tecumseh , Michigan , on February 1 , 1872 . Kehoe 's mother died when he was young , and his father married a much younger widow . Reportedly , Kehoe often quarreled with his stepmother . When he was fourteen , the family 's oil stove exploded and set his stepmother on fire . Kehoe threw a bucket of water on her , but because the fire was oil @-@ based , his action spread the flames more rapidly over her body . She died from her injuries . Some of his neighbors believed that Kehoe had caused the stove explosion . 
 He studied electrical engineering at Michigan State College in East Lansing . After that , he moved to St. Louis , Missouri , where he worked as an electrician . After several years in Missouri , Kehoe returned to Michigan . At the age of 40 , he married Ellen " Nellie " Price in 1912 . Seven years later they moved to a farm they bought outside the village of Bath . Even though Kehoe was said to be dependable , doing favors and volunteer work for his neighbors , they also described him as being impatient with all who disagreed with him . They recounted that Kehoe had shot and killed a neighbor 's dog that had come on his property and annoyed him by barking . He was known to have beaten one of his horses to death when it did not perform as well as he wanted . 
 With a reputation for frugality , Kehoe was elected in 1924 as a trustee for three years and treasurer for one year on the school board . He argued endlessly for lower taxes The later superintendent of the board , M. W. Keys , said that Kehoe " fought the expenditure of money for the most necessary equipment . " He was considered extremely difficult to work with , often voting against the rest of the board and wanting his own way . Kehoe repeatedly accused Superintendent Emory Huyck of financial mismanagement . 
 He argued with township financial authorities , trying to get the valuation of his property reduced , and claimed that he had paid too much for the farm . He also tried to get the mortgage taken off but was not successful . In June 1926 , he was notified that the company was going to foreclose on his property . Kehoe was appointed in 1925 to temporarily fill the position of town clerk but , several months later , he was defeated in the regular spring 1926 election for the position . This public rejection by the community angered him . In his eyewitness account , The Bath School Disaster , Monty J. Ellsworth said he thought this rejection was the reason Kehoe had planned his " murderous revenge " of the bombings , to destroy the school and kill the community 's children and many of its members . 
 A. McMullen , another neighbor , noted that Kehoe had stopped working on his farm altogether for most of the preceding year , and thought he might be planning suicide . For this reason , when Kehoe gave him one of his horses about April 1927 , McMullen returned it . 
 It was discovered later that , as part of Kehoe 's preparations to destroy his farm , he had cut all his wire fences , girdled young shade trees to kill them , and cut off his grapevine plants before putting them back on their stumps to hide the damage . He gathered lumber and other materials and put them in the tool shed , which he later exploded with an incendiary bomb . 
 By the time of the bombing , Nellie Kehoe had become chronically ill with tuberculosis , for which there was no effective treatment or cure . Her frequent hospital stays may have contributed to the family 's debt . Kehoe had ceased making mortgage and homeowner 's insurance payments months earlier . 
 = = = Purchase and planting of explosives = = = 
 There is no clear indication when Kehoe conceived and planned the steps leading to the ultimate events , but his neighbor , M. J. Ellsworth , thought that Kehoe conceived his plan after being defeated in early 1926 for the election as town clerk . The general consensus of the townspeople was that Kehoe had worked on his plan at least since August of the previous year . 
 M.W. Keyes , a member of the Bath School Board was quoted by the New York Times as saying 
 I have no doubt that he made his plans last Fall [ 1926 ] to blow up the school ... He was an experienced electrician and the board employed him in November to make some repairs on the school lighting system . He had ample opportunity then to plant the explosives and lay the wires for touching it off . 
 Kehoe had free access to the building during the summer vacation of 1926 . 
 From mid @-@ 1926 , Kehoe began buying more than a ton of pyrotol , an incendiary explosive used by farmers during the era for excavation and burning of debris . In November 1926 , he drove to Lansing and bought two boxes of dynamite at a sporting goods store . As dynamite was also commonly used on farms , Kehoe 's purchase of small amounts of explosives at different stores and on different dates did not raise any suspicions . Neighbors reported hearing explosions set off on the farm , with one even calling him " the dynamite farmer " . 
 In December 1926 , according to the testimony of Lieutenant Lyle Morse , a Michigan State Police investigator with the Department of Public Safety , Kehoe purchased a .30 @-@ caliber Winchester bolt @-@ action rifle . 
 = = Day of the disaster = = 
 = = = Prior to the disaster = = = 
 Prior to May 18 , Kehoe had loaded the back seat of his truck with all sorts of metal debris capable of producing shrapnel during an explosion . He also bought a new set of tires for his truck so it wouldn 't break down when transporting the explosives . He didn 't want it to look suspicious that his truck was full of dangerous products . He made many trips to Lansing for more explosives , as well as the school , town , and his house . Many of his neighbors noticed how busy he was driving around , but never thought to make any comment about it . Multiple times , a neighbor to the school saw a man carrying objects into the building at night , but never thought to mention it to anyone . 
 Nellie Kehoe had been discharged on May 16 from Lansing 's St. Lawrence Hospital . Between her release and the bombings two days later , Kehoe killed his wife . He put her body in a wheelbarrow located in the rear of the farm 's chicken coop , where it was found after the farm explosions and fire in a heavily charred state . <unk> around the cart were silverware and a metal cash box . Ashes of several bank notes could be seen through a slit in the cash box . Kehoe had placed and wired homemade pyrotol firebombs in the house and all the buildings of the farm . The burned remains of his two horses were found tied in their enclosures with their legs wired together , to prevent their rescue during the fire . 
 = = = Farm bombs = = = 
 At approximately 8 : 45 a.m. , Kehoe detonated the firebombs in his house and farm buildings , causing some debris to fly into a neighbor 's poultry brooding house . Neighbors noticed the fire , and volunteers rushed to the scene . 
 O. H. Bush , a fireman , and several other men crawled through a broken window of the farmhouse in search of survivors . When they determined no one was in the farmhouse , they salvaged what furniture they could before the fire spread into the living room . Discovering dynamite in the corner , Bush picked up an <unk> of explosives and handed it to one of the men . As Kehoe left his burning farm and house in his Ford truck , he stopped to tell those fighting the fire , " Boys , you 're my friends . You better get out of here . You better head down to the school " , and drove off . 
 = = = Explosion in north wing of school = = = 
 Classes began at 8 : 30 a.m. that morning . At about 8 : 45 a.m. , in the basement of the north wing of the school , an alarm clock set by Kehoe detonated the dynamite and pyrotol he had hidden there . 
 Rescuers heading to the scene of the Kehoe farm fire heard the explosion at the school building , turned back and headed toward the school . Parents within the rural community also began rushing to the school . The school building had turned into a war zone with thirty @-@ eight people , mostly children , being killed in the initial explosion . 
 First @-@ grade teacher Bernice Sterling told an Associated Press reporter that the explosion was like an earthquake : 
 " It seemed as though the floor went up several feet , " she said . " After the first shock I thought for a moment I was blind . When it came the air seemed to be full of children and flying desks and books . Children were tossed high in the air ; some were catapulted out of the building . 
 The north wing of the school had collapsed . Parts of the walls had crumbled , and the edge of the roof had fallen to the ground . Monty Ellsworth , a neighbor of the <unk> , recounted , 
 " There was a pile of children of about five or six under the roof and some of them had arms sticking out , some had legs , and some just their heads sticking out . They were unrecognizable because they were covered with dust , plaster , and blood . There were not enough of us to move the roof . " 
 Ellsworth volunteered to drive back to his farm and get a rope heavy enough to pull the school roof off the children 's bodies . Returning to his farm , Ellsworth saw Kehoe in the opposite direction heading toward the school . " He grinned and waved his hand ; when he grinned , I could see both rows of his teeth " , said Ellsworth . 
 The scene at the school building was chaotic . Robert Gates , a witness , said 
 " ... mother after mother came running into the school yard , and demanded information about her child and , on seeing the lifeless form lying on the lawn , sobbed and swooned ... In no time more than 100 men were at work tearing away the debris of the school , and nearly as many women were frantically pawing over the timber and broken bricks for traces of their children . " 
 = = = Truck explosion = = = 
 About a half hour after the explosion , Kehoe drove up to the school and saw Superintendent Huyck . Kehoe summoned the superintendent over to his truck . Charles <unk> testified at the Inquest that he saw the two men struggle over some type of long gun and that the car then went up in an explosion , killing Superintendent Huyck , Kehoe , Nelson <unk> ( a retired farmer ) and Cleo Clayton , an eight @-@ year @-@ old second grader . Clayton , a survivor of the first blast , had wandered out of the school building debris and was killed by the fragmentation from the exploding vehicle . The explosion also mortally wounded postmaster Glenn O. Smith ( who lost a leg and died later that day of his wounds ) and injured several others . 
 After Kehoe 's truck exploded , Ellsworth recounted , 
 I saw one mother , Mrs. Eugene Hart , sitting on the bank a short distance from the school with a little dead girl on each side of her and holding a little boy , Percy , who died a short time after they got him to the hospital . This was about the time Kehoe blew his car up in the street , severely wounding Perry , the oldest child of Mr. and Mrs. Hart . 
 O. H. Bush , foreman of the road crew , recalled the scene after the final explosion : 
 I began to feel as though the world was coming to an end . I guess I was a bit hazy . Anyway , the next thing I remember I was out on the street . One of our men was binding up the wounds of Glenn Smith , the postmaster . His leg had been blown off . I went back to the building and helped with the rescue work until we were ordered to stop while a search was made for dynamite . 
 = = = Recovery and rescue = = = 
 Telephone operators stayed at their stations for hours to summon doctors , undertakers , area hospitals and anyone else who might help . The Lansing Fire Department sent several firefighters and its chief . 
 The local physician , Dr. J. A. Crum and his wife , a nurse , had both served in World War I , and had returned to Bath to open a pharmacy . After the explosion the <unk> turned their drugstore into a triage center with the dead bodies being taken to the town hall , which was being used as a morgue . 
 Hundreds of people worked in the wreckage all day and into the night in an effort to find and rescue any children pinned underneath . Area contractors had sent all their men to assist , and many other people came to the scene in response to the pleas for help . Eventually , 34 firefighters and the Chief of the Lansing Fire Department arrived on the scene , as did several Michigan State Police officers , who managed traffic to and from the scene . The injured and dying were transported to Sparrow Hospital and St. Lawrence Hospital in Lansing . The construction of the latter facility had been financed in large part by Lawrence Price , Nellie Kehoe 's uncle and formerly an executive in charge of Oldsmobile 's Lansing Car Assembly . 
 Michigan Governor Fred W. Green arrived during the afternoon of the disaster and assisted in the relief work , carting bricks away from the scene . The Lawrence Baking Company of Lansing sent a truck filled with pies and sandwiches , which were served to rescuers in the township 's community hall . 
 The bombing had destroyed the north wing of the school . During the search , rescuers found an additional 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) of dynamite , which had failed to detonate , in the south wing . The search was halted to allow the Michigan State Police to disarm the devices . The State Police found an alarm clock timed to go off at 8 : 45 a.m. Investigators speculated that the initial explosion may have caused a short circuit in the second set of bombs , preventing them from detonating . They searched the building and then returned to the recovery work . 
 Police and fire officials gathered at the Kehoe farm to investigate the fires . State troopers had searched for Nellie Kehoe throughout Michigan , thinking she was at a tuberculosis sanitorium , but her charred body was found the following day , May 19 , among the ruins of the farm . All the Kehoe farm buildings were destroyed , and the two horses trapped inside the barn died . Investigators found a wooden sign wired to the farm 's fence with Kehoe 's last message , " Criminals are made , not born " , stenciled on it . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The American Red Cross , setting up operations at the Crum drugstore , took the lead in providing aid and comfort to the victims . The Lansing Red Cross headquarters stayed open until 11 : 30 that night to answer telephone calls , update the list of dead and injured and provide information and planning services for the following day . 
 The local community responded generously , as reported at the time by the Associated Press : " ... a sympathetic public assured the rehabilitation of the stricken community . Aid was tendered freely in the hope that the grief of those who lost loved ones might be even slightly mitigated . " The Red Cross managed donations sent to pay for both the medical expenses of the survivors and the burial costs of the dead . In a few weeks , $ 5 @,@ 284 @.@ 15 ( about $ 71 @,@ 984 today ) was raised through donations , including $ 2 @,@ 500 from the Clinton County board of supervisors and $ 2 @,@ 000 from the Michigan legislature . In addition to monetary donations , the Red Cross Headquarters received extensive donations of flowers from strangers . 
 The disaster received nationwide coverage in the days following , sharing headlines with Charles Lindbergh 's trans @-@ Atlantic crossing , though Lindbergh 's crossing received much more attention , and eliciting a national outpouring of grief . Newspaper headlines from Washington , D.C. to Los Angeles characterized Kehoe as a maniac , madman , and fiend . 
 People from all around the world provided sympathy to the families and the community of Bath , Michigan , including letters from some Italian schoolchildren . One 5th grader wrote : " Even though we are small , we understand all the sorrow and misfortune that has struck our dear brothers ... " And another : " We are praying to God to give to the unfortunate mothers and fathers , the strength to bear the great sorrow that has descent on them , we are near to you in spirit ... " 
 Andrew Kehoe 's body was eventually claimed by one of his sisters . Without ceremony , she had him buried in an unmarked grave in an initially unnamed cemetery . Later it was revealed that Kehoe was buried in the paupers ' section of Mount Rest Cemetery , St. Johns , Clinton County , Michigan . The Price family buried Nellie Price Kehoe in Lansing 's Mount Hope Cemetery under her maiden name . 
 Vehicles from outlying areas and surrounding states descended upon Bath by the thousands . Over 100 @,@ 000 vehicles passed through on Saturday alone , an enormous amount of traffic for the area . Some Bath citizens regarded this armada as an unwarranted intrusion into their time of grief , but most accepted it as a show of sympathy and support from surrounding communities . Many of the victims were buried starting Friday , May 20 . 
 = = = Coroner 's inquest = = = 
 The coroner arrived at the scene on the day of the disaster and swore in six community leaders to serve as a jury investigating the death of Superintendent Huyck . A coroner 's inquest into the matter was held the following week , starting on May 23 . The Clinton County Prosecutor conducted the examination , and more than 50 people testified before the jury . During his testimony , David Hart testified that Kehoe had told him that Kehoe had " killed a horse " . and the New York Times reported people as saying that Kehoe had " an ungovernable temper " and " seemed to have a mania for killing things . " Neighbors had seen him wiring his house in early April 1927 . 
 Kehoe 's neighbor Sidney J. Howell testified that after the fire began , Kehoe warned him and three boys to leave the farm , saying " Boys , you are my friends , you better get out of here , you better go down to the school . " Three telephone linemen working near Bath testified that Kehoe passed them on the road toward the school , and they saw him arrive there . He swerved his truck and stopped in front of the building . In the next instant , according to the linemen , the truck blew up , and one of them was struck by shrapnel . Other witnesses testified that Kehoe paused after stopping and called Superintendent Huyck over before blowing up his truck . 
 Although there was never any doubt that Kehoe was the perpetrator , the jury was asked to determine if the school board or its employees were guilty of criminal negligence . After more than a week of testimony , the jury exonerated the school board and its employees . In its verdict , the jury concluded that Kehoe " conducted himself <unk> and so concealed his operations that there was no cause to suspect any of his actions ; and we further find that the school board , and Frank Smith , janitor of the school building , were not negligent in and about their duties , and were not guilty of any negligence in not discovering Kehoe 's plan . " 
 The inquest determined that Kehoe murdered Superintendent Emory Huyck on the morning of May 18 . It was also the jury 's verdict that the school was blown up as part of a plan and that Kehoe alone , without the aid of conspirators , murdered 43 people in total , including his wife Nellie . Suicide was determined to be the cause of Andrew Kehoe 's death , which brought the total number of dead to 44 at the time of the inquest . 
 On August 22 , three months after the bombing , fourth @-@ grader Beatrice Gibbs died following hip surgery . Hers was the 45th and final death directly attributable to the Bath School disaster , which made it the most deadly attack to ever occur in an American school . Richard Fritz , brother of Marjorie Fritz , was injured in the explosion and died almost one year later of myocarditis . Though Fritz is not included on many lists of the victims , his death from myocarditis is thought to have been brought on by an infection because of his injuries . 
 = = = Rebuilding = = = 
 Governor Fred Green quickly called for donations to aid the townspeople and created the Bath Relief Fund with the money supplied by donors , the state , and local governments . People from around the country donated to the fund . 
 School resumed on September 5 , 1927 , and , for the 1927 – 1928 school year , was held in the community hall , township hall , and two retail buildings . Most of the students returned . The board appointed O. M. Brant of Luther , Michigan , to succeed Huyck as superintendent . The Lansing architect Warren Holmes donated construction plans , and the school board approved the contracts for the new building on September 14 . On September 15 , Michigan 's Republican U.S. Senator James J. Couzens presented his personal check for $ 75 @,@ 000 ( roughly $ 1 @,@ 022 @,@ 000 in today 's money ) to the Bath construction fund to build the new school . 
 The board demolished the damaged portion of the school and constructed a new wing with the donated funds . The " James Couzens Agricultural School , " named for the senator , was dedicated on August 18 , 1928 . The Kehoe farm was completely plowed to ensure that no explosives were hidden in the ground and was sold at auction to pay the mortgage . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In 1928 , artist Carlton W. Angell presented the board with a memorial statue titled Girl With a Cat . The statue is presently in the Bath School Museum located within the school district 's middle school . 
 In 1975 , the Couzens building was demolished and the site was redeveloped as the James Couzens Memorial Park , dedicated to the victims . At the center of the park is the original Bath Consolidated School 's cupola , which survived the disaster and remained on the school until the building was torn down . 
 In 1991 , a Michigan Historical Marker was installed at the park , a bronze plaque bearing the names of those killed and a brief description of events . 
 On November 3 , 2008 , the town announced that tombstones had been donated for Amelia and Robert <unk> , the last two bombing victims whose graves were still unmarked . A grant from a foundation paid for the grave markers . 
 = Well @-@ Manicured Man = 
 The Well @-@ Manicured Man is a fictional character in the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . He serves as an antagonist to FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , being a member of the sinister Syndicate the agents seek to foil . Introduced in the third season , the Well @-@ Manicured Man served to highlight discord within the ranks of the Syndicate , and ultimately betrayed them by leaking information to Mulder before committing suicide in the series ' first feature film . 
 The character of the Well @-@ Manicured Man was portrayed by John Neville in all his appearances ( eight episodes , and the feature film ) . According to the series ' writers , the character represents a non @-@ violent " voice of reason " amongst the series ' antagonists . Neville 's portrayal of the Well @-@ Manicured Man has been positively received by critics , who have noted his " moral ambivalence " and " unnervingly genteel " manner . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Introduced at the beginning of the third season , the Well @-@ Manicured Man is an English member of the Syndicate , a shadow organization within the United States government that exists to hide from the public the fact that aliens are planning to colonize the Earth . He is an important member of the Syndicate , along with The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) and The Elder , and was a friend of William Mulder earlier in his life . 
 The Well @-@ Manicured Man prefers subtlety to brute force , and will attempt to manipulate those in his way before using physical violence . Although the Syndicate 's goals are opposed to those of Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , the Well @-@ Manicured Man will , at times , aid them with clues or information , believing that letting out a certain amount of information would help to keep the two close , and consequently allow for them to be controlled . The Well @-@ Manicured Man openly despises The Smoking Man , seeing him as impulsive and unprofessional . The two maintain a bitter relationship within the Syndicate throughout the series . The Well @-@ Manicured Man is instrumental in the Syndicate 's secondary agenda , to develop a vaccination against the black oil used by the aliens as a means of mind control . To this end , he works with Russian double agent Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) to develop a vaccine , eventually testing it — successfully — on a Syndicate mole , Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) . 
 In the 1998 feature film The X @-@ Files , when Scully is infected with the black oil and taken to Antarctica , it is the Well @-@ Manicured Man who , having grown disillusioned with the Syndicate , gives Mulder the coordinates needed to find her and a sample of the vaccine needed to cure Scully . The colonists had kept secret a secondary characteristic of the black oil — that those infected with it for prolonged periods would gestate a new colonist lifeform , killing the host . Upon discovering this , the Syndicate vowed to work more closely with the colonists in the hope of being spared this fate , while only the Well @-@ Manicured Man wished to continue working on a vaccination for resistance . This rejection led to his betrayal of the Syndicate , and to him committing suicide by car bomb before his duplicity was discovered . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 John Neville has stated that he was originally hired for just two episodes of the series , but that his character " was regularly brought back , because the audience simply doesn 't know if he stands for good or evil " . Series creator Chris Carter has described the character in terms of his relationship with The Smoking Man , noting that the two characters can be seen as " differing in approach , differing in philosophy and differing in personality " . Writer Frank Spotnitz has described the Well @-@ Manicured Man as " sort of the white knight to the Cigarette @-@ Smoking Man 's black knight in this chess game that we were playing " . 
 The character has also been described by Carter and Spotnitz as the " voice of reason " within the Syndicate , who " believes that violence is the wrong way to protect the secret " which they guard . The Well @-@ Manicured Man 's suicide scene in the series ' film adaptation went through several conceptual iterations , with outcomes being considered including an imploding car or suicide by concussion grenade , although ultimately a car bomb scene was decided upon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of the Well @-@ Manicured Man has been positively received by critics . MTV 's Tami <unk> has called him a " legendary TV character " , noting his " moral ambivalence about the work of his shadow organization " and his ability to show " empathy for Mulder and Scully " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Sean O 'Neal praised the character 's " unnervingly genteel " manner , noting that he represented the polar opposite of The Smoking Man . Fellow A.V. Club writer Todd VanDerWerff has also been positive towards the Well @-@ Manicured Man , feeling that the series would have benefited from making more use of the character . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Bob Graham has praised Neville 's portrayal of the character in the feature film , calling his expository monologue " a Wagnerian demonstration of the art of declamation " . Writing for the Los Angeles Daily News , Michael Liedtke and George Avalos described the character as " white @-@ haired , urbane , genteel [ — ] and dangerous " , noting that he was " equally at ease in Virginia 's horse country , the <unk> rooms of Manhattan 's Upper West Side and the antiseptic halls of facilities that house bizarre medical experiments " . Den of Geek 's countdown of " The Top 10 X @-@ Files Baddies " described the Well @-@ Manicured Man as a " super @-@ smooth , super @-@ creep Brit " , noting that he served as " a ' boss ' of sorts " for the Smoking Man . Speaking of how the role eclipsed his other acting work , Neville has been quoted as saying " It 's OK , though . [ The X @-@ Files ] gave me a kind of profile that I didn 't have before , and one shouldn 't grumble about that " . 
 = John Barbirolli = 
 Sir John Barbirolli , CH ( 2 December 1899 – 29 July 1970 ) , né Giovanni Battista Barbirolli , was a British conductor and cellist . He is remembered above all as conductor of the Hallé Orchestra in Manchester , which he helped save from dissolution in 1943 and conducted for the rest of his life . Earlier in his career he was Arturo Toscanini 's successor as music director of the New York Philharmonic , serving from 1936 to 1943 . He was also chief conductor of the Houston Symphony from 1961 to 1967 , and was a guest conductor of many other orchestras , including the BBC Symphony Orchestra , London Symphony Orchestra , the Philharmonia , the Berlin Philharmonic and the Vienna Philharmonic , with all of which he made recordings . 
 Born in London of Italian and French parentage , Barbirolli grew up in a family of professional musicians . After starting out as a cellist , he was given the chance to conduct , from 1926 with the British National Opera Company , and then with Covent Garden 's touring company . On taking up the conductorship of the Hallé he had less opportunity to work in the opera house , but in the 1950s he conducted productions of works by Verdi , Wagner , Gluck , and Puccini at Covent Garden with such success that he was invited to become the company 's permanent musical director , an invitation he declined . Late in his career he made several recordings of operas , of which his 1967 set of Puccini 's Madama Butterfly for EMI is probably the best known . 
 Both in the concert hall and on record , Barbirolli was particularly associated with the music of English composers such as Elgar , Delius and Vaughan Williams . His interpretations of other late romantic composers , such as Mahler and Sibelius , as well as of earlier classical composers , including Schubert , are also still admired . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Giovanni Battista Barbirolli was born in Southampton Row , Holborn , London , the second child and eldest son of an Italian father and a French mother . He was a British national from birth , and as Southampton Row is within the sound of Bow Bells , Barbirolli always regarded himself as a Cockney . His father , Lorenzo Barbirolli ( 1864 – 1928 ) , was a Venetian violinist who had settled in London with his wife , Louise Marie , née <unk> ( 1870 – 1962 ) . Lorenzo and his father had played in the orchestra at La Scala , Milan , where they had taken part in the première of Otello in 1887 . In London they played in West End theatre orchestras , principally that of the Empire , Leicester Square . 
 The young Barbirolli began to play the violin when he was four , but soon changed to the cello . He later said that this was at the instigation of his grandfather who , exasperated at the child 's habit of wandering around while practising the violin , bought him a small cello to stop him from " getting in everybody 's way " . His education at St. Clement Danes Grammar School overlapped , from 1910 , with a scholarship at Trinity College of Music . As a Trinity student , he made his concert debut in a cello concerto in the Queen 's Hall in 1911 . The following year he won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music , which he attended from 1912 to 1916 , studying harmony , counterpoint and theory under Dr. J. B. McEwen and the cello with Herbert <unk> . In 1914 he was joint winner of the academy 's Charles Rube Prize for ensemble playing , and in 1916 The Musical Times singled him out as " that excellent young ' cello player , Mr Giovanni Barbirolli . " The principal of the Academy , Sir Alexander Mackenzie , had forbidden students to play the chamber music of Ravel , which he regarded as " a pernicious influence " . Barbirolli was keenly interested in modern music , and he and three colleagues secretly rehearsed Ravel 's String Quartet in the privacy of a men 's lavatory in the Academy . 
 From 1916 to 1918 Barbirolli was a freelance cellist in London . He recalled , " My first orchestral engagement was with the Queen 's Hall Orchestra – I was probably the youngest orchestral musician ever , joining them in 1916 . We had an enormous repertory – six concerts a week , three hours or more rehearsal a day . In those days we were happy if we began and finished together " . While playing in the Queen 's Hall Orchestra , Barbirolli also played in the opera pit for the Beecham and Carl Rosa opera companies , in recitals with the pianist Ethel Bartlett , with orchestras in theatres , cinemas , hotels and dance @-@ halls , and , as he said , " everywhere except the street " . During the last year of World War I , Barbirolli enlisted in the army and became a lance @-@ corporal in the Suffolk Regiment . Here he had his first opportunity to conduct , when an orchestra of volunteers was formed . He later described the experience : 
 I was stationed on the Isle of Grain – a ghastly place but the first line of defence against invasion – and in our battalion of the Suffolks we had a number of professional musicians . So we formed an orchestra and played in the equivalent of the NAAFI during our spare time . I was the principal cello and we were conducted by the bandmaster , one Lieutenant Bonham . The other boys knew that I was longing to conduct and one day when Bonham fell ill with ' flu , they thought " old <unk> " – as I was known – should have a go . It was really rather romantic – I was scrubbing the floor in the Officers ' Mess when they came and invited me to take over . We did the Light Cavalry overture and Coleridge @-@ Taylor 's Petite Suite de Concert but I can 't say I recall the rest of the programme . 
 While in the army , Barbirolli adopted the anglicised form of his first name for the sake of simplicity : " The sergeant @-@ major had great difficulty in reading my name on the roll @-@ call . ' Who is this Guy Vanni ? ' he used to ask . So I chose John . " After demobilisation he reverted to the original form of his name , using it until 1922 . 
 On re @-@ entering civilian life , Barbirolli resumed his career as a cellist . His association with Edward Elgar 's Cello Concerto began with its première in 1919 , when he played as a rank and file member of the London Symphony Orchestra . He was the soloist at another performance of the concerto just over a year later . The Musical Times commented , " Signor Giovanni Barbirolli was not entirely equal to the demands of the solo music , but his playing unquestionably gave a considerable amount of pleasure . " At the Three Choirs Festival of 1920 he took part in his first Dream of Gerontius , under Elgar 's baton , in the LSO cellos . He joined two newly founded string quartets as cellist : the Kutcher Quartet , led by his former fellow student at Trinity , Samuel Kutcher , and the Music Society Quartet ( later called the International Quartet ) led by André Mangeot . He also made several early broadcasts with Mangeot 's quartet . 
 = = = First conducting posts = = = 
 Barbirolli 's ambition was to conduct . He was the prime mover in establishing the Guild of Singers and Players Chamber Orchestra in 1924 , and in 1926 he was invited to conduct a new ensemble at the <unk> Gallery in Chelsea , initially called the " <unk> Chamber Orchestra " but later renamed " John Barbirolli 's Chamber Orchestra " . Barbirolli 's concerts impressed Frederic Austin , director of the British National Opera Company ( BNOC ) , who in the same year invited him to conduct some performances with the company . Barbirolli had never conducted a chorus or a large orchestra , but had the confidence to accept . He made his operatic debut directing Gounod 's Roméo et Juliette at Newcastle , followed within days by performances of Aida and Madama Butterfly . He conducted the BNOC frequently over the next two years , and made his debut at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , with Madama Butterfly in 1928 . The following year he was invited to conduct the opening work in Covent Garden 's international season , Don Giovanni , with a cast that included Mariano Stabile , Elisabeth Schumann and Heddle Nash . 
 In 1929 , after financial problems had forced the BNOC to disband , the Covent Garden management set up a touring company to fill the gap , and appointed Barbirolli as its musical director and conductor . The operas in the company 's first provincial tour included Die Meistersinger , Lohengrin , La bohème , Madama Butterfly , The Barber of Seville , Tosca , Falstaff , Faust , Cavalleria rusticana , Pagliacci , Il trovatore , and the first performances in English of Turandot . In later tours with the company Barbirolli had the chance to conduct more of the German opera repertory , including Der Rosenkavalier , Tristan und Isolde , and Die Walküre . During his years with the touring opera companies Barbirolli did not neglect the concert hall . In 1927 , deputising at short notice for Sir Thomas Beecham , he conducted the London Symphony Orchestra in a performance of Elgar 's Symphony No. 2 , winning the thanks of the composer . Barbirolli also won warm praise from Pablo Casals , whom he had accompanied in Haydn 's D major cello concerto at the same concert . He conducted a Royal Philharmonic Society concert at which Ralph Vaughan Williams was presented with the society 's Gold Medal , and another RPS concert at which Gustav Mahler 's music , rarely heard at that time , was given – Kindertotenlieder , with Elena Gerhardt as soloist . Although Barbirolli later came to love Mahler 's music , in the 1930s he thought it sounded thin . 
 When the Hallé Orchestra announced in 1932 that its regular conductor , Hamilton Harty , was to spend some time conducting overseas , Barbirolli was one of four guest conductors named to direct the orchestra in Harty 's absence : the other three were Elgar , Beecham and Pierre Monteux . Barbirolli 's programmes included works by composers as diverse as Purcell , Delius , Mozart and Franck . In June 1932 , Barbirolli married the singer Marjorie Parry , a member of the BNOC . In 1933 Barbirolli was invited to become conductor of the Scottish Orchestra . It was not then , as its successor the Scottish National Orchestra was later to be , a permanent ensemble , but gave a season lasting about six months of each year . Barbirolli remained with the Scottish Orchestra for three seasons , " rejuvenating the playing and programmes and winning most favourable opinions " . Notwithstanding his growing reputation in Britain , Barbirolli 's name was little known internationally , and most of the musical world was taken by surprise in 1936 when he was invited to conduct the New York Philharmonic Orchestra in succession to Arturo Toscanini . 
 = = = New York Philharmonic = = = 
 By the spring of 1936 , the management of the New York Philharmonic was confronted with a problem . Toscanini had left in search of higher fees with the NBC Symphony Orchestra . Wilhelm Furtwängler had accepted the orchestra 's invitation to fill the post , but he was politically unacceptable to a section of the Philharmonic 's audience because he continued to live and work in Germany under the Nazi government . Following a campaign of protest in New York he felt unable to take up the appointment . For want of any available conductor of comparable fame the management of the orchestra invited five guest conductors to divide the season among them . Barbirolli was allotted the first ten weeks of the season , comprising 26 concerts . He was followed by the composer @-@ conductors Igor Stravinsky , Georges Enescu and Carlos Chávez , each conducting for two weeks , and finally by Artur Rodziński of the Cleveland Orchestra , for eight weeks . 
 Barbirolli 's first concert in New York was on 5 November 1936 . The programme consisted of short pieces by Berlioz and Arnold Bax , and symphonies by Mozart ( the Linz ) and Brahms ( the Fourth ) . During his ten weeks , he programmed several American novelties including Charles Martin Loeffler 's tone @-@ poem Memories of My Childhood , a symphony by Anis <unk> , and Philip James 's Bret Harte overture . He also conducted Serge Koussevitzky 's Double Bass Concerto . The players told the Philharmonic management that they would be happy for Barbirolli to be appointed to a permanent position . The outcome of this was an invitation to him to become Music Director and Permanent Conductor for three years starting with the 1937 – 38 season . At the same time as this great change in his professional life , Barbirolli 's personal life was also transformed . His marriage had not lasted ; within four years he and Marjorie Barbirolli had been living apart . In 1938 she sued for divorce on the grounds of his desertion . The suit was undefended , and the divorce was granted in December 1938 . In 1939 , Barbirolli married the British oboist Evelyn Rothwell . The marriage lasted for the rest of Barbirolli 's life . 
 One of the features of Barbirolli 's time in New York was his regular programming of modern works . He gave the world premières of Walton 's second Façade Suite , and Britten 's Sinfonia da Requiem and Violin Concerto ; he also introduced pieces by Jacques <unk> , Eugene Goossens , and Arthur Bliss and by many American composers including Samuel Barber , Deems Taylor and Daniel Gregory Mason . The new works he presented were not avant @-@ garde , but they nevertheless alienated the conservative subscription audience , and after an initial increase in ticket sales in his early years sales declined . Barbirolli also had to cope with what The Gramophone described as " a rough press campaign in New York from interested parties who wished to evict him from his post " . The influential critic Olin Downes had opposed Barbirolli 's appointment from the outset , insisting that , though " we abhor chauvinism " , preference should have been given to " native conductors " . Downes had a grudge against the Philharmonic : shortly before Barbirolli 's appointment Downes was sacked as the commentator for the orchestra 's prestigious Sunday broadcasts . He and the composer Virgil Thomson continually wrote disparagingly about Barbirolli , comparing him unfavourably with Toscanini . The management of the orchestra nevertheless renewed Barbirolli 's appointment in 1940 . In 1942 , when his second contract was reaching its expiry , he was offered 18 concerts for the 1943 – 44 season , and the Los Angeles Philharmonic invited him to become its conductor , but he accepted neither offer as he had decided to return to England . 
 Barbirolli 's first reason for leaving was local musical politics . He later said , " The Musicians Union there ... brought out a new regulation saying that everyone , even soloists and conductors , must become members . Horowitz , Heifetz and the rest were shocked by this but there was little they could do about it . They also said that conductors must become American citizens . I couldn 't do that during the war , or at any time for that matter . " His second reason for leaving was that he felt strongly that he was needed in England . In the spring of 1942 he made a hazardous Atlantic crossing : 
 I was in America when the war broke out , as conductor of the New York Philharmonic . A. V. Alexander , who was First Sea Lord , wrote to me to say that , contrary to expectations , music was flourishing and would I come back as I was missed . I was longing to return and it was just a question of how it was to be managed . A.V. went to Churchill , who apparently said , " If he 's fool enough to come , let him come " . It took us 23 days to cross on a fruit trader and , of our convoy of 75 , only 32 ships arrived in Liverpool . I played here for ten weeks with the LSO and LPO for the benefit of the musicians , and then went back on a <unk> banana boat of 5 @,@ 000 tons . We were spotted by U @-@ boats the moment we left Northern Ireland but that kind of thing never worries me as I 'm something of a fatalist . It had been wonderful anyhow to be back , to see England at its greatest , and to visit my old mother . 
 Barbirolli returned to New York to complete his contractual obligations to the Philharmonic . Shortly after his return he received an appeal from the Hallé Orchestra to become its conductor . The orchestra was in danger of extinction for lack of players , and Barbirolli seized the opportunity to help it . 
 = = = Hallé Orchestra = = = 
 In 1943 Barbirolli made another Atlantic crossing , avoiding death by a fluke : he changed flights with the actor Leslie Howard when the latter wished to postpone his own flight for a few days . Barbirolli 's plane landed safely ; Howard 's was shot down . In Manchester , Barbirolli immediately set about reviving the Hallé . The number of players in the orchestra was down to about 30 . Most younger players were serving in the armed forces , and to compound the shortage the management of the orchestra had ended the arrangement by which many of its players were also members of the BBC Northern Orchestra . The Hallé board resolved that its orchestra must follow the example of the Liverpool Philharmonic , which the Hallé 's former conductor Malcolm Sargent had transformed into a full @-@ time , permanent orchestra . Only four of the players shared with the BBC chose to join the Hallé . 
 The Times later wrote of Barbirolli 's first actions for the orchestra : " In a couple of months of endless auditions , he rebuilt the Hallé , accepting any good player , whatever his musical background – he found himself with a schoolboy first flute , a schoolmistress <unk> , and various brass players recruited from brass and military bands in the Manchester area ... The reborn Hallé 's first concert somehow lived up to the Hallé 's great reputation . " The Musical Times also noted , " From his earliest days with the orchestra it was the string tone that commanded immediate attention and respect . There was a fiery intensity and glowing warmth that proclaimed the born string coach " . Barbirolli retained his reputation for training orchestras : after his death , one of his former players commented , " If you wanted orchestral experience you 'd be set for life , starting in the Hallé with John Barbirolli . " Further afield , critics , audiences and players in Europe and the United States commented on the improvement in the playing of their orchestras when Barbirolli was in charge . Later he extended his teaching skills to the Royal Academy of Music , where he took charge of the student orchestra from 1961 . 
 Barbirolli refused invitations to take up more prestigious and lucrative conductorships . Shortly after he took over the Hallé he received an offer from the sponsors of an ambitious scheme that would have put him in charge of the London Symphony Orchestra , and in the early 1950s the BBC sought to recruit him for the BBC Symphony Orchestra . Also in the early 1950s the head of the Royal Opera House , David Webster , wanted him to become the musical director there . Barbirolli conducted six operas for Webster , Turandot , Aida , Orfeo ed Euridice , Tristan und Isolde , La bohème and Madama Butterfly , 1951 – 53 , but he declined to be wooed away from the Hallé . His biographer Charles Reid wrote , " His Manchester kingdom is a kingdom indeed . He is not manacled or <unk> in his choice of programmes . Broadly speaking he conducts only what he loves ... His kingdom approximates to a conductor 's paradise . " Nevertheless , in 1958 , after building the orchestra up and touring continually , conducting up to 75 concerts a year , he arranged a less onerous schedule , allowing him more time to appear as a guest conductor with other orchestras . He also appeared at the Vienna State Opera , and Rome Opera House , where he conducted Aida in 1969 . In 1960 he accepted an invitation to succeed Leopold Stokowski as chief conductor of the Houston Symphony in Texas , a post he held until 1967 , conducting an annual total of 12 weeks there in early spring and late autumn between Hallé engagements . In 1961 he began a regular association with the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra , which lasted for the rest of his life . 
 From 1953 onwards , Barbirolli and the Hallé appeared regularly at the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London . As well as major works from the mainstream repertory they gave an annual concert of music by Viennese composers , including Franz Lehár and Johann Strauss , which , like Sir Malcolm Sargent 's annual Gilbert and Sullivan nights , rapidly became a firm favourite with the <unk> . At one 1958 promenade concert Barbirolli and the Hallé played a replica of Charles Hallé 's first concert with the orchestra in 1858 . 
 Barbirolli 's interest in new music waned in post @-@ war years , but he and the Hallé appeared regularly at the Cheltenham Festival , where he premiered new works of a mostly traditional style by William Alwyn , Richard Arnell , Arthur Benjamin , Peter Racine Fricker , Gordon Jacob , Alan <unk> , Kenneth Leighton and others . For its hundredth anniversary in 1958 the Hallé commissioned several new works , including Walton 's virtuosic divertimento Partita . Increasingly , Barbirolli concentrated on his core repertory of the standard symphonic classics , the works of English composers , and late @-@ romantic music , particularly that of Mahler . In the 1960s he made a series of international tours with the Philharmonia ( Latin America , 1963 ) , BBC Symphony Orchestra ( Czechoslovakia , Poland and the USSR , 1967 ) and the Hallé ( Latin America and West Indies , 1968 ) . It was a lasting disappointment to him that it never proved possible to take the Hallé on a tour of the United States . 
 In 1968 , after 25 years with the Hallé , Barbirolli retired from the principal conductorship ; no successor was appointed in his lifetime . He was appointed the orchestra 's Conductor Laureate . He reduced the number of his appearances with the Hallé , but nevertheless took it on another European tour in 1968 , this time to Switzerland , Austria and Germany . In his last years a propensity to concentrate on detail at the expense of the whole of a piece became marked . His loyal friend and admirer the critic Neville Cardus wrote privately in 1969 , " he seems so much to love a single phrase that he lingers over it , caressing it ; meanwhile the general momentum is lost . " His final year , 1970 , was dogged by heart trouble ; he suffered collapses in April , May , June and July . His last two concerts were with the Hallé at the 1970 King 's Lynn Festival . He produced " inspired " renderings of Elgar 's Symphony No. 1 and Sea Pictures . The last work he conducted in public was Beethoven 's Symphony No. 7 on the Saturday before his death . On the day he died , 29 July 1970 , he spent several hours rehearsing the New Philharmonia Orchestra for a forthcoming tour of Japan that he was scheduled to lead . 
 Barbirolli died at his London home of a heart attack , aged 70 . He was cremated and his ashes interred in his parents ' grave at Kensal Green Cemetery , London . Among planned engagements forestalled by his death were a production of Otello at the Royal Opera House , which would have been his first appearance there for nearly 20 years , and opera recordings for EMI , including Puccini 's Manon Lescaut and Verdi 's Falstaff . 
 = = Honours , awards and memorials = = 
 Among Barbirolli 's state awards were a British knighthood in 1949 and Companion of Honour in 1969 ; the Finnish Grand Star and Collar of Commander 1st Class of the Order of the White Rose in 1963 ; from Italy the Order of Merit in 1964 ; and from France , Officier de l 'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres , 1966 , and Officier de l 'Ordre national du Mérite , 1968 . Awards from musical institutions included the Freedom of the Worshipful Company of Musicians , 1966 ; Honorary Academician of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia , 1960 ; Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society , 1950 ; Bruckner Medal , Bruckner Society of America , 1959 ; and the Mahler Medal , Mahler @-@ Bruckner Society of America , 1965 . 
 There are memorials to Barbirolli in Manchester and London . Barbirolli Square in Manchester is named in his honour and features a sculpture of him by Byron Howard ( 2000 ) . The square includes the present base of the Hallé Orchestra , the Bridgewater Hall , in which the Barbirolli Room commemorates the conductor . At his old school , St Clement Danes , now relocated in <unk> , the main hall is named in his honour . A commemorative blue plaque was placed on the wall of the Bloomsbury Park Hotel in Southampton Row in May 1993 to mark Barbirolli 's birthplace . The Sir John Barbirolli Memorial Foundation of the Royal Philharmonic Society was instituted after his death to assist young musicians with the purchase of instruments . In 1972 the Barbirolli Society was set up with the principal aim of promoting the continued release of Barbirolli 's recorded performances . Its honorary officers have included Evelyn Barbirolli , Daniel Barenboim and Michael Kennedy . In April 2012 , he was voted into the inaugural Gramophone " Hall of Fame " . 
 = = Repertoire and recordings = = 
 Barbirolli is remembered as an interpreter of Elgar , Vaughan Williams and Mahler , as well as Schubert , Beethoven , Sibelius , Verdi and Puccini , and as a staunch supporter of new works by British composers . Vaughan Williams dedicated his Seventh and Eighth Symphonies to Barbirolli , whose nickname , " Glorious John " , comes from the inscription Vaughan Williams wrote at the head of the score of the Eighth : " For glorious John , with love and admiration from Ralph . " Barbirolli did not disdain lighter repertoire . The music critic Richard Osborne wrote that , if all Barbirolli 's recordings were to be lost except that of Lehár 's Gold and Silver Waltz , " there would be reason enough to say , ' Now , there was a conductor ! ' " 
 Barbirolli 's repertoire was not as wide as that of many of his colleagues because he insisted on exhaustive preparation for any work he conducted . His colleague Sir Adrian Boult liked and admired Barbirolli but teased him for his meticulousness : " We can 't all be like you and spend months studying these things and then have days of rehearsals before we conduct them . For some of us they 're only sporting events . " Barbirolli was shocked by such levity . His approach was illustrated by the care he took with Mahler 's symphonies . His biographer Michael Kennedy commented , " it is ironical that the effort of composing the symphonies shortened Mahler 's life ; interpreting them certainly put an enormous strain on Barbirolli in his last decade . " He found that mastering a Mahler symphony took between 18 months and two years , and he would spend hours meticulously bowing all the string parts in preparation for his performances . His first performance of Mahler 's Ninth took nearly 50 hours of rehearsal . 
 = = = Pre @-@ war = = = 
 From almost the start of his career Barbirolli was a frequent recording artist . As a young cellist he made four records for Edison Bell in 1911 , with piano accompaniment by his sister Rosa , and as part of the Kutcher and the Music Society string quartets he recorded music by Mozart , Purcell , Vaughan Williams and others in 1925 and 1926 . As a conductor he began recording in 1927 for the National <unk> Society ( an offshoot of The Gramophone ) . Among his records from that period was the first to be made of Elgar 's Introduction and Allegro for Strings . On hearing it , the composer said , " I 'd never realised it was such a big work . " Elgar , despite an extensive discography as a conductor , never recorded the work himself , and some have speculated that " the breadth , nobility and lyrical poetry " of Barbirolli 's interpretation left the composer disinclined to compete . In 1928 Barbirolli made some recordings for the Edison Bell label . The same year , he began his long association with the His Master 's Voice ( HMV ) label . Immediately after the LSO concert at which he had stood in for Beecham , he was approached by Fred Gaisberg , the chief recording producer for HMV who signed him for his company shortly afterwards . An HMV colleague of Gaisberg described Barbirolli as " a treasure " , because he " could accompany Chaliapin without provoking an uproar , win golden opinions from Jascha Heifetz , Artur Rubinstein , Fritz Kreisler and Pablo Casals , and conduct one of the finest recorded performances of the Quintet from Meistersinger " . 
 Many of Barbirolli 's pre @-@ war recordings for HMV were of concertos . His reputation as an accompanist tended to obscure his talents as a symphonic conductor , and later , his detractors in New York " damned him with faint praise by exalting his powers as an accompanist and then implying that that was where it all stopped . " Barbirolli became very sensitive on this point , and for many years after the war he was reluctant to accompany anyone in the recording studio . Among his early HMV records are works , mainly concertos , by Brahms , Bruch , Chopin , Dvořák , Glazunov , Mendelssohn , Mozart , Schumann , Sibelius , Tchaikovsky and Vieuxtemps . From the 1990s onwards , archive recordings of Barbirolli 's early concerts in New York have been issued on CD . Kennedy wrote in 2004 that they " prove that the orchestra played superbly for him and that the criticism of him was largely unjustified . " Recordings from this period include symphonies by Beethoven , Mendelssohn , Mozart , Schubert , Schumann , Sibelius and Tchaikovsky , and other orchestral music by Berlioz , Debussy , Menotti , Purcell , Ravel , Respighi , and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . 
 = = = 1943 and later = = = 
 Within six months of his return to Britain in 1943 , Barbirolli resumed his contract with HMV , conducting the Hallé in the Third Symphony of Bax and the Fifth of Vaughan Williams , followed by works by a wide range of composers from Corelli to Stravinsky . In 1955 he signed a contract with Pye Records , with whom he and the Hallé recorded a wide repertoire , and made their first stereophonic recordings . These records were distributed in the US by Vanguard Records . A company was formed , named Pye @-@ Barbirolli , of which he was a director : the arrangement was designed to ensure an equal partnership between the company and the musicians . They made many recordings , including symphonies by Beethoven , Dvořák , Elgar , Mozart , Nielsen , Sibelius , Mahler , Tchaikovsky and Vaughan Williams , as well as a few concertos , short orchestral pieces and operatic excerpts . 
 In 1962 , HMV persuaded Barbirolli to return . With the Hallé he recorded a Sibelius symphony cycle , Elgar 's Second Symphony , Falstaff and The Dream of Gerontius , Schubert 's Ninth Symphony , Vaughan Williams 's A London Symphony , and works by Grieg and Delius . With other orchestras , Barbirolli recorded a wide range of his repertoire , including many recordings still in the catalogues in 2012 . Of these , his Elgar recordings include the Cello Concerto with Jacqueline du Pré , Sea Pictures with Janet Baker , and orchestral music including the First Symphony , Enigma Variations and many of the shorter works . His Mahler recordings include the Fifth and Sixth Symphonies ( with the New Philharmonia ) and Ninth Symphony ( with the Berlin Philharmonic ) . With the Vienna Philharmonic , he recorded a Brahms symphony cycle , and with Daniel Barenboim , the two Brahms Piano Concertos . He made three operatic sets for HMV : Purcell 's Dido and Aeneas with Victoria de los Ángeles ( 1966 ) , Verdi 's Otello with James McCracken , Gwyneth Jones and Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau ( 1969 ) , and a set of Madama Butterfly with Renata Scotto , Carlo Bergonzi and Rome Opera forces that has remained in the catalogues since its first issue in 1967 . The impact of the last was such that the head of the Rome Opera invited him to come and conduct " any opera you care to name with as much rehearsal as you wish . " HMV planned to record Die Meistersinger with Barbirolli in Dresden in 1970 , but following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 he refused to conduct in the Soviet bloc , and his place was taken by Herbert von Karajan . 
 = Article 15 of the Constitution of Singapore = 
 Article 15 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore guarantees freedom of religion in Singapore . Specifically , Article 15 ( 1 ) states : " Every person has the right to profess and practise his religion and to propagate it . " 
 The terms profess , practise and propagate are not defined in the Constitution , but cases from Singapore and other jurisdictions may shed light on their meaning . The word profess in relation to a religion was defined in a 1964 Singapore case not involving the Constitution as meaning " to affirm , or declare one 's faith in or allegiance to " . A 2001 Malaysian decision suggested that the profession of religion does not encompass the renunciation of a religion or the profession of an irreligious viewpoint . As regards the word propagate , in 1977 the Supreme Court of India held that it confers on an individual the right to transmit or spread his or her religion by an exposition of its tenets , but not the right to convert another person who holds a pre @-@ existing religious belief to one 's own religion . These issues have not yet come before the Singapore courts for determination . On the other hand , in 1999 the Court of Appeal attempted to draw a line between religious practices and secular facts , taking the view that singing the National Anthem and saying the National Pledge were the latter . Thus , rules that compelled a teacher to engage in these activities in an educational institution could not be regarded as having infringed his right to practise his religion . 
 Freedom of religion under Article 15 ( 1 ) is not absolute as it is qualified by Article 15 ( 4 ) of the Constitution , which provides that the rights secured by Article 15 do not authorize any act contrary to any general law relating to public order , public health or morality . These limitations upon the freedom of religion are an important aspect of Singapore 's secularism . The Singapore courts have interpreted the term public order to be equivalent to the concepts of " public peace , welfare and good order " referred to in section 24 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Societies Act ( Cap . 311 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) , rather than taking the narrower view that public order means freedom from unlawful physical violence . There has also been academic criticism of the fact that the courts have not applied any form of balancing test to determine whether freedom of religion has been reasonably restricted . On the contrary , where national security is said to be involved , the courts have deferred to the Government as to the necessity for the restrictive legislation . The terms public health and morality in Article 15 ( 4 ) have yet to be judicially interpreted . 
 = = Text of Article 15 = = 
 Article 15 of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore is entitled " Freedom of religion " and reads as follows : 
 15 . — ( 1 ) Every person has the right to profess and practise his religion and to propagate it . 
 ( 2 ) No person shall be compelled to pay any tax the proceeds of which are specially allocated in whole or in part for the purposes of a religion other than his own . 
 ( 3 ) Every religious group has the right — 
 ( a ) to manage its own religious affairs ; 
 ( b ) to establish and maintain institutions for religious or charitable purposes ; and 
 ( c ) to acquire and own property and hold and administer it in accordance with law . 
 ( 4 ) This Article does not authorise any act contrary to any general law relating to public order , public health or morality . 
 In Nappalli Peter Williams v. Institute of Technical Education ( 1999 ) , the Court of Appeal affirmed that the Constitution generally adopts what is known as accommodative secularism by " removing restrictions to one 's choice of religious belief " . 
 Article 15 ( 1 ) is in pari materia with Article 11 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of Malaysia , from which it was adopted following Singapore 's independence from Malaysia in 1965 . The latter states : " Every person has the right to profess and practice his religion and , subject to clause ( 4 ) , to propagate it . " Article 15 ( 1 ) also contains similarities to Article 25 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of India : " Subject to public order , morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part , all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess , practise and propagate religion . " 
