 = = Meaning of profess , practise and propagate = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The word profess in Article 15 ( 1 ) is not defined in the Constitution , but the case Re Mohamed Said Nabi , deceased ( 1964 ) may provide guidance . The issue in the case was the meaning of the word Muslim in the Muslims Ordinance 1957 which was defined as " a person who professes the religion of Islam " . The High Court held that to come within the definition , one must be shown to be an orthodox Muslim and must have outwardly manifested and practiced Islam ; merely having been born into that religion was insufficient . More specifically , Justice F.A. Chua referred to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary and noted that the word profess means " to affirm , or declare one 's faith in or allegiance to ( a religion , principle , God or Saint etc . ) " . 
 However , to determine if one has in fact " professed " a religion , a proper scrutiny of the entire circumstances is necessary . On the facts , the deceased was brought up as a Muslim , married under Muslim rites , and had held Muslim religious ceremonies in his house which he had taken part in . This was strong evidence that he professed the religion of Islam , despite the fact that he had also engaged in the heterodox practices of drinking alcohol and eating pork . The judge held that such practices did not amount to a renunciation of the religion , and added that someone who had been born into the religion must be held to be a member of that religion unless it is proved he has adopted some other religion . 
 The Malaysian interpretation of the term profess in Article 11 ( 1 ) of the Malaysian Constitution may be relevant as that provision is worded similarly to Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Singapore Constitution . In Daud bin Mamat v. Majlis Agama Islam ( 2001 ) , it was held that the act of exiting one 's religion does not fall under the meaning of professing and practising one 's religion . In the judge 's view , " to accept that professing no religion equated to ' a religion ' or the ' right to profess and practice it ' would stretch the definition in Article 11 too far " . On the other hand , it might be argued that the freedom to renounce one 's religion or to profess not to have a religion is a corollary of the freedom to profess a religion . This issue has not yet come before the Singapore courts for determination . 
 = = = Practise = = = 
 The Constitution is also silent on what constitutes practising a religion for the purposes of Article 15 ( 1 ) . The local courts have defined the word practise by indicating what types of acts are not considered religious practices . In Nappalli , the Court of Appeal held that singing of the National Anthem and reciting the National Pledge were not religious practices but rather expressions of national patriotism , which were secular acts . The Canadian case Donald v. The Board of Education for the City of Hamilton ( 1945 ) was distinguished ; in that case , singing the national anthem was held to constitute a religious practice because the anthem contained a prayer hymn which " unquestionably reflected some religious character " . 
 In Nappalli , the appellant was dismissed from an educational institution for his refusal to participate in the aforementioned acts . Central to his claim was the submission that these acts were religious practices that went against his belief as a Jehovah 's Witness and thus infringed his constitutional right to practice and profess his religion guaranteed by Article 15 . However , the Court held that since " religion " in Singapore under the Constitution is restricted to " a citizen 's faith in a personal God " and does not include " a system of belief in one 's own country " , the acts in question were not religious practices . Hence , the appellant 's rights had not been contravened . The Court took the view that " the appellant 's interpretation of the pledge and anthem ceremony as a religious ceremony was a distortion of secular fact into religious belief " . If the appellant 's interpretation was correct , this would result in Article 15 ( 1 ) losing operative effect , for " [ h ] ow can the same Constitution guarantee religious freedom if , by asking citizens to pledge their allegiance to country , it is ( as the appellant suggests ) coercing participation in a religious ceremony ? This excruciatingly absurd interpretation cannot have been what was envisaged by the authors of the Constitution . " 
 The courts in Malaysia have taken a similar approach in defining the meaning of religious practice under Article 11 of the Malaysian Constitution . Furthermore , they have also consulted religious texts to determine what type of acts might constitute religious practices . In <unk> v. Public Service Commission , Malaysia ( 1992 ) , the appellant claimed she had been wrongfully dismissed from her employment due to her refusal to comply with employment conditions that prohibited any attire that covered a female public servant 's face while on duty . According to the appellant , this contravened her right to religious practice on grounds that the wearing of the purdah was part of her religious practice as a Muslim . However , the court disagreed and held that the purdah was not considered a religious practice as it was not a requirement under Islam since there was no express mention of such a requirement in the Quran . 
 However , in the Philippines , the courts have accorded the individual autonomy to decide what constitutes religious practice . It is up to the individual to decide what constitutes religious practice so long as such acts do not offend public interest . This was the view proffered in <unk> v. Superintendent of Schools of Cebu ( 1993 ) , in which the issue was whether the petitioners , who were Jehovah 's Witnesses , ought to be expelled from schools for refusing to salute the flag , sing the national anthem and recite the oath of allegiance as required by the Republic Act No. 1265 of 11 July 1955 and other legislation . Cruz J. held that the state could not interpret the Bible for the petitioners as " only they can read it as they see fit . Right or wrong , the meaning they derive from it cannot be revised or reversed except perhaps by their own acknowledged superiors . But certainly not the State . It has no competence in this matter . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Singapore courts have not yet interpreted the word propagate in Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Constitution . 
 Article 25 ( 1 ) of the Indian Constitution , which is in the same terms as in Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Singapore Constitution , guarantees to individuals the right to freely " profess , practise and propagate " their religions . The term propagate was considered by the Supreme Court of India in Stanislaus v. State of Madhya Pradesh ( 1977 ) . The Court adopted a dictionary definition of propagate , which was " to transmit or spread from person to person or from place to place " . Accordingly , it held that the word as used in Article 25 ( 1 ) confers on an individual the right to transmit or spread one 's religion by an exposition of its tenets . In other words , an individual has the right to spread his or her religion by explaining to others the principles and beliefs underlying that particular religion . However , in the Court 's opinion Article 25 ( 1 ) does not confer the right to convert another person who holds a pre @-@ existing religious belief to one 's own religion as this would impinge on the " freedom of conscience " provided for in the Article , which accords each individual with the freedom to hold or consider a thought , fact or viewpoint independent from those of others . In short , the constitutional right to propagate one 's own religion is protected insofar as an individual who exercises this right respects the freedom of persons following other religions . The Indian jurist <unk> Maneckji Seervai has criticized Stanislaus and has said it should be overruled . He argued that when a person propagates his religion to another , that act does not violate the other person 's free conscience but allows that person an opportunity to freely choose a religion : 
 The right to propagate religion gives a meaning to freedom of choice , for choice involves not only knowledge but an act of will . A person cannot choose if he does not know what choices are open to him . To propagate religion is not to impart knowledge and to spread it more widely , but to produce intellectual and moral conviction leading to action , namely , the adoption of that religion . Successful propagation of religion would result in conversion . 
 = = Restrictions on the freedom of religion = = 
 Under Article 15 ( 4 ) of the Constitution , a person 's freedom of religion can be restricted by a general law relating to public order , public health or morality . The term general law is not defined in the Constitution , but may refer to a law that applies to all persons or places belonging to a particular class . 
 The restrictions on freedom of religion are an important reflection of Singapore 's secularism . Although the Constitution does not express the doctrine of secularism explicitly , the report of the 1966 Constitutional Commission described Singapore as a " democratic secular state " . Singapore 's secularism is similar to France 's secularism in that both models seek to " protect the state from religion " . However , unlike in Singapore , the principle of secularism in France is constitutionally expressed . In being secular , the Government of Singapore does not reject religion . Instead , it has been said to practise " accommodative secularism " . 
 The Government 's adherence to secularism has been criticized in that the unwritten principle of secularism has trumped the constitutional protection of freedom of religion . For instance , in 2002 a controversy arose upon the suspension of four Muslim girls from school when their parents insisted that they wear the <unk> ( Islamic headscarf ) to national schools . Section 61 of the Education Act empowers the Minister for Education to regulate schools , including prohibiting students from wearing anything not forming part of an official school uniform . The parents of the schoolgirls took the view that the Ministry of Education 's school uniform policy was unconstitutional as it violated the girls ' freedom of religion under Article 15 ( 1 ) . While the parents eventually did not pursue legal proceedings against the Ministry , the controversy showed the Singapore Government 's steadfastness in insisting on secularism and the difficulties in reconciling secularism and freedom of religion in Singapore . 
 = = = Meaning of public order , public health and morality = = = 
 = = = = Public order = = = = 
 The term public order is not defined in the Constitution but has been judicially deliberated in a series of important legal cases involving the Singapore Congregation of Jehovah 's Witnesses . 
 In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Public Prosecutor ( 1994 ) , the Minister of Home Affairs had <unk> the Jehovah 's Witnesses by Order No. 179 / 1972 made pursuant to section 24 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Societies Act . This provision allows for the dissolution of registered organizations considered to be threats to public peace , welfare or good order . The Minister had also made Order No. 123 / 1972 and Order No. 405 / 1994 pursuant to section 3 ( 1 ) of the Undesirable Publications Act , prohibiting publications by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society relating to the Jehovah 's Witnesses . The appellants were convicted in a district court for possession of prohibited publications . They appealed and sought to challenge the constitutionality of the Minister 's prohibition order and the <unk> of the Jehovah 's Witnesses , arguing that their right to freedom of religion guaranteed by Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Constitution had been infringed . 
 Counsel for the appellants submitted that the Jehovah 's Witnesses in Singapore were a small , non @-@ violent group and that there was no evidence their activities were against public order in any manner . He relied on the Malaysian case Tan Boon Liat v. Menteri Hal <unk> Dalam Negeri , Malaysia ( 1976 ) , which considered the meaning of public order in the context of section 4 ( 1 ) of the Emergency ( Public Order and Prevention of Crime ) Ordinance 1969 ( Malaysia ) : 
 The expression ' public order ' is not defined anywhere but danger to human life and safety and the disturbance of public tranquillity must necessarily fall within the purview of the expression ... [ T ] he test to be adopted in determining whether an act affects law and order or public order is this : Does it lead to disturbance of the current of life of the community so as to amount to disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an individual leaving the tranquillity of the society undisturbed ? 
 Chief Justice Yong Pung How rejected this conception of public order . He noted that Singapore had a policy of compulsory military service known as National Service , and that the Minister had taken the view that the continued existence of the Singapore Congregation of Jehovah 's Witnesses , which held the belief that military service was forbidden , was contrary to public peace , welfare and good order . As such , since the Minister had formed the view that the Jehovah 's Witnesses were a threat to national security , it was not open to the court to take a different view on the matter . Yong C.J. said in his judgment : " I could not see how the concept of public order as envisaged under Art 15 ( 4 ) is dissimilar to the notion of public peace , welfare and good order within s 24 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Societies Act . " He emphasized that the right to religious freedom was not an absolute right as it was subject to the inherent limitations set out in Article 15 ( 4 ) . The right of freedom of religion had to be reconciled with the " right of the state to employ the sovereign power to ensure peace , security and orderly living , without which the constitutional guarantee of civil liberty would be a mockery " . Accordingly , the appeal was dismissed . 
 In 1995 , the Minister for Information and the Arts made Order No. 405 / 1995 banning materials published by the International Bible Students Association , an organization associated with the Jehovah 's Witnesses . In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts ( 1995 ) , the plaintiffs sought leave to apply for an order of certiorari to quash the order , alleging that it was ultra vires as it contravened , among other things , Article 15 ( 1 ) of the Constitution . Presiding over the case in the High Court , Justice Judith Prakash referred to Yong C.J. ' s holding in Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. P.P. ( 1994 ) concerning the meaning of public order . 
 In a 1995 commentary on Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. P.P. ( 1994 ) , Professor Thio Li @-@ ann noted that in other jurisdictions a lack of public order includes the notion of " endangerment to human life and safety as well as the disruption of public tranquillity " , and argued that " [ t ] o establish that public order is threatened , it appears that some degree of violence or unlawful physical violence must be shown " . Using this as a point of reference , she criticized Yong C.J. ' s equation of public order with " public peace , welfare or good order " . 
 = = = = Public health and morality = = = = 
 The Singapore courts have not yet interpreted the meaning of the terms public health and morality in Article 15 ( 4 ) . 
 The UK case of R. ( Ghai ) v. Newcastle City Council ( 2009 ) is therefore interesting for purposes of comparison . The claimant , an orthodox Hindu , applied to his local authority for land to be dedicated for traditional open air funeral pyres . The local authority refused the request , relying on subsidiary legislation that made it an offence to burn human remains other than in a crematorium . The claimant then applied for judicial review , submitting that the decision infringed his right to manifest his religion or belief which was protected by Article 9 ( 1 ) of the European Convention on Human Rights . The High Court found that the statutory interference with the claimant 's right was justified as it was necessary for the protection of public morals and of the rights and freedoms of others . The Court of Appeal reversed the judgment on grounds unrelated to Article 9 , holding that open air pyres were permissible on a proper construction of the legislation . 
 = = = Test for determining if restriction of right is appropriate = = = 
 = = = = Singapore = = = = 
 In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. P.P. ( 1994 ) , counsel for the appellants argued that there had to be a " clear and immediate danger " to public order before the right of freedom of religion could be restricted , and in this case the restriction was unjustified since there had been no such threat at all . However , Yong C.J. said that attempt to apply the " clear and immediate danger " test was misplaced : 
 It cannot be said that beliefs , especially those propagated in the name of " religion " , should not be put to a stop until such a scenario exists . If not , it would in all probability be too late as the damage sought to be prevented would have transpired . 
 However , Yong C.J. did not articulate any alternative test for determining if a restriction upon freedom of religion is appropriate . Quoting Malaysian Chief Justice Hashim <unk> Sani 's judgment in the case Minister for Home Affairs , Malaysia v. Jamaluddin bin Othman ( 1989 ) , he agreed that " [ t ] he freedom to profess and practise one 's religion should not be turned into a licence to commit unlawful acts or acts tending to prejudice or threaten the security of the country " . Yong C.J. considered that since " the sovereignty , integrity and unity of Singapore are undoubtedly the paramount mandate of the Constitution " , religious beliefs and practices which tended to run counter to these objectives had to be restrained . 
 In the appeal against Prakash J. ' s judgment to the Court of Appeal , also called Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts ( 1996 ) , counsel for the appellants argued that the restriction placed by the Minister on the importation , sale and distribution of the Jehovah 's Witnesses publications was too wide and disproportionate . Applying an approach similar to that taken in Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. P.P. ( 1994 ) , the Court of Appeal noted that the appellants were essentially seeking to challenge the view taken by the Minister that Jehovah 's Witnesses ' refusal to carry out National Service was a threat to national security . The Court regarded this as a non @-@ justiciable issue and declined to allow the appellants to bring an application for judicial review of Order No. 405 / 1995 . 
 Professor Thio Li @-@ ann has argued that since Article 15 ( 1 ) is the general statement of principle that guarantees freedom of religion while Article 15 ( 4 ) is an exception to the general principle , Yong C.J. ' s assertion that " actions undertaken or flowing from [ religious ] beliefs must conform with the general law relating to public order and social protection " is incorrect . In making a case against judicial deference and for judicial balancing of interests , she says : 
 It is the judicial role to devise constitutional tests like a [ n ] Object of Act – Art 15 ( 4 ) nexus test or to ensure that a sufficient relationship exists between the means and end of the Act , with the end conforming to an Art 15 ( 4 ) ground . Any other interpretation runs the risk of the exception swallowing up the general , which would make a mockery of any constitutional liberty . 
 In Thio 's view , courts should adopt a three @-@ step proportionality approach when interpreting constitutional fundamental liberties . A judge should first " identify the interests behind two competing rights <unk> the value of religious liberty as a source of private and public virtue as well as being an aspect of free conscience as against the value of having public order and a stable environment . Secondly , these factors are all to be placed on the Libra @-@ like balancing scales of justice so that their merits and demerits can be assessed against each other . ... Thirdly , all things considered , the Judge is to deliver his judgment as to where the balance should lie . " In the light of this approach , Yong C.J. ' s acceptance of the Minister 's view " as conclusive , refusing to question it on the basis of not wanting to transgress the legal / merits dichotomy " resulted in a failure to balance the interest of the appellants against that of the State . 
 = = = = Other jurisdictions = = = = 
 The situation in Singapore may be contrasted with the application of a proportionality analysis in other jurisdictions vis @-@ à @-@ vis the constitutional protection of freedom of religion . Section 2 ( a ) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms states that the freedom of conscience and religion is a fundamental freedom enjoyed by everybody . It is subject to section 1 : " The rights and freedoms set out in the Canadian Charter are subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society . " 
 In the important decision R. v. Oakes ( 1986 ) , the Supreme Court of Canada held that a two @-@ part test must be satisfied before a limitation infringing a right can be " saved " by section 1 . First , the limitation must have " an objective related to concerns which are pressing and substantial in a free and democratic society " ; and , second , it must be shown " that the means chosen are reasonable and demonstrably justified " . The second part is described as a " proportionality test " which requires the invoking party to show : 
 First , the measures adopted must be carefully designed to achieve the objective in question . They must not be arbitrary , unfair or based on irrational considerations . In short , they must be rationally connected to the objective . Second , the means , even if rationally connected to the objective in this first sense , should impair " as little as possible " the right or freedom in question . Third , there must be a proportionality between the effects of the measures which are responsible for limiting the Charter right or freedom , and the objective which has been identified as of " sufficient importance " . 
 In <unk> v. Marguerite @-@ <unk> ( Commission scolaire ) ( 2006 ) , the issue was whether a ban in a public school on Sikh students carrying <unk> ( ceremonial daggers ) for religious purposes was justifiable . Justice Louise <unk> , who delivered the Court 's majority opinion , applied the Oakes test to section 2 ( a ) of the Charter . She held that the school could not discharge its burden of proving that prohibiting the <unk> was a reasonable limit on the student 's constitutional freedom of religion . 
 The UK Human Rights Act 1998 makes Article 9 ( 1 ) of the European Convention on Human Rights , which protects freedom of religion , enforceable in UK domestic law . Article 9 ( 2 ) states when the freedom of religion may be restricted : " Freedom to manifest one 's religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety , for the protection of public order , health or morals , or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others . " R. ( Begum ) v. <unk> and Governors of Denbigh High School ( 2006 ) was a House of Lords case involving a female Muslim student who wished to wear a <unk> ( a long , coat @-@ like garment ) to comply with her understanding of the requirements of her faith , but was disallowed from doing so . Lord Bingham of Cornhill said that under Article 9 ( 2 ) , for a restriction to be justified it must be " prescribed by law and necessary in a democratic society for a permissible purpose , that is , it must be directed to a legitimate purpose and must be proportionate in scope and effect " . In the end , a majority of the Law Lords hearing the appeal ( including Lord Bingham ) held that the appellant 's rights had not been interfered with . However , the court held unanimously that even if they had been , there were justifiable grounds for such interference , one of which was the need to protect the rights of other female students at the school who would not wish to be pressured into adopting a more extreme form of Muslim dress . 
 In Prince v. President of the Law Society of the Cape of Good Hope ( 2002 ) , the appellant challenged , among other things , the constitutionality of the South African Drugs and Drug Trafficking Act 1992 before the Constitutional Court of South Africa . He claimed that his religion – the Rastafari movement – required him to use cannabis and argued that the Act , which prohibited the possession of this drug , infringed his right to freedom of religion protected by section 15 of Chapter 2 of the Constitution of South Africa . Similar to section 1 of the Canadian Charter , section 36 ( 1 ) of the South African Constitution provides : 
 The rights in the Bill of Rights may be limited only in terms of law of general application to the extent that the limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society based on human dignity , equality and freedom , taking into account all relevant factors , including 
 the nature of the right ; 
 the importance of the purpose of the limitation ; 
 and extent of the limitation ; 
 the relation between the limitation and its purpose ; and 
 less restrictive means to achieve the purpose . 
 Justice <unk> <unk> , writing for the minority , said that " [ t ] he limitation analysis ... involves the weighing up of competing values and ultimately an assessment based on proportionality " , and that in weighing competing interests and evaluating proportionality it was " necessary to examine the relation between the complete ban on the sacramental use or possession of cannabis by the Rastafari and the purpose of the limitation as well as the existence of the less restrictive means to achieve this purpose " . Ultimately , though , a majority of the Court held that although the appellant 's freedom of religion had been infringed , the infringement was justifiable in that the restriction was proportionate to the " war on drugs " policy of the State – a general exemption for religious purposes would be virtually impossible to police and would interfere materially with the government 's ability to enforce its drug control legislation , and other proposed control schemes would be administratively unworkable . 
 A key distinction between the bills of rights of the Commonwealth jurisdictions referred to above and the Singapore Constitution is that in the latter document , the grounds set out in Article 15 ( 4 ) for restricting freedom of religion are not expressly subject to any requirement of reasonableness or necessity in a democratic society . One may query whether this is sufficient justification for a Singapore court to decline to apply a proportionality analysis to Article 15 ( 4 ) . 
 = = = Burden of proof = = = 
 An applicant has the burden of proving that a legislative restriction on the freedom of speech has nothing to do with public order , public health or morality . There must be some substance in the applicant 's complaint – the Government does not have an immediate duty to justify making a decision that restricts the applicant 's right to freedom of speech simply because the applicant complains of an alleged infringement of Article 15 ( 1 ) . 
 = = = Instances of restrictions = = = 
 = = = = Right of propagation = = = = 
 Propagation of religion is not protected when it amounts to an act contrary to any general law relating to public order , public health , or morality under Article 15 ( 4 ) of the Constitution . In Public Prosecutor v. Koh Song Huat Benjamin ( 2005 ) , a District Court held that the right to propagate an opinion is not an unfettered right : 
 The right of one person 's freedom of expression must always be balanced by the right of another 's freedom from offence , and tempered by wider public interest considerations . It is only appropriate social behaviour , independent of any legal duty , of every Singapore citizen and resident to respect the other races in view of our multi @-@ racial society . Each individual living here irrespective of his racial origin owes it to himself and to the country to see that nothing is said or done which might incite the people and plunge the country into racial strife and violence . These are basic ground rules . 
 In Public Prosecutor v. Ong Kian Cheong ( 2009 ) , the District Court said that the above statement , which referred to opinions on race , applied with equal force to insensitive and denigrating opinions about religious beliefs . The case involved two accused persons who were convicted under the Sedition Act and the Undesirable Publications Act for distributing religious literature that was considered seditious and objectionable to Muslims . Section 3 ( 1 ) ( e ) of the Sedition Act defines a seditious tendency as including a tendency to " promote feelings of ill @-@ will and hostility between different races or classes of the population of Singapore " . In the course of spreading their own faith , the accused persons had offended public order by distributing religious materials that were objectionable to Muslims , and the Court regarded this to be beyond the bounds of the constitutional right to propagate religion . The Court was of the view that although a person is free to choose his or her own religion and to practise it , religious fervour to spread faith must be constrained by considerations of sensitivity , tolerance and mutual respect for the faith and religious beliefs of another . Individuals cannot claim to be ignorant of the sensitivity of race and religion in Singapore 's multi @-@ racial and multi @-@ religious society . 
 <unk> v. Greece ( 1999 ) points to other grounds on which the right to propagate one 's religion might reasonably be restricted in Singapore . In that case , the European Court of Human Rights accepted that the right to try to persuade another of one 's own religious beliefs is included in the " right to manifest [ one 's ] religion or belief " provided for by Article 9 ( 1 ) of the European Convention on Human Rights . However , this right is not void of limitations . Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Convention prescribes limitations to the freedom to manifest one 's religion " in the interests of public safety , for the protection of public order , health or morals , or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others " . The Court clarified that Article 9 ( 1 ) does not protect improper proselytism , such as when one offers material or social advantages to entice another to adopt certain religious beliefs , or when one applies improper pressure with a view to gaining new members for a religious group . On the facts of the case , the Court found that Article 9 had not been infringed by the prosecution of three air force officers for proselytizing to their subordinates , since the hierarchical nature of military life meant it was difficult for a subordinate to rebuff the approaches of persons of superior rank . Thus , a conversation which might be regarded as a harmless exchange of ideas in a civilian context could be seen in a military setting as harassment or the imposition of undue pressure in abuse of power . 
 = = Other constitutional provisions = = 
 In addition to Article 15 , there are other provisions in the Constitution that protect religious freedom . Article 12 ( 2 ) prohibits discrimination against Singapore citizens on the ground of , among others , religion in any law ; in the appointment to any office or employment under a public authority ; or in the administration of any law relating to the acquisition , holding or disposition of property , or the establishing or carrying on of any trade , business , profession , vocation or employment . 
 Related to this is Article 16 , subsection ( 1 ) of which prohibits discrimination against citizens of Singapore on the ground only of , among others , religion in the administration of public educational institutions ( and , in particular , as regards the admission of students or the payment of fees ) , and in providing financial aid from public funds for the maintenance or education of students in any educational institution . The Constitution declares that religious groups have the right to establish and maintain institutions for the education of children and to provide them religious instruction in those institutions , but provides that people cannot be discriminated against on the ground only of religion in laws relating to such institutions or the administration of such laws . Furthermore , no person may be compelled to receive instruction in or take part in any ceremony or act of worship of a religion apart from his or her own . 
 The Government has a constitutional responsibility " constantly to care for the interests of the racial and religious minorities in Singapore " . In particular , the Government must exercise its functions in such a way as to recognize the special position of the Malays , the indigenous people of Singapore . Accordingly , it has the responsibility to " protect , safeguard , support , foster and promote their political , educational , religious , economic , social and cultural interests and the Malay language . " The Constitution also requires the Legislature to enact legislation to regulate Muslim religious affairs and to establish a council to advise the President concerning matters relating to Islam . The legislation in question is the Administration of Muslim Law Act . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Re Mohamed Said Nabi , deceased [ 1965 ] M.L.J. [ Malayan Law Journal ] 121 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Public Prosecutor [ 1994 ] ICHRL 26 , [ 1994 ] SGHC 207 , [ 1994 ] 3 S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 209 , archived from the original on 26 October 2012 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1995 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 627 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1996 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 294 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) . 
 Nappalli Peter Williams v. Institute of Technical Education [ 1999 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 529 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 Prince v. President of the Law Society of the Cape of Good Hope [ 2002 ] <unk> 1 , 2002 ( 2 ) S.A. 794 , Constitutional Court ( South Africa ) . 
 Public Prosecutor v. Ong Kian Cheong [ 2009 ] <unk> 163 , District Court ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( 1999 Reprint ) . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 1995 ) , " The Secular Trumps the Sacred : Constitutional Issues Arising from Colin Chan v Public Prosecutor " , Singapore Law Review 16 : 26 – 103 , archived from the original on 21 October 2012 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Jayasuriya , Kanishka ( 2001 ) , " The Exception Becomes the Norm : Law and Regimes of Exception in East Asia " , Asia @-@ Pacific Law and Policy Journal 2 ( 1 ) : 108 – 124 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 11 November 2010 . 
 Tan , Eugene K [ heng ] B [ oon ] ( 2009 ) , " From Clampdown to Limited Empowerment : Hard and Soft Law in the Calibration and Regulation of Religious Conduct in Singapore " , Law and Policy 31 ( 3 ) : 351 – 379 , doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1467 @-@ <unk> , SSRN <unk> . 
 Tan , Eugene K [ heng ] B [ oon ] ( 2007 ) , " Norming ' Moderation ' in an ' Iconic Target ' : Public Policy and the Regulation of Religious <unk> in Singapore " , Terrorism and Political Violence 19 ( 4 ) : 443 – 462 , doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( December 2009 ) , " Between Eden and Armageddon : Navigating ' Religion ' and ' Politics ' in Singapore " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 365 – 405 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2004 ) , " Constitutional ' Soft ' Law and the Management of Religious Liberty and Order : The 2003 Declaration on Religious Harmony " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 414 – 443 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2006 ) , " Control , Co @-@ optation and Co @-@ operation : Managing Religious Harmony in Singapore 's Multi @-@ Ethnic , Quasi @-@ Secular State " , Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly 33 ( 2 & 3 ) : 197 – 253 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 30 October 2011 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2009 ) , " The Cooperation of Religion and State in Singapore : A Compassionate Partnership in Service of Welfare " , Review of Faith and International Affairs 7 ( 3 ) : 33 – 45 , doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> @.@ 2009 @.@ <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2009 ) , " Courting Religion : The Judge between Caesar and God in Asian Courts " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 52 – 79 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 11 November 2010 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ( 2011 ) , " Fundamental Liberties III : Freedom of Expression • Association • Assembly • Religion " , An Introduction to Singapore 's Constitution ( rev. ed . ) , Singapore : Talisman Publishing , pp. 186 – 203 at 197 – 203 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 08 @-@ 6456 @-@ 9 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " Freedom of Religion " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 1197 – 1344 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2012 ) , " Freedom of Religion " , A Treatise on Singapore Constitutional Law , Singapore : Academy Publishing , pp. 869 – 923 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 07 @-@ 1515 @-@ 1 . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2008 ) , " Religion in the Public Sphere of Singapore : Wall of Division or Public Square ? " , in Turner , Bryan S. , ed . , Religious Pluralism and Civil Society : A Comparative Analysis , Oxford : Bardwell Press , pp. 73 – 104 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 11 @-@ 5 . 
 = ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World = 
 " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " is a song by Super Furry Animals and was the second single taken from the band 's fifth album , Rings Around the World . The track reached number 28 on the UK Singles Chart on release in October 2001 . Singer Gruff Rhys has described the song as being about " rings of communication around the world . All the rings of pollution " . 
 Critical reaction to the track was generally positive with many reviewers comparing the song to the work of other groups such as Status Quo , ELO and The Beach Boys . A promotional music video was produced to accompany " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " ' s release as a single . Directed by Pedro Romhanyi the video features images of fictional television stations including " SFA TV " , which shows the band playing along with the track . An alternative video , directed by Sean Hillen , was included on the DVD version of Rings Around the World on its release in July 2001 . This video features the lyrics to the track scrolling slowly from the bottom of the screen upwards in front of an image of a globe . The DVD version of Rings Around the World also includes a Llwybr <unk> remix of " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " . 
 = = Themes and recording = = 
 According to lead vocalist Gruff Rhys , " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " is about " all the rings of communication around the world . All the rings of pollution , and all the radioactivity that goes around . If you could visualize all the things we don 't see , Earth could look like some kind of fucked @-@ up Saturn . And that 's the idea I have in my head – surrounded by communication lines and traffic and debris thrown out of spaceships . " Rhys has claimed that the theory was initially his girlfriend 's father 's . The track was recorded in 2000 at Monnow Valley Studio , Rockfield , Monmouthshire and was produced by the Super Furry Animals and Chris Shaw . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " is 3 minutes 29 seconds long and is in the key of B major . The track begins with feedback which plays while drums and a guitar , playing a riff based around a B chord , fade in . The first verse begins on 25 seconds with Gruff Rhys singing the lines " You expose the film in me , we 're drawing rings around the world " backed by harmony vocals on the title phrase . A short bridge plays , during which the guitar chords change from B , E and F ♯ to just E , F ♯ , E , F ♯ . Another verse , bridge and verse play before the last bridge which begins at 1 minute 23 seconds . The outro starts at 1 minute 32 seconds with Rhys singing " Ring ring , ring ring , rings around the world " over the chords B , D and F ♯ backed by harmony vocals . A guitar counter @-@ melody begins at 2 minutes 2 seconds and excerpts from phone calls the band made to random people around the world , including calls to the United States embassies in Madagascar and Moscow , a record shop in Osaka and a record company in Australia , play as the track fades out . 
 = = = Alternative version = = = 
 A Llwybr <unk> remix of " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " is included on the DVD version of Rings Around The World . The track is 3 minutes 33 seconds in length and begins with a reed organ playing a riff in the key of B major . The remix largely follows the arrangement of the original but , for the majority of its duration , dispenses with the instrumental backing , featuring just Gruff Rhys 's main vocals , the band 's backing vocals and excerpts from the random <unk> the group made alongside occasional organ and cymbals . Towards the end of the track the original version 's guitar , drums and bass appear briefly before the song ends with the same reed organ riff that appeared at the start . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critical reaction to " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " was generally positive with many journalists comparing the song to the work of other groups . Writing for the NME , Ted Kessler described the track as " Status Quo for Generation X @-@ ers with a Manhattan Portage full of millennial tension " and went on to ask " who said there was anything wrong with that ? " in his review of the song on its release as a single , despite his earlier review of Rings Around the World claiming that the album would benefit from the removal of the " Status Quo @-@ ish title track " . Q described the track as " excellent " while PopMatters claimed the song " sounds so much like ELO that it blows away everything on last year 's ELO reunion album " and the Dallas Observer stated that " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " is a " Beach Boys / Beatles / ELO homage as fine as the ' 70s heyday of Roy Wood 's Wizzard or very early Cheap Trick " <unk> Media stated that the song " takes the upbeat Britpop of their debut album and layers on spectral details " while Uncut described the track as " tooled up rock ' n ' roll modelled on " Surfin ' USA " . The Guardian claimed the song 's lyrics tackle environmental issues with a " sharp wit " while Drowned in Sound saw them as evidence that chief songwriter Gruff Rhys was " taking his lyrics a little bit more seriously " . The song was placed at number 21 in the 2001 Festive Fifty on John Peel 's BBC Radio 1 show . " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " appeared on the soundtrack to the 2001 film Me Without You . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music videos = = 
 = = = Sean Hillen video = = = 
 A Sean Hillen @-@ directed music video was included on the DVD version of Rings Around the World released July 2001 . The video starts with a static shot of the 1994 collage The Great Pyramids of Carlingford Lough , <unk> by Hillen , which shows a man in a red jumper sat in a wooded area overlooking a river and three pyramids ( this image was used for the front cover of all three formats of the single ) . The camera moves up to reveal a rotating globe in a <unk> sky . As " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " begins to play , the text " In the beginning ... No ! Long before that ... " scrolls slowly from the bottom of the screen upwards . The song 's lyrics are displayed in the same manner throughout the remainder of the video as several objects circle the globe including a flying saucer , metal cube and fireworks . Occasionally the camera switches to a close up view of the globe showing models of huge missile firing electricity pylons . As the song comes to an end the text " Every building has been built " appears in the middle of the screen and the camera pans down to show a black @-@ and @-@ white version of the Hillen collage used in the opening shot . 
 Keyboard player Cian Ciaran has stated that the band deliberately tried to avoid making videos that looked like just " another pop promo ... like MTV " for the DVD version of Rings Around the World and asked the directors to make the visuals as " extreme as possible " . Ciaran claims the directors had to " work even harder at creating something interesting " due to the limited budget available . 
 = = = Pedro Romhanyi video = = = 
 A promotional music video , directed by Pedro Romhanyi , was produced to accompany the release of " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " as a single . According to Gruff Rhys the band made separate videos for Rings Around the World 's three singles as they saw the videos included on the DVD release of the album as " pure art " whereas they needed promotional music videos that were more like adverts for the songs . The video begins with a shot of the band in an all white room playing along to the track . A station identification logo for " SFA television " is seen in the top left and a green graphic appears , showing the volume level being turned up . The camera pans back to reveal a TV which switches channel from " SFA " to a station showing golf . The rest of the video continues this pattern , continually flicking between the band and a variety of other stations , which generally feature similar logos to real life channels but with slightly different names e.g. " Cartoon Animals " ( Cartoon Network ) , " <unk> " ( QVC ) , " Animal Channel " ( Discovery Channel ) Actors , news presenters , puppets , a golfer , an astronaut and weatherman sing along with the track as the television stops on the channel each appears on . As the video ends , the camera pans back to show a television in a room with a man having a telephone conversation . The camera continues to pan back showing this image on a television on a shelf in a small room . The camera pans back through three more televisions , each showing an image of the last shot , ending with a TV in a <unk> room next to an electric fire . A few seconds before the video ends the screen turns to static . The Pedro Romhanyi video appears on the DVD release of the band 's greatest hits album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 and the Enhanced CD version of the " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " single . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 Digipak Enhanced CD ( <unk> ) 
 " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " – 3 : 30 
 " Edam Anchorman " – 3 : 23 
 " All the Shit U Do " – 2 : 30 
 " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World ( Video ) " – 3 : 30 
 12 " ( <unk> ) , MC ( <unk> ) 
 " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " – 3 : 30 
 " Edam Anchorman " – 3 : 23 
 " All the Shit U Do " – 2 : 30 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals 
 Huw Bunford – guitar 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums 
 = = Singles chart positions = = 
 = Super Bowl XLVI halftime show = 
 The Super Bowl XLVI halftime show , on February 5 , 2012 , was part of Super Bowl XLVI at the Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis . It featured Madonna and guests LMFAO , Nicki Minaj , M.I.A. and CeeLo Green . In 2011 , the National Football League ( NFL ) announced that Madonna would perform at the Super Bowl XLVI show . The singer collaborated with Cirque du Soleil on the show , where her longtime choreographer Jamie King was music director ; King , in turn , enlisted the multimedia @-@ show producer Moment Factory . Madonna performed four songs , beginning with " Vogue " in a Roman @-@ Egyptian setting and followed by " Music " with LMFAO . Minaj and M.I.A. joined Madonna for her new single , " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , and Madonna finished with Green on " Like a Prayer " . 
 Preparations began in January , with Madonna saying that the rehearsal was the most exhausting one in which she had ever participated . Costumes were designed by Riccardo Tisci , Givenchy , Miu Miu and Prada . The performance required 500 outfits , including customized costumes for the musical guests and assisting performers . The production team was allotted seven minutes to set up the stage , 12 minutes for the performance and eight minutes to take down the stage . The modular structure was assembled from a truck , with a large white fabric in front as media screens for Moment Factory . Projection mapping was used by video @-@ hardware manufacturer Barco , with films modified for the spectators and the television audience . The stadium was equipped with Sharpys lighting arrangements from Clay Paky , and the show used Sennheiser sound equipment . 
 Madonna was not paid for performing at the halftime show , which provides global exposure for an artist . The show was a success , setting a Super Bowl halftime @-@ show record of 114 million viewers ( higher than the viewership of the game itself ) . Keith Caulfield of Billboard reported a 17 @-@ fold sales increase for Madonna 's back catalog and strong preorder sales for her upcoming releases . Critics praised the show , noting Madonna 's cautious performance . However , M.I.A. extended her middle finger to the camera near the end of her verse of " Give Me All Your <unk> ' " in place of the word " shit " . The rapper was criticized , and the NFL apologized for its inability to blur out the image . The league later fined M.I.A. $ 16 @.@ 6 million , which was settled in a confidential 2014 agreement . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The halftime show was broadcast on NBC . It began as a procession to the stage , with men dressed as gladiators pulling a large structure hidden from view by large gold @-@ colored flags . As " Vogue " began the flags were removed , revealing Madonna in a long , gold @-@ colored cape and an ancient @-@ Egyptian headdress seated on a large throne . The procession reached the stage , and the singer began performing " Vogue " . During the chorus , the stadium floor lit up to reveal animated Vogue magazine covers featuring Madonna . As " Vogue " segued into " Music " , two large boom boxes appeared on the ground screens and the stadium handrails were lit with moving lights . Madonna and her dancers moved towards the stands . <unk> performer Andy Lewis accompanied the singer , who danced on a tall pedestal . Madonna pretended to shoot Lewis and moved to the other end of the stage , where LMFAO sang " Party Rock Anthem " in a segue from " Music " . They and Madonna danced to " Sexy and I Know It " . 
 " Music " ended with a group of female dancers in cheerleading uniforms joining Madonna onstage for " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " . Nicki Minaj and M.I.A. joined her onstage , dressed in Egyptian @-@ style clothing , and they danced as cheerleaders with pom @-@ poms . During the song they stood on separate , elevated platforms , where Minaj and M.I.A. performed their respective verses . CeeLo Green came onstage with a marching band at the end of the song , and he and Madonna performed portions of " Open Your Heart " and " Express Yourself " . " Like a Prayer " opened to a darkened stadium , with small specks of light visible , and a large choir dressed in black joined Madonna onstage . She reached the top of the bleachers and sang the final line before being pulled beneath the stage , surrounded by smoke . The show ended with " World peace " appearing on the ground screens with an image of the continents . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to CBS News , Madonna had been asked to perform in the 1998 and 2000 Super Bowl halftime shows but cancelled both . In January 2000 she was scheduled to perform her new single , " American Pie " , at the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show . However , she withdrew from the commitment due to a conflict with her recording schedule . In a statement at the time , Madonna expressed " sincere apologies " to the league and said : " I look forward to the possibility of doing something with the NFL in the future . " 
 In late 2011 Madonna was busy with the release of her film W.E. and with recording her twelfth studio album , MDNA . The singer was reportedly signed by the NFL for the Super Bowl halftime show , and in December the league confirmed that Madonna would perform in the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis . The game was scheduled for February 5 , 2012 , and its organizers continued their practice of inviting global musicians to perform . Artists who had previously performed in the show included the Black Eyed Peas , Bruce Springsteen , the Rolling Stones , the Who , Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers , U2 , Paul McCartney and Prince . The show coincided with the release of W.E. in United States . 
 Madonna collaborated with Cirque du Soleil to produce the show , and her longtime choreographer Jamie King was its music director . King suggested hiring Moment Factory . The production studio , which had worked on Celine Dion 's Las Vegas residency shows , specializes in multimedia effects . Jacques <unk> , Cirque du Soleil executive producer for special events , said that it was " contributing to the creative process that will lead to the creation of this very special moment ... For us , it 's an interesting opportunity . It 's not something that we do very often , working with other stars " . According to <unk> , Cirque du Soleil was involved with the creative side of the halftime show and its logistical challenges . The circus had previously put together a nine @-@ minute pregame show at the 2007 Super Bowl . " Our work has been done mostly to help magnify and create an environment for the artists " , said Moment Factory executive producer Eric Fournier , citing shows in which the studio had used lighting and video projections for special effects . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Rehearsals = = = 
 Rehearsals began in January 2012 in a New York studio , and lasted for 12 hours . Rappers Nicki Minaj and M.I.A. , who had collaborated on Madonna 's single " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , said that the rehearsals were " the most grueling thing [ they had ] ever done and wouldn 't expect anything else , calling it an ' epic learning experience ' " . Minaj confirmed her performance in the show with a Twitter message , and rapper will.i.am confirmed that the American electronic dance music group LMFAO would also join Madonna for the event . 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , the NFL had coyly revealed the show 's set list in its magazine : " Though Madonna 's set list was not officially announced at press time , fans might expect her to give all her <unk> ' , provide a ray of light and be in vogue with her music " . Before the show , Madonna expressed concern about the physical and time constraints of the event . " I have eight minutes to set up my stage , 12 minutes to put on the greatest show on Earth , and I have seven minutes to take it down . So , that football field is clean for the second half of the game " , she said . " How do you do that ? This is a <unk> girls dream to be performing at the Super Bowl half @-@ time show . In over 25 years of performing that I 've done , I have never worked so hard or been so scrupulous or detail @-@ orientated or freaked out . " The singer 's plan to have 100 drummers descend from the stadium ceiling was cancelled , since the structure could not support the weight . 
 = = = Fashion = = = 
 Madonna had promised that there would be no wardrobe malfunction during the show , alluding to controversy surrounding Janet Jackson 's performance in the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show . Madonna 's show 's fashion theme was the Roman Empire , with gladiator influences combined with modern Roman elements . Costume designer B. Akerlund created the dresses , which took over three months . Akerlund called on other designers to contribute to the costumes , which included Givenchy haute couture , boots by Miu Miu and earrings by <unk> . She worked closely with Madonna , who was involved with details including costuming the show 's gladiators . According to Akerlund : 
 This was by far the biggest challenge I have ever taken on in my career , and I could not be more honored to be a part of such an amazing and historical event . Nothing could ever come close to working with Madonna on this Super Bowl performance , her attention to detail and commitment to all of her projects is truly inspiring and life changing . 
 Madonna 's first dress was black , with a gold @-@ colored , pleated <unk> designed by Riccardo Tisci for Givenchy . The singer wore heavy jewelry , her blonde hair long and tightly waved , with diamond earrings by <unk> . Her first costume also had a gold @-@ sequined cape with a leopard @-@ print chiffon lining and Philip Treacy headgear . For " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , Madonna , Minaj and M.I.A. wore red @-@ and @-@ black cheerleader outfits and carried gold @-@ colored pom @-@ poms . The singer wore a long @-@ sleeved black gown over the short black dress for her last performance . Riccardo Tisci said that he had made all of Madonna 's clothes , gloves , belts , hats and underwear . He had 28 choices for the singer , who decided on the gold cape . Although Tisci and his team had designed a shorter version of the cape , they had to re @-@ do it for the singer . The performance featured 500 outfits customized for LMFAO , Minaj , M.I.A. , Green , 100 drumline performers , 150 gladiators ( who wore black Calvin Klein underwear ) and 200 choir singers . 
 = = = Stage setup = = = 
 The 1 @,@ 500 crew members were allotted seven minutes to set up the stage , with the California @-@ based Torrence All Access Staging and Productions handling the required equipment . Erik Eastland of the company , who oversaw the setup , had been associated with the Grammy Awards and the Daytime Emmy Awards . About 70 percent of the workers were volunteers who underwent six months of screening , and the remainder were stage @-@ vendor employees . The main stage was 120 feet ( 36 @.@ 6 m ) long and modular , assembled in segments from six large trucks . The crew also set up the lighting , video , special effects and audio equipment . 
 The challenge may come from working outside in the elements . It could be 50 degrees when we rehearse and 50 below on game day , we 're working under the pretext that we can be doing this in snow or rain ... In a normal indoor environment we have seven minutes to install the stage and get it camera ready . That can be stretched to nine minutes . It 's the same time frame for this . 
 According to setup coordinator Douglas Cook , the rehearsals enabled them to reduce the setup time to under five minutes . Cook , who had worked on previous halftime shows , understood the details and guided the team . Drawings of the performances depicted what was expected for each setup , with the volunteers assembling the stage in segments and moving them to the field with carts . Madonna 's entrance had to be rehearsed several times for coordination . Although Cook learned during the game that the New England Patriots were scheduled to exit on the route used by volunteers carrying the stage equipment , he resolved the issue by talking with the team . 
 Set designer Bruce Rodgers , who had worked with Madonna on the Drowned World Tour in 2001 , was familiar with the singer 's work ethic . Rodgers , director Hamish Hamilton and executive producer Ricky Kirshner met several times with Madonna 's team , represented by choreographer Jamie King ( who presented the show 's initial concept ) . Rodgers developed a large , cross @-@ shaped stage with a central platform accessible by five hidden lifts , bleachers with an escape system at the rear , four positions for the band to play , an area for slacklining at one edge and ramps at the two ends of the cross . At the front of the stage was a 149 ft × 90 ft ( 45 m × 27 m ) white fabric , the main screen for the Moment Factory projections . Props included a Jimmie Martin @-@ designed gold @-@ leaf throne on a barge carried by 150 gladiators . Rodgers ' greatest challenges were getting the barge onstage and rehearsing the procession . 
 = = = Multimedia and video = = = 
 The stage used multimedia projection and technology conceived by Moment Factory and Cirque du Soleil . After Madonna 's entrance , the ground and stage floor revealed animated Vogue magazine covers featuring the singer . The effect was achieved by projection mapping , which turns an object ( often irregularly @-@ shaped ) into a surface for video projection . Although projection mapping had been used to introduce the Nokia Lumia and project images of NBA players on the Hudson River in 2011 , it had never been used on such a large scale . Moment Factory partner and executive producer Eric Fournier said that since the studio had been associated with technology @-@ dependent shows , preparing for and accommodating the requirements of the Super Bowl were easy . When Moment Factory began the halftime @-@ show preparations , Madonna 's team had already selected the songs , and the studio developed visual effects complementing the songs ' choreography . According to Moment Factory creative director <unk> Bessette , using video projections was the most efficient method for the visual effects , as this required moving less equipment to the field than other methods . Fournier said , " It all came from the decision at the beginning to make a show out of it , not just a performance . Madonna 's a perfectionist , and she wanted to do something extraordinary , so that was the objective of everybody . " 
 The show 's major concepts included the shifting magazine covers , the Egyptian @-@ inspired procession , " intergalactic " boomboxes during " Music " and an effect which made the " stage appear to suck up the grass and chalk from the football field " . Some visuals were synchronized with the dancers and Madonna 's movements . When the visuals were decided , the Moment Factory and Cirque du Soleil staff watched the performances closely to adapt the backdrops to the choreography . Fournier relied on a " disciplined " team enlisted by the NFL and experienced with the video setup , which totaled 32 HD Barco projectors . The projectors were attached to eight pods of four projectors each to cover the entire stadium . Barco 's Projector <unk> was used to operate the screens and display the show 's videos . According to Fournier , " On TV there were a lot of closeups of Madonna and the dancers , but from the audience in the stadium , the show covered 50 yards . That was the idea : that the show , in essence , must eclipse the size of the stadium . " A consistent 10 to 12 people worked on the project to create , in essence , two shows : one for those at the stadium and one for the TV audience . Moment Factory coordinated with the show 's producers so it would be projected properly on television . Bessette said that the video resolution of the videos was very high ( almost 18 times that of normal high definition ) and moving the video files to proper locations was a problem : " We had to find a solution that would be spectacular and that would fit within those parameters " . 
 Rodgers used LMG , Inc for video , light and audio equipment . LMG , in turn , collaborated with the live @-@ event production company <unk> Live on the show 's projection . According to <unk> founder Danny Whetstone , using Barco helped with seamless projection and brightness adjustment : " It was essential that we hang the projectors straight down , 151 feet in the air , lens to field , in order to fill the enormous visual area with the converged image " . Barco 's <unk> has a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ lumen lighting capacity , rendering clear , bright images with high contrast . 
 = = = Lighting and sound = = = 
 Lucas Oil Stadium was equipped with Sharpys lighting arrangements from Clay Paky for the halftime show . Lighting designer Al Gurdon of Incandescent Designs enlisted console group PRG to help him install 204 Sharpys across the main stage . According to Gurdon , Madonna conceived the main idea ; the choreography @-@ driven show , centered on the main stage , was less logistically challenging than those in previous years . However , Gurdon had to ensure that the audience could enjoy the show from a distance and that Madonna was highlighted properly for the cameras . He and board operator Mike Owen brainstormed in England and tried a number of schemes for a week with CAST software . A " cleaner " approach was taken to prevent interference between the video projections and lighting . Gurdon placed the Sharpys together in rectangular areas , with 16 to 20 lights in each . This resulted in a strong , compact , moving light which could be split into smaller beams as needed . 
 Since the arrangement had to be set up in seven minutes , Gurdon developed a rig . He flew equipment to the roof of Lucas Oil , attaching it at a height of 175 feet ( 53 @.@ 3 m ) so that it would not interfere with camera movement during the game . At halftime , it was lowered to light the stadium . Golden light was used for the opening sequence , followed by black and white strobes for " Vogue " . A multicolored palette illuminated " Music " , and red predominated during " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " . " Like a Prayer " had another stream of gold Sharpys , evoking rays of sunlight . 
 Sennheiser sound equipment was used for the audio . According to Matt Napier , Madonna 's monitor engineer , they used Sennheiser 's Wireless Systems Manager software to tweak frequencies . Madonna used an HSP 4 headset at the beginning of the show , later switching to a Sennheiser SKM 5200 @-@ II handheld transmitter . Sennheiser transmitters were also used by Minaj , M.I.A. and LMFAO , and Green 's microphone used an MD 5235 capsule . Napier said in a Mix article that they needed gold @-@ plated transmitters for Madonna and Green , which were provided by Sennheiser the day of the show . Professional Wireless Systems ( PWS ) , a Masque Sound company , were in charge of wireless sound monitoring ; in a series of trial runs , PWS chose a frequency that eliminated interference from other systems . 
 According to LMG video technologist Ken Gay , lighting , sound and television teams met at the Orange County Convention Center to test the setup . They used simple fabrics on the ground to test the lighting projections for the stage . <unk> Bessette had samples to be used for projections , which helped LMG in its tests . The team 's Mark Sanford monitored the cameras for any reflections from the fabric caused by the projections , calculating their effect during the show and adjusting camera placement accordingly . LMG tested the projection pods used from the ceilings at its Orlando headquarters . The pods were positioned 150 feet ( 46 m ) above the ground , using the fabric from the previous test . Concerned that the stadium grass would affect the projections , the company used Heavy <unk> Bright White fabric from All Access . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The halftime show received critical acclaim . Said Marc Schneider of Billboard : " It 's Madonna Louise Ciccone 's world , we 're just living in it " . Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times wrote that although the choice of Madonna as halftime @-@ show performer was a subject of discussion , the singer was " defiantly unconcerned with the more conservative red state wing of the football fanbase who 'd never be caught dead singing along to one of her songs ... and her halftime show was pure spectacle by the Cleopatra of the game ... Madonna is Madonna for a reason . And we saw it firsthand Sunday . " Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot called the show an " S & M party to Ancient Egypt " . Along with reminding the audience of her older hits , Madonna had " important career @-@ advancing work to do ... [ The singer ] , after all , never does anything unless she 's got something to sell , and with a new studio album due out in March and a tour to follow , she had plenty on her to @-@ do list " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote that although the singer was not as " indefatigable " as she had been , she was a " party girl turned regent : a queen on her throne , a homecoming queen strutting in the bleachers , a church singer fronting a choir " . Pareles called Madonna " grown @-@ up " , and wrote that she put on a show appropriate for the NFL . Peter Robinson of The Guardian called the performance low @-@ key for the singer , despite the large audience . Robinson wrote that the show 's budget would " [ make ] your average James Cameron effort look like Homes Under the Hammer " , and called Madonna 's entrance and exit his favorite parts of the show . 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly said that Madonna delivered a " joyous , unironic , openhearted " show rather than a cautious performance . According to Tucker , the singer was in " full command " ; although the visuals lacked flow , the song transitions meshed " perfectly " . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph called the show a " tribute to Madonna " and a " shameless " promotion of the singer 's return to the music scene after directing W.E. : " The message [ of the show ] is that she is back in business . I suspect she ’ d settle for a global number one over global harmony " . Troy Patterson of Slate wrote that Madonna retained her " greatest marketing agent " title with the show and praised its costumes , sets and the singer 's repeated self @-@ referencing . Linda Holmes of NPR said , " What 's curious , given how much ' <unk> , she 's too old ' stuff went around on Twitter , is that everything she did Sunday night is exactly what it should mean to age gracefully " . Miriam Coleman of Rolling Stone called the show a " serious spectacle " , and Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News called it a " high @-@ concept music video " : " Madonna brilliantly manipulates the combined impact of visuals and sonics . The 13 @-@ minute performance was an eye @-@ popping marvel " . A Huffington Post reviewer wrote , " Love her or hate her , there 's no doubt that only Madonna can bring a certain level of pop flair to a performance " . Spencer Kornhaber of The Atlantic praised the show 's choreography and cinematography : " With so , so much to look at , Madonna remained the center of attention . That is , until the end , when white light and smoke engulfed her and she dropped down through the stage , out of sight " . According to Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle , Madonna controlled her nerves and he liked her selection of songs . 
 Cara Kelly of The Washington Post gave the show a mixed review ; although it was " revolutionary " after Janet Jackson 's wardrobe malfunction , it was a " pathetic attempt at a comeback " . According to Lou Harry of the Indianapolis Business Journal , Madonna lacked focus and energy and the audience response was lukewarm . Harry called the show an " awkward celebration " , but praised its overall production . USA Today 's <unk> Gardner wrote , " Madonna herself , stylish but hardly provocative in tailored tops and skirts that showed off her yoga @-@ toned <unk> , delivered [ the songs ] and other flourishes with a winking sense of humor " . David Zurawik of The Baltimore Sun called the show " Madonna 's zombie halftime " , criticizing its song choices and overall concept : " [ Madonna 's ] acting as if she 's almost singing . I say almost , because there is not a whit of artistic aspiration in the star performer or the production as far I can tell . But hey , that 's our sad @-@ sack , super @-@ sized , gross American culture these days , isn 't it . And it is perfectly suited for empty Super Bowl half @-@ time spectacle " . 
 = = Commercial impact = = 
 Like previous performers , Madonna was not paid for the show . According to Zack O 'Malley Greenburg of Forbes , " Typically , the entertainers for the Super Bowl do not get a cash payment ... This is the kind of exposure that entertainers would give their right arm for ; they could do 20 Leno and Letterman appearances and still not reach that [ kind of ] audience " . Greenburg wrote that with 30 @-@ second commercial spots commanding over $ 3 million apiece , the 12 minutes of free television exposure had a total value of $ 84 million for Madonna 's enterprises and the singer did not have to pay for accommodations , travel , backup dancers , stage setup , advertising and publicity : " Given all these benefits , playing the Super Bowl halftime show for free is more than worth the trouble . In fact , it 's incredibly lucrative – and such a good deal for artists that some suspect a major change might be on the horizon " . 
 Madonna 's performance was the most @-@ watched Super Bowl halftime show in history , with 114 million viewers – more than the game itself , which had 111 @.@ 3 million viewers . According to the Nielsen ratings , the show had a 47 @.@ 4 household rating ; among adults 18 – 49 it had a 41 @.@ 5 rating , compared with the game average of 40 @.@ 5 . Reuters noted that the half @-@ hour from 9 : 30 to 9 : 58 ET peaked at a 50 @.@ 7 household rating and a 72 share , with 117 @.@ 7 million viewers . The record was broken by Bruno Mars in 2014 ( 115 million ) and Katy Perry in 2015 ( 118 million ) . Madonna set a record as the most @-@ tweeted subject on Twitter ( 10 @,@ 245 posts in one second , with an average of 8 @,@ 000 tweets per second for five minutes ) and was the most @-@ searched term on Google during the show . Wired CEO Mark <unk> tweeted that less than one @-@ third of the tweets were negative , 59 percent were positive and 11 percent were neutral . According to Billboard , the day after the show its ratings and economic impact were discussed . 
 The show 's chief impact was on Madonna 's music . Keith Caulfield of Billboard wrote that about 50 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders for Madonna 's 12th studio album , MDNA , were placed within three days of its availability on the iTunes Store . That week , according to Nielsen SoundScan , " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " had 115 @,@ 000 digital downloads and the singer 's catalog of older albums had a 410 percent increase in sales ( from 5 @,@ 000 to 26 @,@ 000 copies ) . A week after the Super Bowl , " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " had an additional 165 @,@ 000 digital downloads ( a 44 @-@ percent increase ) and her other songs sold a combined 166 @,@ 000 copies ( up from 94 @,@ 000 the previous week ) . " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " reached number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart ; the singer 's 38th top @-@ ten hit , it increased her record as the artist with the most top @-@ ten singles on the chart . Madonna 's back catalog of albums also had increased sales due to discounting and publicity generated by the single and her performance . Billboard estimated that her top @-@ 10 digital sales collectively increased over 1 @,@ 700 percent . Madonna 's bestselling album was the 2009 greatest @-@ hits collection , Celebration , which sold 16 @,@ 000 copies ( up 1 @,@ 341 percent ) and reentered the Billboard 200 album chart . The following week Celebration fell 105 spots on the chart to number 157 , with sales falling to 4 @,@ 000 copies . " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " fell to number 39 on the Hot 100 , with sales falling by 58 percent to 69 @,@ 000 copies . The show had an impact on slacklining ; The New York Times reported , " [ Andy Lewis ] and his sport had never appeared before an audience like the one commanded by Madonna at halftime of the Super Bowl " . According to professional <unk> Frankie Najera , " That was by far the biggest thing that has happened for the sport " . 
 = = M.I.A. controversy = = 
 M.I.A. extended her middle finger to the camera near the end of her verse in " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " instead of singing the word " shit " , and the media compared the incident to Janet Jackson 's 2004 wardrobe malfunction . According to People , " Call it a finger malfunction ? Madonna was supposed to be the center of attention during the Super Bowl halftime show Sunday , but the Queen of Pop was upstaged by her collaborator M.I.A. , who flipped off the camera at one point during the performance , prompting swift apologies from the NFL and NBC . " Madonna expressed her disappointment in an interview with host Ryan Seacrest on his talk show , On Air with Ryan Seacrest . She said that it was a " teenager ... irrelevant thing " for M.I.A. to do , and was " out of place " in the show : " I was really surprised . I didn 't know anything about it . I wasn 't happy about it . I understand it 's punk rock and everything , but to me there was such a feeling of love and good energy and positivity ; it seemed negative . " 
 According to NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy , " Our system was late to obscure the inappropriate gesture and we apologize to our viewers . The NFL hired the talent and produced the halftime show . There was a failure in NBC 's delay system . The obscene gesture in the performance was completely inappropriate , very disappointing , and we apologize to our fans " . McCarthy said that the gesture was not made during rehearsals , and M.I.A. improvised it on stage . The Federal Communications Commission received 222 complaints about the rapper 's gesture , and Rolling Stone reported that the commission might " punish " the NFL and NBC despite their apologies . Any fine imposed on the NFL would be charged to M.I.A. , since the rapper had signed a contract <unk> the league against FCC fines . A year later , it was reported that the NFL had filed a $ 1 @.@ 5 million arbitration claim against M.I.A. for " breach of her contract and flagrant disregard for the values that form the cornerstone of the NFL brand and the Super Bowl " . Her lawyer , Howard King , filed a counterclaim calling the NFL 's action " hilarious in light of the weekly felonies committed by its stars " . M.I.A. enlisted the help of fans in documenting objectionable actions by the NFL to refute the league 's claim of damage to its reputation . 
 In September 2013 , M.I.A. released a video statement about the lawsuit . The rapper said , " They 're basically [ saying ] it 's OK for me to promote being sexually exploited as a female , than to display empowerment , female empowerment , through being punk rock . That 's what it boils down to , and I 'm being sued for it " . In March 2014 , Rolling Stone reported that the NFL had added $ 15 million to its arbitration claim for a total of $ 16 @.@ 6 million . M.I.A. said on Twitter that the NFL wanted a portion of her income , which lacked " any basis in law , fact , or logic " , and blamed NBC for its " dereliction " in not blurring out the gesture during the live telecast . M.I.A. tweeted Madonna with a request to borrow $ 16 million , later deleting the tweet . In August 2014 , ESPN reported that the NFL had reached a confidential agreement with M.I.A. Neither attorney Howard King nor the NFL provided any further details . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Vogue " 
 " Music " ( featuring LMFAO , contains elements of " Party Rock Anthem " and " Sexy and I Know It " ) 
 " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " ( featuring Nicki Minaj and M.I.A. ) 
 " Open Your Heart / Express Yourself " ( featuring CeeLo Green , the Avon High School Drumline , the Center Grove High School Drumline , the Fishers High School Drumline and the Franklin Central High School Drumline ) 
 " Like a Prayer " ( featuring CeeLo Green and a choir of 200 local Indianapolis singers ) 
 Source for the set list performed at the show . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the halftime show 's name reel . 
 = Washington State Route 173 = 
 State Route 173 ( SR 173 ) is an 11 @.@ 86 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 19 @.@ 09 km ) state highway serving Douglas and Okanogan counties in the U.S. state of Washington . The highway travels northwest along the Columbia River from SR 17 in Bridgeport to U.S. Route 97 ( US 97 ) in Brewster . It serves as an alternate route to SR 17 , which travels north of the Columbia River , and serves the Chief Joseph State Park and the Bridgeport Bar State Wildlife Recreation Area . SR 173 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering and codified in 1970 , but it has been a part of the state highway system since 1931 as a branch of State Road 10 , later Primary State Highway 10 ( PSH 10 ) . The highway crosses the Columbia River on the Brewster Bridge , which originally opened in 1928 and was destroyed in 1967 before being re @-@ built a decade later . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 173 begins at an intersection with SR 17 southwest of the Bridgeport Bridge in Bridgeport , a city in rural Douglas County . The two @-@ lane street travels northwest through Bridgeport as Foster Creek Avenue and turns northeast onto 17th Avenue and later northwest as Columbia Avenue to Bridgeport Park , where SR 173 turns southwest onto 10th Street and Maple Street to leave the city . The highway turns northwest , following the Columbia River towards Chief Joseph State Park . SR 173 continues west , forming the southern boundary of the Bridgeport Bar State Wildlife Recreation Area before crossing the Columbia River into Okanogan County on the Brewster Bridge . The highway enters Brewster and becomes Bridge Street , traveling north over Swamp Creek to end at an intersection with US 97 . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that between 970 and 3 @,@ 400 vehicles per day used the highway , mostly in Brewster . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 173 follows the route of wagon roads built in the late 19th century between Brewster Ferry and Bridgeport Ferry on the east side of the Columbia River . The Brewster Bridge was completed in June 1928 and the roadway was first codified in 1931 as part of a State Road 10 branch that connected Brewster to Coulee City . State Road 10 became PSH 10 and retained the branch during the creation of the primary and secondary state highway system in 1937 as the state purchased the Brewster Bridge . The branch was moved to the west side of the Columbia River , located north of Bridgeport , in 1951 and a new branch between Bridgeport and Brewster was created to continue maintenance of the paved highway . During the 1964 highway renumbering , SR 173 was established on the route of the PSH 10 branch between Bridgeport and Brewster , later re @-@ aligned into a straighter highway and codified in 1970 . The Brewster Bridge later was destroyed in a fire in August 1967 , being replaced by a 15 @-@ minute ferry until the new span was opened in the 1970s . No major revisions to the route of the highway have occurred since 1970 , however the state tried unsuccessfully to transfer ownership of SR 173 and the Brewster Bridge in 1986 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Minotaur @-@ class cruiser ( 1906 ) = 
 The Minotaur class was a three @-@ ship class of armoured cruisers built in the first decade of the twentieth century for the Royal Navy . They initially served with the Home Fleet , generally as the flagships of cruiser squadrons . Minotaur became flagship of the China Station in 1910 and Defence served as flagship of the 1st Cruiser Squadron in the Mediterranean from 1912 ; Shannon remained at home as flagship of several different squadrons . 
 When World War I began in August 1914 , Defence participated in the pursuit of the German ships SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau and Minotaur hunted for the German East Asia Squadron and German commerce raiders in the Pacific and Indian Oceans . Shannon remained with the Grand Fleet , as the Home Fleet was renamed , for the entire war . All three were present at the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 , where Defence was sunk with heavy loss of life . The surviving pair spent most of the rest of the war assigned to the Northern Patrol unsuccessfully searching for German warships and commerce raiders . They were scrapped after the war . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Minotaur @-@ class ships were the last armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy . They were significantly larger and more heavily armed than their predecessors , although their armour was reduced in an attempt to compensate for the additional weight of the armament . The design was criticized for this weakness as well as the wide dispersal of the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 191 mm ) turrets along the length of the ship . They have been described by naval historian R. A. Burt as " cruiser editions of the Lord Nelson @-@ class battleship " . 
 The Minotaur class displaced 14 @,@ 600 long tons ( 14 @,@ 800 t ) as built and 16 @,@ 630 long tons ( 16 @,@ 900 t ) at deep load . Defence and Minotaur had an overall length of 519 feet ( 158 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 74 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 7 m ) and a mean draught of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . Shannon had 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) more beam and one foot less draught than her sister ships to evaluate the theory that she might be faster with these proportions than her sisters . The class displaced 1 @,@ 050 long tons ( 1 @,@ 070 t ) more , was 13 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) longer overall , was one foot broader in beam and had more freeboard than their predecessors of the Duke of Edinburgh class . At normal load they had a metacentric height of 3 @.@ 05 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) , and at deep load , 3 @.@ 25 feet ( 1 @.@ 0 m ) . The Minotaurs were designed to carry 779 officers and enlisted men , but mustered 802 – 842 between 1908 and 1912 . 
 The ships were powered by a pair of four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 27 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 20 @,@ 130 kW ) intended to give a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The engines were powered by 24 water @-@ tube boilers with a working pressure of 275 psi ( 1 @,@ 896 kPa ; 19 kgf / cm2 ) . They carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 060 long tons ( 2 @,@ 090 t ) of coal and an additional 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , the ships could steam for 8 @,@ 150 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 090 km ; 9 @,@ 380 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . During her sea trials on 6 December 1907 , Minotaur made her designed speed when she reached 23 @.@ 01 knots from 27 @,@ 049 ihp ( 20 @,@ 170 kW ) during her eight @-@ hour full @-@ power test . Shannon proved to be the slowest of the three and only reached 22 @.@ 324 knots ( 41 @.@ 344 km / h ; 25 @.@ 690 mph ) from 27 @,@ 372 ihp ( 20 @,@ 411 kW ) during her trial three days before Minotaur 's . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Minotaurs carried only four 50 @-@ calibre BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mk XI guns , compared to the six of the earlier ships , but the guns were mounted in twin hydraulically powered centreline turrets , which gave them the same four @-@ gun broadside as the Duke of Edinburghs . The guns had an elevation range of − 5 ° / + 15 ° . They fired 380 @-@ pound ( 172 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 875 ft / s ( 876 m / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 16 @,@ 200 yd ( 14 @,@ 813 m ) with armour @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells . The rate of fire of these guns was up to four rounds per minute and the ships carried 100 rounds per gun . 
 The secondary armament was much heavier than the older ships , with five single hydraulically powered turrets equipped with 50 @-@ calibre BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk II guns mounted on each side . The guns could be depressed to − 7 @.@ 5 ° and elevated to + 15 ° . Using <unk> AP shells , they had a maximum range of 15 @,@ 571 yd ( 14 @,@ 238 m ) . Their 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) projectiles were fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 841 ft / s ( 866 m / s ) at four rounds per minute . Each gun was provided with 100 rounds . 
 Anti @-@ torpedo boat defence was provided by sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder 18 @-@ cwt guns . Eight of these were mounted on the tops of the 7 @.@ 5 inch gun turrets and the other eight in the superstructure ( four fore and four aft ) , as per the deck plan illustration . They fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 660 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) ; this gave a maximum range of 9 @,@ 300 yd ( 8 @,@ 500 m ) at their maximum elevation of + 20 ° . They also mounted five submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two on each broadside , plus one mounted in the stern . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Armour in the Minotaur class was reduced compared to the earlier ships . The upper belt , considered superfluous after the elimination of the main deck casemates , was eliminated as were the transverse bulkheads that connected the waterline belt to the barbettes that protected the ships from raking fire . The 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) waterline armour belt of Krupp cemented armour extended past the fore and aft 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun turrets ; its lower edge was about 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) below the waterline at normal load . Forward the armour was 4 inches ( 102 mm ) up to about 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) from the bow when it was reduced to three inches ; aft the belt armour was three inches thick all the way to the stern . In addition to this , the engine cylinders were protected by armour plates 1 @.@ 5 – 2 inches ( 38 – 51 mm ) thick . 
 The faces of the primary gun turrets were 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick and they had 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) sides . The face armour for the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch turrets was also eight inches thick , but their sides were only 6 inches ( 152 mm ) thick . The main barbettes were protected by seven inches of armour as were the ammunition hoists , although the armour for those thinned to two inches between the lower and main decks . The thickness of the lower deck ranged from 1 @.@ 5 inches on the flat amidships to two inches on the slope connecting it to the lower edge of the waterline belt for the length of the ship . At the ends of the ship , the thickness of the deck armour increased to two inches . The sides of the forward conning tower were 10 inches thick while those of the rear conning tower were three inches in thickness . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 The funnels were raised 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) in 1909 to eliminate smoke interference with the bridge . During 1915 – 16 , a 12 @-@ pounder was fitted to the rear superstructure and a three @-@ pounder to the quarterdeck , both guns on high @-@ angle mounts for anti @-@ aircraft defence . In 1916 , reinforcing legs were added to the foremast to support the weight of a fire @-@ control director ; Shannon received her director that same year and Minotaur in 1917 – 18 . In the last year of the war , the reinforced foremast was replaced by a stronger tripod mast and the 12 @-@ pounder was moved to the top of the forward turret . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Careers = = 
 The sisters were all initially assigned to the Home Fleet upon commissioning with Shannon frequently serving as the flagship of the 5th , 2nd and 3rd Cruiser Squadrons before reverting to the flagship of the 2nd Squadron in 1914 . Minotaur became the flagship of the China Station in 1910 and she was briefly joined by Defence in 1912 before the latter was transferred to the Mediterranean at the end of the year to serve as flagship of the 1st Cruiser Squadron there . 
 When the war began , Minotaur searched unsuccessfully for the German East Asia Squadron in the Pacific and the commerce @-@ raiding light cruiser Emden in the Indian Ocean before she was transferred to the Grand Fleet at the end of 1914 . She became flagship of the 7th Cruiser Squadron and was assigned to the Northern Patrol . Defence participated in the pursuit of the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau , but Rear @-@ Admiral Ernest Troubridge decided not to engage Goeben due to the latter 's more powerful guns , heavier armour and faster speed . She then blockaded the German ships inside the Dardanelles . The Admiralty ordered the ship to the South Atlantic in October to join Rear @-@ Admiral Christopher Cradock 's squadron searching for the German ships . Defence , however , had only reached Montevideo , Uruguay by 3 November when she received word that most of Admiral Cradock 's squadron had been destroyed two days previously at the Battle of Coronel . The ship was then ordered to South Africa to escort a troop convoy to Great Britain . Defence departed Table Bay , Cape Town in December and rejoined the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet as its flagship upon her arrival . 
 In early 1915 , the sisters were all assigned to the Grand Fleet , each as flagship of their respective squadrons . Just before the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 , the 2nd and 7th Cruiser Squadrons were combined with Minotaur as the flagship . During the battle the 2nd Cruiser Squadron was unengaged and did not fire their guns . In contrast the 1st Cruiser Squadron was engaged at close range by the German capital ships during the battle ; Defence was hit by two salvoes from the German ships that caused the aft 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch magazine to explode . The resulting fire spread via the ammunition passages to the adjacent 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch magazines which detonated in turn . The ship exploded with the loss of all men on board ; between 893 and 903 men were killed . 
 Shannon and Minotaur were also present during the attempted interception of the High Seas Fleet by the Grand Fleet on 19 August although no combat occurred . For the rest of the war , the ships were assigned to the Northern Patrol . On 11 December 1917 , the sisters and four destroyers were assigned to patrol the convoy route between Lerwick and Norway , but the Germans successfully destroyed a convoy off the Norwegian coast on the following day and returned home without being spotted . The British ships were only able to rescue survivors and escort the sole surviving ship from the convoy , the crippled destroyer Pellew , back to Scapa Flow . 
 The sisters were paid off in 1919 , although Shannon temporarily became a training ship before the two were sold for scrap in 1920 . Shannon was not actually broken up until January 1923 . 
 = <unk> = 
 The cervix or cervix uteri ( Latin : neck of the uterus ) is the lower part of the uterus in the human female reproductive system . In a non @-@ pregnant woman , the cervix is usually 2 to 3 cm long ( ~ 1 inch ) and roughly cylindrical in shape . The narrow , central cervical canal runs along its entire length , connecting the uterine cavity and the lumen of the vagina . The opening into the uterus is called the internal os , and the opening into the vagina is called the external os . The lower part of the cervix , known as the vaginal portion of the cervix ( or ectocervix ) , bulges into the top of the vagina . The cervix has been documented anatomically since at least the time of Hippocrates , over 2 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 The cervical canal is a passage through which sperm must travel to fertilize an egg cell after sexual intercourse . Several methods of contraception , including cervical caps and cervical diaphragms aim to block or prevent the passage of sperm through the cervical canal . Cervical mucus is used in several methods of fertility awareness , such as the Creighton model and Billings method , due to its changes in consistency throughout the menstrual period . During vaginal childbirth , the cervix must flatten and dilate to allow the fetus to progress along the birth canal . <unk> and doctors use the extent of the dilation of the cervix to assist decision @-@ making during childbirth . 
 The endocervical canal is lined with a single layer of column @-@ shaped cells , while the ectocervix is covered with multiple layers of cells topped with flat cells . The two types of epithelia meet the squamocolumnar junction . Infection with the human papillomavirus ( HPV ) can cause changes in the epithelium , which can lead to cancer of the cervix . Cervical cytology tests can often detect cervical cancer and its precursors , and enable early successful treatment . Ways to avoid HPV include avoiding sex , using condoms , and HPV vaccination . HPV vaccines , developed in the early 21st century , reduce the risk of cervical cancer by preventing infections from the main cancer @-@ causing strains of HPV . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The cervix is part of the female reproductive system . Around 2 – 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) in length , it is the lower narrower part of the uterus continuous above with the broader upper part — or body — of the uterus . The lower end of the cervix bulges through the anterior wall of the vagina , and is referred to as the vaginal portion of cervix ( or ectocervix ) while the rest of the cervix above the vagina is called the supravaginal portion of cervix . A central canal , known as the cervical canal , runs along its length and connects the cavity of the body of the uterus with the lumen of the vagina . The openings are known as the internal os and external orifice of the uterus ( or external os ) respectively . The mucosa lining the cervical canal is known as the endocervix , and the mucosa covering the ectocervix is known as the <unk> . The cervix has an inner mucosal layer , a thick layer of smooth muscle , and posteriorly the supravaginal portion has a <unk> covering consisting of connective tissue and overlying peritoneum . 
 In front of the upper part of the cervix lies the bladder , separated from it by cellular connective tissue known as <unk> , which also extends over the sides of the cervix . To the rear , the supravaginal cervix is covered by peritoneum , which runs onto the back of the vaginal wall and then turns upwards and onto the rectum , forming the recto @-@ uterine pouch . The cervix is more tightly connected to surrounding structures than the rest of the uterus . 
 The cervical canal varies greatly in length and width between women or over the course of a woman 's life , and it can measure 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 inch ) at its widest diameter in <unk> adults . It is wider in the middle and narrower at each end . The anterior and posterior walls of the canal each have a vertical fold , from which ridges run diagonally upwards and laterally . These are known as palmate folds , due to their resemblance to a palm leaf . The anterior and posterior ridges are arranged in such a way that they interlock with each other and close the canal . They are often effaced after pregnancy . 
 The ectocervix ( also known as the vaginal portion of the cervix ) has a convex , elliptical shape and projects into the cervix between the anterior and posterior vaginal <unk> . On the rounded part of the ectocervix is a small , depressed external opening , connecting the cervix with the vagina . The size and shape of the ectocervix and the external opening ( external os ) can vary according to age , hormonal state , and whether natural or normal childbirth has taken place . In women who have not had a vaginal delivery , the external opening is small and circular , and in women who have had a vaginal delivery , it is slit @-@ like . On average , the ectocervix is 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) wide . 
 Blood is supplied to the cervix by the descending branch of the uterine artery and drains into the uterine vein . The pelvic splanchnic nerves , emerging as S2 – S3 , transmit the sensation of pain from the cervix to the brain . These nerves travel along the <unk> ligaments , which pass from the uterus to the anterior sacrum . 
 Three channels facilitate lymphatic drainage from the cervix . The anterior and lateral cervix drains to nodes along the uterine arteries , travelling along the cardinal ligaments at the base of the broad ligament to the external iliac lymph nodes and ultimately the <unk> lymph nodes . The posterior and lateral cervix drains along the uterine arteries to the internal iliac lymph nodes and ultimately the <unk> lymph nodes , and the posterior section of the cervix drains to the obturator and presacral lymph nodes . However , there are variations as lymphatic drainage from the cervix travels to different sets of pelvic nodes in some people . This has implications in scanning nodes for involvement in cervical cancer . 
 After menstruation and directly under the influence of estrogen , the cervix undergoes a series of changes in position and texture . During most of the menstrual cycle , the cervix remains firm , and is positioned low and closed . However , as ovulation approaches , the cervix becomes softer and rises to open in response to the higher levels of estrogen present . These changes are also accompanied by changes in cervical mucus , described below . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As a component of the female reproductive system , the cervix is derived from the two <unk> ducts ( also called Müllerian ducts ) , which develop around the sixth week of embryogenesis . During development , the outer parts of the two ducts fuse , forming a single urogenital canal that will become the vagina , cervix and uterus . The cervix grows in size at a smaller rate than the body of the uterus , so the relative size of the cervix over time decreases , decreasing from being much larger than the body of the uterus in fetal life , twice as large during childhood , and decreasing to its adult size , smaller than the uterus , after puberty . Previously it was thought that during fetal development , the original squamous epithelium of the cervix is derived from the urogenital sinus and the original columnar epithelium is derived from the <unk> duct . The point at which these two original epithelia meet is called the original squamocolumnar junction . New studies show , however , that all the cervical as well as large part of the vaginal epithelium are derived from Müllerian duct tissue and that phenotypic differences might be due to other causes . 
 = = = Histology = = = 
 The endocervical mucosa is about 3 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) thick , lined with a single layer of columnar mucous cells , and contains numerous tubular mucous glands which empty viscous alkaline mucus into the lumen . In contrast , the ectocervix is covered with <unk> stratified squamous epithelium , which resembles the squamous epithelium lining the vaginal . The junction between these two types of epithelia is called the squamocolumnar junction . Underlying both types of epithelium is a tough layer of collagen . The mucosa of the endocervix is not shed during menstruation . The cervix has more fibrous tissue , including collagen and elastin , than the rest of the uterus . 
 In prepubertal girls , the functional squamocolumnar junction is present just within the endocervical canal . Upon entering puberty , due to hormonal influence , and during pregnancy , the columnar epithelium extends outwards over the ectocervix as the cervix everts . Hence , this also causes the squamocolumnar junction to move outwards onto the vaginal portion of the cervix , where it is exposed to the acidic vaginal environment . The exposed columnar epithelium can undergo physiological metaplasia and change to tougher metaplastic squamous epithelium in days or weeks , which when mature is very similar to the original squamous epithelium . The new squamocolumnar junction is therefore internal to the original squamocolumnar junction , and the zone of unstable epithelium between the two junctions is called the transformation zone of the cervix . After menopause , the uterine structures involute and the functional squamocolumnar junction moves into the endocervical canal . 
 Nabothian cysts ( or Nabothian follicles ) form in the transformation zone where the lining of metaplastic epithelium has replaced mucous epithelium and caused a strangulation of the outlet of some of the mucous glands . A build up of mucus in the glands forms Nabothian cysts , usually less than about 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) in diameter , which are considered physiological rather than pathological . Both gland openings and Nabothian cysts are helpful to identify the transformation zone . 
 = = Function = = 
 = = = Fertility = = = 
 The cervical canal is a pathway through which sperm enter the uterus after sexual intercourse , and some forms of artificial insemination . Some sperm remains in cervical crypts , <unk> of the endocervix , which act as a reservoir , releasing sperm over several hours and maximising the chances of fertilisation . A theory states the cervical and uterine contractions during orgasm draw semen into the uterus . Although the " <unk> theory " has been generally accepted for some years , it has been disputed due to lack of evidence , small sample size , and methodological errors . 
 Some methods of fertility awareness , such as the Creighton model and the Billings method involve estimating a woman 's periods of fertility and infertility by observing physiological changes in her body . Among these changes are several involving the quality of her cervical mucus : the sensation it causes at the vulva , its elasticity ( <unk> ) , its transparency , and the presence of <unk> . 
 = = = Cervical mucus = = = 
 Several hundred glands in the endocervix produce 20 – 60 mg of cervical mucus a day , increasing to 600 mg around the time of ovulation . It is viscous as it contains large proteins known as mucins . The viscosity and water content varies during the menstrual cycle ; mucus is composed of around 93 % water , reaching 98 % at <unk> . These changes allow it to function either as a barrier or a transport medium to spermatozoa . It contains electrolytes such as calcium , sodium , and potassium ; organic components such as glucose , amino acids , and soluble proteins ; trace elements including zinc , copper , iron , manganese , and selenium ; free fatty acids ; enzymes such as amylase ; and prostaglandins . Its consistency is determined by the influence of the hormones estrogen and progesterone . At <unk> around the time of ovulation — a period of high estrogen levels — the mucus is thin and serous to allow sperm to enter the uterus , and is more alkaline and hence more hospitable to sperm . It is also higher in electrolytes , which results in the " <unk> " pattern that can be observed in drying mucus under low magnification ; as the mucus dries , the salts crystallize , resembling the leaves of a fern . The mucus has stretchy character described as <unk> most prominent around the time of ovulation . 
 At other times in the cycle , the mucus is thick and more acidic due to the effects of progesterone . This " infertile " mucus acts as a barrier to sperm from entering the uterus . Women taking an oral contraceptive pill also have thick mucus from the effects of progesterone . Thick mucus also prevents pathogens from interfering with a nascent pregnancy . 
 A cervical mucus plug , called the operculum , forms inside the cervical canal during pregnancy . This provides a protective seal for the uterus against the entry of pathogens and against leakage of uterine fluids . The mucus plug is also known to have antibacterial properties . This plug is released as the cervix dilates , either during the first stage of childbirth or shortly before . It is visible as a blood @-@ tinged mucous discharge . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The cervix plays a major role in childbirth . As the fetus descends within the uterus in preparation for birth , the presenting part , usually the head , rests on and is supported by the cervix . As labour progresses , the cervix becomes softer and shorter , begins to dilate , and rotates to face anteriorly . The support the cervix provides to the fetal head starts to give way when the uterus begins its contractions . During childbirth , the cervix must dilate to a diameter of more than 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) to accommodate the head of the fetus as it descends from the uterus to the vagina . In becoming wider , the cervix also becomes shorter , a phenomenon known as effacement . 
 Along with other factors , midwives and doctors use the extent of cervical dilation to assist decision making during childbirth . Generally , the active first stage of labour , when the uterine contractions become strong and regular , begins when the cervical dilation is more than 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) . The second phase of labor begins when the cervix has dilated to 10 cm ( 4 in ) , which is regarded as its fullest dilation , and is when active pushing and contractions push the baby along the birth canal leading to the birth of the baby . The number of past vaginal deliveries is a strong factor in influencing how rapidly the cervix is able to dilate in labour . The time taken for the cervix to dilate and efface is one factor used in reporting systems such as the Bishop score , used to recommend whether interventions such as a forceps delivery , induction , or Caesarean section should be used in childbirth . 
 Cervical incompetence is a condition in which shortening of the cervix due to dilation and thinning occurs , before term pregnancy . Short cervical length is the strongest predictor of preterm birth . 
 = = = Contraception = = = 
 Several methods of contraception involve the cervix . Cervical diaphragms are reusable , firm @-@ rimmed plastic devices inserted by a woman prior to intercourse that cover the cervix . Pressure against the walls of the vagina maintain the position of the diaphragm , and it acts as a physical barrier to prevent the entry of sperm into the uterus , preventing fertilisation . Cervical caps are a similar method , although they are smaller and adhere to the cervix by suction . <unk> and caps are often used in conjunction with spermicides . In one year , 12 % of women using the diaphragm will undergo an unintended pregnancy , and with optimal use this falls to 6 % . Efficacy rates are lower for the cap , with 18 % of women undergoing an unintended pregnancy , and 10 – 13 % with optimal use . Most types of progestogen @-@ only pills are effective as a contraceptive because they thicken cervical mucus making it difficult for sperm to pass along the endocervical canal . In addition , they may also sometimes prevent ovulation . In contrast , contraceptive pills that contain both oestrogen and progesterone , the combined oral contraceptive pills , work mainly by preventing ovulation . They also thicken cervical mucus and thin the lining of the uterus enhancing their effectiveness . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 In 2008 , cervical cancer was the third @-@ most common cancer in women worldwide , with rates varying geographically from less than one to more than 50 cases per 100 @,@ 000 women . It is a leading cause of cancer @-@ related death in poor countries , where delayed diagnosis leading to poor outcomes is common . The introduction of routine screening has resulted in fewer cases of ( and deaths from ) cervical cancer , however this has mainly taken place in developed countries . Most developing countries have limited or no screening , and 85 % of the global burden occurring there . 
 Cervical cancer nearly always involves human papillomavirus ( HPV ) infection . HPV is a virus with numerous strains , several of which predispose to precancerous changes in the cervical epithelium , particularly in the transformation zone , which is the most common area for cervical cancer to start . HPV vaccines , such as <unk> and <unk> , reduce the incidence of cervical cancer , by inoculating against the viral strains involved in cancer development . 
 Potentially precancerous changes in the cervix can be detected by cervical screening , using methods including a Pap smear ( also called a cervical smear ) , in which epithelial cells are scraped from the surface of the cervix and examined under a microscope . The <unk> , an instrument used to see a magnified view of the cervix , was invented in 1925 . The Pap smear was developed by Georgios Papanikolaou in 1928 . A <unk> procedure using a heated loop of platinum to excise a patch of cervical tissue was developed by Aurel Babes in 1927 . In some parts of the developed world including the UK , the Pap test has been superseded with liquid @-@ based cytology . 
 A cheap , cost @-@ effective and practical alternative in poorer countries is visual inspection with acetic acid ( VIA ) . Instituting and sustaining cytology @-@ based programs in these regions can be difficult , due to the need for trained personnel , equipment and facilities and difficulties in follow @-@ up . With VIA , results and treatment can be available on the same day . As a screening test , VIA is comparable to cervical cytology in accurately identifying precancerous lesions . 
 A result of dysplasia is usually further investigated , such as by taking a cone biopsy , which may also remove the cancerous lesion . Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia is a possible result of the biopsy , and represents dysplastic changes that may eventually progress to invasive cancer . Most cases of cervical cancer are detected in this way , without having caused any symptoms . When symptoms occur , they may include vaginal bleeding , discharge , or discomfort . 
 = = = Inflammation = = = 
 Inflammation of the cervix is referred to as <unk> . This inflammation may be of the endocervix or ectocervix . When associated with the endocervix , it is associated with a mucous vaginal discharge and the sexually transmitted infections such as chlamydia and gonorrhoea . As many as half of pregnant women having a <unk> infection of the cervix are asymptomatic . Other causes include overgrowth of the commensal flora of the vagina . When associated with the ectocervix , inflammation may be caused by the herpes simplex virus . Inflammation is often investigated through directly visualising the cervix using a speculum , which may appear <unk> due to exudate , and by taking a Pap smear and examining for causal bacteria . Special tests may be used to identify particular bacteria . If the inflammation is due to a bacterium , then antibiotics may be given as treatment . 
 = = = Anatomical abnormalities = = = 
 Cervical stenosis refers to an abnormally narrow cervical canal , typically associated with trauma caused by removal of tissue for investigation or treatment of cancer , or cervical cancer itself . <unk> , used from 1938 to 1971 to prevent preterm labour and miscarriage , is also strongly associated with the development of cervical stenosis and other abnormalities in the daughters of the exposed women . Other abnormalities include : vaginal <unk> , in which the squamous epithelium of the ectocervix becomes columnar ; cancers such as clear cell adenocarcinomas ; cervical ridges and hoods ; and development of a <unk> cervix appearance . 
 Cervical agenesis is a rare congenital condition in which the cervix completely fails to develop , often associated with the concurrent failure of the vagina to develop . Other congenital cervical abnormalities exist , often associated with abnormalities of the vagina and uterus . The cervix may be duplicated in situations such as bicornuate uterus and uterine <unk> . 
 Cervical polyps , which are benign <unk> of endocervical tissue , if present , may cause bleeding , or a benign overgrowth may be present in the endocervical canal . Cervical ectropion refers to the horizontal overgrowth of the endocervical columnar lining in a one @-@ cell @-@ thick layer over the ectocervix . 
 = = Other mammals = = 
 Female marsupials have paired uteri and cervices . Most eutherian ( placental ) mammal species have a single cervix and single , bipartite or bicornuate uterus . <unk> , rodents , aardvarks and hyraxes have a duplex uterus and two cervices . <unk> and rodents share many morphological characteristics and are grouped together in the clade Glires . Anteaters of the family <unk> are unusual in that they lack a defined cervix ; they are thought to have lost the characteristic rather than other mammals developing a cervix on more than one lineage . 
 = = Etymology and pronunciation = = 
 The word cervix ( / <unk> / ) came to English from Latin , where it means " neck " , and like its Germanic counterpart , it can refer not only to the neck [ of the body ] but also to an analogous narrowed part of an object . The cervix uteri ( neck of the uterus ) is thus the uterine cervix , but in English the word cervix used alone usually refers to it . Thus the adjective cervical may refer either to the neck ( as in cervical vertebrae or cervical lymph nodes ) or to the uterine cervix ( as in cervical cap or cervical cancer ) . 
 Latin cervix came from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European root <unk> , referring to a " structure that projects " . Thus , the word cervix is linguistically related to the English word " horn " , the Persian word for " head " ( sar ) , the Greek word for " head " ( Greek : <unk> ) , and the Welsh word for " deer " ( Welsh : <unk> ) . 
 The cervix was documented in anatomical literature in at least the time of Hippocrates ; cervical cancer was first described more than 2 @,@ 000 years ago , with descriptions provided by both Hippocrates and Aretaeus . However , there was some variation in word sense among early writers , who used the term to refer to both the cervix and the internal uterine orifice . The first attested use of the word to refer to the cervix of the uterus was in 1702 . 
 = Sir John Fowler , 1st Baronet = 
 Sir John Fowler , 1st Baronet , KCMG , LLD , FRSE ( 15 July 1817 – 20 November 1898 ) was an English civil engineer specialising in the construction of railways and railway infrastructure . In the 1850s and 1860s , he was engineer for the world 's first underground railway , London 's Metropolitan Railway , built by the " cut @-@ and @-@ cover " method under city streets . In the 1880s , he was chief engineer for the Forth Railway Bridge , which opened in 1890 . Fowler 's was a long and eminent career , spanning most of the 19th century 's railway expansion , and he was engineer , adviser or consultant to many British and foreign railway companies and governments . He was the youngest president of the Institution of Civil Engineers , between 1865 and 1867 , and his major works represent a lasting legacy of Victorian engineering . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fowler was born in Wadsley , Sheffield , Yorkshire , England , to land surveyor John Fowler and his wife Elizabeth ( née Swann ) . He was educated privately at Whitley Hall near Ecclesfield . He trained under John <unk> Leather , engineer of the Sheffield waterworks , and with Leather 's uncle , George Leather , on the Aire and Calder Navigation and on railway surveys . From 1837 he worked for John <unk> <unk> on railway projects including the London and Brighton Railway and the unbuilt West Cumberland and Furness Railway . He then worked again for George Leather as resident engineer on the Stockton and Hartlepool Railway and was appointed engineer to the railway when it opened in 1841 . Fowler initially established a practice as a consulting engineer in the Yorkshire and Lincolnshire area , but , a heavy workload led him to move to London in 1844 . He became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1847 , the year the Institution was founded , and a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1849 . On 2 July 1850 he married Elizabeth Broadbent ( died 19 November 1901 ) , daughter of J. <unk> of Manchester . The couple had four sons . 
 = = Railways = = 
 Fowler established a busy practice , working on many railway schemes across the country . He became chief engineer for the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway and was engineer of the East Lincolnshire Railway , the Oxford , Worcester and Wolverhampton Railway and the Severn Valley Railway . In 1853 , he became chief engineer of the Metropolitan Railway in London , the world 's first underground railway . Constructed in shallow " cut @-@ and @-@ cover " trenches beneath roads , the line opened between Paddington and Farringdon in 1863 . Fowler was also engineer for the associated District Railway and the Hammersmith and City Railway . Today these railways form the majority of the London Underground 's Circle line . For his work on the Metropolitan Railway Fowler was paid the great sum of £ 152 @,@ 000 ( £ 12 @.@ 2 million today ) , with £ 157 @,@ 000 ( £ 12 @.@ 6 million today ) , from the District Railway . Although some of this would have been passed on to staff and contractors , Sir Edward Watkin , chairman of the Metropolitan Railway from 1872 , complained that " No engineer in the world was so highly paid . " 
 Other railways that Fowler consulted for were the London Tilbury and Southend Railway , the Great Northern Railway , the Highland Railway and the Cheshire Lines Railway . Following the death of Isambard Kingdom Brunel in 1859 , Fowler was retained by the Great Western Railway . His various appointments involved him in the design of Victoria station in London , Sheffield Victoria station , St Enoch station in Glasgow , Liverpool Central station and Manchester Central station . The latter station 's 210 @-@ foot ( 64 m ) wide train shed roof was the second widest unsupported iron arch in Britain after the roof of St Pancras railway station . 
 Fowler 's consulting work extended beyond Britain including railway and engineering projects in Algeria , Australia , Belgium , Egypt , France , Germany , Portugal and the United States . He travelled to Egypt for the first time in 1869 and worked on a number of , mostly unrealised , schemes for the Khedive , including a railway to Khartoum in Sudan which was planned in 1875 but not completed until after his death . In 1870 he provided advice to an Indian Government inquiry on railway gauges where he recommended a narrow gauge of 3 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) for light railways . He visited Australia in 1886 , where he made some remarks on the break of gauge difficulty . Later in his career , he was also a consultant with his partner Benjamin Baker and with James Henry Greathead on two of London 's first tube railways , the City and South London Railway and the Central London Railway . 
 = = Bridges = = 
 As part of his railway projects , Fowler designed numerous bridges . In the 1860s , he designed Grosvenor Bridge , the first railway bridge over the River Thames , and the 13 @-@ arch Dollis Brook Viaduct for the Edgware , Highgate and London Railway . 
 He is credited with the design of the Victoria Bridge at Upper Arley , Worcestershire , constructed between 1859 and 1861 , and the near identical Albert Edward Bridge at Coalbrookdale , Shropshire built from 1863 to 1864 . Both remain in use today carrying railway lines across the River Severn . 
 Following the collapse of Sir Thomas Bouch 's Tay Bridge in 1879 , Fowler , William Henry Barlow and Thomas Elliot Harrison were appointed in 1881 to a commission to review Bouch 's design for the Forth Railway Bridge . The commission recommended a steel cantilever bridge designed by Fowler and Benjamin Baker , which was constructed between 1883 and 1890 . 
 = = Locomotives = = 
 To avoid problems with smoke and steam overwhelming staff and passengers on the covered sections of the Metropolitan Railway , Fowler proposed a fireless locomotive . The locomotive was built by Robert Stephenson and Company and was a broad gauge 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tender engine . The boiler had a normal firebox connected to a large combustion chamber containing fire bricks which were to act as a heat reservoir . The combustion chamber was linked to the smokebox through a set of very short <unk> . Exhaust steam was re @-@ condensed instead of escaping and fed back to the boiler . The locomotive was intended to operate conventionally in the open , but in tunnels dampers would be closed and steam would be generated using the stored heat from the fire bricks . 
 The first trial on the Great Western Railway in October 1861 was a failure . The condensing system leaked , causing the boiler to run dry and pressure to drop , risking a boiler explosion . A second trial on the Metropolitan Railway in 1862 was also a failure , and the fireless engine was abandoned , becoming known as " Fowler 's Ghost " . The locomotive was sold to Isaac Watt Boulton in 1865 ; he intended to convert it into a standard engine but it was eventually scrapped . 
 On opening , the Metropolitan Railway 's trains were provided by the Great Western Railway , but these were withdrawn in August 1863 . After a period hiring trains from the Great Northern Railway , the Metropolitan Railway introduced its own , Fowler designed , 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank engines in 1864 . The design , known as the A class and , with minor updates , the B class , was so successful that the Metropolitan and District Railways eventually had 120 of the engines in use and they remained in operation until electrification of the lines in the 1900s . 
 = = Other activities and professional recognition = = 
 Fowler stood unsuccessfully for parliament as a Conservative candidate in 1880 and 1885 . His standing within the engineering profession was very high , to the extent that he was elected president of the Institution of Civil Engineers for the period 1866 @-@ 67 , its youngest president . Through his position in the Institution and through his own practice , he led the development of training for engineers . In 1857 , he purchased a 57 @,@ 000 acres ( 23 @,@ 000 ha ) estate at Braemore in Ross @-@ shire , Scotland , where he spent frequent holidays and where he was a Justice of the Peace and a Deputy Lieutenant of the County . He listed his recreations in Who 's Who as yachting and <unk> and was a member of the Carlton Club , St Stephen 's Club , the Conservative Club and the Royal Yacht Squadron . He was also President of the Egyptian Exploration Fund . 
 In 1885 he was made a Knight Commander of the Order of Saint Michael and Saint George as thanks from the government for allowing the use of maps of the Upper Nile valley he had had made when working on the Khedive 's projects . They were the most accurate survey of the area and were used in the British Relief of Khartoum . In 1887 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Scotland . 
 Following the successful completion of the Forth Railway Bridge in 1890 , Fowler was created a baronet , taking the name of his Scottish estate as his territorial designation . Along with Benjamin Baker , he received an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Edinburgh in 1890 for his engineering of the bridge . In 1892 , the Poncelet Prize was doubled and awarded jointly to Baker and Fowler . 
 Fowler died in Bournemouth , Dorset , at the age of 81 and is buried in Brompton Cemetery , London . He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his son , Sir John Arthur Fowler , 2nd Baronet ( died 25 March 1899 ) . The baronetcy became extinct in 1933 on the death of Reverend Sir Montague Fowler , 4th Baronet , the first baronet 's third son . 
 = Chose Promise = 
 Chose Promise ( French : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Promised Thing ) is a one @-@ man show performed by the French comedian Arnaud Tsamere from 2007 to 2014 . Written by Tsamere , François Rollin and Arnaud Joyet , it features the character Patrice Valenton , a teacher who is performing a comedy show because of a promise he made to his friend Rémi , who died in a car accident . After explaining this , he attempts ventriloquism , shadow puppetry , a vaudeville play and a song about Rémi . Tsamere then comes out of character and does a routine about bulbs around mirrors in dressing rooms . 
 The show 's title comes from the expression chose promise , chose due ( " a promise is a promise " ) and it deals with the theme of death ; the character of a teacher was chosen to depict failure . Chose Promise was released on DVD on 6 March 2013 after being recorded at the Sébastopol Theatre in Lille , and its final performances were at the Olympia in February 2014 — it has been broadcast on the television channels Comédie + and <unk> . It was well received by critics , who praised Tsamere 's performance , particularly in the vaudeville sequence . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 This summary is based on the DVD version of the show . 
 Patrice Valenton ( Arnaud Tsamere ) introduces himself as an economics teacher at the University Institute of Technology in Vincennes . He explains that he is there to honour a promise he made to his best friend Rémi , who was hospitalised by a car accident . Patrice arrived to see Rémi on his deathbed , and Rémi asked Patrice to perform a one @-@ man show on his behalf . Patrice answered " I promise ... " , and Rémi died , not knowing that the end of the sentence was " ... that you 'll get better " and that Patrice did not want to perform . Patrice explains that he will keep his promise because becoming a comedian was Rémi 's dream , but that he is not a comedian and is not there to get laughs or applause . 
 Patrice begins the show , explaining that he will use memories and objects relating to Rémi to perform . He says that Rémi loved ventriloquism , and performs his own routine with a monkey puppet called <unk> , in which the puppet never speaks . He talks about how the puppet is not alive as it has Velcro pads , and imitates a cat and mouse with Velcro on their paws . He tells a story of when he removed the batteries from his colleague 's calculator , then takes out Rémi 's notebook , which contains the telephone numbers of prostitutes and vomit stains . Patrice performs a shadow puppetry routine in which an Armenian soldier rescues his daughter from 25 duduk players . It becomes clear that Patrice is not actually making the shadows , and he gets annoyed at three stagehands called David . 
 Patrice decides to perform the final scene of a vaudeville play he has written called La <unk> ( The Clock ) . He explains the complex plot and characters : set in 1929 in a townhouse in Provence , the play involves the Duke of <unk> and his family , associates and household servants . He performs the scene , playing all the characters himself and exaggerating their voices and mannerisms . For Patrice 's final act , he plays a recording of Rémi and himself from 1985 , then sings a song he has written about Rémi and the accident . When the audience applauds the song , he criticises them as he does not want to be a famous comedian . After imitating a marionette , he performs his curtain call with a toy dragon ; he dances with it and a <unk> , and flaps its wings to Johann Strauss I 's Radetzky March . 
 Tsamere comes out of character , thanks the audience , writers and producers of the show , and explains that the preceding story is a fiction . He talks about his stage fright and goes off on a tangent about the bulbs around mirrors in dressing rooms ; he asks a row of the audience to stand repeatedly to check whether pillars in the theatre are load @-@ bearing . He ends by saying that he does not need the mirror , as he does not wear make @-@ up . 
 = = Background and themes = = 
 The French expression chose promise , chose due , which is the equivalent of " a promise is a promise " in English , and to which Chose Promise responds , dates from the 17th century . After his first show Réflexions profondes sur pas mal de trucs ( Profound reflections on quite a few things ) , written with Arnaud Joyet and inspired by a videotape of François Rollin , Tsamere met Rollin at the Dinard Comedy Festival . He joined Tsamere and Joyet to write a new show . Rollin had seen his previous show , which played on theatrical " flops " , and told Tsamere that he could not perform this humour as himself without showing at the end that he could really do ventriloquism and play the guitar , which he could not . Therefore , the character of a teacher was created to play on failure . 
 Tsamere has described Valenton 's profession as " not far from the style of what I am , [ but ] very far in substance " ; he said of the character : " Under his generous side as a friend who is keeping his promise ... we have a guy who is ... in the end quite megalomaniacal . " The show deals with the theme of death , which Tsamere said is " a bit strange , but it has the virtue of attracting the public 's attention " . He said that he and his co @-@ authors thought that " the most irrefutable reason to go on stage ... was to talk about something strong " . Tsamere has described how the show changed as the size of its audiences grew and he incorporated improvisations . 
 = = Performances = = 
 Chose Promise was produced by <unk> Productions and Troyes dans l 'Aube Prod and directed by Rollin and Joyet . It was written in 2007 , and has been performed at the Européen theatre and the Casino de Paris ; Tsamere has done three tours of the show . In early 2014 , the show was performed in Tours , Strasbourg , Lille , Petite @-@ Forêt , Rennes , Bourg @-@ les @-@ Valence , <unk> , Annecy and Chalon @-@ sur @-@ Saône in France , as well as in Geneva and Montreux in Switzerland . The two final performances took place at the Olympia in February 2014 . 
 After it was recorded at the Sébastopol Theatre in Lille on 5 October 2012 , the show was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and video on demand on 6 March 2013 ; it includes a commentary track by Rollin and Joyet , and a making @-@ of documentary called La <unk> est <unk> ( " We 've come full circle " ) filmed by Simon Astier , who followed Tsamere around with a camera on the day of the recording . Tsamere said he chose Lille for the recording because he has a " special relationship " with the place . On 23 September 2013 , the show was broadcast on the television channel Comédie + — it was later shown on <unk> on 31 August 2014 , when it was seen by 254 @,@ 000 people ( a 1 @.@ 1 % audience share ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 <unk> 's Julien Barret praised Tsamere 's " unbridled imagination [ and ] oratorical ease " , and called his vaudeville performance " exceptional " ; Marie @-@ Céline <unk> , of the same publication , said " [ Tsamere 's ] talents as an actor are remarkable " and also praised the vaudeville act . Michèle <unk> of Télérama called it " an acting performance with mastered folly " and rated it " TT " , meaning " We like it a lot " . Le Parisien described " the meticulous writing , the absurd universe and the hilarious digressions " of Chose Promise , calling it a " masterpiece of the genre " . Le Figaro 's Nathalie Simon wrote of Tsamere 's " bubbly disposition [ and ] tremendous energy " , noting that his appearances on On n 'demande qu 'à en rire " have brought him an audience of appreciative fans whatever he does " . 
 = Break the Ice ( Britney Spears song ) = 
 " Break the Ice " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fifth studio album , Blackout ( 2007 ) . It was released on March 4 , 2008 by Jive Records as the third single from the album . The song was written by Nate " Danja " Hills , James " Jim Beanz " Washington , Keri Hilson and Marcella Araica , while production was handled by Hills and vocal production was handled by Washington . " Radar " was originally planned to be released as the third single from Blackout , but " Break the Ice " was released after it was chosen by a poll on Spears 's official website . Musically , " Break the Ice " is an electro @-@ R & B song with influences of rave and crunk . The song opens with a choir and features synthesizers . Its lyrics deal with an attraction between two people . " Break the Ice " received positive reviews from music critics , who deemed it as a strong electronic track from the album . 
 The song was a moderate success , reaching the top ten in Belgium , Canada , Finland and Sweden and charting within the top forty in Australia , New Zealand and many European countries . In the United States , the song reached number forty @-@ three on Billboard Hot 100 , while peaking at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . An accompanying music video , directed by Robert Hales , was released on March 12 , 2008 . The anime @-@ influenced animation video was based on the superheroine character of Spears ' " Toxic " music video , and portrays her destroying a highly secured laboratory with several clones , including one of herself . A remix of " Break the Ice " was used as a video interlude during The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) and was performed for the first time during her Las Vegas residency at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino , Britney : Piece of Me . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Break the Ice " was written by Nate " Danja " Hills , Marcella " Ms. Lago " Araica , Keri Hilson , James Washington and produced by Danja . Spears started working with Danja in July 2006 . He explained that the creative process was not difficult at first since he was " left to do pretty much whatever I wanted to " , and " if she felt it , she was gonna ride with it . If she didn 't , you ’ d see it in her face . " Spears began recording the track in Las Vegas in August 2006 , while she was seven months pregnant with her second child , Jayden James . Recording continued at Spears ' house in Los Angeles , California , three weeks after she gave birth . Hilson commented that " She gave 150 percent . [ ... ] I don ’ t know any other mother that would do that . " " Radar " was originally planned to be released as the third single from Blackout , according to Ezekiel Lewis of The Clutch . " Break the Ice " was chosen as a single by a poll on Spears ' official Jive Records website . On February 11 , 2008 , it was announced that the song had won , receiving a 39 % of the total votes . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Break the Ice " is an electro @-@ R & B song with influences of rave and crunk . It is performed in a moderate pop groove . The song is composed in the key of F minor and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . According to Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly , " Break the Ice " sounds similar to Nelly Furtado 's " Say It Right " ( 2006 ) . It opens with Spears singing the lines " It 's been a while / I know I shouldn 't keep you waiting / But I 'm here now " , which serve as an apology for being gone so long from the music industry as well as away from her love interest in the song . After the first line , Spears sings over a choir . According to Chuck Arnold of People , Spears delivers her " trademark breathy vocals " . In the first verse , synthesizers kick in and run until the end of the second chorus . After it , Spears stops the song and sings " I like this part / It feels kind of good " , mimicking Janet Jackson in " Nasty " ( 1986 ) . The music changes , as described by Tom Ewing of Pitchfork Media , to " [ something that ] sounds like <unk> [ are ] bouncing in slow motion round a padded cell " . The song is constructed in the common verse @-@ chorus form . Lyrically , the song is about two people , in which one of them asks the other to get to know each other and break the ice . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Eric R. Danton of The Hartford Courant deemed it as a " crunk @-@ style thumper " , while calling it one of the " killer tracks " off the album along with " Radar " and " Hot as Ice " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy called it " a booming slice of multi @-@ layered electro R & B " and said that along with " Radar " , " are as avant @-@ garde as pop gets in 2007 " . A reviewer from Popjustice said " [ it ] is a really brilliant track " , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said some of the songs of Blackout , " really show off the skills of the producers " , exemplifying " Gimme More " , " Radar " , " Break the Ice " , " Heaven on Earth " and " Hot as Ice " . He also referred to the song as a " stuttering electro @-@ clip " . 
 Jennifer Vineyard of MTV said the song " might have been a stronger album leadoff track than ' Gimme More ' , [ ... ] since [ Spears ] re @-@ introduces herself at the top and apologizes for being gone for so long . " <unk> Sanneh of The New York Times said the song was " nearly as good " as previous singles " Gimme More " and " Piece of Me " , and described it as a " rave @-@ inspired flirtation " . A reviewer from the Ottawa Citizen said that " [ t ] here 's also a lot to like about Break The Ice , Why Should I Be Sad and Perfect Love [ r ] " . Jim Abbott of the Orlando Sentinel said that " Musically , songs such as ' Piece of Me , ' ' Radar ' and ' Break the Ice ' are one @-@ dimensional , robotic exercises . " Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe called it " numbing club filler . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Break the Ice " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number one hundred on the issue dated March 15 , 2008 . It peaked at number forty @-@ three on May 24 , 2008 . Two weeks later , it peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs , becoming the third consecutive single from the album to reach the top position of the chart . As of July 2010 , " Break the Ice " has sold 688 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . In Canada , the song entered the Canadian Hot 100 at number ninety @-@ seven on March 1 , 2008 . On April 26 , 2008 , it reached its peak position of number nine . On May 5 , 2008 , the track debuted at number forty @-@ one on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart . It peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the issue dated May 19 , 2008 . In New Zealand , the single debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on April 7 , 2008 . It peaked at number twenty @-@ four three weeks later . " Break the Ice " entered the UK Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ six on March 31 , 2008 . On April 20 , 2008 , it peaked at number fifteen . The song also had moderate success through Europe , reaching the top ten in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) and Finland , and the top twenty in Denmark and Sweden . In Denmark , it was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for sales over 7 @,@ 5000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Break the Ice " was made in an anime @-@ influenced animation style in South Korea and was directed by Robert Hales . The concept was reportedly Spears 's idea , who asked Jive Records to come up with an animated music video based on the superheroine character of the " Toxic " music video . It premiered on March 12 , 2008 at <unk> , a website created exclusively for the premiere , in which fans could access a chat room . 
 The video begins with Spears wearing a short black bodysuit and knee @-@ high black boots , standing in the roofs of a futuristic city . As the first verse begins , she breaks into a research facility and battles with suited henchmen . Spears ends up gaining access to a highly secured laboratory and walks through aisles of clones held in liquid cocoons . She sees that one is a clone of her , kisses her and plants a bomb on the tank . After this , Spears infiltrates the base of the apparent villain , kissing him , and then destroying him , revealing him to be a robot also . From there , she dodges a bullet and sets off a panic among the newly arrived henchmen , meanwhile the bomb 's timer runs lower and lower . Next , there is a wide shot of the building exploding , while Spears is jumping and " Victory " is depicted on the side of the structure . The video ends with the phrase " To be continued ... " . Originally , the remix with Fabolous was initially to be released as the album 's third single and have a music video , before the animated video was used . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 A remix of " Break the Ice " was used as a video interlude during The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) . The song was performed for the first time in 2013 during Spears ' Las Vegas Residency at PH Live , Britney : Piece of Me . Halfway through the performance of " Gimme More " Spears and her dancers , wearing cowboy @-@ inspired plaid and denim outfits , performed a fragment of " Break the Ice " , which was then followed by a dance routine which pays tribute to Michael Jackson and then " Piece of Me " . In the 2016 revamp of the concert , the song was moved to the first act of the show and has different choreography . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Break the Ice " are taken from Blackout 's liner notes . 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals 
 Nate " Danja " Hills – songwriting , production 
 Marcella Araica – songwriting , instruments , programming , mixing 
 Keri Hilson – recording , background vocals 
 James Washington – songwriting 
 Jim Beanz – background vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Menkauhor Kaiu = 
 Menkauhor Kaiu ( also known as Ikauhor and in Greek as Mencherês , <unk> ) was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the Old Kingdom period . He was the seventh ruler of the Fifth Dynasty at the end of the 25th century BC or early in the 24th century BC . 
 Menkauhor ruled for possibly eight or nine years , following king Nyuserre Ini , and was succeeded in turn by Djedkare Isesi . Although Menkauhor is well attested by historical sources , few artifacts from his reign have survived . Consequently , his familial relation to his predecessor and successor is unclear , and no offspring of his have been identified . Khentkaus III may have been Menkauhor 's mother , as indicated by evidence discovered in her tomb in 2015 . 
 Beyond the construction of monuments , the only known activity dated to Menkauhor 's reign is an expedition to the copper and turquoise mines in Sinai . Menkauhor ordered the construction of a sun temple , called the " Akhet @-@ Ra " , meaning " The Horizon of Ra " . The last ever to be built , this sun temple , known from inscriptions found in the tombs of its priests , is yet to be located . Menkauhor was buried in a small pyramid in Saqqara , which the Ancient Egyptians named <unk> @-@ <unk> Menkauhor , " The Divine Places of Menkauhor " . Known today as the Headless Pyramid , the ruin had been lost under shifting sands until its rediscovery in 2008 . 
 The figure of Menkauhor was at the centre of a long lasting funerary cult until the end of the Old Kingdom period , with at least seven agricultural domains producing goods for the necessary offerings . The cult of a deified Menkauhor , then known by the titles " Strong Lord of the Two Lands , Menkauhor the Justified " reappeared during the New Kingdom period ( c . 1550 – c . 1077 BC ) , and lasted until at least the Nineteenth Dynasty ( c . 1292 – c . 1077 BC ) , some 1200 years after his death . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 Menkauhor is attested by three hieroglyphic sources , all from the much later New Kingdom period . His name is given on the 31st entry of the Abydos King List , which was inscribed on the walls of a temple during the reign of Seti I ( 1290 – 1279 BC ) . He is also mentioned on the Saqqara Tablet ( 30th entry ) and on the Turin canon ( third column , 23rd row ) , both of which were written during the reign of Ramesses II ( 1279 – 1213 BC ) . The Turin canon credits Menkauhor with a reign of eight years . These sources indicate that Menkauhor succeeded Nyuserre Ini and preceded Djedkare Isesi on the throne , making him the seventh pharaoh of the Fifth Dynasty . 
 Menkauhor was likely mentioned in the Aegyptiaca , a history of Egypt written in the 3rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II ( 283 – 246 BC ) by the Egyptian priest Manetho , but no copies of the text survive , and it is known only through later writings by Sextus Julius Africanus and Eusebius . Africanus relates that the Aegyptiaca mentioned a pharaoh " Mencherês " reigning for nine years as the seventh king of the Fifth Dynasty . Mencherês is believed to be a Hellenized form of Menkauhor , and Africanus ' nine @-@ year figure fits well with the eight years of reign given to Menkauhor on the Turin canon , the latter figure being considered by some Egyptologists , including Hartwig Altenmüller , as more likely than the former . 
 = = = Contemporaneous = = = 
 Relatively few attestations dating to Menkauhor 's reign have survived compared to the other kings of the Fifth Dynasty . Nonetheless , Menkauhor 's name is well attested in the names and titles of priests and officials of the Fifth Dynasty as well as in the names of the agricultural estates associated with his funerary cult . Surviving artefacts contemporaneous with Menkauhor 's reign include two stone vessels inscribed with his name from the mortuary temple of Neferefre – possibly gifts from Menkauhor for the funerary cult of Neferefre – as well as a few <unk> from the same temple and from an area known as " Djedkare 's Family Cemetery " in Abusir . Cylinder seal impressions showing Menkauhor 's Horus name or the name of his pyramid have also been unearthed in the mortuary complex of Nyuserre Ini , and in the necropolises of Giza and Gebelein . 
 A gold cylinder seal bearing Menkauhor 's cartouche as part of the name of his pyramid together with the serekh of Djedkare Isesi is now on display at the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston . The seal , purportedly discovered near the Pactolus river valley in western Anatolia , could attest to wide ranging trade @-@ contacts during the Fifth Dynasty , but its provenance remains unverifiable . 
 The only secure depiction of the king dating to the Old Kingdom that has survived to this day is a rough , possibly unfinished , alabaster statuette showing Menkauhor enthroned and wearing the tight @-@ fitting ceremonial robe of the Heb @-@ sed . The statue was discovered in a <unk> built during the late New Kingdom beneath the floor of a room to the west of the sacred lake at the temple of Ptah in Memphis . The Egyptologist Jocelyn <unk> proposed that another statuette , usually attributed to Teti , belongs instead to Menkauhor Kaiu . <unk> bases her hypothesis on stylistic grounds , noting the resemblance with Menkauhor 's seated statue , as well as the location of the second statue , which was uncovered east of Teti 's pyramid , in close proximity to Menkauhor 's pyramid . 
 Monumental attestations of Menkauhor are limited to a rock inscription at the Wadi Maghareh in Sinai , showing his titulary and a rough stele inscribed with his cartouche from Mastaba 904 at Saqqara . 
 = = Family = = 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The name of Menkauhor is a departure from those of other kings of the Fifth Dynasty . Menkauhor , whose name means " Eternal are the Kas of Horus " , is the first pharaoh in 80 years whose name does not refer to the sun god Ra . The name of Menkauhor instead finds its peers among the princes of the Fifth Dynasty with , for example , prince Khentykauhor " The forces of Horus are at the fore " , a son of Nyuserre Ini , and prince Neserkauhor , a son of Djedkare Isesi . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Owing to the paucity of contemporaneous sources for Menkauhor , his relation to his predecessor , Nyuserre Ini , and to his successor , Djedkare Isesi , cannot be ascertained beyond doubt . Menkauhor may have been a son of Nyuserre Ini ; indeed Nyuserre Ini is known to have fathered a prince Khentykauhor as shown by a relief mentioning the prince from the mortuary complex of queen Khentkaus II , the mother of Nyuserre Ini . The similarity of Khentykauhor 's name to that of Menkauhor led the Egyptologists Miroslav Verner and Vivienne Callender to propose that the two are the same person , with Khentykauhor taking the name " Menkauhor " upon ascending the throne . This hypothesis is possibly contradicted by an inscription discovered in 2008 in the mastaba of <unk> , the eldest son of an unnamed king . The inscription mentions a " Menkauhor " , but does not ascribe any royal attributes to him . The Egyptologists Hana <unk> and Filip Coppens suggest this might refer to the future pharaoh Menkauhor Kaiu at a time when he was still a prince . They note that Menkauhor might have offered high @-@ quality stone blocks for the construction of the tomb of his ( possible ) relative , which would explain the inscription . This contradicts the identification of Menkauhor with Khentykauhor ; <unk> and Coppens theorize that Khentykauhor and Menkauhor were brothers and sons of Nyuserre Ini . 
 The identity of Menkauhor 's mother is equally uncertain . In January 2015 the tomb of the " King 's wife " and " King 's mother " , Khentkaus III , was discovered by a team of Czech archaeologists in the necropolis surrounding the pyramid of Neferefre in Abusir . Mud seals in the tomb indicate that Khentkaus III was buried during Nyuserre Ini 's reign . Since Nyuserre Ini 's own mother is known to have been Khentkaus II , the discovery suggests that she was Menkauhor Kaiu 's mother . The position of her tomb close to the pyramid of Neferefre could indicate that she was this king 's consort and thus that Neferefre was Menkauhor 's father . 
 = = = Consorts = = = 
 No queen consort of Menkauhor has been identified for certain . The Egyptologist Wilfried Seipel has proposed that Khuit I was a queen of Menkauhor . Based on the dating of the tombs surrounding Khuit 's burial , Seipel argues that she lived during the mid @-@ Fifth Dynasty . By the process of elimination , he attributes known queens to each king of the period , which leaves only Menkauhor as a candidate for her king . These arguments are criticized by the Egyptologist Michel Baud , who observes that pharaohs could have had more than one queen . 
 Queen Meresankh IV has also been suggested as a consort for Menkauhor based on the dating and location of her tomb in Saqqara . It is possible however that she was a wife of Djedkare Isesi . 
 = = = Descendants = = = 
 There is no evidence either for or against the hypothesis that Menkauhor 's successor Djedkare Isesi was his son . Two sons have been suggested for Menkauhor based on the dating and general location of their tombs in Saqqara : princes Raemka and Kaemtjenent , both believed to be children of Meresankh IV . By the same reasoning , they could instead be sons of Djedkare Isesi . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Duration = = = 
 Given the scarcity of contemporaneous attestations for Menkauhor , modern Egyptologists consider his reign to have been perhaps eight or nine years long , as indicated by the much later historical sources . The small seated statue of Menkauhor wearing the robe of the Sed festival might suggest a longer reign , since this festival was typically celebrated only after a ruler had spent 30 years on the throne . However , Egyptologist Hartwig Altenmüller deems this hypothesis unlikely . Mere depictions of the festival do not necessarily imply a long reign ; for example , a relief showing pharaoh Sahure in the tunic of the Sed festival was found in his mortuary temple , although both historical sources and archaeological evidence suggest Sahure ruled Egypt for less than 14 full years . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 Owing to the scarcity of artefacts and inscriptions relating to Menkauhor 's reign , few of his activities are known . Menkauhor sent an expedition to Sinai to exploit the mines of turquoise and copper in the Wadi Maghareh . The expedition is evidenced by a damaged rock inscription showing Menkauhor 's titulary which is one of the few attestations dating to his lifetime . The mines of Sinai had been exploited since the Third Dynasty ( 2686 BC – 2613 BC ) , and both Menkauhor 's predecessor Nyuserre Ini and successor Djedkare Isesi sent expeditions to the Wadi Maghareh . 
 = = Construction activities = = 
 Menkauhor Kaiu is known to have ordered the construction of two major monuments during his reign : a sun temple for the veneration of Ra and a pyramid for his burial , known today as the " Headless Pyramid " . 
 = = = Sun temple = = = 
 Following a tradition which started with Userkaf , the founder of the Fifth Dynasty , Menkauhor built a temple to the sun god Ra . He was the last pharaoh to do so . His successors , Djedkare Isesi and Unas , abandoned this practice as the cult of Ra declined at the expense of that of Osiris . Given the paucity of documents relating to Menkauhor 's sun temple , it probably functioned for only a short time or was never completed . 
 Menkauhor 's sun temple was called Akhet @-@ Ra , which is variously translated as " The Horizon of Ra " or " The Place where Ra Issues Forth " . The temple has yet to be located and could be lying under the sands of Saqqara or Abusir . Its existence is known thanks to inscriptions found in the tombs of Fifth and Sixth Dynasties officials who served as priests of Ra in the temple . These include Hemu , buried in Giza , and Neferiretptah and <unk> , who were both buried in Saqqara @-@ north . In addition to his service in the Akhet @-@ Ra , Neferiretptah was a priest in Menkauhor 's pyramid and held the office of " royal ornament " , making him responsible for the precious items in the palace of the king . 
 Besides these inscriptions , a single seal bearing the name of the Akhet @-@ Ra is known from the tomb of princess <unk> , located near the mortuary temple of <unk> in Abusir . The seal was placed on a large vessel indicating that provisions for the tombs of members of the royal family were dispatched from Menkauhor 's temple to <unk> 's pyramid complex . 
 = = = Pyramid = = = 
 Menkauhor Kaiu built a pyramid in North @-@ Saqqara , thereby abandoning the royal necropolis of Abusir , where kings of the Fifth Dynasty had been buried since the reign of Sahure , some 80 years earlier . The reason for this choice may be that the Abusir plateau had become overcrowded by the beginning of Menkauhor 's reign . 
 Originally named <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Menkauhor by the Ancient Egyptians , meaning " The divine places of Menkauhor " , the pyramid is known today as Lepsius XXIX after the number given to it by the archaeologist Karl Richard Lepsius who discovered the pyramid in 1843 . Owing to the ruined state of the structure , it is known in Arabic as the " Headless Pyramid " , a name that has been retained . The pyramid was lost under shifting sands in the early 20th century and its attribution to Menkauhor was consequently debated . Instead , it was proposed that the Headless Pyramid was that of <unk> , a structure dating to the First Intermediate Period and which has yet to be found . In 2008 , the structure identified by Lepsius was rediscovered by a team of archaeologists under the direction of Zahi Hawass , and excavations at the site quickly established a Fifth Dynasty date as indicated by the construction techniques used in its making . Although the excavations failed to yield the name of the king who built the pyramid , Menkauhor was the last pharaoh of the dynasty whose pyramid remained undiscovered . Thus , proceeding by elimination , archeologists and egyptologists have formally recognized the Headless Pyramid as that of Menkauhor . 
 The pyramid is estimated to have been around 50 – 60 m ( 160 – 200 ft ) at the base , so that the edifice would have stood 40 – 50 m ( 130 – 160 ft ) high at the time of its construction , making it one of the smallest royal pyramids of the Old Kingdom . There is evidence that Menkauhor had the time to complete his pyramid , whose small dimensions are thus consistent with his short eight to nine years of reign . 
 On the north side lies the entrance to the underground chamber system , which was sealed by two granite portcullises indicating that a burial took place . A broken sarcophagus lid of blue @-@ grey basalt was found in the burial chamber by Cecil Mallaby Firth during his brief excavations of the pyramid in 1930 . 
 = = Funerary cult = = 
 = = = Old Kingdom = = = 
 After his death Menkauhor enjoyed a funerary cult centered on his pyramid complex . The cult lasted at least until the second half of the Sixth Dynasty , nearly 150 years later . Provisions for this cult were produced in dedicated agricultural domains that were established during Menkauhor 's lifetime . Products of these domains were delivered to Menkauhor 's sun and mortuary temples and distributed to the priests of the cult , who could use them for their sustenance or their own funerary cults . <unk> representations of Menkauhor 's agricultural domains are depicted bringing offerings on the walls of the mastabas of these priests . Most of the depictions are located in Saqqara North , near the pyramid complex of Djoser . This area comprises the tombs of Neferiretptah , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Ptahhotep and <unk> , all priests of the funerary cult of Menkauhor . Further tombs of priests of this cult are found to the north , in Abusir South , with the mastaba of <unk> and <unk> and in Giza . 
 The complete names of at least seven domains of Menkauhor are known : " Ikauhor is perfect in favor " and " the favor of Ikauhor " , both mentioned in the tombs of Ptahhotep and <unk> ; " Ikauhor is perfect of life " , from the tomb of Ptahhotep II ; " Horus <unk> causes Ikauhor to live " ; " Ikauhor is strong " ; " Seshat loves Ikauhor " and " <unk> loves Ikauhor " from the tombs of viziers Senedjemib Inti , Senedjemib <unk> and Hemu in Giza . In addition the <unk> domain of the king , which comprises the land holdings of the mortuary temple of Menkauhor , was named " Menkauhor is perfect of appearances " . 
 = = = New Kingdom = = = 
 The cult of Menkauhor enjoyed a revival during the New Kingdom period ( 1550 – 1077 BC ) . At this point Menkauhor had been deified as a local god of the Saqqara necropolis acting as a divine intercessor , and qualified of " Strong Lord of the Two Lands , Menkauhor the Justified " . This cult is evidenced by reliefs showing Menkauhor in the tombs of the " Chief of the artisans and jewelers " <unk> and of the physician <unk> in Saqqara @-@ North , both of whom lived at the time of the late Eighteenth Dynasty ( 1550 – 1292 BC ) , during the reigns of Tutankhamun , Ay and Horemheb . 
 An inscribed block dating to the later Ramesside period ( 1292 – 1077 BC ) and now in the Egyptian Museum of Berlin , was uncovered by Lepsius in a house in Abusir and shows Menkauhor enthroned beside four other deified kings of the Old Kingdom : the name of the first , partially lost , but probably Sneferu is then followed by Djedefre , Menkaure , Menkauhor and finally Neferkare . The owner of the tomb stands before the kings , in worship . Another relief dating to the same period shows a similar scene . It was inscribed on the lintel of the tomb chapel of <unk> buried in Saqqara North . Four deified kings of the Old Kingdom are shown , all of whom built their pyramids at Saqqara : Djoser , Teti , Userkaf and Menkauhor . 
 The persistence of the cult of Menkauhor during the late Eighteenth to Nineteenth Dynasty possibly results from the location of his pyramid , which stood on the way to the necropolis of the Apis bulls , which later became the Serapeum . 
 = Salmon Creek Dam = 
 The Salmon Creek Dam is a concrete arch dam on the Salmon Creek , 3 miles ( 5 km ) northwest of Juneau , Alaska . Built in 1914 , it is the world 's first constant @-@ angle arch variable radius dam . Since it was built , over 100 such dams have been constructed all over the world . 
 The dam was built by the Alaska @-@ Gastineau Mining Company to meet the electrical energy needs for mining operations . The dam continues to be fully functional for hydroelectric generation , as one of the drinking water sources to Juneau city and for aquaculture and fishing . When built , adoption of the constant arch design for the dam reduced costs by 20 % because less concrete was needed to construct the dam . Of the two hydroelectric power stations built at the initial stage ( one at the upper level and the other at the lower level ) – the latter one is still in use after a new powerhouse was built adjoining the old one – it produces the inexpensive electricity in Alaska while meeting 10 % of the energy needs of Juneau city . When built , the dam and its two power plants were considered engineering wonders . Both are operated and maintained by the Alaska Electric Light & Power ( AEL & P ) . 
 = = Topography = = 
 The dam was built in a forested , scenic and narrow valley of the Salmon creek , which runs from Salmon Creek Reservoir and flows southwest for 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the Gastineau Channel . The dam ( marked as Juneau B @-@ 2 in USGS maps ) is located at the terminus of the tram @-@ way that was built specifically by the Alaska Gastineau Mining Co . The tram @-@ way was built for hauling material for constructing the dam and its associated power stations . The power supply was for the mines located at a site 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the south at Sheep Creek . However , a 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long road had been built by AEL & P to the upper powerhouse at the base of the Salmon Creek Dam , which has since been de @-@ commissioned . 
 The creek runs for a length of 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) within the watershed , which has a creek divide of 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and a ridge line of 2 @.@ 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) . The stream bed has large gravel and bedrock substrata and its gradient decreases downstream of the dam . The average width of the stream is 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) and depth of water is about 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) . The basin is surrounded by hills with steep slopes and with elevation above 980 feet ( 300 m ) above sea level . The distance from the dam to Juneau city is 2 @.@ 9 miles ( 4 @.@ 7 km ) , to the Juneau harbor is 3 @.@ 2 miles ( 5 @.@ 1 km ) , and to the Juneau Harbor Seaplane Base is 3 @.@ 4 miles ( 5 @.@ 5 km ) . 
 = = Evolution of the arch dam design = = 
 During the Roman period , the theory of building a curved dam ( arch dam ) was known as a means to withstand the water pressure and hold the masonry joints . However , in the background of masonry arch dams which dominated dam building scenario in the 19th century and with introduction of concrete technology for building dams , the structural design of arch dams underwent a dramatic change in its economic evolution to minimize use of construction material and inter alia , the cost of construction . Basically , an arch dam is a structure that curves upstream and the water pressure is transferred either directly to the valley sides or indirectly through concrete abutments . Theoretically , the ideal constant angle arch in a " V " -shaped valley for such an arch dam has a central angle of 133 ° of curvature . This theory led to the development of the " constant @-@ angle " ( or variable radius ) arch dam , which was also thinner in design . The theory was first initiated in North America for several dams , and in Alaska in particular , in 1913 with the building of the Salmon Creek Dam , which was completed in 1914 . In this regard , Bartlett Lee Thane , the mining engineer , who made a lasting impact in the mining industry – in the Alaska @-@ Gastineau Mining Company – was instrumental in introducing this design of thin arch dam with help from his former football team mates . Lars Jorgensen evolved the specific first design of the constant arch dam . However , AEL & P gives design credit to their then Chief Engineer Harry L. Wallenberg for the Salmon Creek Dam . The idea for building such a dam had been thought about 30 years earlier to economize on the use of construction material for building the dam . However , it was only in 1913 that the concept was transformed on ground by the pioneer mining engineer Thane . 
 = = Theory and design = = 
 In arch dam design , two basic shapes are adopted . These are the constant – radius arch and the constant @-@ angle arch , the latter design is more complex . In the constant @-@ radius arch design , which is also known as the single @-@ radius arch , the shape of the dam is cylindrical with vertical upstream face while the downstream face is battered . The constant @-@ angle arch design has also a variable – radius arch . In this design , the central opening angle is constant whereas the arch radius increases from the base to the crest ; this increase towards the crest is proportional to the increase of the canyon width of the gorge . Further , according to the theory of constant @-@ arch design , the arch action at the base of the dam exerts the maximum pressure on the base . A " V " shaped gorge in particular is considered an ideal feature for building this type of dam . This design ensures substantial savings in use of construction material as opposed to the constant – radius arch design . Lars R. Jorgenson who had conceived this concept had proved that the most economic design of the dam was obtained with an optimum opening angle of 133 @.@ 6 ° , with the least quantity of concrete . This design was applied with some modifications for the Salmon Creek Dam , which was designed with constant opening angle of 113 ° with radius varying from 147 @.@ 5 feet ( 45 @.@ 0 m ) at the base to 331 feet ( 101 m ) at the crest . 
 The " V " shape of the gorge at the dam site was adjudged ideal for building this type of dam at Salmon Creek site . 
 An ice pressure of 10 tons per square foot ( 500 kPa ) was considered based on the rim conditions of the reservoir and the design was also checked for an ice pressure of 20 tons per square foot ( 1 @,@ 000 kPa ) ; in the latter case the safety factor in concrete under resultant compression values was considered to be 5 and safe . The dam was designed with a base width of 47 @.@ 5 feet ( 14 @.@ 5 m ) ( width of 37 @.@ 5 feet ( 11 @.@ 4 m ) is also mentioned in one source ) and it tapers to a width of 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) ( 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) is also mentioned in one source ) at the top over a dam height of 168 feet ( 51 m ) . The geological condition at the base of the dam also dictated the type of dam as a flat rocky bed of 75 feet ( 23 m ) width was available to lay the foundation for the arch dam without resorting to large @-@ scale excavations . The dip of the rock was also steep both on upstream and downstream side of the flat base . Bank to bank , the crest length is 640 feet ( 200 m ) . The dam envisaged storage of about 18 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) at the full reservoir level while it is 445 acre feet ( 549 @,@ 000 m3 ) when the water is 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) deep . A steel outlet pipe of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) diameter was proposed to be embedded in the mid base of the dam as a spillway . The dam was planned with a top elevation of 343 feet ( 105 m ) above sea level . The reservoir water spreads to an area of 192 acres ( 78 ha ) , while the catchment drained is 7 @.@ 5 square miles ( 19 km2 ) . 
 Concurrently , two power houses were planned to generate power for the mining industry from the reservoir 's water – an upper power station with a 3 MW capacity about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) downstream of the dam and a lower power station with a 3 MW capacity near the shore of the Gastineau Channel . The variable @-@ radius type shape of the dam adopted for Salmon Creek became a standard for many high and large dams , particularly in western USA . An article from the National Science Foundation 's <unk> project notes the following : 
 The upstream bulging served to offset the undercutting by the stronger curved lower arches near the abutments while the pronounced downstream toe reduced the tensile stresses at the upstream heel . The full realization of the new design was made possible by building the dam entirely out of concrete . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Based on the plans prepared for the concrete arch dam and the two power stations , construction was started in May 1912 . Construction of the lower power house on the shore at the confluence of Salmon Creek with Gastineau Channel was initiated first ; a transmission line was erected from here to the mines in March 1913 and the construction of the dam was started in April 1913 . Construction facilities for the dam were established upstream where aggregates ( fine and coarse ) were produced by crushing rocks at the crushing plant . The aggregates were mixed in designed proportions with cement and with a small admixture of lime to manufacture concrete for placing on the dam . The first batch of concrete was placed on the dam on July 14 , 1913 . The dam was completed , over a 13 months period , on August 13 , 1914 . A concrete quantity of 54 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 41 @,@ 000 m3 ) was placed on the dam . Concrete was placed at the rate of 400 cubic yards ( 310 m3 ) per day . 
 Between 1912 and 1914 , two power stations were built to utilize the water stored in the reservoir created by the dam . The first power station , the upper powerhouse titled ‘ Powerhouse 2 ’ , was located 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) below the dam and had an installation of two units of 1 @.@ 5 MW capacity each operating under a hydraulic head of 600 feet ( 180 m ) . The tail waters from this power station was conveyed through a 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) long power channel to the second power station titled ‘ Powerhouse 1 ’ located on the shore of the Gastineau Channel . The power house at this location also had two units of 1 @.@ 5 MW capacity each operating under a head of 500 feet ( 150 m ) . Thus , the total generation from the two power stations was 6 @,@ 000 kW ( 8 @,@ 000 hp ) . In 1916 , the average load on the two power stations was 5 @,@ 187 horsepower ( 3 @,@ 868 kW ) . Near Powerhouse 1 on the shore , office buildings , machine shops , saw mills , canteen and housing facilities for staff were also built . 
 = = Rehabilitation = = 
 Since its completion , the dam and its two power stations have gone through many rehabilitation measures . Power House 2 was damaged in a fire in 1923 . It was rehabilitated in 1935 . It was finally abandoned in 1998 . 
 With aging , the dam also needed to be rehabilitated and work was carried out in 1967 . <unk> concrete was removed , the dam body was <unk> and the upstream face of the dam was provided with a layer of high strength concrete in the top 45 feet ( 14 m ) . 
 The lower power house also underwent major rehabilitation measures . It was shut down in December 1974 due to the high cost of operation and maintenance . In 1984 a new power plant was built adjoining the old powerhouse , with installation of 6 @.@ 7 MW capacity . 
 = = Benefits = = 
 Even though the project was initially built for hydroelectric power generation to meet the mining requirements , it has over the years evolved into a multipurpose reservoir with benefits of power generation , drinking water and fisheries . 
 = = = Hydroelectricity = = = 
 The rehabilitated dam and the new power house facility at the lower house site are now fully functional . The generating capacity of the power station is 29 @.@ 5 GWh annually , which accounts for nearly 10 % of Juneau 's power demand . Alaska Electric Light and Power operates and maintains the system . 
 = = = Drinking water supply = = = 
 Salmon Creek reservoir is a secondary source of drinking water which is provided in conjunction with Alaska Electric Light and Power Company ( AEL & P ) . Water is drawn from near the Salmon Creek power generation plant , which is located near sea level . Tail waters from the power station are then pumped to a water treatment plant for chlorination , and pH and alkalinity adjustment with soda ash before the water is supplied to the distribution system . This system was commissioned by the City Borough of Juneau ( <unk> ) in 1984 , after the lower Salmon Creek Powerhouse was re @-@ commissioned with new generating units . The reservoir is also used as chlorine contact tanks , where chlorine is added for purification and given time to react with any pathogens , before it is supplied to the city . However , this source is subject to seasonal high turbidity and also interruptions due to the annual maintenance of the generator units . This system is able to supply 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 3 @,@ 800 m3 ) of water , which covers about one third area of Juneau . The water resources are generally pollution @-@ free and quality is monitored and tested every month to check for drinking @-@ water standards set by the EPA and Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Fisheries = = = 
 In 1880 , the Salmon Creek was named by Richard Harris and Joe Juneau ( during their first visit to the area for gold prospecting ) . The local people called it <unk> meaning " dog salmon " a native name used by <unk> Alaskan Indian ; this name is also shown in some early topographic maps . In 1917 , fish propagation was established in Salmon Creek Reservoir by introducing 50 @,@ 000 fry <unk> ( small and young recently hatched fish ) in the reservoir with assistance from Alaska Fish and Game Club , which maintained a hatchery at Juneau . This helped in propagating fish reserves of Salmon in the reservoir . It is reported that by the time the lake was opened for fishing , the fish measured 6 inches ( 150 mm ) and could be caught with a fly of 6 – 8 inches ( 150 – 200 mm ) . Salmon Creek Reservoir is now open for bait fishing all the year round . Salmon fish varieties are many . Some fish species identified are : Dolly Varden , Brook Trout , Freshwater Trout , Salmon family , Chum Salmon and Coho Salmon . 
 = Telengard = 
 Telengard is a 1982 role @-@ playing dungeon crawler video game developed by Daniel Lawrence and published by Avalon Hill . The player explores a dungeon , fights monsters with magic , and avoids traps in real time without any set mission other than surviving . Lawrence first wrote the game as DND , a 1976 version of Dungeons & Dragons for the DECsystem @-@ 10 mainframe computer . He continued to develop DND at Purdue University as a hobby , rewrote the game for the Commodore PET 2001 after 1978 , and ported it to Apple II + , TRS @-@ 80 , and Atari 800 platforms before Avalon Hill found the game at a convention and licensed it for distribution . Its Commodore 64 release was the most popular . Reviewers noted Telengard 's similarity to Dungeons and Dragons . RPG historian Shannon Appelcline noted the game as one of the first professionally produced computer role @-@ playing games , and Gamasutra 's Barton considered Telengard consequential in what he deemed " The Silver Age " of computer role @-@ playing games preceding the golden age of the late 1980s . Some of the game 's dungeon features , such as altars , fountains , teleportation cubes , and thrones , were adopted by later games such as Tunnels of Doom . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Telengard , the player travels alone through a dungeon fraught with monsters , traps , and treasures in a manner similar to the original Dungeons & Dragons . The game has 50 levels with two million rooms , 20 monster types , and 36 spells . It has no missions or quests , and its only goal is to survive and improve the player character . The game is set in real time and cannot be paused , so the player must visit an " inn " to save their game progress . In the early releases ( e.g. , Apple II ) , the game world has no sound and is represented by ASCII characters , such as slashes for stairs and dollar signs for treasure . Unless the player enters a special cheat , they cannot resume progress upon dying . 
 The single @-@ player adventure begins by personalizing a player character . Each character has randomly generated values for their statistical character attributes : charisma , constitution , dexterity , intelligence , strength , and wisdom . While the algorithm stays the same , the player can randomize repeatedly for new character attribute distributions until satisfied . The player begins with a sword , armor , shield , and no money , and can only see his immediate surroundings , rather than the whole level . Monsters spawn randomly , and players have three options in battle : fight , use magic , or evade . Magic includes combative missiles , fireballs , lightning bolts , and turning the undead , as well as health regeneration and trap navigation . The effects of the game 's most complex spells are not outlined in the instruction manual and must be learned by trial and error . Like the game , the battle events are carried out in real time instead of in turns . Enemies increase in difficulty as the player progresses through the dungeon . They include both living and undead monsters such as elves , dragons , mummies , and wraiths . Defeating enemies awards experience points , which accrete to raise the player 's experience level and increase player stats . The player is rewarded with treasures that include magical weapons , armor items , and potions . Players can code their own features into the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 While a computer science student at Purdue University , Daniel Lawrence wrote several hobbyist computer games for the university 's PDP @-@ 11 <unk> / E mainframe computer , and one grew into Telengard . In his 1976 and 1977 college summers at home , he worked at BOCES in Spencerport , New York , where he wrote a dungeon crawl game called DND ( not to be confused with dnd ) in the BASIC programming language for the DECsystem @-@ 10 's TOPS @-@ 10 operating system . He had been influenced by the pen and paper Dungeons & Dragons . At college , he ported the game to Purdue 's PDP @-@ 11 <unk> / E. The game 's mechanics grew from conversations at the Purdue engineering building . Part of its " real @-@ time " nature descended from the need to not have players occupy the few shared computer terminals for long . 
 In 1978 , Lawrence purchased the Commodore PET 2001 and no longer needed the university 's computer . He rewrote DND as Telengard within eight kilobytes of memory . Due to a lack of space , he designed the dungeon to be procedurally generated based on the player @-@ character 's position so the maps would not have to be stored in memory . Lack of memory was Lawrence 's primary design obstacle . Nevertheless , the final version almost completely used 32 kilobytes of memory . It was easily ported to the Apple II + and TRS @-@ 80 platforms due to their similar usage of the 8K BASIC programming language . The later Atari 800 port required a more complicated handling of string variables . The three ports were finished before Avalon Hill saw the game at a gaming convention and licensed it in 1982 as one of its first computer games . The IBM PC port required a rewrite into the C programming language ; the source code for this version was later lost . The Heath / Zenith CP / M version requires <unk> . The game 's most popular port was for the Commodore 64 . 
 Matt Barton of Gamasutra reported that Lawrence 's DND ( and consequently , his Telengard ) was directly inspired by Whisenhunt and Wood 's dnd for PLATO , with its randomized dungeons and minimalist graphics , though Lawrence recalled in an interview that he had not seen or known of their game . Computer Gaming World 's " resident adventure game expert " wrote that Telengard was based on the earlier , public domain software Castle Telengard . 
 As the game 's BASIC source code was available , ports and remaster exist therefore by the fan community . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 RPG historian Shannon Appelcline identifies Telengard as one of the first professionally produced computer role @-@ playing games . Gamasutra 's Barton described the game as a " pure dungeon crawler " for its lack of diversions , and noted its expansive dungeons as a " key selling point " . AllGame 's Earl Green remarked that the game 's mechanics were very similar in practice to Dungeons & Dragons , and Computer Gaming World 's Dick McGrath also thought the game " borrowed heavily " from the original such that he expected its creators to be thanked in the end credits , and Scorpia cited four specific similarities with Dungeons & Dragons . 
 Green described the game as both " exceedingly simple ... yet very addictive " and rated it four of five stars . McGrath wrote that he wanted to have more control over his money , and added that a store for purchasing upgrades would have been useful . He thought that games such as <unk> and <unk> and Magic handled this aspect better . McGrath suggested that the player draw their own map in the absence of an overview mapping system . He felt that his appreciation for the game grew with time and that it had the necessary hook to make him continually return and play again . Tony Roberts of Compute ! considered the Commodore 64 version of the game best for its enhanced graphics . Scorpia in 1993 stated that while Telengard was " interesting for its time , the game would be pretty dated today " compared to the Gold Box games ; " back then , however , it was hot stuff , and a fun way of passing the time " . 
 Barton of Gamasutra placed Telengard alongside Wizardry and the early Ultima series in what he deemed " The Silver Age " of computer role @-@ playing games that preceded the golden age of the late 1980s . Yet in 1992 , Computer Gaming World 's Gerald <unk> wrote that Telengard and Temple of Apshai were " quickly overshadowed " by the Wizardry and Ultima series . Some of the game 's dungeon features , such as altars , fountains , teleportation cubes , and thrones , were adopted by later games such as Tunnels of Doom . The 1982 Sword of Fargoal similarly shared features . Barton wrote in 2007 that Telengard " still enjoys considerable appreciation today " and questioned whether the Diablo series was " but an updated Telengard " . 
 = Tang dynasty = 
 The Tang dynasty ( Chinese : <unk> ) was an imperial dynasty of China preceded by the Sui dynasty and followed by the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . It is generally regarded as a high point in Chinese civilization , and a golden age of cosmopolitan culture . Its territory , acquired through the military campaigns of its early rulers , rivaled that of the Han dynasty , and the Tang capital at Chang 'an ( present @-@ day Xi 'an ) was the most populous city in the world . 
 The dynasty was founded by the Lǐ family ( 李 ) , who seized power during the decline and collapse of the Sui Empire . The dynasty was briefly interrupted when Empress Wu Zetian seized the throne , proclaiming the Second Zhou dynasty ( 690 – 705 ) and becoming the only Chinese empress regnant . In two censuses of the 7th and 8th centuries , the Tang records estimated the population by number of registered households at about 50 million people . Yet , even when the central government was breaking down and unable to compile an accurate census of the population in the 9th century , it is estimated that the population had grown by then to about 80 million people . With its large population base , the dynasty was able to raise professional and conscripted armies of hundreds of thousands of troops to contend with nomadic powers in dominating Inner Asia and the lucrative trade routes along the Silk Road . Various kingdoms and states paid tribute to the Tang court , while the Tang also conquered or subdued several regions which it indirectly controlled through a protectorate system . Besides political hegemony , the Tang also exerted a powerful cultural influence over neighboring states such as those in Korea , Japan , and Vietnam . 
 The Tang dynasty was largely a period of progress and stability in the first half of the dynasty 's rule , until the An Lushan Rebellion and the decline of central authority in the later half of the dynasty . Like the previous Sui dynasty , the Tang dynasty maintained a civil service system by recruiting scholar @-@ officials through standardized examinations and recommendations to office . This civil order was undermined by the rise of regional military governors known as jiedushi during the 9th century . Chinese culture flourished and further matured during the Tang era ; it is considered the greatest age for Chinese poetry . Two of China 's most famous poets , Li Bai and Du Fu , belonged to this age , as did many famous painters such as Han Gan , Zhang Xuan , and Zhou Fang . There was a rich variety of historical literature compiled by scholars , as well as encyclopedias and geographical works . The adoption of the title <unk> Qaghan by the Tang Emperor Taizong in addition to his title as emperor was eastern Asia 's first " simultaneous kingship " . 
 There were many notable innovations during the Tang , including the development of woodblock printing . Buddhism became a major influence in Chinese culture , with native Chinese sects gaining prominence . However , Buddhism would later be persecuted by the state , subsequently declining in influence . Although the dynasty and central government were in decline by the 9th century , art and culture continued to flourish . The weakened central government largely withdrew from managing the economy , though the country 's mercantile affairs stayed intact and commercial trade continued to thrive regardless , at least until agrarian rebellions in the latter half of the 9th century brought the dynasty to its knees , resulting in damaging atrocities such as the Guangzhou Massacre . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The Li family belonged to the northwest military aristocracy prevalent during the Sui dynasty and claimed to be paternally descended from the Daoist founder Laozi ( whose personal name was Li Dan or Li Er ) , the Han dynasty General Li Guang , and Western Liang ruler Li Gao . This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage ( 隴西李氏 ) which includes Li Bai . The Tang Emperors had Xianbei maternal ancestry , from Emperor Gaozu of Tang 's Xianbei mother Duchess <unk> . 
 Li Yuan was Duke of Tang and governor of Taiyuan during the Sui dynasty 's collapse , which was caused in part by the Sui failure to conquer the northern part of the Korean peninsula during the Goguryeo – Sui War . He had prestige and military experience , and was a first cousin of Emperor Yang of Sui ( their mothers were sisters ) . Li Yuan rose in rebellion in 617 , along with his son and his equally militant daughter Princess <unk> ( d . 623 ) , who raised and commanded her own troops . In winter 617 , Li Yuan occupied Chang 'an , relegated Emperor Yang to the position of Taishang Huang or retired emperor , and acted as regent to the puppet child @-@ emperor , Emperor Gong of Sui . On the news of Emperor Yang 's murder by General Yuwen Huaji on June 18 , 618 , Li Yuan declared himself the emperor of a new dynasty , the Tang . 
 Li Yuan , known as Emperor Gaozu of Tang , ruled until 626 , when he was forcefully deposed by his son Li Shimin , the Prince of Qin . Li Shimin had commanded troops since the age of 18 , had prowess with bow and arrow , sword and lance and was known for his effective cavalry charges . Fighting a numerically superior army , he defeated Dou Jiande ( 573 – 621 ) at Luoyang in the Battle of Hulao on May 28 , 621 . In a violent elimination of royal family due to fear of assassination , Li Shimin ambushed and killed two of his brothers , Li <unk> ( b . 603 ) and Crown prince Li Jiancheng ( b . 589 ) , in the Xuanwu Gate Incident on July 2 , 626 . Shortly thereafter , his father abdicated in his favor and Li Shimin ascended the throne . He is conventionally known by his temple name Taizong . 
 Although killing two brothers and deposing his father contradicted the Confucian value of filial piety , Taizong showed himself to be a capable leader who listened to the advice of the wisest members of his council . In 628 , Emperor Taizong held a Buddhist memorial service for the casualties of war , and in 629 he had Buddhist monasteries erected at the sites of major battles so that monks could pray for the fallen on both sides of the fight . This was during the campaign against Eastern Tujue , a Göktürk khanate that was destroyed after the capture of its ruler , <unk> Qaghan , by the famed Tang military officer Li Jing ( 571 – 649 ) , who later became a Chancellor of the Tang dynasty . With this victory , the Turks accepted Taizong as their khagan , a title rendered as Tian <unk> in addition to his rule as Emperor of China under the traditional title " Son of Heaven " . 
 = = = Wu Zetian 's usurpation = = = 
 Although she entered Emperor Gaozong 's court as the lowly consort Wu Zhao , Wu Zetian rose to the highest seat of power in 690 , establishing the short @-@ lived Wu Zhou . Empress Wu 's rise to power was achieved through cruel and calculating tactics : a popular conspiracy theory stated that she killed her own baby girl and blamed it on Gaozong 's empress so that the empress would be demoted . Emperor Gaozong suffered a stroke in 655 , and Wu began to make many of his court decisions for him , discussing affairs of state with his councilors , who took orders from her while she sat behind a screen . When Empress Wu 's eldest son , the crown prince , began to assert his authority and advocate policies opposed by Empress Wu , he suddenly died in 675 . Many suspected he was poisoned by Empress Wu . Although the next heir apparent kept a lower profile , in 680 he was accused by Wu of plotting a rebellion and was banished . ( He was later obliged to commit suicide . ) 
 In 683 , Emperor Gaozong died . He was succeeded by Emperor Zhongzong , his eldest surviving son by Wu . Zhongzong tried to appoint his wife 's father as chancellor : after only six weeks on the throne , he was deposed by Empress Wu in favor of his younger brother , 12 @-@ year @-@ old Emperor Ruizong . This provoked a group of Tang princes to rebel in 684 ; Wu 's armies suppressed them within two months . She proclaimed the <unk> era of Wu Zhou on October 16 , 690 , and three days later demoted Emperor Ruizong to crown prince . He was also forced to give up his father 's surname Li in favor of the empress 's Wu . She then ruled as China 's only empress . A palace coup on February 20 , 705 , forced her to yield her position on February 22 . The next day , her son Zhongzong was restored to power ; the Tang was formally restored on March 3 . She died soon after . To legitimize her rule , she circulated a document known as the Great Cloud Sutra , which predicted that a reincarnation of the Maitreya Buddha would be a female monarch who would dispel illness , worry , and disaster from the world . She even introduced numerous revised written characters to the written language , which reverted to the originals after her death . Arguably the most important part of her legacy was diminishing the power of the northwest aristocracy , allowing people from other clans and regions of China to become more represented in Chinese politics and government . 
 = = = Emperor Xuanzong 's reign = = = 
 There were many prominent women at court during and after Wu 's reign , including Shangguan Wan 'er ( 664 – 710 ) , a poetess , writer , and trusted official in charge of Wu 's private office . In 706 the wife of Emperor Zhongzong of Tang , Empress Wei ( d . 710 ) , persuaded her husband to staff government offices with his sister and her daughters , and in 709 requested that he grant women the right to bequeath hereditary privileges to their sons ( which before was a male right only ) . Empress Wei eventually poisoned Zhongzong , whereupon she placed his fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son upon the throne in 710 . Two weeks later , Li <unk> ( the later Emperor Xuanzong ) entered the palace with a few followers and slew Empress Wei and her faction . He then installed his father Emperor Ruizong ( r . 710 – 712 ) on the throne . Just as Emperor Zhongzong was dominated by Empress Wei , so too was Ruizong dominated by Princess Taiping . This was finally ended when Princess Taiping 's coup failed in 712 ( she later hanged herself in 713 ) and Emperor Ruizong abdicated to Emperor Xuanzong . 
 During the 44 @-@ year reign of Emperor Xuanzong , the Tang dynasty reached its height , a golden age with low economic inflation and a toned down lifestyle for the imperial court . Seen as a progressive and benevolent ruler , Xuanzong even abolished the death penalty in the year 747 ; all executions had to be approved beforehand by the emperor himself ( these were relatively few , considering that there were only 24 executions in the year 730 ) . Xuanzong bowed to the consensus of his ministers on policy decisions and made efforts to staff government ministries fairly with different political factions . His staunch Confucian chancellor Zhang <unk> ( 673 – 740 ) worked to reduce deflation and increase the money supply by upholding the use of private coinage , while his aristocratic and technocratic successor Li Linfu ( d . 753 ) favored government monopoly over the issuance of coinage . After 737 most of Xuanzong 's confidence rested in his long @-@ standing chancellor Li Linfu , who championed a more aggressive foreign policy employing non @-@ Chinese generals . This policy ultimately created the conditions for a massive rebellion against Xuanzong . 
 = = = An Lushan Rebellion and catastrophe = = = 
 The Tang Empire was at its height of power up until the middle of the 8th century , when the An Lushan Rebellion ( December 16 , 755 – February 17 , 763 ) destroyed the prosperity of the empire . An Lushan was a half @-@ Sogdian , half @-@ Turk Tang commander since 744 , had experience fighting the Khitans of Manchuria with a victory in 744 , yet most of his campaigns against the Khitans were unsuccessful . He was given great responsibility in Hebei , which allowed him to rebel with an army of more than one hundred thousand troops . After capturing Luoyang , he named himself emperor of a new , but short @-@ lived , Yan state . Despite early victories scored by Tang General Guo Ziyi ( 697 – 781 ) , the newly recruited troops of the army at the capital were no match for An Lushan 's die @-@ hard frontier veterans , so the court fled Chang 'an . While the heir apparent raised troops in Shanxi and Xuanzong fled to Sichuan province , they called upon the help of the Uyghur Turks in 756 . The Uyghur khan <unk> was greatly excited at this prospect , and married his own daughter to the Chinese diplomatic envoy once he arrived , receiving in turn a Chinese princess as his bride . The Uyghurs helped recapture the Tang capital from the rebels , but they refused to leave until the Tang paid them an enormous sum of tribute in silk . Even Abbasid Arabs assisted the Tang in putting down An Lushan 's rebellion . The Tibetans took hold of the opportunity and raided many areas under Chinese control , and even after the Tibetan Empire had fallen apart in 842 ( and the Uyghurs soon after ) the Tang were in no position to reconquer Central Asia after 763 . So significant was this loss that half a century later jinshi examination candidates were required to write an essay on the causes of the Tang 's decline . Although An Lushan was killed by one of his eunuchs in 757 , this time of troubles and widespread insurrection continued until rebel Shi <unk> was killed by his own son in 763 . 
 One of the legacies that the Tang government left since 710 was the gradual rise of regional military governors , the jiedushi , who slowly came to challenge the power of the central government . After the An Lushan Rebellion , the autonomous power and authority accumulated by the jiedushi in Hebei went beyond the central government 's control . After a series of rebellions between 781 and 784 in today 's Hebei , Shandong , Hubei and Henan provinces , the government had to officially acknowledge the jiedushi 's hereditary ruling without accreditation . The Tang government relied on these governors and their armies for protection and to suppress locals that would take up arms against the government . In return , the central government would acknowledge the rights of these governors to maintain their army , collect taxes and even to pass on their title to heirs . As time passed , these military governors slowly phased out the prominence of civil officials drafted by exams , and became more autonomous from central authority . The rule of these powerful military governors lasted until 960 , when a new civil order under the Song dynasty was established . Also , the abandonment of the equal @-@ field system meant that people could buy and sell land freely . Many poor fell into debt because of this , forced to sell their land to the wealthy , which led to the exponential growth of large estates . With the breakdown of the land allocation system after 755 , the central Chinese state barely interfered in agricultural management and acted merely as tax collector for roughly a millennium , save a few instances such as the Song 's failed land nationalization during the 13th @-@ century war with the Mongols . 
 With the central government collapsing in authority over the various regions of the empire , it was recorded in 845 that bandits and river pirates in parties of 100 or more began plundering settlements along the Yangtze River with little resistance . In 858 , enormous floods along the Grand Canal inundated vast tracts of land and terrain of the North China Plain , which drowned tens of thousands of people in the process . The Chinese belief in the Mandate of Heaven granted to the ailing Tang was also challenged when natural calamities occurred , forcing many to believe the Heavens were displeased and that the Tang had lost their right to rule . Then in 873 a disastrous harvest shook the foundations of the empire ; in some areas only half of all agricultural produce was gathered , and tens of thousands faced famine and starvation . In the earlier period of the Tang , the central government was able to meet crises in the harvest , as it was recorded from 714 – 719 that the Tang government responded effectively to natural disasters by extending the price @-@ regulation granary system throughout the country . The central government was able then to build a large surplus stock of foods to ward off the rising danger of famine and increased agricultural productivity through land reclamation . In the 9th century , however , the Tang government was nearly helpless in dealing with any calamity . 
 = = = Rebuilding and recovery = = = 
 Although these natural calamities and rebellions stained the reputation and hampered the effectiveness of the central government , the early 9th century is nonetheless viewed as a period of recovery for the Tang dynasty . The government 's withdrawal from its role in managing the economy had the unintended effect of stimulating trade , as more markets with less bureaucratic restrictions were opened up . By 780 , the old grain tax and labor service of the 7th century was replaced by a semiannual tax paid in cash , signifying the shift to a money economy boosted by the merchant class . Cities in the Jiangnan region to the south , such as Yangzhou , Suzhou , and Hangzhou prospered the most economically during the late Tang period . The government monopoly on the production of salt , weakened after the An Shi Rebellion , was placed under the Salt Commission , which became one of the most powerful state agencies , run by capable ministers chosen as specialists . The commission began the practice of selling merchants the rights to buy monopoly salt , which they would then transport and sell in local markets . In 799 salt accounted for over half of the government 's revenues . S. A. M. Adshead writes that this salt tax represents " the first time that an indirect tax , rather than tribute , levies on land or people , or profit from state enterprises such as mines , had been the primary resource of a major state . " Even after the power of the central government was in decline after the mid 8th century , it was still able to function and give out imperial orders on a massive scale . The <unk> ( Old Book of Tang ) compiled in the year 945 recorded that in 828 the Tang government issued a decree that standardized <unk> square @-@ pallet chain pumps in the country : 
 In the second year of the Taihe reign period [ 828 ] , in the second month ... a standard model of the chain pump was issued from the palace , and the people of <unk> Fu ( d footnote : the capital ) were ordered by the emperor to make a considerable number of machines , for distribution to the people along the Zheng Bai Canal , for irrigation purposes . | 
 The last great ambitious ruler of the Tang dynasty was Emperor Xianzong ( r . 805 – 820 ) , his reign period aided by the fiscal reforms of the 780s , including the government monopoly on the salt industry . He also had an effective well trained imperial army stationed at the capital led by his court eunuchs ; this was the Army of Divine Strategy , numbering 240 @,@ 000 in strength as recorded in 798 . Between the years 806 and 819 , Emperor Xianzong conducted seven major military campaigns to quell the rebellious provinces that had claimed autonomy from central authority , managing to subdue all but two of them . Under his reign there was a brief end to the hereditary jiedushi , as Xianzong appointed his own military officers and staffed the regional bureaucracies once again with civil officials . However , Xianzong 's successors proved less capable and more interested in the leisure of hunting , feasting , and playing outdoor sports , allowing eunuchs to amass more power as drafted scholar @-@ officials caused strife in the bureaucracy with factional parties . The eunuchs ' power became unchallenged after Emperor Wenzong 's ( r . 826 – 840 ) failed plot to have them overthrown ; instead the allies of Emperor Wenzong were publicly executed in the West Market of Chang 'an , by the eunuchs ' command . 
 = = = End of the dynasty = = = 
 In addition to natural calamities and jiedushi amassing autonomous control , the Huang Chao Rebellion ( 874 – 884 ) resulted in the sacking of both Chang 'an and Luoyang , and took an entire decade to suppress . Although the rebellion was defeated by the Tang , it never recovered from that crucial blow , weakening it for the future military powers to take over . There were also large groups of bandits , in the size of small armies , that ravaged the countryside in the last years of the Tang , who smuggled illicit salt , ambushed merchants and convoys , and even besieged several walled cities . 
 Zhu Wen , originally a salt smuggler who had served under the rebel Huang , surrendered to Tang forces . By helping to defeat Huang , he was granted a series of rapid military promotions . In 907 the Tang dynasty was ended when Zhu Wen , now a military governor , deposed the last emperor of Tang , Emperor Ai of Tang , and took the throne for himself ( known posthumously as Emperor Taizu of Later Liang ) . He established the Later Liang , which inaugurated the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . A year later the deposed Emperor Ai was poisoned by Zhu Wen , and died . 
 = = Administration and politics = = 
 = = = Initial reforms = = = 
 Taizong set out to solve internal problems within the government which had constantly plagued past dynasties . Building upon the Sui legal code , he issued a new legal code that subsequent Chinese dynasties would model theirs upon , as well as neighboring polities in Vietnam , Korea , and Japan . The earliest law code to survive was the one established in the year 653 , which was divided into 500 articles specifying different crimes and penalties ranging from ten blows with a light stick , one hundred blows with a heavy rod , exile , penal servitude , or execution . 
 The legal code clearly distinguished different levels of severity in meted punishments when different members of the social and political hierarchy committed the same crime . For example , the severity of punishment was different when a servant or nephew killed a master or an uncle than when a master or uncle killed a servant or nephew . 
 The Tang Code was largely retained by later codes such as the early Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) code of 1397 , yet there were several revisions in later times , such as improved property rights for women during the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . 
 The Tang had three departments ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , which were obliged to draft , review , and implement policies respectively . There were also six ministries ( Chinese : 部 ; pinyin : bù ) under the administrations that implemented policy , each of which was assigned different tasks . These Three Departments and Six Ministries included the personnel administration , finance , rites , military , justice , and public works — an administrative model which would last until the fall of the Qing dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) . 
 Although the founders of the Tang related to the glory of the earlier Han dynasty ( 3rd century BC – 3rd century AD ) , the basis for much of their administrative organization was very similar to the previous Northern and Southern dynasties . The Northern Zhou ( 6th century ) fubing system of divisional militia was continued by the Tang , along with farmer @-@ soldiers serving in rotation from the capital or frontier in order to receive appropriated farmland . The equal @-@ field system of the Northern Wei ( 4th – 6th centuries ) was also kept , although there were a few modifications . 
 Although the central and local governments kept an enormous number of records about land property in order to assess taxes , it became common practice in the Tang for literate and affluent people to create their own private documents and signed contracts . These had their own signature and that of a witness and scribe in order to prove in court ( if necessary ) that their claim to property was legitimate . The prototype of this actually existed since the ancient Han dynasty , while contractual language became even more common and embedded into Chinese literary culture in later dynasties . 
 The center of the political power of the Tang was the capital city of Chang 'an ( modern Xi 'an ) , where the emperor maintained his large palace quarters and entertained political emissaries with music , sports , acrobatic stunts , poetry , paintings , and dramatic theater performances . The capital was also filled with incredible amounts of riches and resources to spare . When the Chinese prefectural government officials traveled to the capital in the year 643 to give the annual report of the affairs in their districts , Emperor Taizong discovered that many had no proper quarters to rest in and were renting rooms with merchants . Therefore , Emperor Taizong ordered the government agencies in charge of municipal construction to build every visiting official his own private mansion in the capital . 
 = = = Imperial examinations = = = 
 Following the Sui dynasty 's example , the Tang abandoned the nine @-@ rank system in favor of a service system . Students of Confucian studies were potential candidates for the imperial examinations , the graduates of which could be appointed as state bureaucrats in the local , provincial , and central government . There were two types of exams that were given , <unk> ( ' illuminating the classics examination ' ) and jinshi ( ' presented scholar examination ' ) . The <unk> was based upon the Confucian classics and tested the student 's knowledge of a broad variety of texts . The jinshi tested a student 's literary abilities in writing essay @-@ style responses to questions on matters of governance and politics , as well as their skills in composing poetry . Candidates were also judged on their skills of deportment , appearance , speech , and level of skill in calligraphy , all of which were subjective criteria that allowed the already wealthy members of society to be chosen over ones of more modest means who were unable to be educated in rhetoric or fanciful writing skills . There was a disproportionate number of civil officials coming from aristocratic as opposed to non @-@ aristocratic families . The exams were open to all male subjects whose fathers were not of the artisan or merchant classes , although having wealth or noble status was not a prerequisite in receiving a recommendation . In order to promote widespread Confucian education , the Tang government established state @-@ run schools and issued standard versions of the Five Classics with selected commentaries . 
 This competitive procedure was designed to draw the best talent into government . But perhaps an even greater consideration for the Tang rulers , aware that imperial dependence on powerful aristocratic families and warlords would have destabilizing consequences , was to create a body of career officials having no autonomous territorial or functional power base . The Tang law code ensured equal division of inherited property amongst legitimate heirs , allowing a bit of social mobility and preventing the families of powerful court officials from becoming landed nobility through primogeniture . As it turned out , these scholar @-@ officials acquired status in their local communities and in family ties , while they also shared values that connected them to the imperial court . From Tang times until the end of the Qing dynasty in 1912 , scholar @-@ officials functioned often as intermediaries between the grassroots level and the government . Yet the potential of a widespread examination system was not fully realized until the Song dynasty , when the merit @-@ driven scholar official largely shed his aristocratic habits and defined his social status through the examination system . As historian Patricia Ebrey states of the Song period scholar @-@ officials : 
 The examination system , used only on a small scale in Sui and Tang times , played a central role in the fashioning of this new elite . The early Song emperors , concerned above all to avoid domination of the government by military men , greatly expanded the civil service examination system and the government school system . 
 Nevertheless , the Sui and Tang dynasties institutionalized and set the foundations for the civil service system and the new elite class of exam @-@ drafted scholar @-@ officials . 
 = = = Religion and politics = = = 
 From the outset , religion played a role in Tang politics . In his bid for power , Li Yuan had attracted a following by claiming descent from the Daoist sage Laozi ( fl . 6th century BC ) . People bidding for office would have monks from Buddhist temples pray for them in public in return for cash donations or gifts if the person was selected . Before the persecution of Buddhism in the 9th century , Buddhism and Daoism were accepted side by side , and Emperor Xuanzong ( r . 712 – 56 ) invited monks and clerics of both religions to his court . At the same time Xuanzong exalted the ancient Laozi by granting him grand titles , wrote commentary on the Daoist Laozi , set up a school to prepare candidates for examinations on Daoist scriptures , and called upon the Indian monk <unk> ( 671 – 741 ) to perform Tantric rites to avert a drought in the year 726 . In 742 Emperor Xuanzong personally held the incense burner during a ceremony led by Amoghavajra ( 705 – 74 , patriarch of the Shingon school ) reciting " mystical incantations to secure the victory of Tang forces . " 
 While religion played a role in politics , politics also played a role in religion . In the year 714 , Emperor Xuanzong forbade shops and vendors in the city of Chang 'an to sell copied Buddhist sutras , instead giving the Buddhist clergy of the monasteries the sole right to distribute sutras to the laity . In the previous year of 713 , Emperor Xuanzong had liquidated the highly lucrative <unk> Treasury , which was run by a prominent Buddhist monastery in Chang 'an . This monastery collected vast amounts of money , silk , and treasures through multitudes of anonymous people 's <unk> , leaving the donations on the monastery 's premise . Although the monastery was generous in donations , Emperor Xuanzong issued a decree abolishing their treasury on grounds that their banking practices were fraudulent , collected their riches , and distributed the wealth to various other Buddhist monasteries and Daoist abbeys , and to repair statues , halls , and bridges in the city . 
 = = = Taxes and the census = = = 
 The Tang dynasty government attempted to create an accurate census of the size of their empire 's population , mostly for effective taxation and matters of military conscription for each region . The early Tang government established both the grain tax and cloth tax at a relatively low rate for each household under the empire . This was meant to encourage households to enroll for taxation and not avoid the authorities , thus providing the government with the most accurate estimate possible . In the census of 609 , the population was tallied by efforts of the government at a size of 9 million households , or about 50 million people . The Tang census of 742 again approximated the size of China 's population at about 50 million people . Patricia Ebrey writes that even if a rather significant number of people had avoided the registration process of the tax census , the population size during the Tang had not grown significantly since the earlier Han dynasty ( the census of the year 2 recording a population of roughly 58 million people in China ) . <unk> Adshead disagrees , estimating that there were about 75 million people by 750 . 
 In the Tang census of the year 754 , there were 1 @,@ 859 cities , 321 prefectures , and 1 @,@ 538 counties throughout the empire . Although there were many large and prominent cities during the Tang , the rural and agrarian areas comprised the majority of China 's population at some 80 to 90 % . There was also a dramatic migratory shift of the population from northern to southern China , as the North held 75 % of the overall population at the dynasty 's inception , but by its end was reduced to 50 % . 
 Chinese population size would not dramatically increase until the Song dynasty period , when the population doubled to 100 million people because of extensive rice cultivation in central and southern China , coupled with rural farmers holding more abundant yields of food that they could easily provide to the growing market . 
 = = Military and foreign policy = = 
 = = = <unk> and tributaries = = = 
 The 7th and first half of the 8th century are generally considered to be the era in which the Tang reached the zenith of its power . In this period , Tang control extended further west than any previous dynasty , stretching from north Vietnam in the south , to a point north of Kashmir bordering Persia in the west , to northern Korea in the north @-@ east . 
 Some of the kingdoms paying tribute to the Tang dynasty included Kashmir , Nepal , Khotan , Kucha , Kashgar , Korea , Champa , and kingdoms located in Amu Darya and Syr Darya valley . Turkic nomads addressed the Emperor of Tang China as Tian <unk> . After the widespread Göktürk revolt of <unk> Khan ( d . 658 ) was put down at <unk> <unk> in 657 by Su Dingfang ( 591 – 667 ) , Emperor Gaozong established several protectorates governed by a Protectorate General or Grand Protectorate General , which extended the Chinese sphere of influence as far as Herat in Western Afghanistan . Protectorate Generals were given a great deal of autonomy to handle local crises without waiting for central admission . After Xuanzong 's reign , military governors ( jiedushi ) were given enormous power , including the ability to maintain their own armies , collect taxes , and pass their titles on <unk> . This is commonly recognized as the beginning of the fall of Tang 's central government . 
 = = = Soldiers and conscription = = = 
 By the year 737 , Emperor Xuanzong discarded the policy of conscripting soldiers that were replaced every three years , replacing them with long @-@ service soldiers who were more battle @-@ hardened and efficient . It was more economically feasible as well , since training new recruits and sending them out to the frontier every three years drained the treasury . By the late 7th century , the fubing troops began abandoning military service and the homes provided to them in the equal @-@ field system . The supposed standard of 100 mu of land allotted to each family was in fact decreasing in size in places where population expanded and the wealthy bought up most of the land . Hard @-@ pressed peasants and vagrants were then induced into military service with benefits of exemption from both taxation and corvée labor service , as well as provisions for farmland and dwellings for dependents who accompanied soldiers on the frontier . By the year 742 the total number of enlisted troops in the Tang armies had risen to about 500 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = = Turkic and Western regions = = = 
 The Sui and Tang carried out very successful military campaigns against the steppe nomads . Chinese foreign policy to the north and west now had to deal with Turkic nomads , who were becoming the most dominant ethnic group in Central Asia . To handle and avoid any threats posed by the Turks , the Sui government repaired fortifications and received their trade and tribute missions . They sent four royal princesses to form marriage alliances with Turkic clan leaders , in 597 , 599 , 614 , and 617 . The Sui stirred trouble and conflict amongst ethnic groups against the Turks . As early as the Sui dynasty , the Turks had become a major militarized force employed by the Chinese . When the Khitans began raiding northeast China in 605 , a Chinese general led 20 @,@ 000 Turks against them , distributing Khitan livestock and women to the Turks as a reward . On two occasions between 635 and 636 , Tang royal princesses were married to Turk mercenaries or generals in Chinese service . Throughout the Tang dynasty until the end of 755 , there were approximately ten Turkic generals serving under the Tang . While most of the Tang army was made of fubing Chinese conscripts , the majority of the troops led by Turkic generals were of non @-@ Chinese origin , campaigning largely in the western frontier where the presence of fubing troops was low . Some " Turkic " troops were <unk> Han Chinese , a <unk> people . 
 Civil war in China was almost totally diminished by 626 , along with the defeat in 628 of the Ordos Chinese warlord Liang <unk> ; after these internal conflicts , the Tang began an offensive against the Turks . In the year 630 , Tang armies captured areas of the Ordos Desert , modern @-@ day Inner Mongolia province , and southern Mongolia from the Turks . After this military victory , Emperor Taizong won the title of Great Khan amongst the various Turks in the region who pledged their allegiance to him and the Chinese empire ( with several thousand Turks traveling into China to live at Chang 'an ) . On June 11 , 631 , Emperor Taizong also sent envoys to the Xueyantuo bearing gold and silk in order to persuade the release of enslaved Chinese prisoners who were captured during the transition from Sui to Tang from the northern frontier ; this embassy succeeded in freeing 80 @,@ 000 Chinese men and women who were then returned to China . 
 While the Turks were settled in the Ordos region ( former territory of the Xiongnu ) , the Tang government took on the military policy of dominating the central steppe . Like the earlier Han dynasty , the Tang dynasty ( along with Turkic allies ) conquered and subdued Central Asia during the 640s and 650s . During Emperor Taizong 's reign alone , large campaigns were launched against not only the Göktürks , but also separate campaigns against the <unk> , the <unk> states , and the Xueyantuo . Under Emperor Gaozong , a campaign led by the general Su Dingfang was launched against the Western Turks ruled by Ashina Helu . 
 The Tang Empire competed with the Tibetan Empire for control of areas in Inner and Central Asia , which was at times settled with marriage alliances such as the marrying of Princess Wencheng ( d . 680 ) to Songtsän Gampo ( d . 649 ) . A Tibetan tradition mentions that Chinese troops captured Lhasa after Songtsän Gampo 's death , but no such invasion is mentioned in either Chinese annals or the Tibetan manuscripts of Dunhuang . 
 There was a long string of conflicts with Tibet over territories in the Tarim Basin between 670 – 692 , and in 763 the Tibetans even captured the capital of China , Chang 'an , for fifteen days during the An Shi Rebellion . In fact , it was during this rebellion that the Tang withdrew its western garrisons stationed in what is now Gansu and Qinghai , which the Tibetans then occupied along with the territory of what is now Xinjiang . Hostilities between the Tang and Tibet continued until they signed a formal peace treaty in 821 . The terms of this treaty , including the fixed borders between the two countries , are recorded in a bilingual inscription on a stone pillar outside the Jokhang temple in Lhasa . 
 During the Islamic conquest of Persia ( 633 – 656 ) , the son of the last ruler of the Sassanid Empire , Prince <unk> , fled to Tang China . According to the Old Book of Tang , <unk> was made the head of a Governorate of Persia in what is now Zaranj , Afghanistan . During this conquest of Persia , the Islamic Caliph Uthman Ibn Affan ( r . 644 – 656 ) sent an embassy to the Tang court at Chang 'an . By the 740s , the Arabs of Khurasan had established a presence in the Ferghana basin and in Sogdiana . At the Battle of Talas in 751 , <unk> mercenaries under the Chinese defected , helping the Arab armies of the Islamic Caliphate to defeat the Tang force under commander Gao <unk> . Although the battle itself was not of the greatest significance militarily , this was a pivotal moment in history ; it marks the spread of Chinese papermaking into regions west of China as captured Chinese soldiers revealed secrets of Chinese papermaking to the Arabs . These techniques ultimately reached Europe by the 12th century through Arab @-@ controlled Spain . Although they had fought at Talas , on June 11 , 758 , an Abbasid embassy arrived at Chang 'an simultaneously with the Uyghur Turks bearing gifts for the Tang Emperor . From even further west , a tribute embassy came to the court of Taizong in 643 from the Patriarch of Antioch . In 788 – 9 the Chinese concluded a military alliance with the Uighur Turks who twice defeated the Tibetans , in 789 near the town of Kuch 'eng in <unk> , and in 791 near Ning @-@ <unk> on the Yellow River . 
 = = = Korea and Japan = = = 
 In the east , the Chinese military campaigns were less successful than elsewhere . Like the emperors of the Sui dynasty before him , Taizong established a military campaign in 644 against the kingdom of Goguryeo in the Goguryeo @-@ Tang War ; however , this led to its withdrawal in the first campaign because they failed to overcome the successful defense led by General Yeon <unk> . Allying with the Korean Silla Kingdom , the Chinese fought against Baekje and their Yamato Japanese allies in the Battle of <unk> in August 663 , a decisive Tang – Silla victory . The Tang dynasty navy had several different ship types at its disposal to engage in naval warfare , these ships described by Li Quan in his <unk> <unk> ( Canon of the White and Gloomy Planet of War ) of 759 . The Battle of <unk> was actually a restoration movement by remnant forces of Baekje , since their kingdom was toppled in 660 by a joint Tang – Silla invasion , led by Chinese general Su Dingfang and Korean general Kim Yushin ( 595 – 673 ) . In another joint invasion with Silla , the Tang army severely weakened the Goguryeo Kingdom in the north by taking out its outer forts in the year 645 . With joint attacks by Silla and Tang armies under commander Li Shiji ( 594 – 669 ) , the Kingdom of Goguryeo was destroyed by 668 . 
 Although they were formerly enemies , the Tang accepted officials and generals of Goguryeo into their administration and military , such as the brothers Yeon <unk> ( 634 – 679 ) and Yeon Namsan ( 639 – 701 ) . From 668 to 676 , the Tang Empire would control northern Korea . However , in 671 Silla began fighting the Tang forces there . At the same time the Tang faced threats on its western border when a large Chinese army was defeated by the Tibetans on the <unk> River in 670 . By 676 , the Tang army was driven out of Korea by Unified Silla . Following a revolt of the Eastern Turks in 679 , the Tang abandoned its Korean campaigns . 
 Although the Tang had fought the Japanese , they still held cordial relations with Japan . There were numerous Imperial embassies to China from Japan , diplomatic missions that were not halted until 894 by Emperor <unk> ( r . 887 – 897 ) , upon persuasion by Sugawara no <unk> ( 845 – 903 ) . The Japanese Emperor <unk> ( r . 672 – 686 ) even established his conscripted army on that of the Chinese model , his state ceremonies on the Chinese model , and constructed his palace at Fujiwara on the Chinese model of architecture . 
 Many Chinese Buddhist monks came to Japan to help further the spread of Buddhism as well . Two 7th @-@ century monks in particular , Zhi Yu and Zhi You , visited the court of Emperor <unk> ( r . 661 – 672 ) , whereupon they presented a gift of a south @-@ pointing chariot that they had crafted . This 3rd century mechanically driven directional @-@ compass vehicle ( employing a differential gear ) was again reproduced in several models for <unk> in 666 , as recorded in the Nihon Shoki of 720 . Japanese monks also visited China ; such was the case with <unk> ( 794 – 864 ) , who wrote of his travel experiences including travels along China 's Grand Canal . The Japanese monk <unk> ( 814 – 891 ) stayed in China from 839 to 847 and again from 853 to 858 , landing near Fuzhou , Fujian and setting sail for Japan from Taizhou , Zhejiang during his second trip to China . 
 = = Trade and spread of culture = = 
 Through use of the land trade along the Silk Road and maritime trade by sail at sea , the Tang were able to gain many new technologies , cultural practices , rare luxury , and contemporary items . From the Middle East , India , Persia , and Central Asia the Tang were able to acquire new ideas in fashion , new types of ceramics , and improved silver @-@ smithing . The Chinese also gradually adopted the foreign concept of stools and chairs as seating , whereas the Chinese beforehand always sat on mats placed on the floor . To the Middle East , the Islamic world coveted and purchased in bulk Chinese goods such as silks , lacquerwares , and porcelain wares . Songs , dances , and musical instruments from foreign regions became popular in China during the Tang dynasty . These musical instruments included oboes , flutes , and small lacquered drums from Kucha in the Tarim Basin , and percussion instruments from India such as cymbals . At the court there were nine musical ensembles ( expanded from seven in the Sui dynasty ) representing music from throughout Asia . 
 There was great contact and interest in India as a hub for Buddhist knowledge , with famous travelers such as Xuanzang ( d . 664 ) visiting the South Asian subcontinent . After a 17 @-@ year @-@ long trip , Xuanzang managed to bring back valuable Sanskrit texts to be translated into Chinese . There was also a Turkic – Chinese dictionary available for serious scholars and students , while Turkic folksongs gave inspiration to some Chinese poetry . In the interior of China , trade was facilitated by the Grand Canal and the Tang government 's rationalization of the greater canal system that reduced costs of transporting grain and other commodities . The state also managed roughly 32 @,@ 100 km ( 19 @,@ 900 mi ) of postal service routes by horse or boat . 
 = = = Silk Road = = = 
 Although the Silk Road from China to the West was initially formulated during the reign of Emperor Wu ( 141 – 87 BC ) during the Han , it was reopened by the Tang in 639 when Hou Junji ( d . 643 ) conquered the West , and remained open for almost four decades . It was closed after the Tibetans captured it in 678 , but in 699 , during Empress Wu 's period , the Silk Road reopened when the Tang reconquered the Four Garrisons of Anxi originally installed in 640 , once again connecting China directly to the West for land @-@ based trade . 
 The Tang captured the vital route through the Gilgit Valley from Tibet in 722 , lost it to the Tibetans in 737 , and regained it under the command of the Goguryeo @-@ Korean General Gao <unk> . When the An Lushan Rebellion ended in 763 , the Tang Empire had once again lost control over its western lands , as the Tibetan Empire largely cut off China 's direct access to the Silk Road . An internal rebellion in 848 ousted the Tibetan rulers , and Tang China regained its northwestern prefectures from Tibet in 851 . These lands contained crucial grazing areas and pastures for raising horses that the Tang dynasty desperately needed . 
 Despite the many western travelers coming into China to live and trade , many travelers , mainly religious monks , recorded the strict border laws that the Chinese enforced . As the monk Xuanzang and many other monk travelers attested to , there were many Chinese government checkpoints along the Silk Road that examined travel permits into the Tang Empire . Furthermore , banditry was a problem along the checkpoints and oasis towns , as Xuanzang also recorded that his group of travelers were assaulted by bandits on multiple occasions . 
 The Silk Road also had an impact on Tang dynasty art . Horses became a significant symbol of prosperity and power as well as an instrument of military and diplomatic policy . Horses were also revered as a relative of the dragon . 
 = = = Seaports and maritime trade = = = 
 Chinese envoys had been sailing through the Indian Ocean to India since perhaps the 2nd century BC , yet it was during the Tang dynasty that a strong Chinese maritime presence could be found in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea , into Persia , Mesopotamia ( sailing up the Euphrates River in modern @-@ day Iraq ) , Arabia , Egypt , Aksum ( Ethiopia ) , and Somalia in the Horn of Africa . 
 During the Tang dynasty , thousands of foreigners came and lived in numerous Chinese cities for trade and commercial ties with China , including Persians , Arabs , Hindu Indians , Malays , Bengalis , Sinhalese , Khmers , Chams , Jews and Nestorian Christians of the Near East , and many others . In 748 , the Buddhist monk Jian Zhen described Guangzhou as a bustling mercantile center where many large and impressive foreign ships came to dock . He wrote that " many big ships came from Borneo , Persia , <unk> ( Indonesia / Java ) ... with ... spices , pearls , and jade piled up mountain high " , as written in the Yue Jue Shu ( Lost Records of the State of Yue ) . During the An Lushan Rebellion Arab and Persian pirates burned and looted Guangzhou in 758 , and foreigners were massacred at Yangzhou in 760 . The Tang government reacted by shutting the port of Canton down for roughly five decades , and foreign vessels docked at Hanoi instead . However , when the port reopened it continued to thrive . In 851 the Arab merchant Sulaiman al @-@ Tajir observed the manufacturing of Chinese porcelain in Guangzhou and admired its transparent quality . He also provided a description of Guangzhou 's mosque , its granaries , its local government administration , some of its written records , the treatment of travelers , along with the use of ceramics , rice @-@ wine , and tea . However , in another bloody episode at Guangzhou in 879 , the Chinese rebel Huang Chao sacked the city , and purportedly slaughtered thousands of native Chinese , along with foreign Jews , Christians , Zoroastrians , and Muslims in the process . Huang 's rebellion was eventually suppressed in 884 . 
 Vessels from Korean Silla , Balhae and Hizen Province of Japan were all involved in the Yellow Sea trade , which Silla dominated . After Silla and Japan reopened renewed hostilities in the late 7th century , most Japanese maritime merchants chose to set sail from Nagasaki towards the mouth of the Huai River , the Yangzi River , and even as far south as the Hangzhou Bay in order to avoid Korean ships in the Yellow Sea . In order to sail back to Japan in 838 , the Japanese embassy to China procured nine ships and sixty Korean sailors from the Korean wards of <unk> and <unk> cities along the Huai River . It is also known that Chinese trade ships traveling to Japan set sail from the various ports along the coasts of Zhejiang and Fujian provinces . 
 The Chinese engaged in large @-@ scale production for overseas export by at least the time of the Tang . This was proven by the discovery of the Belitung shipwreck , a silt @-@ preserved shipwrecked Arabian dhow in the Gaspar Strait near Belitung , which had 63 @,@ 000 pieces of Tang ceramics , silver , and gold ( including a Changsha bowl inscribed with a date : " 16th day of the seventh month of the second year of the <unk> reign " , or 826 , roughly confirmed by radiocarbon dating of star anise at the wreck ) . Beginning in 785 , the Chinese began to call regularly at <unk> on the East African coast in order to cut out Arab middlemen , with various contemporary Chinese sources giving detailed descriptions of trade in Africa . The official and geographer Jia Dan ( 730 – 805 ) wrote of two common sea trade routes in his day : one from the coast of the Bohai Sea towards Korea and another from Guangzhou through Malacca towards the Nicobar Islands , Sri Lanka and India , the eastern and northern shores of the Arabian Sea to the Euphrates River . In 863 the Chinese author Duan Chengshi ( d . 863 ) provided a detailed description of the slave trade , ivory trade , and ambergris trade in a country called <unk> , which historians suggest was Berbera in Somalia . In Fustat ( old Cairo ) , Egypt , the fame of Chinese ceramics there led to an enormous demand for Chinese goods ; hence Chinese often traveled there ( this continued into later periods such as Fatimid Egypt ) . From this time period , the Arab merchant <unk> once wrote of his admiration for Chinese seafaring junks , but noted that their draft was too deep for them to enter the Euphrates River , which forced them to ferry passengers and cargo in small boats . <unk> also noted that Chinese ships were often very large , with capacities up to 600 – 700 passengers . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 Both the Sui and Tang Dynasties had turned away from the more feudal culture of the preceding Northern Dynasties , in favor of staunch civil Confucianism . The governmental system was supported by a large class of Confucian intellectuals selected through either civil service examinations or recommendations . In the Tang period , Daoism and Buddhism reigned as core ideologies as well , and played a large role in people 's daily lives . The Tang Chinese enjoyed feasting , drinking , holidays , sports , and all sorts of entertainment , while Chinese literature blossomed and was more widely accessible with new printing methods . 
 = = = Leisure in the Tang = = = 
 Much more than earlier periods , the Tang era was renowned for the time reserved for leisure activity , especially for those in the upper classes . Many outdoor sports and activities were enjoyed during the Tang , including archery , hunting , horse polo , cuju football , cockfighting , and even tug of war . Government officials were granted vacations during their tenure in office . Officials were granted 30 days off every three years to visit their parents if they lived 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) away , or 15 days off if the parents lived more than 167 mi ( 269 km ) away ( travel time not included ) . Officials were granted nine days of vacation time for weddings of a son or daughter , and either five , three , or one days / day off for the nuptials of close relatives ( travel time not included ) . Officials also received a total of three days off for their son 's capping initiation rite into manhood , and one day off for the ceremony of initiation rite of a close relative 's son . 
 Traditional Chinese holidays such as Chinese New Year , Lantern Festival , Cold Food Festival , and others were universal holidays . In the capital city of Chang 'an there was always lively celebration , especially for the Lantern Festival since the city 's nighttime curfew was lifted by the government for three days straight . Between the years 628 and 758 , the imperial throne bestowed a total of sixty @-@ nine grand carnivals nationwide , granted by the emperor in the case of special circumstances such as important military victories , abundant harvests after a long drought or famine , the granting of amnesties , the installment of a new crown prince , etc . For special celebration in the Tang era , lavish and gargantuan @-@ sized feasts were sometimes prepared , as the imperial court had staffed agencies to prepare the meals . This included a prepared feast for 1 @,@ 100 elders of Chang 'an in 664 , a feast for 3 @,@ 500 officers of the Divine Strategy Army in 768 , and a feast for 1 @,@ 200 women of the palace and members of the imperial family in the year 826 . Drinking wine and alcoholic beverages was heavily ingrained into Chinese culture , as people drank for nearly every social event . A court official in the 8th century allegedly had a serpentine @-@ shaped structure called the ' Ale Grotto ' built with 50 @,@ 000 bricks on the <unk> that each featured a bowl from which his friends could drink . 
 = = = Chang 'an , the Tang capital = = = 
 Although Chang 'an was the capital of the earlier Han and Jin dynasties , after subsequent destruction in warfare , it was the Sui dynasty model that comprised the Tang era capital . The roughly square dimensions of the city had six miles ( 10 km ) of outer walls running east to west , and more than five miles ( 8 km ) of outer walls running north to south . The royal palace , the Taiji Palace , stood north of the city 's central axis . From the large <unk> Gates located mid @-@ center of the main southern wall , a wide city avenue stretched from there all the way north to the central administrative city , behind which was the <unk> Gate of the royal palace , or Imperial City . Intersecting this were fourteen main streets running east to west , while eleven main streets ran north to south . These main intersecting roads formed 108 rectangular wards with walls and four gates each , and each ward filled with multiple city blocks . The city was made famous for this checkerboard pattern of main roads with walled and gated districts , its layout even mentioned in one of Du Fu 's poems . During the Heian period , the city of Heian kyō ( present @-@ day Kyoto ) of Japan like many cities was arranged in the checkerboard street grid pattern of the Tang capital and in accordance with traditional geomancy following the model of Chang 'an . Of these 108 wards in Chang 'an , two of them ( each the size of two regular city wards ) were designated as government @-@ supervised markets , and other space reserved for temples , gardens , ponds , etc . Throughout the entire city , there were 111 Buddhist monasteries , 41 Daoist abbeys , 38 family shrines , 2 official temples , 7 churches of foreign religions , 10 city wards with provincial transmission offices , 12 major inns , and 6 graveyards . Some city wards were literally filled with open public playing fields or the backyards of lavish mansions for playing horse polo and cuju football . In 662 , Emperor Gaozong moved the imperial court to the Daming Palace , which became the political center of the empire and served as the royal residence of the Tang emperors for more than 220 years . 
 The Tang capital was the largest city in the world at its time , the population of the city wards and its suburban countryside reaching 2 million inhabitants . The Tang capital was very cosmopolitan , with ethnicities of Persia , Central Asia , Japan , Korea , Vietnam , Tibet , India , and many other places living within . Naturally , with this plethora of different ethnicities living in Chang 'an , there were also many different practiced religions , such as Buddhism , Nestorian Christianity , Manichaeism , Zoroastrianism , Judaism , and Islam being practiced within . With widely open access to China that the Silk Road to the west facilitated , many foreign settlers were able to move east to China , while the city of Chang 'an itself had about 25 @,@ 000 foreigners living within . Exotic green @-@ eyed , blonde @-@ haired <unk> ladies serving wine in agate and amber cups , singing , and dancing at taverns attracted customers . If a foreigner in China pursued a Chinese woman for marriage , he was required to stay in China and was unable to take his bride back to his homeland , as stated in a law passed in 628 to protect women from temporary marriages with foreign envoys . Several laws enforcing segregation of foreigners from Chinese were passed during the Tang dynasty . In 779 the Tang dynasty issued an edict which forced Uighurs in the capital , Chang 'an , to wear their ethnic dress , stopped them from marrying Chinese females , and banned them from passing off as Chinese . 
 Chang 'an was the center of the central government , the home of the imperial family , and was filled with splendor and wealth . However , incidentally it was not the economic hub during the Tang dynasty . The city of Yangzhou along the Grand Canal and close to the Yangtze River was the greatest economic center during the Tang era . 
 Yangzhou was the headquarters for the Tang 's government monopoly on salt , and the greatest industrial center of China ; it acted as a midpoint in shipping of foreign goods that would be organized and distributed to the major cities of the north . Much like the seaport of Guangzhou in the south , Yangzhou boasted thousands of foreign traders from all across Asia . 
 There was also the secondary capital city of Luoyang , which was the favored capital of the two by Empress Wu . In the year 691 she had more than 100 @,@ 000 families ( more than 500 @,@ 000 people ) from around the region of Chang 'an move to populate Luoyang instead . With a population of about a million , Luoyang became the second largest capital in the empire , and with its close proximity to the Luo River it benefited from southern agricultural fertility and trade traffic of the Grand Canal . However , the Tang court eventually demoted its capital status and did not visit Luoyang after the year 743 , when Chang 'an 's problem of acquiring adequate supplies and stores for the year was solved . As early as 736 , granaries were built at critical points along the route from Yangzhou to Chang 'an , which eliminated shipment delays , spoilage , and pilfering . An artificial lake used as a transshipment pool was dredged east of Chang 'an in 743 , where curious northerners could finally see the array of boats found in southern China , delivering tax and tribute items to the imperial court . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The Tang period was a golden age of Chinese literature and art . There are over 48 @,@ 900 poems penned by some 2 @,@ 200 Tang authors that have survived until modern times . Skill in the composition of poetry became a required study for those wishing to pass imperial examinations , while poetry was also heavily competitive ; poetry contests amongst guests at banquets and courtiers were common . Poetry styles that were popular in the Tang included gushi and jintishi , with the renowned poet Li Bai ( 701 – 762 ) famous for the former style , and poets like Wang Wei ( 701 – 761 ) and Cui Hao ( 704 – 754 ) famous for their use of the latter . <unk> poetry , or regulated verse , is in the form of eight @-@ line stanzas or seven characters per line with a fixed pattern of tones that required the second and third couplets to be antithetical ( although the antithesis is often lost in translation to other languages ) . Tang poems remained popular and great emulation of Tang era poetry began in the Song dynasty ; in that period , Yan Yu ( <unk> ; active 1194 – 1245 ) was the first to confer the poetry of the High Tang ( c . 713 – 766 ) era with " canonical status within the classical poetic tradition . " Yan Yu reserved the position of highest esteem among all Tang poets for Du Fu ( 712 – 770 ) , who was not viewed as such in his own era , and was branded by his peers as an anti @-@ traditional rebel . 
 The Classical Prose Movement was spurred in large part by the writings of Tang authors Liu <unk> ( 773 – 819 ) and Han Yu ( 768 – 824 ) . This new prose style broke away from the poetry tradition of the ' <unk> ' style begun in the Han dynasty . Although writers of the Classical Prose Movement imitated ' <unk> ' , they criticized it for its often vague content and lack of colloquial language , focusing more on clarity and precision to make their writing more direct . This <unk> ( archaic prose ) style can be traced back to Han Yu , and would become largely associated with orthodox Neo @-@ Confucianism . 
 Short story fiction and tales were also popular during the Tang , one of the more famous ones being <unk> 's Biography by Yuan Zhen ( 779 – 831 ) , which was widely circulated in his own time and by the Yuan dynasty ( 1279 – 1368 ) became the basis for plays in Chinese opera . Timothy C. Wong places this story within the wider context of Tang love tales , which often share the plot designs of quick passion , inescapable societal pressure leading to the abandonment of romance , followed by a period of melancholy . Wong states that this scheme lacks the undying vows and total self @-@ commitment to love found in Western romances such as Romeo and Juliet , but that underlying traditional Chinese values of <unk> of self from one 's environment ( including human society ) served to create the necessary fictional device of romantic tension . 
 There were large encyclopedias published in the Tang . The <unk> <unk> encyclopedia was compiled in 624 by the chief editor Ouyang Xun ( 557 – 641 ) as well as <unk> <unk> ( 582 – 666 ) and Chen <unk> ( d . 635 ) . The encyclopedia Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era was fully compiled in 729 by Gautama Siddha ( fl . 8th century ) , an ethnic Indian astronomer , astrologer , and scholar born in the capital Chang 'an . 
 Chinese geographers such as Jia Dan wrote accurate descriptions of places far abroad . In his work written between 785 and 805 , he described the sea route going into the mouth of the Persian Gulf , and that the medieval Iranians ( whom he called the people of Luo @-@ He @-@ Yi ) had erected ' ornamental pillars ' in the sea that acted as lighthouse beacons for ships that might go astray . Confirming Jia 's reports about lighthouses in the Persian Gulf , Arabic writers a century after Jia wrote of the same structures , writers such as al @-@ Mas 'udi and al @-@ Muqaddasi . The Tang dynasty Chinese diplomat Wang <unk> traveled to Magadha ( modern northeastern India ) during the 7th century . Afterwards he wrote the book Zhang <unk> <unk> ( Illustrated Accounts of Central India ) , which included a wealth of geographical information . 
 Many histories of previous dynasties were compiled between 636 and 659 by court officials during and shortly after the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang . These included the Book of Liang , Book of Chen , Book of Northern Qi , Book of Zhou , Book of Sui , Book of Jin , History of Northern Dynasties and the History of Southern Dynasties . Although not included in the official Twenty @-@ Four Histories , the <unk> and Tang <unk> were nonetheless valuable written historical works of the Tang period . The <unk> written by Liu <unk> in 710 was a meta @-@ history , as it covered the history of Chinese historiography in past centuries until his time . The Great Tang Records on the Western Regions , compiled by <unk> , recounted the journey of Xuanzang , the Tang era 's most renowned Buddhist monk . 
 Other important literary offerings included Duan Chengshi 's ( d . 863 ) Miscellaneous <unk> from <unk> , an entertaining collection of foreign legends and hearsay , reports on natural phenomena , short anecdotes , mythical and mundane tales , as well as notes on various subjects . The exact literary category or classification that Duan 's large informal narrative would fit into is still debated amongst scholars and historians . 
 = = = Religion and philosophy = = = 
 Since ancient times , the Chinese believed in a folk religion and Taoism that incorporated many deities . The Chinese believed Tao and the afterlife was a reality parallel to the living world , complete with its own bureaucracy and afterlife currency needed by dead ancestors . Funerary practices included providing the deceased with everything they might need in the afterlife , including animals , servants , entertainers , hunters , homes , and officials . This ideal is reflected in Tang dynasty art . This is also reflected in many short stories written in the Tang about people accidentally winding up in the realm of the dead , only to come back and report their experiences . 
 Taoism was the official religion of the Tang . Buddhism , originating in India around the time of Confucius , continued its influence during the Tang period and was accepted by some members of imperial family , becoming thoroughly sinicized and a permanent part of Chinese traditional culture . In an age before Neo @-@ Confucianism and figures such as Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) , Buddhism had begun to flourish in China during the Northern and Southern dynasties , and became the dominant ideology during the prosperous Tang . Buddhist monasteries played an integral role in Chinese society , offering lodging for travelers in remote areas , schools for children throughout the country , and a place for urban literati to stage social events and gatherings such as going @-@ away parties . Buddhist monasteries were also engaged in the economy , since their land property and serfs gave them enough revenues to set up mills , oil presses , and other enterprises . Although the monasteries retained ' serfs ' , these monastery dependents could actually own property and employ others to help them in their work , including their own slaves . 
 The prominent status of Buddhism in Chinese culture began to decline as the dynasty and central government declined as well during the late 8th century to 9th century . Buddhist convents and temples that were exempt from state taxes beforehand were targeted by the state for taxation . In 845 Emperor <unk> of Tang finally shut down 4 @,@ 600 Buddhist monasteries along with 40 @,@ 000 temples and shrines , forcing 260 @,@ 000 Buddhist monks and nuns to return to secular life ; this episode would later be dubbed one of the Four Buddhist Persecutions in China . Although the ban would be lifted just a few years after , Buddhism never regained its once dominant status in Chinese culture . This situation also came about through new revival of interest in native Chinese philosophies , such as Confucianism and Daoism . Han Yu ( 786 – 824 ) — who Arthur F. Wright stated was a " brilliant polemicist and ardent <unk> " — was one of the first men of the Tang to denounce Buddhism . Although his contemporaries found him crude and obnoxious , he would foreshadow the later persecution of Buddhism in the Tang , as well as the revival of Confucian theory with the rise of Neo @-@ Confucianism of the Song dynasty . Nonetheless , <unk> Buddhism gained popularity amongst the educated elite . There were also many famous Chan monks from the Tang era , such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . The sect of Pure Land Buddhism initiated by the Chinese monk <unk> ( 334 – 416 ) was also just as popular as Chan Buddhism during the Tang . 
 <unk> Buddhism was Daoism , a native Chinese philosophical and religious belief system that found its roots in the book of the Daodejing ( attributed to Laozi in the 6th century BC ) and the Zhuangzi . The ruling Li family of the Tang dynasty actually claimed descent from the ancient Laozi . On numerous occasions where Tang princes would become crown prince or Tang princesses taking vows as Daoist priestesses , their lavish former mansions would be converted into Daoist abbeys and places of worship . Many Daoists were associated with alchemy in their pursuits to find an elixir of immortality and a means to create gold from concocted mixtures of many other elements . Although they never achieved their goals in either of these futile pursuits , they did contribute to the discovery of new metal alloys , porcelain products , and new dyes . The historian Joseph Needham labeled the work of the Daoist alchemists as " proto @-@ science rather than pseudo @-@ science . " However , the close connection between Daoism and alchemy , which some sinologists have asserted , is refuted by Nathan Sivin , who states that alchemy was just as prominent ( if not more so ) in the secular sphere and practiced more often by laymen . 
 The Tang dynasty also officially recognized various foreign religions . The Assyrian Church of the East , otherwise known as the Nestorian Christian Church , was given recognition by the Tang court . In 781 , the Nestorian Stele was created in order to honor the achievements of their community in China . A Christian monastery was established in Shaanxi province where the Daqin Pagoda still stands , and inside the pagoda there is Christian @-@ themed artwork . Although the religion largely died out after the Tang , it was revived in China following the Mongol invasions of the 13th century . 
 = = = Tang women = = = 
 Concepts of women 's social rights and social status during the Tang era were notably liberal @-@ minded for the period . However , this was largely reserved for urban women of elite status , as men and women in the rural countryside labored hard in their different set of tasks ; with wives and daughters responsible for more domestic tasks of weaving textiles and rearing of silk worms , while men tended to farming in the fields . There were many women in the Tang era who gained access to religious authority by taking vows as Daoist priestesses . The head mistresses of the bordellos in the North Hamlet of the capital Chang 'an acquired large amounts of wealth and power . Their high @-@ class courtesans , who likely influenced the Japanese geishas , were well respected . These courtesans were known as great singers and poets , supervised banquets and feasts , knew the rules to all the drinking games , and were trained to have the utmost respectable table manners . 
 Although they were renowned for their polite behavior , the courtesans were known to dominate the conversation amongst elite men , and were not afraid to openly castigate or criticize prominent male guests who talked too much or too loudly , boasted too much of their accomplishments , or had in some way ruined dinner for everyone by rude behavior ( on one occasion a courtesan even beat up a drunken man who had insulted her ) . When singing to entertain guests , courtesans not only composed the lyrics to their own songs , but they popularized a new form of lyrical verse by singing lines written by various renowned and famous men in Chinese history . 
 It was fashionable for women to be full @-@ figured ( or plump ) . Men enjoyed the presence of assertive , active women . The foreign horse @-@ riding sport of polo from Persia became a wildly popular trend amongst the Chinese elite , and women often played the sport ( as glazed earthenware figurines from the time period portray ) . The preferred hairstyle for women was to bunch their hair up like " an elaborate edifice above the forehead " , while affluent ladies wore extravagant head ornaments , combs , pearl necklaces , face powders , and perfumes . A law was passed in 671 which attempted to force women to wear hats with veils again in order to promote decency , but these laws were ignored as some women started wearing caps and even no hats at all , as well as men 's riding clothes and boots , and tight @-@ sleeved bodices . 
 There were some prominent court women after the era of Empress Wu , such as Yang <unk> ( 719 – 756 ) , who had Emperor Xuanzong appoint many of her relatives and cronies to important ministerial and martial positions . 
 = = = Tea , food , and necessities = = = 
 During the earlier Northern and Southern dynasties ( 420 – 589 ) , and perhaps even earlier , the drinking of tea ( Camellia sinensis ) became popular in southern China . Tea was viewed then as a beverage of tasteful pleasure and with pharmacological purpose as well . During the Tang dynasty , tea became synonymous with everything sophisticated in society . The poet Lu Tong ( 790 – 835 ) devoted most of his poetry to his love of tea . The 8th @-@ century author Lu Yu ( known as the Sage of Tea ) even wrote a treatise on the art of drinking tea , called The Classic of Tea . Although wrapping paper had been used in China since the 2nd century BC , during the Tang dynasty the Chinese were using wrapping paper as folded and sewn square bags to hold and preserve the flavor of tea leaves . Indeed , paper found many other uses besides writing and wrapping during the Tang era . 
 Earlier , the first recorded use of toilet paper was made in 589 by the scholar @-@ official Yan <unk> ( 531 – 591 ) , and in 851 an Arab Muslim traveler commented on how he believed the Tang era Chinese were not careful about cleanliness because they did not wash with water ( as was his people 's habit ) when going to the bathroom ; instead , he said , the Chinese simply used paper to wipe themselves . 
 In ancient times , the Chinese had outlined the five most basic foodstuffs known as the five grains : <unk> , legumes , wheat , <unk> millet , and glutinous millet . The Ming dynasty encyclopedist Song Yingxing ( 1587 – 1666 ) noted that rice was not counted amongst the five grains from the time of the legendary and deified Chinese sage Shennong ( the existence of whom Yingxing wrote was " an uncertain matter " ) into the 2nd <unk> BC , because the properly wet and humid climate in southern China for growing rice was not yet fully settled or cultivated by the Chinese . 
 During the Tang , the many common foodstuffs and cooking ingredients in addition to those already listed were barley , garlic , salt , turnips , soybeans , pears , apricots , peaches , apples , pomegranates , jujubes , rhubarb , hazelnuts , pine nuts , chestnuts , walnuts , yams , taro , etc . The various meats that were consumed included pork , chicken , lamb ( especially preferred in the north ) , sea otter , bear ( which was hard to catch , but there were recipes for steamed , boiled , and marinated bear ) , and even Bactrian camels . In the south along the coast meat from seafood was by default the most common , as the Chinese enjoyed eating cooked jellyfish with cinnamon , Sichuan pepper , cardamom , and ginger , as well as oysters with wine , fried squid with ginger and vinegar , horseshoe crabs and red swimming crabs , shrimp and pufferfish , which the Chinese called " river piglet " . 
 Some foods were also off @-@ limits , as the Tang court encouraged people not to eat beef ( since the bull was a valuable working animal ) , and from 831 to 833 Emperor Wenzong of Tang even banned the slaughter of cattle on the grounds of his religious convictions to Buddhism . 
 From the trade overseas and over land , the Chinese acquired peaches from Samarkand , date palms , pistachios , and figs from Greater Iran , pine nuts and ginseng roots from Korea and mangoes from Southeast Asia . In China , there was a great demand for sugar ; during the reign of Harsha over North India ( r . 606 – 647 ) , Indian envoys to the Tang brought two makers of sugar who successfully taught the Chinese how to cultivate sugarcane . Cotton also came from India as a finished product from Bengal , although it was during the Tang that the Chinese began to grow and process cotton , and by the Yuan dynasty it became the prime textile fabric in China . 
 Methods of food preservation were important , and practiced throughout China . The common people used simple methods of preservation , such as digging deep ditches and trenches , <unk> , and salting their foods . The emperor had large ice pits located in the parks in and around Chang 'an for preserving food , while the wealthy and elite had their own smaller ice pits . Each year the emperor had laborers carve 1000 blocks of ice from frozen creeks in mountain valleys , each block with the dimension of 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) by 3 ft by 3 ½ ft ( 1 @.@ 06 m ) . There were many frozen delicacies enjoyed during the summer , especially chilled melon . 
 = = = Nobility = = = 
 The nobility 's power was eclipsed by scholar @-@ officials . The Anding origin noble Liang family produced Liang Su , a Confucian scholar . An anti @-@ meritocratic pro @-@ aristocratic faction was led by Li Linfu . During the Tang dynasty the Li family of Zhaojun <unk> , <unk> clan of Boling , the Cui clan of Qinghe , the Lu clan of <unk> , the Zheng family of <unk> <unk> , the Wang family of Taiyuan <unk> , and the Li family of Longxi 隴西李氏 were the seven noble families between whom marriage was banned by law . Moriya Mitsuo wrote a history of the Later Han @-@ Tang period of the Taiyuan Wang . Among the strongest families was the Taiyuan Wang . The prohibition on marriage between the clans issued in 659 by the Gaozong Emperor was flouted by the seven families since a woman of the Boling Cui married a member of the Taiyuan Wang , giving birth to the poet Wang Wei . He was the son of Wang <unk> who in turn was the son of Wang Zhou . The marriages between the families were performed clandestinely after the prohibition was implemented on the seven families by Gaozong . The Zhou dynasty King Ling 's son Prince Jin is assumed by most to be the ancestor of the Taiyuan Wang . The Longmen Wang were a cadet line of the Zhou dynasty descended Taiyuan Wang , and Wang Yan and his grandson Wang Tong hailed from his cadet line . Both Buddhist monks and scholars hailed from the Wang family of Taiyuan such as the monk <unk> . The Wang family of Taiyuan included Wang Huan . Their status as " Seven Great surnames " became known during Gaozong 's rule . The Taiyuan Wang family produced Wang Jun who served under Emperor Huai of Jin . A Fuzhou @-@ based section of the Taiyuan Wang produced the Buddhist monk <unk> . 
 The title Duke <unk> ( <unk> ) . was bestowed upon the a descendant of Confucius , replacing the earlier Marquis <unk> ( <unk> ) title . 
 The Tang Imperial family was watched over by the <unk> si <unk> . 
 = = Science , technology , and medicine = = 
 = = = Engineering = = = 
 Technology during the Tang period was built also upon the precedents of the past . Advancements in clockworks and timekeeping included the mechanical gear systems of Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 ) and Ma Jun ( fl . 3rd century ) gave the Tang engineer , astronomer , and monk Yi Xing ( 683 – 727 ) inspiration when he invented the world 's first clockwork escapement mechanism in 725 . This was used alongside a clepsydra clock and waterwheel to power a rotating armillary sphere in representation of astronomical observation . Yi Xing 's device also had a mechanically timed bell that was struck automatically every hour , and a drum that was struck automatically every quarter @-@ hour ; essentially , a striking clock . Yi Xing 's astronomical clock and water @-@ powered armillary sphere became well known throughout the country , since students attempting to pass the imperial examinations by 730 had to write an essay on the device as an exam requirement . However , the most common type of public and palace timekeeping device was the inflow clepsydra . Its design was improved c . 610 by the Sui @-@ dynasty engineers Geng Xun and Yuwen Kai . They provided a steelyard balance that allowed seasonal adjustment in the pressure head of the compensating tank and could then control the rate of flow for different lengths of day and night . 
 There were many other mechanical inventions during the Tang era . This included a 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) tall mechanical wine server of the early 8th century that was in the shape of an artificial mountain , carved out of iron and rested on a lacquered @-@ wooden tortoise frame . This intricate device used a hydraulic pump that siphoned wine out of metal dragon @-@ headed faucets , as well as tilting bowls that were timed to dip wine down , by force of gravity when filled , into an artificial lake that had intricate iron leaves popping up as trays for placing party treats . Furthermore , as the historian Charles Benn describes it : 
 Midway up the southern side of the mountain was a dragon … the beast opened its mouth and spit brew into a goblet seated on a large [ iron ] lotus leaf beneath . When the cup was 80 % full , the dragon ceased spewing ale , and a guest immediately seized the goblet . If he was slow in draining the cup and returning it to the leaf , the door of a pavilion at the top of the mountain opened and a mechanical wine server , dressed in a cap and gown , emerged with a wooden bat in his hand . As soon as the guest returned the goblet , the dragon refilled it , the wine server withdrew , and the doors of the pavilion closed … A pump siphoned the ale that flowed into the ale pool through a hidden hole and returned the brew to the reservoir [ holding more than 16 quarts / 15 liters of wine ] inside the mountain . 
 Although the use of a teasing mechanical puppet in this wine @-@ serving device was certainly ingenious , the use of mechanical puppets in China date back to the Qin dynasty ( 221 – 207 BC ) while Ma Jun in the 3rd century had an entire mechanical puppet theater operated by the rotation of a waterwheel . There was also an automatic wine @-@ server known in the ancient Greco @-@ Roman world , a design of Heron of Alexandria that employed an urn with an inner valve and a lever device similar to the one described above . There are many stories of automatons used in the Tang , including general Yang <unk> 's wooden statue of a monk who stretched his hands out to collect contributions ; when the amount of coins reached a certain weight , the mechanical figure moved his arms to deposit them in a satchel . This weight @-@ and @-@ lever mechanism was exactly like Heron 's penny slot machine . Other devices included one by Wang Ju , whose " wooden otter " could allegedly catch fish ; Needham suspects a spring trap of some kind was employed here . 
 In the realm of structural engineering and technical Chinese architecture , there were also government standard building codes , outlined in the early Tang book of the <unk> Ling ( National Building Law ) . Fragments of this book have survived in the Tang Lü ( The Tang Code ) , while the Song dynasty architectural manual of the Yingzao Fashi ( State Building Standards ) by Li Jie ( 1065 – 1101 ) in 1103 is the oldest existing technical treatise on Chinese architecture that has survived in full . During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang ( 712 – 756 ) there were 34 @,@ 850 registered craftsmen serving the state , managed by the Agency of Palace Buildings ( <unk> Jian ) . 
 = = = Woodblock printing = = = 
 The popularization of woodblock printing during the Tang dynasty made the written word available to greater audiences . As a result of the much wider distribution and circulation of reading materials , the general populace were for the first time able to purchase affordable copies of texts , which correspondingly led to greater literacy . While the immediate effects of woodblock printing did not create a drastic change in Chinese society , in the long term , the accumulated effects of increased literacy enlarged the talent pool to encompass civilians of broader social @-@ economic circumstances and backgrounds , who would be seen entering the imperial examinations and passing them by the later Song dynasty . The extent of woodblock printing is attested to by one of the world 's oldest surviving printed documents , a miniature Buddhist <unk> sutra unearthed at Xi 'an in 1974 , dating roughly from 650 to 670 . A copy of the Diamond Sutra found at Dunhuang is the earliest surviving full @-@ length book printed at regular size , complete with illustrations embedded within the text and dated precisely to 868 . Among the earliest documents to be printed were Buddhist texts as well as calendars , the latter essential for calculating and marking which days were auspicious and which days were not . The commercial success and profitability of woodblock printing was attested to by one British observer at the end of the nineteenth century , who noted that even before the arrival of western printing methods , the price of books and printed materials in China had already reached an astoundingly low price , primarily owing to the immense sales books enjoyed in China . Of this , he said : 
 We have an extensive penny literature at home , but the English cottager cannot buy anything like the amount of printed matter for his penny that the Chinaman can for even less . A penny Prayer @-@ book , admittedly sold at a loss , cannot compete in mass of matter with many of the books to be bought for a few cash in China . When it is considered , too , that a block has been laboriously cut for each leaf , the cheapness of the result is only accounted for by the wideness of sale . 
 Although Bi Sheng later invented the movable type system in the 11th century , Tang dynasty style woodblock printing would remain the dominant mode of printing in China until the more advanced printing press from Europe became widely accepted and used in East Asia . However it was not Gutenberg 's letterpress that made the decisive breakthrough for Western methods in China as it is commonly believed , but lithography , a nineteenth century technological marvel almost wholly forgotten in Europe . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 The Chinese of the Tang era were also very interested in the benefits of officially classifying all of the medicines used in pharmacology . In 657 , Emperor Gaozong of Tang ( r . 649 – 683 ) commissioned the literary project of publishing an official materia medica , complete with text and illustrated drawings for 833 different medicinal substances taken from different stones , minerals , metals , plants , herbs , animals , vegetables , fruits , and cereal crops . In addition to compiling <unk> , the Tang fostered learning in medicine by upholding imperial medical colleges , state examinations for doctors , and publishing forensic manuals for physicians . Authors of medicine in the Tang include Zhen Chuan ( d . 643 ) and Sun <unk> ( 581 – 682 ) , the former who first identified in writing that patients with diabetes had an excess of sugar in their urine , and the latter who was the first to recognize that diabetic patients should avoid consuming alcohol and starchy foods . As written by Zhen Chuan and others in the Tang , the thyroid glands of sheep and pigs were successfully used to treat <unk> ; thyroid extracts were not used to treat patients with goiter in the West until 1890 . The use of the dental amalgam , manufactured from tin and silver , was first introduced in the medical text <unk> Bencao written by Su Gong in 659 . 
 = = = Cartography = = = 
 In the realm of cartography , there were further advances beyond the map @-@ makers of the Han dynasty . When the Tang chancellor Pei Ju ( 547 – 627 ) was working for the Sui dynasty as a Commercial Commissioner in 605 , he created a well @-@ known gridded map with a graduated scale in the tradition of Pei Xiu ( 224 – 271 ) . The Tang chancellor Xu Jingzong ( 592 – 672 ) was also known for his map of China drawn in the year 658 . In the year 785 the Emperor <unk> had the geographer and cartographer Jia Dan ( 730 – 805 ) complete a map of China and her former colonies in Central Asia . Upon its completion in 801 , the map was 9 @.@ 1 m ( 30 ft ) in length and 10 m ( 33 ft ) in height , mapped out on a grid scale of one inch equaling one hundred li ( Chinese unit of measuring distance ) . A Chinese map of 1137 is similar in complexity to the one made by Jia Dan , carved on a stone stele with a grid scale of 100 li . However , the only type of map that has survived from the Tang period are star charts . Despite this , the earliest extant terrain maps of China come from the ancient State of Qin ; maps from the 4th century BC that were excavated in 1986 . 
 = = = Alchemy , gas cylinders , and air conditioning = = = 
 The Chinese of the Tang period employed complex chemical formulas for an array of different purposes , often found through experiments of alchemy . These included a waterproof and dust @-@ repelling cream or varnish for clothes and weapons , fireproof cement for glass and porcelain wares , a waterproof cream applied to silk clothes of underwater divers , a cream designated for polishing bronze mirrors , and many other useful formulas . The vitrified , translucent ceramic known as porcelain was invented in China during the Tang , although many types of glazed ceramics preceded it . 
 Ever since the Han dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) , the Chinese had drilled deep boreholes to transport natural gas from bamboo pipelines to stoves where cast iron evaporation pans boiled brine to extract salt . During the Tang dynasty , a gazetteer of Sichuan province stated that at one of these 182 m ( 600 ft ) ' fire wells ' , men collected natural gas into portable bamboo tubes which could be carried around for dozens of km ( mi ) and still produce a flame . These were essentially the first gas cylinders ; Robert Temple assumes some sort of tap was used for this device . 
 The inventor Ding Huan ( fl . 180 AD ) of the Han dynasty invented a rotary fan for air conditioning , with seven wheels 3 m ( 10 ft ) in diameter and manually powered . In 747 , Emperor Xuanzong had a " Cool Hall " built in the imperial palace , which the Tang Yulin ( <unk> ) describes as having water @-@ powered fan wheels for air conditioning as well as rising jet streams of water from fountains . During the subsequent Song dynasty , written sources mentioned the air conditioning rotary fan as even more widely used . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The first classic work about the Tang is the Old Book of Tang by Liu Xu ( 887 – 946 ) et al. of the Later Jin , who redacted it during the last years of his life . This was edited into another history ( labelled the New Book of Tang ) in order to distinguish it , which was a work by the Song historians Ouyang Xiu ( 1007 – 1072 ) , Song Qi ( 998 – 1061 ) , et al. of the Song dynasty ( between the years 1044 and 1060 ) . Both of them were based upon earlier annals , yet those are now lost . Both of them also rank among the Twenty @-@ Four Histories of China . One of the surviving sources of the Old Book of Tang , primarily covering up to 756 , is the <unk> , which Du You presented to the emperor in 801 . The Tang period was again placed into the enormous universal history text of the Zizhi Tongjian , edited , compiled , and completed in 1084 by a team of scholars under the Song dynasty Chancellor Sima Guang ( 1019 – 1086 ) . This historical text , written with 3 million Chinese characters in 294 volumes , covered the history of China from the beginning of the Warring States ( 403 BC ) until the beginning of the Song dynasty ( 960 ) . 
 = 1963 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1963 Atlantic hurricane season featured one of the deadliest tropical cyclones on record in the Atlantic basin : Hurricane Flora . The season officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . It was a near @-@ average season in terms of tropical storms , with a total of nine named storms . The first system , Hurricane Arlene , developed between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles on July 31 . The storm later impacted Bermuda , where strong winds resulted in about $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ) in damage . Other storms such as hurricanes Beulah and Debra , as well as an unnamed tropical storm , did not impact land . During the month of September , Hurricane Cindy caused wind damage and flooding in Texas , leaving three deaths and approximately $ 12 @.@ 5 million in damage . Hurricane Edith passed through the Lesser Antilles and the eastern Greater Antilles , causing 10 deaths and about $ 43 million in damage , most of which occurred on Martinique . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Flora , which peaked as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Drifting slowly and executing a cyclonic loop , Flora dropped very heavy rainfall in the Greater Antilles , including over 100 in ( 2 @,@ 500 mm ) in Cuba . Extreme flooding ensued , leaving behind at least 7 @,@ 193 fatalities and about $ 773 @.@ 4 million in damage . Flora is thus listed among the deadliest Atlantic hurricanes on record . In October , Hurricane Ginny moved erratically offshore the Southeastern United States , though eventually , the extratropical remnants struck Nova Scotia . Ginny caused at least three deaths and $ 400 @,@ 000 in damage in the United States alone . The final cyclone , Tropical Storm Helena , caused five deaths and over $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage on Guadeloupe . Overall , the storms in this season caused at least 7 @,@ 225 deaths and about $ 830 @.@ 1 million in damage . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The 1963 hurricane season officially began on June 15 and ended on November 15 . It was a near @-@ average with nine tropical storms , slightly less than the 1950 – 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms . Seven of these reached hurricane status , which is above the 1950 – 2000 average of 5 @.@ 9 . Furthermore , two storms reached major hurricane status , which is Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Early in the season , activity was suppressed by an abnormally intense trough offshore the East Coast of the United States as well as strong westerly winds . Later , tropical cyclone formation occurred more often after a portion of the trough weaken and easterly flow increased across much of the Atlantic . A total of four hurricanes made landfall during the season , causing at least 7 @,@ 225 deaths and $ 830 @.@ 1 million in damage . Hurricane Ginny and Tropical Storm Helena also caused damage and deaths , despite remaining offshore and then after becoming extratropical . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began late , with Hurricane Arlene developing on July 31 . Another system formed in August , Hurricane Beulah . September was much more active , with an unnamed tropical storm , as well as hurricanes Cindy , Debra , Edith , and Flora all developing in that month . Flora was the most intense tropical cyclone of the season , peaking as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . There were two other system in October , Hurricane Ginny and Tropical Storm Helena ; the latter dissipated on October 29 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an above average accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 118 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Arlene = = = 
 A cloud mass developed into the first tropical depression of the season at 18 : 00 UTC on July 31 while located about halfway between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . It headed west , becoming a tropical storm on August 2 . Arlene soon rapidly intensified , acquiring 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) maximum sustained winds – ranking it as a Category 2 hurricane – later that day . However , lack of outflow caused it to weaken to a tropical depression by August 4 . The storm failed to significantly reorganize until August 7 , by which time it restrengthened into a tropical storm . The following day , Arlene re @-@ intensified into a hurricane before passing directly over Bermuda . Several hours after passing the island , the hurricane reached its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 969 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . On August 11 , Arlene transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before being absorbed by another cyclone later that day . 
 Along its track , several hurricane warnings and watches were issued for the Leeward Islands ; however , no damage was reported on any of the islands . The storm has its greatest impact in Bermuda , where high winds and near @-@ record rainfall of 6 @.@ 05 inches ( 154 mm ) downed trees , power lines , and caused flooding . Damages across the island amounted to $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1963 USD ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Beulah = = = 
 On August 20 , a tropical wave developed into a tropical depression while situated about 635 mi ( 1 @,@ 020 km ) north @-@ northwest of Cayenne , French Guiana . Moving west @-@ northwestward , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Beulah around 06 : 00 UTC on the following day . Later on August 21 , the first reconnaissance aircraft flight into the storm observed winds of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 005 mbar ( 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) . A subsequent flight into Beulah on August 22 recorded a well @-@ defined eye , winds of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) , and a barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) . As a result , the storm was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane around 12 : 00 UTC . Shortly thereafter , Beulah curved north @-@ northwestward and continued to deepen . Early on August 23 , it strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane . 
 The storm intensified into a Category 3 hurricane by early on August 24 , at which time Beulah attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) . Radar imagery depicted an elliptical eye with a diameter of 20 to 30 mi ( 32 to 48 km ) . The hurricane turned to the north , where an anticyclone that was favoring development to its south caused unfavorable conditions . Beulah weakened to a minimal hurricane , but briefly re @-@ intensified into a Category 2 hurricane before racing to the northeast under the influence of an upper @-@ level trough offshore the East Coast of the United States . Early on August 28 , the hurricane transitioned into an extratropical cyclone about 250 mi ( 400 km ) east of Newfoundland . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 As early as September 8 , ships north of Puerto Rico reported a weak circulation . Drifting northward , the system developed tropical depression by 06 : 00 UTC on September 10 , while situated about 150 mi ( 240 km ) southwest of Bermuda . The cyclone was subtropical in nature , fueled by both latent heat and instability from contrasting cool and warm air masses . While passing Bermuda later on September 10 , sustained wind speeds of 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) and decrease in barometric pressure were observed . The system moved east @-@ northeastward and strengthening into a tropical storm early the following day . By late on September 12 , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . Around that time , the Freiburg observed winds of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) . Thereafter , the system accelerated ahead of a cold front and became extratropical on September 14 , while located about 725 mi ( 1 @,@ 167 km ) north @-@ northwest of Corvo Island in the Azores . The extratropical remnants moved rapidly eastward , until dissipating well west of Ireland early on September 15 . 
 = = = Hurricane Cindy = = = 
 In mid @-@ September , a trough of low pressure was situated in the Gulf of Mexico . The system developed into Tropical Storm Cindy at 12 : 00 UTC on September 16 , while located about 210 mi ( 340 km ) south of Cameron , Louisiana . Cindy strengthened quickly while moving north @-@ northwestward and reached hurricane intensity early on September 17 . Around that time , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 996 mbar ( 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) . Shortly after 12 : 00 UTC on September 17 , Cindy made landfall near High Island , Texas , with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Early on September 18 , the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm and further to a tropical depression about six hours later . Turning southwest , the depression dissipated at 00 : 00 UTC on September 20 . 
 In southwestern Louisiana , over 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain fell in some areas . Rice crops were flooded , causing about $ 360 @,@ 000 in damage . However , the precipitation was described as more beneficial than detrimental . Along the coast , tides inundated roads leading to Cameron and Holly Beach . A man drowned offshore Cameron while evacuating from an oil rig . The storm brought flooding to the southeastern Texas , particularly in and around Port Arthur . Two people drowned in the Port Acres area . Water entered 4 @,@ 000 homes across Jefferson , Newton , and Orange counties . In Oklahoma , flooding in Guthrie prompted 300 residents to flee their homes ; water intruded into 25 businesses and 35 homes . Overall , Cindy caused about $ 12 @.@ 5 million in damage , of which $ 11 @.@ 7 million stemmed from property damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Debra = = = 
 On September 19 , a westward moving tropical wave became a tropical depression about 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) east of the southwestern @-@ most islands of Cape Verde . Initially , the depression moved west @-@ northwestward and remained weak . Despite the system 's intensity at the time , a reconnaissance aircraft flight observed a radar eye on September 20 . While curving northward early on September 21 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Debra . Several hours later , Debra became a Category 1 hurricane . The cyclone peaked with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 50 inHg ) late on September 22 . Debra soon began weakening and fell to tropical storm status early the following day . The system began losing extratropical characteristics and was absorbed by an extratropical low late on September 24 , while located about halfway between Bermuda and Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = = = Hurricane Edith = = = 
 An Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) disturbance developed into a tropical depression while east of the Windward Islands on September 23 . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Edith the next day . Only six hours later , Edith reached hurricane status . Edith fluctuated between Category 1 and 2 status as it moved west @-@ northwest ; its central pressure was analyzed at 978 mbar ( 28 @.@ 88 inHg ) on September 24 . After striking Saint Lucia on September 25 , the storm traversed the eastern Caribbean Sea . Curving north @-@ northwest on September 26 , Edith made landfall near La Romana , Dominican Republic , early on the following day as a minimal hurricane . Interaction with land and an upper @-@ level trough caused Edith to weaken to a tropical storm on September 28 and to a tropical depression by the next day . The storm dissipated just east of the Bahamas on September 29 . 
 In Martinique , a wind gust of 127 mph ( 204 km / h ) was observed at Le Lamentin Airport ; tides about 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal and heavy rainfall impacted the island . Throughout the island , about 6 @,@ 000 homes were demolished and 13 @,@ 000 other were severely impacted . Agriculture suffered significantly , with bananas and other food crops destroyed , while sugar cane experienced significant damage . Winds up to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) caused significant damage on Dominica and strong winds on Saint Lucia ruined about half of the island 's banana crop . In Puerto Rico , the storm brought heavy rainfall to the southwest corner of the island and abnormally high tides to the south coast . Several beach front properties were badly damaged , particularly in the Salinas municipality . Overall , Edith caused 10 deaths , all on Martinique , and approximately $ 46 @.@ 6 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Flora = = = 
 On September 26 , another tropical depression developed from the ITCZ about 755 mi ( 1 @,@ 215 km ) southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . After remaining weak for several days , it rapidly organized on September 29 into Tropical Storm Flora . Quickly strengthening , Flora passed over Tobago on September 30 with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . Curving west @-@ northwestward , Flora peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on October 3 . Early the next day , the hurricane made landfall in southwestern Haiti at the same intensity . Flora briefly re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean Sea on October 4 , where the storm weakened to a Category 3 . Late on October 4 , the cyclone made landfall near San Antonio del Sur , Cuba , with winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) . A ridge to the north caused Flora to stall and move erratically over eastern Cuba for four days , and Flora eventually emerged into the Atlantic Ocean on October 8 as a weakened storm . After passing over the southeastern Bahamas early on October 9 , Flora began to restrengthen and became a major hurricane again on the next day . Thereafter , Flora continued northeastward and gradually weakened , falling to Category 1 intensity on October 11 . Flora gradually lost convection and became extratropical on October 12 while located 270 mi ( 430 km ) east @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . The extratropical remnants dissipated the next day . 
 In Trinidad and Tobago , abnormally high tides capsized six ships in Scarborough harbor , while strong winds caused severe effects to coconut , banana , and cocoa plantations , with 50 % of the coconut trees destroyed and 11 % severely damaged . About 2 @,@ 750 houses were destroyed , while 3 @,@ 500 others were impacted . The hurricane killed 24 people and resulted in $ 30 @.@ 1 million damage . Six additional drowning fatalities occurred in Grenada . The slow movement of the storm resulted in record rainfall totals for the Greater Antilles . In Dominican Republic , over 3 @,@ 800 sq mi ( 9 @,@ 800 km2 ) of land was flooded . Bridges and roads were significantly damaged , with many roads left unpassable for several months . The hurricane caused about $ 60 million in damage and over 400 deaths . In Haiti , flash floods washed out large sections of several towns , while mudslides buried some entire cities . In most areas , crops were entirely destroyed . Additionally , the combination of rough waves and strong winds destroyed three entire communities . About 3 @,@ 500 people were confirmed dead and damaged ranged $ 125 million and $ 180 million . In Cuba , the storm dropped 100 @.@ 39 in ( 2 @,@ 550 mm ) of rainfall at Santiago de Cuba . Nearly all crops in southeastern Cuba were affected by strong winds and flooding . Many citizens were left stranded at the tops of their houses . Several entire houses were swept away by the flooding , and many roads and bridges were destroyed , resulting in major disruptions to communications . Throughout the country , the hurricane destroyed as many as 30 @,@ 000 dwellings . Flora left at least 1 @,@ 750 fatalities and $ 500 million in damage in Cuba . Overall , Hurricane Flora caused at least 7 @,@ 193 deaths and over $ 783 @.@ 4 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Ginny = = = 
 On October 16 , a tropical depression formed near Turks and Caicos from the interaction of a trough and a tropical wave , although the system was not very tropical due to cold air . It moved to the north and northwest , becoming Tropical Storm Ginny on October 19 . The next day it attained hurricane status , and approached North Carolina before looping to the southwest due to a ridge over New England . By October 22 , Ginny crossed the Gulf Stream and intensified , developing an eye . It briefly weakened to a tropical storm the next day while approaching Florida , but regained hurricane intensity within ten hours . Ahead of an advancing trough , Ginny turned sharply northward and later northeastward , paralleling the coast of the Southeastern United States . For eight days , the storm was within 250 mi ( 400 km ) of the United States coastline . Moving farther offshore , Ginny gradually intensified to reach peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on October 29 . Later that day , it became extratropical before striking southwestern Nova Scotia ; its remnants dissipated on October 30 over the Gulf of Saint Lawrence . 
 Early in its existence , Ginny dropped heavy rainfall across the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas . In Florida and Georgia , Ginny produced above normal tides that caused minor damage and beach erosion . Rainfall was beneficial in South Carolina , and in North Carolina , high tides caused minor flooding and destroyed one house . In Massachusetts , wind gusts reached 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) in Nantucket , and 1 @,@ 000 homes lost power in Chatham . Ginny was the latest hurricane on record to affect Maine during a calendar year . During its passage , the storm brought an influx of cold air that produced up to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of snow in northern Maine , killing two people . Offshore , many boats were damaged or ripped from their moorings ; one person died from a heart attack while trying to rescue his boat . Damage from Ginny in the United States was estimated at $ 400 @,@ 000 . In Canada , high winds downed trees and caused power outages , leaving the entirety of Prince Edward Island without power . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Helena = = = 
 A tropical wave accompanied by a large area of convection moved westward in late October . On October 25 , the wave spawned a tropical depression , based on ship and Hurricane Hunter reports of southwest winds and heavy rainfall . Although poorly defined , the system gradually intensified and became Tropical Storm Helena . On October 26 , the storm reached peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , before quickly weakening when it passed between Dominica and Guadeloupe , potentially due to their high terrain . Helena was a weak tropical depression upon entering the eastern Caribbean Sea , but re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm after turning to the north on October 27 . Its slow , erratic movement and failure to intensify was due to a weak trough across the region . While passing near Antigua , the storm developed an intense rainband that produced winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , as measured by reconnaissance aircraft between Dominica and Guadeloupe . However , Helena again weakened into a tropical depression on October 29 and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 The threat of Helena prompted the San Juan Weather Bureau to issue a hurricane watch and later gale warnings for portions of the Lesser Antilles . On the Guadeloupe , the storm left 500 people homeless , killed 5 people , and seriously injured 14 others . Several boats were heavily damaged or sank . Damage was estimated at $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1963 . Storms were named Ginny and Helena for the first time in 1963 . The name Flora was later retired . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Bertie 's Brainstorm = 
 Bertie 's Brainstorm is a 1911 American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on Bertie Fawcett , a dim @-@ witted fop , who erroneously believes to have won the heart of May Vernon . In reality , May loves Jack and the two are set to be married , but May 's father wishes he would prove his worth by earning his own living . Bertie chances upon the letter and sets off to make a living proceeds through a number of jobs with hope to claim May as his bride . The film ends with Bertie returning and finding out that May has married Jack . Little is known about the production of the film save that William Russell played an unknown role and that the scenario was written by Lloyd F. Lonergan . The foppish character of Bertie may have been inspired by Edwin Thanhouser 's role as Bertie <unk> in Thoroughbred . Originally conceived as a series , this ultimately singular work received praise from critics . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot and production = = 
 An official synopsis published in the Billboard states , " Bertie Fawcett is a <unk> chap , who believes that he has won the heart of May Vernon . May , however , regards Bertie as very much of a joke , and is in love with Jack Mace , who is her ideal of manly beauty . May 's father has no objection to Jack personally , but he does not propose that the daughter he idolizes shall wed a weakling or a ne 'er do well . Therefore , he tells May in a letter that if ' that young man wants to marry you , he must show his ability by earning his own living during vacation . ' Unfortunately for Bertie , he sees the letter , and <unk> jumps to the conclusion that he is the person referred to . He starts out to make his own living , but soon finds that it is not as easy as it sounds . He is successfully a writer , a <unk> , a village constable , and a living target in the baseball show , but fails to shine in any one sphere . And then to cap the climax , when he returns to claim his bride , he finds that May is married to Jack . " 
 The only known actor in the production for William Russell in an unknown role . A surviving film still appears to show Russell in the role of Jack at the climax of the film in which Bertie encounters the newly married couple . The other cast credits are unknown , but many Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . The scenario was written by Lloyd F. Lonergan and the character of Bertie may have been based on Edwin Thanhouser 's role of Bertie <unk> from Thoroughbred . The play was a three @-@ act comedy by Ralph Lumley and was first produced on February 13 , 1895 . The play would come to the Garrick Theatre in New York City on August 17 , 1896 and Edwin Thanhouser took over the role on August 29 , 1896 . A series of Bertie films was projected , but only this work was produced . Two other announced works included Bertie 's Bride and Bertie 's Baby . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on January 17 , 1911 . The film received favorable reviews from Billboard , The Moving Picture World and The New York Dramatic Mirror . Billboard would write , " The adventures of the unfortunate Bertie are such as will make the usual motion picture audience chuckle with appreciation . The film is , of course , a farce essentially . The photography is well up to the Thanhouser standard . " Walton of the Moving Picture News , would quip , " This beats the brainstorm in Les Miserables . It is a Doré nightmare . " The comedic farce of the dim @-@ witted fop proved to be successful if ultimately singular release of an expected series of films . The film is presumed lost because the film is not known to be held in any archive or by any collector . 
 = Sega Genesis = 
 The Sega Genesis , known as the Mega Drive ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Mega <unk> ) in most regions outside North America , is a 16 @-@ bit home video game console which was developed and sold by Sega Enterprises , Ltd . The Genesis was Sega 's third console and the successor to the Master System . Sega first released the console as the Mega Drive in Japan in 1988 , followed by a North American debut under the Genesis moniker in 1989 . In 1990 , the console was distributed as the Mega Drive by Virgin Mastertronic in Europe , by <unk> in Australasia , and by Tec Toy in Brazil . In South Korea , the systems were distributed by Samsung and were known as the Super Gam * Boy , and later the Super Aladdin Boy . 
 Designed by an R & D team supervised by Hideki Sato and Masami Ishikawa , the hardware was adapted from Sega 's System 16 arcade board , centered on a Motorola 68000 processor as a primary CPU and a Zilog Z80 as a secondary processor . The system supports a library of more than 900 games created both by Sega and a wide array of third @-@ party publishers and delivered on ROM @-@ based cartridges . It can play Master System games when the separately sold Power Base Converter is inserted . The Genesis has benefited from several peripherals and network services , as well as multiple first @-@ party and third @-@ party variations of the console that focus on extending its functionality . 
 In Japan , the Mega Drive did not fare well against its two main competitors , Nintendo 's Super Famicom and NEC 's PC Engine , although it achieved considerable success in North America , Brazil , and Europe . Contributing to its success were its library of arcade game ports , the popularity of the Genesis @-@ exclusive Sonic the Hedgehog series , several popular sports game franchises , and aggressive youth marketing that positioned the system as the cool console for adolescents . The release of the Super Nintendo Entertainment System two years after the Genesis resulted in a fierce battle for market share in the United States and Europe that has often been termed as a " console war " by journalists and historians . As this contest drew increasing attention to the video game industry among the general public , the Genesis and several of its highest @-@ profile games attracted significant legal scrutiny on matters involving reverse engineering and video game violence . Controversy surrounding violent titles such as Night Trap and Mortal Kombat led Sega to create the Videogame Rating Council , a predecessor to the Entertainment Software Rating Board . 
 Sega sold 30 @.@ 75 million units worldwide . In addition , Tec Toy sold an estimated 3 million licensed variants in Brazil , Majesco projected it would sell 1 @.@ 5 million licensed variants of the system in the United States , and much smaller numbers were sold by Samsung in South Korea . The console and its games continue to be popular among game fans , game music fans , collectors , and emulation enthusiasts . As of 2015 , licensed third party re @-@ releases of the console are being sold by AtGames in North America and Europe . Many games have been re @-@ released in compilations for newer consoles and offered for download on various online services , such as Virtual Console , Xbox Live Arcade , PlayStation Network , and Steam . The Genesis was succeeded by the Sega Saturn . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In the early 1980s , Sega Enterprises , Inc . , then a subsidiary of Gulf & Western , was one of the top five arcade game manufacturers active in the United States , as company revenues rose to $ 214 million . A downturn in the arcade business starting in 1982 seriously hurt the company , leading Gulf & Western to sell its North American arcade manufacturing organization and the licensing rights for its arcade games to Bally Manufacturing . The company retained Sega 's North American R & D operation , as well as its Japanese subsidiary , Sega Enterprises , Ltd . With its arcade business in decline , Gulf & Western executives turned to Sega Enterprises , Ltd . ' s president , Hayao Nakayama , for advice on how to proceed . Nakayama advocated that the company leverage its hardware expertise gained through years working in the arcade industry to move into the home console market in Japan , which was in its infancy at the time . 
 Nakayama received permission to proceed with this project , leading to the release of Sega 's first home video game system , the SG @-@ 1000 , in July 1983 . The SG @-@ 1000 was not successful , and was replaced by the Sega Mark III within two years . In the meantime , Gulf & Western began to divest itself of its non @-@ core businesses after the death of company founder Charles Bluhdorn , so Nakayama and former Sega CEO David Rosen arranged a management buyout of the Japanese subsidiary in 1984 with financial backing from CSK Corporation , a prominent Japanese software company . Nakayama was then installed as CEO of the new Sega Enterprises , Ltd . 
 In 1986 , Sega redesigned the Mark III for release in North America as the Sega Master System . This was followed by a European release the next year . Although the Master System was a success in Europe , and later also Brazil , it failed to ignite significant interest in the Japanese or North American markets , which , by the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s , were both dominated by Nintendo . With Sega continuing to have difficulty penetrating the home market , Sega 's console R & D team , led by Masami Ishikawa and supervised by Hideki Sato , began work on a successor to the Master System almost immediately after that console launched . 
 In 1987 , Sega faced another threat to its console business when Japanese computer giant NEC released the PC Engine amid great publicity . To remain competitive against the two more established consumer electronics companies , Ishikawa and his team decided they needed to incorporate a 16 @-@ bit microprocessor into their new system to make an impact in the marketplace and once again turned to Sega 's strengths in the arcade industry to adapt the successful Sega System 16 arcade board into a home console architecture . The decision to use a Motorola 68000 as the system 's main CPU was made late in development , while a Zilog Z80 was used as a secondary CPU to handle the sound due to fears that the load to the main CPU would be too great if it handled both the visuals and the audio . 
 First announced in June 1988 in Beep ! , a Japanese gaming magazine , the developing console was referred to as the " Mark V , " but Sega management felt the need for a stronger name . After reviewing more than 300 proposals , the company settled on " Mega Drive . " In North America , the name of the console was changed to " Genesis . " The reason for this change is not known , but it may have been due to a trademark dispute . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Sega released the Mega Drive in Japan on October 29 , 1988 , though the launch was overshadowed by Nintendo 's release of Super Mario Bros. 3 a week earlier . Positive coverage from magazines Famitsu and Beep ! helped to establish a following , but Sega only managed to ship 400 @,@ 000 units in the first year . In order to increase sales , Sega released various peripherals and games , including an online banking system and answering machine called the Sega Mega Anser . Nevertheless , the Mega Drive was unable to overtake the venerable Famicom and remained a distant third in Japan behind Nintendo 's Super Famicom and NEC 's PC Engine throughout the 16 @-@ bit era . 
 Sega announced a North American release date for the system on January 9 , 1989 . At the time , Sega did not possess a North American sales and marketing organization and was distributing its Master System through Tonka . Dissatisfied with Tonka 's performance , Sega looked for a new partner to market the Genesis in North America and offered the rights to Atari Corporation , which did not yet have a 16 @-@ bit system . David Rosen made the proposal to Atari CEO Jack <unk> and the president of Atari 's Entertainment Electronics Division , Michael Katz . <unk> declined to acquire the new console , deeming it too expensive , and instead opted to focus on the Atari ST . Sega decided to launch the console through its own Sega of America subsidiary , which executed a limited launch on August 14 , 1989 , in New York City and Los Angeles . The Sega Genesis was released in the rest of North America later that year . 
 The European version was released on November 30 , 1990 . Building on the success of the Master System , the Mega Drive became the most popular console in Europe . Since the Mega Drive was two years old at the time of its release in the region , more games were available at launch compared to the launches in other regions . The ports of arcade titles like Altered Beast , Golden Axe and <unk> ' n Ghosts , available in stores at launch , provided a strong image of the console 's power to deliver an arcade @-@ like experience . The release of the Mega Drive in Europe was handled by Virgin Mastertronic , which was later purchased by Sega in 1991 and became Sega of Europe . 
