 Du Tertre gave a detailed account of the behavior of the Lesser Antillean macaw in 1654 : 
 This bird lives on berries , and on the fruit of certain trees , but principally on the apples of the <unk> ( ! ) , which is a powerful and caustic poison to other animals . It is the prettiest sight in the world to see ten or a dozen Macaws in a green tree . Their voice is loud and piercing , and they always cry when flying . If one imitates their cry , they stop short . They have a grave and dignified demeanor , and so far from being alarmed by many shots fired under a tree where they are perched , they gaze at their companions who fall dead to the ground without being disturbed at all , so that one may fire five or six times into the same tree without their appearing to be frightened . 
 In a 1667 work , Du Tertre gave a similar account , and added that the macaw only ate the poisonous manchineel ( Hippomane mancinella ) fruits in times of necessity . He also described the monogamous reproductive behavior of the bird : 
 The male and the female are inseparable companions and it is rare that one is seen singly . When they wish to breed ( which they do once or twice a year ) they make a hole with their beaks in the stump of a large tree , and construct a nest with feathers from their own bodies . They lay two eggs , the size of those of a partridge ( Perdix cinerea ) . The others of the parrot kind make their nests in the same way , but lay green eggs ... The Macaws are much larger than the large parrots of Guadeloupe or Grenada , and live longer than a man ; but they are almost all subject to a falling sickness . 
 The twice @-@ yearly breeding mentioned by Du Tertre may have actually been staggered breeding , which is practiced by some tropical birds . 
 Though Clark suggested that the Lesser Antillean macaw also occurred on Dominica and Martinique , there is no evidence for this . Instead , it probably existed on other islands close to Guadeloupe . The fossil phalanx bone from Marie @-@ Galante was deposited in a time when that island and the rest of the Guadeloupe archipelago were closer together than they are today due to lower sea @-@ levels . The areas were separated by three channels , the largest of which was 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 miles ) wide . This would not have been a hindrance to flying animals , and the macaws of the Guadeloupe islands would probably have been a single population during the Pleistocene . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 In 1534 , German historian Johann <unk> wrote that the forests of Guadeloupe were full of red macaws , which were apparently as abundant as grasshoppers , and the native people of the region cooked its flesh together with that of humans and of other birds . In 1654 , Du Tertre stated that the flesh was tough to eat , and that some considered it unpalatable and even poisonous . He wrote that he and the other inhabitants often consumed it , and that he experienced no ill @-@ effects from it . He also stated that the native people wore the feathers decoratively on their heads and as moustaches through the septum of the nose . He described how it was hunted by the native population : 
 The natives make use of a stratagem to take them alive ; they watch for a chance to find them on the ground , eating the fruit which has fallen from the trees , when they approach quietly under cover of the trees , then all at once run forward , clapping their hands and filling the air with cries capable not only of astounding the birds , but of terrifying the boldest . Then the poor birds , surprised and distracted , as if struck with thunderbolt , lose the use of their wings , and , making a virtue of necessity , throw themselves on their backs and assume the defensive with the weapons nature has given them – their beaks and claws – with which they defend themselves so bravely that not one of the natives dares to put his hand on them . One of the natives brings a big stick which he lays across the belly of the bird , who seizes it with beak and claws ; but while he is occupied in biting it , the native ties him so adroitly to the stick that he can do with him anything he wishes ... 
 Since Du Tertre wrote that the macaws were prone to sickness , an outbreak of a disease , along with hunting , may have contributed to its demise . In 1760 , the French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson quoted a letter by French writer M. de la Borde , which stated that macaws had become very rare in the Antillean islands because they were hunted for food . By then they could only be found in areas not frequented by humans , and were probably extinct soon afterwards . Parrots are often among the first species to be exterminated from a given locality , especially islands . 
 = The 23rd Psalm = 
 " The 23rd Psalm " is the tenth episode of the second season of Lost , and the 35th episode overall . The episode was directed by Matt Earl Beesley , and written by Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof . It first aired on January 11 , 2006 , on ABC , and was watched by an average of 20 @.@ 56 million American viewers . The episode is centered on the character of Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) , who in flashbacks is revealed to be a former warlord in Nigeria , and in the present day events goes with Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) to the Nigerian airplane which had crashed on the island . 
 The episode has an overall theme of redemption , and was written by drawing inspiration from " Deus Ex Machina " , the episode where the Nigerian airplane was first introduced . Reviews for " The 23rd Psalm " were positive , praising the flashback and Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje 's performance as Eko . The episode 's script was later nominated for an Emmy Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Nigerian guerrillas arrive at a small village , grab a young boy named Yemi and try to force him to shoot an old man . The boy hesitates and his older brother , Eko , takes the gun and shoots the man himself , thus saving his brother from the act . The guerrillas are pleased with this , and force him to join their group , tearing his Christian cross from his neck , which is then taken by Yemi . 
 Years later , Eko has become a powerful warlord . He meets with a drug dealer who is trying to get his heroin out of the country . Eko offers to do him a " favour , " buying the drugs at a low price and spiriting them out of the country . The drug runner agrees , but is killed after telling that he believed Eko had no soul . Later , Eko visits the church of his hometown , where Yemi has become a priest . Eko asks him for a plane , because only United Nations relief and missionary aircraft are allowed to fly out of Nigeria , saying he will fly the drugs away from the Nigerians and give his brother money for a polio vaccine . Yemi refuses to help . Later , Eko approaches his brother again , asking simply for Yemi to sign ordination papers that make Eko and two associates priests so that they can arrange the flight themselves . His brother refuses , but reluctantly signs after Eko says that his two friends will burn the church to the ground if Yemi does not collaborate . Eko also buys Virgin Mary statues to hide the heroin within . 
 Dressed as priests , Eko and two associates are loading drugs onto a Beechcraft airplane , when Yemi drives up and tells him not to leave . The Nigerian military arrives shortly thereafter , killing a henchman and shooting Yemi . Eko loads his brother onto the plane , but the pilot , who has a gold tooth , prevents Eko from boarding and flies away . Then the military approach and , mistaking Eko for a real priest , ask Eko , " Are you alright , Father ? " 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 On the island , Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) watches Eko whittling scripture into the head of his club , and mentions that Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) carries a Virgin Mary statue . Eko immediately demands to see the statue , which he breaks open and shows Claire the heroin inside . Eko then goes to Charlie , demanding him to take him to the plane . 
 Meanwhile , Locke teaches Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) how to use a gun , and Michael then asks Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) to have her shift at the hatch computer . At the computer , Michael continues his conversation with his son Walt ( Malcolm David Kelley ) , which is interrupted by the arrival of Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , who remains unaware of it . 
 On the way to the Beechcraft , Eko and Charlie find a parachute in a tree , which leads to the corpse of a Nigerian man dressed as a priest that Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) and John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) had previously found . When Eko sees the dead man 's gold tooth , he tells Charlie that the man " saved his life . " Charlie loses his way , and Mr. Eko tells him to climb a tree . As he is above the tree , explosions and a cloud of black smoke emerge from the jungle . It confronts him whilst flashing images to him of his past . Mr. Eko stands his ground , despite Charlie telling him to run , and stares at the smoke before it pulls back and disappears . Eko and Charlie then find the plane , inside which Eko finds another corpse which Eko recognizes as Yemi . After taking the cross from Yemi 's body , Eko tells Charlie that it is his brother , gives Charlie a Virgin Mary statue " for the one [ he ] broke " and sets the plane on fire . Charlie asks Eko if he is a priest himself , and as Eko puts the cross around his neck he replies " Yes , I am . " The two then recite Psalm 23 from the Old Testament as the plane burns . 
 After arriving at the camp , Charlie apologizes to Claire , but Claire tells him to leave her and her son alone . Charlie then goes into the jungle , and opens a hiding place where he is keeping Virgin Mary statues to put the one Eko gave him . 
 = = Production = = 
 During the production of " Deus Ex Machina " , which introduced the Nigerian airplane , a corpse dressed as a priest with a gun , and Virgin Mary statues filled with heroin , the Lost writers decided that the story of the Beechcraft would coincide with one of the characters ' flashbacks . They decided to use one of the tail section characters to be introduced in season 2 , " essentially a bad guy who was forced to disguise himself as a priest , and how would that come about , and could he now be presenting himself as a priest " . Since Eko and Locke are both spiritual leaders on the island - but with Locke having a " <unk> , ritualistic appreciation " for the island 's powers and Eko , " pure religious faith " - writers Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof decided to write in this episode parallels with " Deus Ex Machina " , where Locke and Boone find the Beechcraft . The biggest similarity is Charlie unwillingly become Eko 's " acolyte " , just like Boone was being Locke 's follower in their expedition to the airplane . 
 The main theme of " The 23rd Psalm " was redemption , which both Eko and Charlie are seeking , with Eko eventually getting his upon finding his brother . Charlie was chosen to be Eko 's companion because the character did not have much screentime up to that point in the season , and the writers found similarities between Charlie and Eko , such as both having difficult relationships with their brothers . The writers accidentally transcribed Psalm 23 wrong , with " the shadow of the valley of death " instead of " the valley of the shadow of death , " but decided to keep the mistake , feeling it was appropriate as Eko was never a proper priest . 
 The flashbacks had the intent of showing that Eko was the opposite of his religious brother , but eventually ended up similar to Yemi . Nigeria 's depiction was described by art director Bill Matthews as a " very dusty @-@ dirty brown kind of Nigerian @-@ earth look " , with touches such as vendors on the street , and a square where children play soccer . The interior of the church was an actual location in Haleiwa , and a facade was built on the set to match it . While editing , the producers decided to separate a part of the final scene involving the airplane getting attacked and taking off , where a soldier confuses Eko for a priest , to juxtapose with Eko 's spiritual epiphany on the island and set up his next flashback on " ? " , where he is a priest in Australia . As the casting team was having trouble finding a Moroccan to play the drug dealer , set caterer Moumen El Hajji was selected for the role . 
 As the Monster had not yet appeared in the second season , the producers decided to expand on his mythology in " The 23rd Psalm " , as they thought Eko was a good character to confront the Monster because of his spirituality and " self @-@ awareness " . Visual effects supervisor Kevin Blank suggested on adding imagery representing Eko 's past on the smoke , such a cross and the man he shoots at the opening scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original broadcast of " The 23rd Psalm " was on January 11 , 2006 on ABC , being preceded by a clip show titled " Lost : Revelations " . It was watched by approximately 20 @.@ 56 million American viewers , being third in the weekly audience ranking , behind the AFC playoffs and Desperate Housewives . 
 Reviews for " The 23rd Psalm " were mostly positive . Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Jensen gave the episode an A , describing it as a " wonderfully strange parable about redemption and fate " . Mac Slocum of Filmfodder.com considered the episode a worthy return after the two @-@ month break , saying that Eko 's " simple looks and simple phrases pummel the screen with gravitas and charisma " . Ryan Mcgee of Zap2it considered highlights of the episode the scene with the Monster , and the flashback , which in his opinion " [ did ] so great a job at explaining an entire character so succinctly " . IGN 's Chris Carabott gave the episode an 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 , praising the development of Eko 's character and the flashback . 
 Writers Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof 's script for " The 23rd Psalm " was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . IGN ranked " The 23rd Psalm " 40th out of the 115 Lost episodes , calling the flashback " one of most action @-@ packed and ambitious on the series " . A similar list by Los Angeles Times ranked the episode at 49th , describing it as " a great first chapter that sadly never got a worthy follow @-@ up . " 
 = Redland railway station = 
 Redland railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and serves the districts of Cotham and Redland in Bristol , England . It is 3 @.@ 3 miles ( 5 @.@ 3 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is RDA . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every forty minutes in each direction between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth . 
 The line through Redland was opened in 1874 by the Great Western and Midland Railways as part of the Clifton Extension Railway . The station itself was opened in 1897 following a petition by local residents . There were two platforms , with the main station building on the Bristol @-@ bound platform and smaller facilities on the opposite platform . No goods facilities were provided . The main station building , although no longer in railway use , is the only original station building left on the line . In 1903 the station had 11 staff . 
 The Severn Beach Line declined over the latter half of the twentieth century , with passenger numbers falling significantly . All station staff were withdrawn in 1967 , with the line through the station reduced to single track in 1970 , with the second platform taken out of use . Services had decreased to ten per day each direction by 2005 , but have since increased to twenty @-@ four trains per day . 
 = = Description = = 
 Redland railway station is on the Severn Beach Line , serving the areas of Cotham and Redland , Bristol . The surrounding area is mostly residential , with some commercial premises to the east . A park and tennis centre are directly to the south . The station is located 3 miles 25 chains ( 5 @.@ 3 km ) along the line from Bristol Temple Meads , and 10 miles 18 chains ( 16 @.@ 5 km ) from Severn Beach . It is the fourth station from Temple Meads . There is a single 130 @-@ yard ( 120 m ) -long platform which serves trains in both directions , situated on the north side of the track and angled at 062 degrees . The station 's southern platform was abandoned in 1970 and is overgrown . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – there are a few chairs and timetable information is provided . Help points , giving next train information , were installed in 2010 . There is no ticket office , but there are self @-@ service ticket machines which can be used to buy or collect tickets . The Victorian @-@ era station building is only original station building left on the line , decorated with a mural painted by local students , it is used as an upholsterer 's showroom rather than for railway purposes . Access is step @-@ free from South Road , through an area containing residents ' garages . The platform backs onto the gardens on the south side of the road . 
 At the west end of the station are two bridges , neither directly accessible from the station : the first is a footbridge carrying the Lovers ' Walk footpath , then some 10 metres ( 11 yd ) beyond is a road bridge carrying Redland Grove . The line crosses over Redland Road just beyond the east end of the station . 
 There is no car park or taxi rank . Cycle storage is available on the platform . There is a bus stop on South Road , and another on Redland Grove . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Redland are all operated by Great Western Railway , mainly using diesel Class 150 Sprinter units , occasionally supplemented by Class 153 Super Sprinter and Class 158 Express Sprinter units . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . Monday to Friday , three trains every two hours run from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach , giving a service at Redland of one train in each direction every 40 minutes . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , but more trains continue to Severn Beach . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period , when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . 
 There is a short interval between services to Avonmouth and those to Bristol , due to the line 's passing point , Clifton Down , being the next station . Most trains call at all stations , but some services omit Lawrence Hill . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is roughly 15 minutes , and about the same to Avonmouth . In 2012 , the single fare to Clifton Down or Bristol was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 = = History = = 
 The Clifton Extension Railway was opened from Narroways Hill Junction to Clifton Down as a joint venture between the Great Western Railway and Midland Railway , to connect their main lines to the Bristol Port Railway and Pier in the Avon Gorge . Passenger services to Clifton Down began in 1874 , and through services to Avonmouth started in 1885 . There was not initially a station at Redland , but there was local support , with several petitions submitted to the line 's Joint Railway Committee . The first was received in October 1885 , but was rejected due to the estimated cost of £ 3 @,@ 410 to provide the station . A second petition was rejected eighteen months later . The Bristol Chamber of Commerce petitioned for a station in 1892 , but the Committee again rejected the request , stating that estimated traffic levels would not justify the expense . It took until 1896 until a revised plan was accepted by the Committee . 
 Construction of the station was complicated by the need to keep the line open : trains ferrying materials were unable to stay on @-@ site for long , and frequently had to switch from one track to the other , necessitating trips to nearby Montpelier railway station , where the nearest crossover points were located . The station finally opened on 12 April 1897 . The first train was the 7 am service : 94 tickets were issued to Clifton Down , and an estimated 550 passengers bought tickets from the station the same day . Some local writers were sceptical , claiming that many of those first day passengers were not new passengers , but would previously have travelled from Montpelier or Clifton Down . Construction took nine months , and cost £ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 The station as built had two through lines , with platforms on either side . The southern " down " platform was for trains towards Clifton Down and Avonmouth , the northern " up " platform for trains towards Montpelier and Bristol . The main station building , comprising the station master 's office , general waiting room , ladies ' waiting room and cloakroom , was on the northern platform . A smaller building was built in the same style on the southern platform , and was used as a general waiting room . No goods facilities were provided . A footbridge at the west end of the platforms , between the preexisting Lovers ' Walk and Redland Grove bridges , allowed access between the two platforms . The ticket office was situated at the north end of this bridge , on South Road . In September 1899 , a Midland Railway @-@ style signal box was opened at the east end of the northern platform . Services were provided by the Great Western Railway and the Midland Railway . Midland trains worked between Clifton Down and Fishponds or Mangotsfield , where passengers could change for services to Bath , Birmingham and other Midland destinations . The Great Western provided services from Bristol Temple Meads to <unk> Down and Avonmouth , many looping back to Temple Meads via Henbury or Pilning . Bristol Temple Meads was the city 's major station , where passengers could change for trains to London , Exeter and Wales , among others . There were also occasional through services to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . In 1910 , Redland saw 20 Great Western trains each day to and from Clifton Down , a further 17 from and 15 to Avonmouth , and 13 Midland trains in each direction between Clifton Down and Mangotsfield or Fishponds . Midland services were suspended from 1 January 1917 due to the First World War , but resumed in May 1919 . 
 In 1903 , the station employed 11 men , but the post of station master was abolished on 27 August 1909 as a cost @-@ cutting measure , with responsibility passing to Clifton Down . There were six staff by 1938 . In 1923 , grouping resulted in the Midland Railway being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) , and the line continued in a joint arrangement between the Great Western and the LMS . Services to Fishponds ended on 31 March 1941 . When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , when it came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . The signal box closed in 1950 , and by 1958 there were only three staff members : a booking clerk and two porters . Through services to Pilning and Henbury ceased with the Beeching Axe in 1964 , with services terminating at Severn Beach , and from December that year the station was unstaffed after 2 pm . Staff were withdrawn completely on 17 July 1967 , a fate shared by most of the other stations on the Severn Beach Line . The southern running line was lifted on 19 October 1970 , and the adjacent platform abandoned and its shelter demolished . The ticket office and footbridge were also demolished , with a replacement entrance opened through the South Road garages . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Redland passed to Regional Railways . All trains ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This was changed in the mid @-@ 1990s , with a more frequent service to Avonmouth but very few on to Severn Beach . Local tourism expert Bernard Lane described the line 's state as 
 ... the line the railway wished was not there . It was the line that got bus substitution whenever they were short of trains or queues , when a rugby match in Cardiff needed a special . It has a problem in that the route is slow and not very direct ; for years it was invisible , short of marketing and lacking a regular interval timetable . 
 By 1995 there was no Sunday service , and there was even talk of the line being closed completely . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Following action by Friends of Severn Beach Railway ( FOSBR ) and a string of protests , services had increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , subsequently rebranded as Great Western Railway . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the line . In 2007 , the Council unanimously agreed to pay £ 450 @,@ 000 per annum to fund extra services from May 2008 for three years , which resulted in a 60 % increase in passenger numbers along the line , and a 25 % year @-@ on @-@ year increase between June 2009 and June 2010 . Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored in 2010 . 
 Passenger numbers at Redland were further boosted by a marketing campaign by the Severnside Community Rail Partnership to attract more people , especially students , to use the station . The work won a Department for Transport Community Rail Marketing Award in 2007 . The Severnside CRP also formed a support group for the station , and improved the provision of timetabling information through the use of simplified departure timetable posters . In 2008 , they helped to renovate and repaint the station building . It was decorated in 2009 by students from Fairfield School , who created a mural of Victorian characters with incongruous details such as mobile phones , sunglasses and funny hats . The work won a Community Rail Award . 
 Customer help points with next train information screens were installed during 2008 / 09 , paid for by money from the Department for Transport 's " Access for All " fund and local councils . The help points were stolen in early 2010 , but have since been replaced . Ticket machines were installed in early 2011 , following complaints that passengers were unable to pay their fares . A small coffee stand and snack bar began operating at the station in 2014 . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Redland are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond the main lines , so Redland will continue to be served by diesel trains , with the current " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . Stephen Williams , MP for Bristol West , questioned whether electrification could continue to Redland . Then @-@ Secretary of State for Transport Philip Hammond replied that it would have to be looked at in the future . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification of the entire Severn Beach Line . 
 Improved services at Redland are called for as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . There is an aspiration for half @-@ hourly services , with trains towards Bristol terminating alternately at Portishead and Bath Spa , however due to the large sections of the Severn Beach Line which are single @-@ track and to the congested main line from Temple Meads , such frequency is not currently feasible . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There are also calls for the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line , which could allow a direct service from Redland to Bristol Parkway via Avonmouth . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = Sleipnir = 
 In Norse mythology , Sleipnir ( Old Norse " slippy " or " the slipper " ) is an eight @-@ legged horse . Sleipnir is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , Sleipnir is Odin 's steed , is the child of Loki and Svaðilfari , is described as the best of all horses , and is sometimes ridden to the location of Hel . The Prose Edda contains extended information regarding the circumstances of Sleipnir 's birth , and details that he is grey in color . 
 Additionally , Sleipnir is mentioned in a riddle found in the 13th century legendary saga Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks , in the 13th century legendary saga Völsunga saga as the ancestor of the horse Grani , and book I of Gesta Danorum , written in the 12th century by Saxo Grammaticus , contains an episode considered by many scholars to involve Sleipnir . Sleipnir is generally accepted as depicted on two 8th century <unk> image stones ; the Tjängvide image stone and the Ardre VIII image stone . 
 Scholarly theories have been proposed regarding Sleipnir 's potential connection to shamanic practices among the Norse pagans . In modern times , Sleipnir appears in Icelandic folklore as the creator of <unk> , in works of art , literature , software , and in the names of ships . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda , Sleipnir appears or is mentioned in the poems Grímnismál , Sigrdrífumál , Baldrs draumar , and Hyndluljóð . In Grímnismál , Grimnir ( Odin in disguise and not yet having revealed his identity ) tells the boy Agnar in verse that Sleipnir is the best of horses ( " Odin is the best of the Æsir , Sleipnir of horses " ) . In Sigrdrífumál , the valkyrie Sigrdrífa tells the hero Sigurðr that runes should be cut " on Sleipnir 's teeth and on the sledge 's strap @-@ bands . " In Baldrs draumar , after the Æsir convene about the god Baldr 's bad dreams , Odin places a saddle on Sleipnir and the two ride to the location of Hel . The Völuspá hin skamma section of Hyndluljóð says that Loki produced " the wolf " with Angrboða , produced Sleipnir with Svaðilfari , and thirdly " one monster that was thought the most baleful , who was descended from <unk> 's brother . " 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Sleipnir is first mentioned in chapter 15 where the enthroned figure of High says that every day the Æsir ride across the bridge Bifröst , and provides a list of the Æsir 's horses . The list begins with Sleipnir : " best is Sleipnir , he is Odin 's , he has eight legs . " In chapter 41 , High quotes the Grímnismál stanza that mentions Sleipnir . 
 In chapter 42 , Sleipnir 's origins are described . Gangleri ( described earlier in the book as King Gylfi in disguise ) asks High who the horse Sleipnir belongs to and what there is to tell about it . High expresses surprise in Gangleri 's lack of knowledge about Sleipnir and its origin . High tells a story set " right at the beginning of the gods ' settlement , when the gods established Midgard and built Val @-@ Hall " about an unnamed builder who has offered to build a fortification for the gods in three seasons that will keep out invaders in exchange for the goddess Freyja , the sun , and the moon . After some debate , the gods agree to this , but place a number of restrictions on the builder , including that he must complete the work within three seasons with the help of no man . The builder makes a single request ; that he may have help from his stallion Svaðilfari , and due to Loki 's influence , this is allowed . The stallion Svaðilfari performs twice the deeds of strength as the builder , and hauls enormous rocks to the surprise of the gods . The builder , with Svaðilfari , makes fast progress on the wall , and three days before the deadline of summer , the builder was nearly at the entrance to the fortification . The gods convene , and figured out who was responsible , resulting in a unanimous agreement that , along with most trouble , Loki was to blame . 
 The gods declare that Loki would deserve a horrible death if he could not find a scheme that would cause the builder to forfeit his payment , and threatened to attack him . Loki , afraid , swore oaths that he would devise a scheme to cause the builder to forfeit the payment , whatever it would cost himself . That night , the builder drove out to fetch stone with his stallion Svaðilfari , and out from a wood ran a mare . The mare neighed at Svaðilfari , and " realizing what kind of horse it was , " Svaðilfari became frantic , neighed , tore apart his tackle , and ran towards the mare . The mare ran to the wood , Svaðilfari followed , and the builder chased after . The two horses ran around all night , causing the building work to be held up for the night , and the previous momentum of building work that the builder had been able to maintain was not continued . 
 When the Æsir realize that the builder is a hrimthurs , they disregard their previous oaths with the builder , and call for Thor . Thor arrives , and kills the builder by smashing the builder 's skull into shards with the hammer Mjöllnir . However , Loki had " such dealings " with Svaðilfari that " somewhat later " Loki gave birth to a grey foal with eight legs ; the horse Sleipnir , " the best horse among gods and men . " 
 In chapter 49 , High describes the death of the god Baldr . Hermóðr agrees to ride to Hel to offer a ransom for Baldr 's return , and so " then Odin 's horse Sleipnir was fetched and led forward . " Hermóðr mounts Sleipnir and rides away . Hermóðr rides for nine nights in deep , dark valleys where Hermóðr can see nothing . The two arrive at the river Gjöll and then continue to Gjöll bridge , encountering a maiden guarding the bridge named Móðguðr . Some dialogue occurs between Hermóðr and Móðguðr , including that Móðguðr notes that recently there had ridden five battalions of dead men across the bridge that made less sound than he . Sleipnir and Hermóðr continue " downwards and northwards " on the road to Hel , until the two arrive at Hel 's gates . Hermóðr dismounts from Sleipnir , tightens Sleipnir 's girth , mounts him , and spurs Sleipnir on . Sleipnir " jumped so hard and over the gate that it came nowhere near . " Hermóðr rides up to the hall , and dismounts from Sleipnir . After Hermóðr 's pleas to Hel to return Baldr are accepted under a condition , Hermóðr and Baldr retrace their path backward and return to Asgard . 
 In chapter 16 of the book Skáldskaparmál , a kenning given for Loki is " relative of Sleipnir . " In chapter 17 , a story is provided in which Odin rides Sleipnir into the land of Jötunheimr and arrives at the residence of the jötunn Hrungnir . Hrungnir asks " what sort of person this was " wearing a golden helmet , " riding sky and sea , " and says that the stranger " has a marvellously good horse . " Odin wagers his head that no horse as good could be found in all of Jötunheimr . Hrungnir admitted that it was a fine horse , yet states that he owns a much longer @-@ paced horse ; <unk> . Incensed , Hrungnir leaps atop <unk> , intending to attack Odin for Odin 's boasting . Odin gallops hard ahead of Hrungnir , and , in his , fury , Hrungnir finds himself having rushed into the gates of Asgard . In chapter 58 , Sleipnir is mentioned among a list of horses in <unk> : " Hrafn and Sleipnir , splendid horses [ ... ] " . In addition , Sleipnir occurs twice in kennings for " ship " ( once appearing in chapter 25 in a work by the skald <unk> , and " sea @-@ Sleipnir " appearing in chapter 49 in Húsdrápa , a work by the 10th century skald Úlfr Uggason ) . 
 = = = Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks = = = 
 In Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks , the poem Heiðreks <unk> contains a riddle that mentions Sleipnir and Odin : 
 36 . Gestumblindi said : 
 " Who are the twain 
 that on ten feet run ? 
 three eyes they have , 
 but only one tail . 
 Alright guess now 
 this riddle , <unk> ! " 
 <unk> said : 
 " Good is thy riddle , Gestumblindi , 
 and guessed it is : 
 that is Odin riding on Sleipnir . " 
 = = = Völsunga saga = = = 
 In chapter 13 of Völsunga saga , the hero Sigurðr is on his way to a wood and he meets a long @-@ bearded old man he had never seen before . Sigurd tells the old man that he is going to choose a horse , and asks the old man to come with him to help him decide . The old man says that they should drive the horses down to the river <unk> . The two drive the horses down into the deeps of <unk> , and all of the horses swim back to land but a large , young , and handsome grey horse that no one had ever mounted . The grey @-@ bearded old man says that the horse is from " Sleipnir 's kin " and that " he must be raised carefully , because he will become better than any other horse . " The old man vanishes . Sigurd names the horse Grani , and the narrative adds that the old man was none other than ( the god ) Odin . 
 = = = Gesta Danorum = = = 
 Sleipnir is generally considered as appearing in a sequence of events described in book I of Gesta Danorum . In book I , the young Hadingus encounters " a certain man of great age who had lost an eye " who allies him with <unk> . Hadingus and <unk> set out to wage war on <unk> , ruler of Kurland . Meeting defeat , the old man takes Hadingus with him onto his horse as they flee to the old man 's house , and the two drink an invigorating drought . The old man sings a prophecy , and takes Hadingus back to where he found him on his horse . During the ride back , Hadingus trembles beneath the old man 's mantle , and peers out of its holes . Hadingus realizes that he is flying through the air : " and he saw that before the steps of the horse lay the sea ; but was told not to steal a glimpse of the forbidden thing , and therefore turned his amazed eyes from the dread spectacle of the roads that he journeyed . " Additionally , in book II , <unk> mentions Odin and Sleipnir : " If I may look on the awful husband of Frigg , howsoever he be covered in his white shield , and guide his tall steed , he shall in no way go safe out of <unk> ; it is lawful to lay low in war the war @-@ waging god . " 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 Two of the 8th century picture stones from the island of Gotland , Sweden depict eight @-@ legged horses , which are thought by most scholars to depict Sleipnir : the Tjängvide image stone and the Ardre VIII image stone . Both stones feature a rider sitting atop an eight @-@ legged horse , which some scholars view as Odin . Above the rider on the Tjängvide image stone is a horizontal figure holding a spear , which may be a valkyrie , and a female figure greets the rider with a cup . The scene has been interpreted as a rider arriving at the world of the dead . The mid @-@ 7th century <unk> stone bearing the Odinic name <unk> ( Old Norse ' army god ' ) may be interpreted as depicting Sleipnir . 
 = = Theories = = 
 John Lindow theorizes that Sleipnir 's " connection to the world of the dead grants a special poignancy to one of the kennings in which Sleipnir turns up as a horse word , " referring to the skald Úlfr Uggason 's usage of " sea @-@ Sleipnir " in his Húsdrápa , which describes the funeral of Baldr . Lindow continues that " his use of Sleipnir in the kenning may show that Sleipnir 's role in the failed recovery of Baldr was known at that time and place in Iceland ; it certainly indicates that Sleipnir was an active participant in the mythology of the last decades of paganism . " Lindow adds that the eight legs of Sleipnir " have been interpreted as an indication of great speed or as being connected in some unclear way with cult activity . " 
 Hilda Ellis Davidson says that " the eight @-@ legged horse of Odin is the typical steed of the shaman " and that in the shaman 's journeys to the heavens or the underworld , a shaman " is usually represented as riding on some bird or animal . " Davidson says that while the creature may vary , the horse is fairly common " in the lands where horses are in general use , and Sleipnir 's ability to bear the god through the air is typical of the shaman 's steed " and cites an example from a study of shamanism by Mircea Eliade of an eight @-@ legged foal from a story of a Buryat shaman . Davidson says that while attempts have been made to connect Sleipnir with hobby horses and steeds with more than four feet that appear in carnivals and processions , but that " a more fruitful resemblance seems to be on the bier on which a dead man is carried in the funeral procession by four bearers ; borne along thus , he may be described as riding on a steed with eight legs . " As an example , Davidson cites a funeral dirge from the Gondi people in India as recorded by Verrier Elwin , stating that " it contains references to Bagri Maro , the horse with eight legs , and it is clear from the song that it is the dead man 's bier . " Davidson says that the song is sung when a distinguished <unk> dies , and provides a verse : 
 What horse is this ? 
 It is the horse of Bagri Maro . 
 What should we say of its legs ? 
 This horse has eight legs . 
 What should we say of its heads ? 
 This horse has four heads . . . . 
 Catch the bridle and mount the horse . 
 Davidson adds that the representation of Odin 's steed as eight @-@ legged could arise naturally out of such an image , and that " this is in accordance with the picture of Sleipnir as a horse that could bear its rider to the land of the dead . " 
 Ulla <unk> cites Sleipnir and the flying horse Hófvarpnir as " prime examples " of horses in Norse mythology as being able to " mediate between earth and sky , between <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and between the world of mortal men and the underworld . " 
 The Encyclopedia of Indo @-@ European Culture theorizes that Sleipnir 's eight legs may be the remnants of horse @-@ associated divine twins found in Indo @-@ European cultures and ultimately stemming from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European religion . The encyclopedia states that " [ ... ] Sleipnir is born with an extra set of legs , thus representing an original pair of horses . Like Freyr and Njörðr , Sleipnir is responsible for carrying the dead to the otherworld . " The encyclopedia cites parallels between the birth of Sleipnir and myths originally pointing to a Celtic goddess who gave birth to the Divine horse twins . These elements include a demand for a goddess by an unwanted suitor ( the hrimthurs demanding the goddess Freyja ) and the seduction of builders . 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 According to Icelandic folklore , the horseshoe shaped canyon <unk> located in <unk> National Park , northern Iceland was formed by Sleipnir 's hoof . Sleipnir is depicted with Odin on <unk> <unk> 's wooden relief " Odin på Sleipnir " ( 1945 – 1950 ) on the exterior of the Oslo City Hall in Oslo , Norway . Sleipnir has been and remains a popular name for ships in Northern Europe , and Rudyard Kipling 's short story entitled " Sleipnir , late <unk> " ( 1888 ) features a horse named " Sleipnir " . A statue of Sleipnir ( 1998 ) stands in Wednesbury , England , a town which takes its name from the Anglo @-@ Saxon version of Odin , Wōden . 
 = Dengue fever = 
 Dengue fever is a mosquito @-@ borne tropical disease caused by the dengue virus . Symptoms typically begin three to fourteen days after infection . This may include a high fever , headache , vomiting , muscle and joint pains , and a characteristic skin rash . Recovery generally takes less than two to seven days . In a small proportion of cases , the disease develops into the life @-@ threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever , resulting in bleeding , low levels of blood platelets and blood plasma leakage , or into dengue shock syndrome , where dangerously low blood pressure occurs . 
 Dengue is spread by several species of mosquito of the Aedes type , principally A. aegypti . The virus has five different types ; infection with one type usually gives lifelong immunity to that type , but only short @-@ term immunity to the others . Subsequent infection with a different type increases the risk of severe complications . A number of tests are available to confirm the diagnosis including detecting antibodies to the virus or its RNA . 
 A novel vaccine for dengue fever has been approved in three countries , but it is not yet commercially available . Prevention is by reducing mosquito habitat and limiting exposure to bites . This may be done by getting rid of or covering standing water and wearing clothing that covers much of the body . Treatment of acute dengue is supportive and includes giving fluid either by mouth or intravenously for mild or moderate disease . For more severe cases blood transfusion may be required . About half a million people require admission to hospital a year . <unk> anti @-@ inflammatory drug ( NSAIDs ) such as ibuprofen should not be used . 
 Dengue has become a global problem since the Second World War and is common in more than 110 countries . Each year between 50 and 528 million people are infected and approximately 10 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 die . The earliest descriptions of an outbreak date from 1779 . Its viral cause and spread were understood by the early 20th century . Apart from eliminating the mosquitoes , work is ongoing for medication targeted directly at the virus . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Typically , people infected with dengue virus are asymptomatic ( 80 % ) or have only mild symptoms such as an uncomplicated fever . Others have more severe illness ( 5 % ) , and in a small proportion it is life @-@ threatening . The incubation period ( time between exposure and onset of symptoms ) ranges from 3 to 14 days , but most often it is 4 to 7 days . Therefore , travelers returning from endemic areas are unlikely to have dengue if fever or other symptoms start more than 14 days after arriving home . Children often experience symptoms similar to those of the common cold and gastroenteritis ( vomiting and diarrhea ) and have a greater risk of severe complications , though initial symptoms are generally mild but include high fever . 
 = = = Clinical course = = = 
 The characteristic symptoms of dengue are sudden @-@ onset fever , headache ( typically located behind the eyes ) , muscle and joint pains , and a rash . The alternative name for dengue , " <unk> fever " , comes from the associated muscle and joint pains . The course of infection is divided into three phases : febrile , critical , and recovery . 
 The febrile phase involves high fever , potentially over 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) , and is associated with generalized pain and a headache ; this usually lasts two to seven days . Nausea and vomiting may also occur . A rash occurs in 50 – 80 % of those with symptoms in the first or second day of symptoms as flushed skin , or later in the course of illness ( days 4 – 7 ) , as a measles @-@ like rash . A rash described as " islands of white in a sea of red " has also been observed . Some petechiae ( small red spots that do not disappear when the skin is pressed , which are caused by broken capillaries ) can appear at this point , as may some mild bleeding from the mucous membranes of the mouth and nose . The fever itself is classically biphasic or saddleback in nature , breaking and then returning for one or two days . 
 In some people , the disease proceeds to a critical phase as fever resolves . During this period , there is leakage of plasma from the blood vessels , typically lasting one to two days . This may result in fluid accumulation in the chest and abdominal cavity as well as depletion of fluid from the circulation and decreased blood supply to vital organs . There may also be organ dysfunction and severe bleeding , typically from the gastrointestinal tract . Shock ( dengue shock syndrome ) and hemorrhage ( dengue hemorrhagic fever ) occur in less than 5 % of all cases of dengue , however those who have previously been infected with other serotypes of dengue virus ( " secondary infection " ) are at an increased risk . This critical phase , while rare , occurs relatively more commonly in children and young adults . 
 The recovery phase occurs next , with resorption of the leaked fluid into the bloodstream . This usually lasts two to three days . The improvement is often striking , and can be accompanied with severe itching and a slow heart rate . Another rash may occur with either a maculopapular or a <unk> appearance , which is followed by peeling of the skin . During this stage , a fluid overload state may occur ; if it affects the brain , it may cause a reduced level of consciousness or seizures . A feeling of fatigue may last for weeks in adults . 
 = = = Associated problems = = = 
 Dengue can occasionally affect several other body systems , either in isolation or along with the classic dengue symptoms . A decreased level of consciousness occurs in 0 @.@ 5 – 6 % of severe cases , which is attributable either to inflammation of the brain by the virus or indirectly as a result of impairment of vital organs , for example , the liver . 
 Other neurological disorders have been reported in the context of dengue , such as transverse myelitis and Guillain @-@ Barré syndrome . Infection of the heart and acute liver failure are among the rarer complications . 
 A pregnant woman who develops dengue may be at a higher risk of miscarriage as well as low birth weight and premature birth . 
 = = Cause = = 
 = = = Virology = = = 
 Dengue fever virus ( DENV ) is an RNA virus of the family <unk> ; genus <unk> . Other members of the same genus include yellow fever virus , West Nile virus , St. Louis encephalitis virus , Japanese encephalitis virus , tick @-@ borne encephalitis virus , <unk> forest disease virus , and Omsk hemorrhagic fever virus . Most are transmitted by arthropods ( mosquitoes or ticks ) , and are therefore also referred to as arboviruses ( arthropod @-@ borne viruses ) . 
 The dengue virus genome ( genetic material ) contains about 11 @,@ 000 nucleotide bases , which code for the three different types of protein molecules ( C , <unk> and E ) that form the virus particle and seven other types of protein molecules ( NS1 , <unk> , <unk> , NS3 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) that are found in infected host cells only and are required for replication of the virus . There are five strains of the virus , called serotypes , of which the first four are referred to as DENV @-@ 1 , DENV @-@ 2 , DENV @-@ 3 and DENV @-@ 4 . The fifth type was announced in 2013 . The distinctions between the serotypes are based on their <unk> . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 Dengue virus is primarily transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes , particularly A. aegypti . These mosquitoes usually live between the latitudes of 35 ° North and 35 ° South below an elevation of 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . They typically bite during the early morning and in the evening , but they may bite and thus spread infection at any time of day . Other Aedes species that transmit the disease include A. <unk> , A. <unk> and A. <unk> . Humans are the primary host of the virus , but it also circulates in nonhuman primates . An infection can be acquired via a single bite . A female mosquito that takes a blood meal from a person infected with dengue fever , during the initial 2 – 10 day febrile period , becomes itself infected with the virus in the cells lining its gut . About 8 – 10 days later , the virus spreads to other tissues including the mosquito 's salivary glands and is subsequently released into its saliva . The virus seems to have no detrimental effect on the mosquito , which remains infected for life . Aedes aegypti is particularly involved , as it prefers to lay its eggs in artificial water containers , to live in close proximity to humans , and to feed on people rather than other vertebrates . 
 Dengue can also be transmitted via infected blood products and through organ donation . In countries such as Singapore , where dengue is endemic , the risk is estimated to be between 1 @.@ 6 and 6 per 10 @,@ 000 transfusions . Vertical transmission ( from mother to child ) during pregnancy or at birth has been reported . Other person @-@ to @-@ person modes of transmission have also been reported , but are very unusual . The genetic variation in dengue viruses is region specific , suggestive that establishment into new territories is relatively infrequent , despite dengue emerging in new regions in recent decades . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Severe disease is more common in babies and young children , and in contrast to many other infections , it is more common in children who are relatively well nourished . Other risk factors for severe disease include female sex , high body mass index , and viral load . While each serotype can cause the full spectrum of disease , virus strain is a risk factor . Infection with one serotype is thought to produce lifelong immunity to that type , but only short @-@ term protection against the other three . The risk of severe disease from secondary infection increases if someone previously exposed to serotype DENV @-@ 1 contracts serotype DENV @-@ 2 or DENV @-@ 3 , or if someone previously exposed to DENV @-@ 3 acquires DENV @-@ 2 . Dengue can be life @-@ threatening in people with chronic diseases such as diabetes and asthma . 
 Polymorphisms ( normal variations ) in particular genes have been linked with an increased risk of severe dengue complications . Examples include the genes coding for the proteins known as TNFα , mannan @-@ binding lectin , <unk> , <unk> , DC @-@ SIGN , <unk> , and particular forms of human leukocyte antigen from gene variations of HLA @-@ B. A common genetic abnormality , especially in Africans , known as glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency , appears to increase the risk . Polymorphisms in the genes for the vitamin D receptor and FcγR seem to offer protection against severe disease in secondary dengue infection . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 When a mosquito carrying dengue virus bites a person , the virus enters the skin together with the mosquito 's saliva . It binds to and enters white blood cells , and reproduces inside the cells while they move throughout the body . The white blood cells respond by producing a number of signaling proteins , such as cytokines and interferons , which are responsible for many of the symptoms , such as the fever , the flu @-@ like symptoms , and the severe pains . In severe infection , the virus production inside the body is greatly increased , and many more organs ( such as the liver and the bone marrow ) can be affected . Fluid from the bloodstream leaks through the wall of small blood vessels into body cavities due to capillary permeability . As a result , less blood circulates in the blood vessels , and the blood pressure becomes so low that it cannot supply sufficient blood to vital organs . Furthermore , dysfunction of the bone marrow due to infection of the stromal cells leads to reduced numbers of platelets , which are necessary for effective blood clotting ; this increases the risk of bleeding , the other major complication of dengue fever . 
 = = = Viral replication = = = 
 Once inside the skin , dengue virus binds to Langerhans cells ( a population of dendritic cells in the skin that identifies pathogens ) . The virus enters the cells through binding between viral proteins and membrane proteins on the Langerhans cell , specifically the C @-@ type lectins called DC @-@ SIGN , mannose receptor and <unk> . DC @-@ SIGN , a non @-@ specific receptor for foreign material on dendritic cells , seems to be the main point of entry . The dendritic cell moves to the nearest lymph node . Meanwhile , the virus genome is translated in membrane @-@ bound vesicles on the cell 's endoplasmic reticulum , where the cell 's protein synthesis apparatus produces new viral proteins that replicate the viral RNA and begin to form viral particles . Immature virus particles are transported to the Golgi apparatus , the part of the cell where some of the proteins receive necessary sugar chains ( glycoproteins ) . The now mature new viruses are released by exocytosis . They are then able to enter other white blood cells , such as monocytes and macrophages . 
 The initial reaction of infected cells is to produce interferon , a cytokine that raises a number of defenses against viral infection through the innate immune system by augmenting the production of a large group of proteins mediated by the <unk> @-@ STAT pathway . Some serotypes of dengue virus appear to have mechanisms to slow down this process . Interferon also activates the adaptive immune system , which leads to the generation of antibodies against the virus as well as T cells that directly attack any cell infected with the virus . Various antibodies are generated ; some bind closely to the viral proteins and target them for phagocytosis ( ingestion by specialized cells and destruction ) , but some bind the virus less well and appear instead to deliver the virus into a part of the phagocytes where it is not destroyed but is able to replicate further . 
 = = = Severe disease = = = 
 It is not entirely clear why secondary infection with a different strain of dengue virus places people at risk of dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome . The most widely accepted hypothesis is that of antibody @-@ dependent enhancement ( ADE ) . The exact mechanism behind ADE is unclear . It may be caused by poor binding of non @-@ neutralizing antibodies and delivery into the wrong compartment of white blood cells that have ingested the virus for destruction . There is a suspicion that ADE is not the only mechanism underlying severe dengue @-@ related complications , and various lines of research have implied a role for T cells and soluble factors such as cytokines and the complement system . 
 Severe disease is marked by the problems of capillary permeability ( an allowance of fluid and protein normally contained within blood to pass ) and disordered blood clotting . These changes appear associated with a disordered state of the endothelial <unk> , which acts as a molecular filter of blood components . Leaky capillaries ( and the critical phase ) are thought to be caused by an immune system response . Other processes of interest include infected cells that become necrotic — which affect both coagulation and fibrinolysis ( the opposing systems of blood clotting and clot degradation ) — and low platelets in the blood , also a factor in normal clotting . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of dengue is typically made clinically , on the basis of reported symptoms and physical examination ; this applies especially in endemic areas . However , early disease can be difficult to differentiate from other viral infections . A probable diagnosis is based on the findings of fever plus two of the following : nausea and vomiting , rash , generalized pains , low white blood cell count , positive tourniquet test , or any warning sign ( see table ) in someone who lives in an endemic area . Warning signs typically occur before the onset of severe dengue . The tourniquet test , which is particularly useful in settings where no laboratory investigations are readily available , involves the application of a blood pressure cuff at between the diastolic and systolic pressure for five minutes , followed by the counting of any petechial hemorrhages ; a higher number makes a diagnosis of dengue more likely with the cut off being more than 10 to 20 per 1 <unk> ( 6 @.@ 25 cm2 ) . 
 The diagnosis should be considered in anyone who develops a fever within two weeks of being in the tropics or subtropics . It can be difficult to distinguish dengue fever and <unk> , a similar viral infection that shares many symptoms and occurs in similar parts of the world to dengue . Often , investigations are performed to exclude other conditions that cause similar symptoms , such as malaria , leptospirosis , viral hemorrhagic fever , typhoid fever , meningococcal disease , measles , and influenza . Zika fever also has similar symptoms as dengue . 
 The earliest change detectable on laboratory investigations is a low white blood cell count , which may then be followed by low platelets and metabolic acidosis . A moderately elevated level of aminotransferase ( AST and ALT ) from the liver is commonly associated with low platelets and white blood cells . In severe disease , plasma leakage results in <unk> ( as indicated by a rising hematocrit ) and <unk> . <unk> effusions or ascites can be detected by physical examination when large , but the demonstration of fluid on ultrasound may assist in the early identification of dengue shock syndrome . The use of ultrasound is limited by lack of availability in many settings . Dengue shock syndrome is present if pulse pressure drops to ≤ 20 mm Hg along with peripheral vascular collapse . Peripheral vascular collapse is determined in children via delayed capillary refill , rapid heart rate , or cold extremities . While warning signs are an important aspect for early detection of potential serious disease , the evidence for any specific clinical or laboratory marker is weak . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 The World Health Organization 's 2009 classification divides dengue fever into two groups : uncomplicated and severe . This replaces the 1997 WHO classification , which needed to be simplified as it had been found to be too restrictive , though the older classification is still widely used including by the World Health Organization 's Regional Office for South @-@ East Asia as of 2011 . Severe dengue is defined as that associated with severe bleeding , severe organ dysfunction , or severe plasma leakage while all other cases are uncomplicated . The 1997 classification divided dengue into undifferentiated fever , dengue fever , and dengue hemorrhagic fever . Dengue hemorrhagic fever was subdivided further into grades I – IV . Grade I is the presence only of easy bruising or a positive tourniquet test in someone with fever , grade II is the presence of spontaneous bleeding into the skin and elsewhere , grade III is the clinical evidence of shock , and grade IV is shock so severe that blood pressure and pulse cannot be detected . Grades III and IV are referred to as " dengue shock syndrome " . 
 = = = Laboratory tests = = = 
 The diagnosis of dengue fever may be confirmed by microbiological laboratory testing . This can be done by virus isolation in cell cultures , nucleic acid detection by PCR , viral antigen detection ( such as for NS1 ) or specific antibodies ( serology ) . Virus isolation and nucleic acid detection are more accurate than antigen detection , but these tests are not widely available due to their greater cost . Detection of NS1 during the febrile phase of a primary infection may be greater than 90 % sensitive however is only 60 – 80 % in subsequent infections . All tests may be negative in the early stages of the disease . PCR and viral antigen detection are more accurate in the first seven days . In 2012 a PCR test was introduced that can run on equipment used to diagnose influenza ; this is likely to improve access to PCR @-@ based diagnosis . 
 These laboratory tests are only of diagnostic value during the acute phase of the illness with the exception of serology . Tests for dengue virus @-@ specific antibodies , types IgG and IgM , can be useful in confirming a diagnosis in the later stages of the infection . Both IgG and IgM are produced after 5 – 7 days . The highest levels ( titres ) of IgM are detected following a primary infection , but IgM is also produced in reinfection . IgM becomes undetectable 30 – 90 days after a primary infection , but earlier following re @-@ infections . IgG , by contrast , remains detectable for over 60 years and , in the absence of symptoms , is a useful indicator of past infection . After a primary infection , IgG reaches peak levels in the blood after 14 – 21 days . In subsequent re @-@ infections , levels peak earlier and the titres are usually higher . Both IgG and IgM provide protective immunity to the infecting serotype of the virus . In testing for IgG and IgM antibodies there may be cross @-@ reactivity with other <unk> which may result in a false positive after recent infections or vaccinations with yellow fever virus or Japanese encephalitis . The detection of IgG alone is not considered diagnostic unless blood samples are collected 14 days apart and a greater than fourfold increase in levels of specific IgG is detected . In a person with symptoms , the detection of IgM is considered diagnostic . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Prevention depends on control of and protection from the bites of the mosquito that transmits it . The World Health Organization recommends an Integrated Vector Control program consisting of five elements : 
 Advocacy , social mobilization and legislation to ensure that public health bodies and communities are strengthened ; 
 Collaboration between the health and other sectors ( public and private ) ; 
 An integrated approach to disease control to maximize use of resources ; 
 Evidence @-@ based decision making to ensure any interventions are targeted appropriately ; and 
 Capacity @-@ building to ensure an adequate response to the local situation . 
 The primary method of controlling A. aegypti is by eliminating its habitats . This is done by getting rid of open sources of water , or if this is not possible , by adding insecticides or biological control agents to these areas . Generalized spraying with organophosphate or <unk> insecticides , while sometimes done , is not thought to be effective . Reducing open collections of water through environmental modification is the preferred method of control , given the concerns of negative health effects from insecticides and greater logistical difficulties with control agents . People can prevent mosquito bites by wearing clothing that fully covers the skin , using mosquito netting while resting , and / or the application of insect repellent ( <unk> being the most effective ) . However , these methods appear not to be sufficiently effective , as the frequency of outbreaks appears to be increasing in some areas , probably due to urbanization increasing the habitat of A. aegypti . The range of the disease appears to be expanding possibly due to climate change . 
 = = = Vaccine = = = 
 As of December 2015 , there is no commercially available vaccine for dengue fever . One that is partially effective is predicted to become available in Mexico , the Philippines , and Brazil in early 2016 . It received approval in December 2015 . The vaccine is produced by Sanofi and goes by the brand name <unk> . It is based on a weakened combination of the yellow fever virus and each of the four dengue serotypes . Two studies of a vaccine found it was 60 % effective and prevented more than 80 to 90 % of severe cases . This is less than wished for by some . 
 There are ongoing programs working on a dengue vaccine to cover all four serotypes . Now that there is a fifth serotype this will need to be factored in . One of the concerns is that a vaccine could increase the risk of severe disease through antibody @-@ dependent enhancement ( ADE ) . The ideal vaccine is safe , effective after one or two injections , covers all serotypes , does not contribute to ADE , is easily transported and stored , and is both affordable and cost @-@ effective . 
 = = = Anti @-@ dengue day = = = 
 International Anti @-@ Dengue Day is observed every year on June 15 . The idea was first agreed upon in 2010 with the first event held in Jakarta , Indonesia in 2011 . Further events were held in 2012 in Yangon , Myanmar and in 2013 in Vietnam . Goals are to increase public awareness about dengue , mobilize resources for its prevention and control and , to demonstrate the Asian region ’ s commitment in tackling the disease . 
 = = Management = = 
 There are no specific antiviral drugs for dengue , however maintaining proper fluid balance is important . Treatment depends on the symptoms . Those who are able to drink , are passing urine , have no " warning signs " and are otherwise healthy can be managed at home with daily follow up and oral rehydration therapy . Those who have other health problems , have " warning signs " , or who cannot manage regular follow @-@ up should be cared for in hospital . In those with severe dengue care should be provided in an area where there is access to an intensive care unit . 
 Intravenous hydration , if required , is typically only needed for one or two days . In children with shock due to dengue a rapid dose of <unk> / kg is reasonable . The rate of fluid administration is than titrated to a urinary output of 0 @.@ 5 – 1 mL / kg / h , stable vital signs and normalization of hematocrit . The smallest amount of fluid required to achieve this is recommended . 
 Invasive medical procedures such as nasogastric intubation , intramuscular injections and arterial punctures are avoided , in view of the bleeding risk . Paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) is used for fever and discomfort while NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and aspirin are avoided as they might aggravate the risk of bleeding . Blood transfusion is initiated early in people presenting with unstable vital signs in the face of a decreasing hematocrit , rather than waiting for the hemoglobin concentration to decrease to some predetermined " transfusion trigger " level . Packed red blood cells or whole blood are recommended , while platelets and fresh frozen plasma are usually not . There is not enough evidence to determine if corticosteroids have a positive or negative effect in dengue fever . 
 During the recovery phase intravenous fluids are discontinued to prevent a state of fluid overload . If fluid overload occurs and vital signs are stable , stopping further fluid may be all that is needed . If a person is outside of the critical phase , a loop diuretic such as furosemide may be used to eliminate excess fluid from the circulation . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Most people with dengue recover without any ongoing problems . The fatality rate is 1 – 5 % , and less than 1 % with adequate treatment ; however those who develop significantly low blood pressure may have a fatality rate of up to 26 % . Dengue is common in more than 110 countries . It infects 50 to 528 million people worldwide a year , leading to half a million hospitalizations , and approximately 20 @,@ 000 deaths . For the decade of the 2000s , 12 countries in Southeast Asia were estimated to have about 3 million infections and 6 @,@ 000 deaths annually . It is reported in at least 22 countries in Africa ; but is likely present in all of them with 20 % of the population at risk . This makes it one of the most common vector @-@ borne diseases worldwide . 
 Infections are most commonly acquired in the urban environment . In recent decades , the expansion of villages , towns and cities in the areas in which it is common , and the increased mobility of people has increased the number of epidemics and circulating viruses . Dengue fever , which was once confined to Southeast Asia , has now spread to Southern China , countries in the Pacific Ocean and America , and might pose a threat to Europe . 
 Rates of dengue increased 30 fold between 1960 and 2010 . This increase is believed to be due to a combination of urbanization , population growth , increased international travel , and global warming . The geographical distribution is around the equator . Of the 2 @.@ 5 billion people living in areas where it is common 70 % are from Asia and the Pacific . An infection with dengue is second only to malaria as a diagnosed cause of fever among travelers returning from the developing world . It is the most common viral disease transmitted by arthropods , and has a disease burden estimated at 1 @,@ 600 disability @-@ adjusted life years per million population . The World Health Organization counts dengue as one of seventeen neglected tropical diseases . 
 Like most arboviruses , dengue virus is maintained in nature in cycles that involve preferred blood @-@ sucking vectors and vertebrate hosts . The viruses are maintained in the forests of Southeast Asia and Africa by transmission from female Aedes mosquitoes — of species other than A. aegypti — to their offspring and to lower primates . In towns and cities , the virus is primarily transmitted by the highly domesticated A. aegypti . In rural settings the virus is transmitted to humans by A. aegypti and other species of Aedes such as A. <unk> . Both these species had expanding ranges in the second half of the 20th century . In all settings the infected lower primates or humans greatly increase the number of circulating dengue viruses , in a process called amplification . 
 = = History = = 
 The first record of a case of probable dengue fever is in a Chinese medical encyclopedia from the Jin Dynasty ( 265 – 420 AD ) which referred to a " water poison " associated with flying insects . The primary vector , A. aegypti , spread out of Africa in the 15th to 19th centuries due in part to increased globalization secondary to the slave trade . There have been descriptions of epidemics in the 17th century , but the most plausible early reports of dengue epidemics are from 1779 and 1780 , when an epidemic swept across Asia , Africa and North America . From that time until 1940 , epidemics were infrequent . 
 In 1906 , transmission by the Aedes mosquitoes was confirmed , and in 1907 dengue was the second disease ( after yellow fever ) that was shown to be caused by a virus . Further investigations by John Burton Cleland and Joseph Franklin Siler completed the basic understanding of dengue transmission . 
 The marked spread of dengue during and after the Second World War has been attributed to ecologic disruption . The same trends also led to the spread of different serotypes of the disease to new areas , and to the emergence of dengue hemorrhagic fever . This severe form of the disease was first reported in the Philippines in 1953 ; by the 1970s , it had become a major cause of child mortality and had emerged in the Pacific and the Americas . Dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome were first noted in Central and South America in 1981 , as DENV @-@ 2 was contracted by people who had previously been infected with DENV @-@ 1 several years earlier . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The origins of the Spanish word dengue are not certain , but it is possibly derived from <unk> in the Swahili phrase Ka @-@ <unk> pepo , which describes the disease as being caused by an evil spirit . Slaves in the West Indies having contracted dengue were said to have the posture and gait of a dandy , and the disease was known as " dandy fever " . 
 The term " break @-@ bone fever " was applied by physician and United States Founding Father Benjamin Rush , in a 1789 report of the 1780 epidemic in Philadelphia . In the report title he uses the more formal term " bilious remitting fever " . The term dengue fever came into general use only after 1828 . Other historical terms include " <unk> fever " and " la dengue " . Terms for severe disease include " infectious thrombocytopenic purpura " and " Philippine " , " Thai " , or " Singapore hemorrhagic fever " . 
 = = Research = = 
 Research efforts to prevent and treat dengue include various means of vector control , vaccine development , and antiviral drugs . 
 = = = Vector = = = 
 With regards to vector control , a number of novel methods have been used to reduce mosquito numbers with some success including the placement of the <unk> ( <unk> reticulata ) or copepods in standing water to eat the mosquito larvae . There are also trials with genetically modified male A. aegypti that after release into the wild mate with females , and render their offspring unable to fly . 
 = = = Wolbachia = = = 
 Attempts are ongoing to infect the mosquito population with bacteria of the Wolbachia genus , which makes the mosquitoes partially resistant to dengue virus . While artificially induced infections with Wolbachia is effective , it is unclear if naturally acquired infections are protective . Working is still ongoing as of 2015 to determine the best type of Wolbachia to use . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Apart from attempts to control the spread of the Aedes mosquito there are ongoing efforts to develop antiviral drugs that would be used to treat attacks of dengue fever and prevent severe complications . Discovery of the structure of the viral proteins may aid the development of effective drugs . There are several plausible targets . The first approach is inhibition of the viral RNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerase ( coded by <unk> ) , which copies the viral genetic material , with nucleoside analogs . Secondly , it may be possible to develop specific inhibitors of the viral protease ( coded by NS3 ) , which splices viral proteins . Finally , it may be possible to develop entry inhibitors , which stop the virus entering cells , or inhibitors of the 5 ′ capping process , which is required for viral replication . 
 = Izuna 2 : The Unemployed Ninja Returns = 
 Izuna 2 : The Unemployed Ninja Returns , released in Japan as <unk> <unk> Den Izuna Ni ( <unk> <unk> ) , is a dungeon crawler video game developed by Ninja Studio and published in Japan by Success and in North America by Atlus for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . It is the sequel to Izuna : Legend of the Unemployed Ninja and was released in Japan on November 29 , 2007 and in North America on July 22 , 2008 . 
 Like the first game , Izuna 2 focuses on the adventures of Izuna and her friends . Shino , Izuna 's friend , disappears in the midst of a wedding , so Izuna goes on a quest to find her . Izuna finds her , only to discover that Shino was looking for her sister , Shizune , so Izuna and her group decide to help search for Shizune . But by looking for Shizune , Izuna angers a group of foreign gods , who attempt to prevent her from reuniting with Shizune . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Izuna 2 , like the original Izuna game , is a dungeon crawler . The player controls Izuna or various other characters and explores randomly generated dungeons . Each dungeon has multiple floors that need to be cleared , and many of these dungeons have bosses that must be defeated . The player manages a health bar ; if the health bar is depleted , the player dies and is forced to return to town . Dying , a common occurrence in the game , will cause the player to lose all money and items being carried , though the player will not lose experience or levels . The health bar refills continuously every turn . To prevent players from remaining in place to restore health excessively , an " SP bar " was added . It constantly depletes per turn and a depleted SP bar decreases the player 's attack power . The game is turn @-@ based ; the player can perform an action , such as moving , using an item , or attacking , and every other enemy in the dungeon will perform an action as well . The game includes many role @-@ playing video game elements , such as equippable items , stats , and experience points to level up . 
 Equipment , items , and talismans can be found in dungeons . Their location and effects are randomly generated . Equipment comes in several classes : melee equipment such as swords , claws , arms , dolls , and boots , or ranged weapons such as boomerangs and bows . Items come in several types including pills , shuriken , kunai knives , bombs , caltrops , and restorative items that heal health or SP . Talismans can " stick , " or be attached , to equipment to add abilities or stats . A weapon can only have a limited number of talismans stuck to it . Talismans can also be used to cast magic , which uses SP . 
 Izuna 2 also includes a " tag " system not found in the previous game . The player enters dungeons with two characters , allowing the player to continue exploring the dungeon even after the first character has died . The player can switch characters in game during a fight through this system . Additionally , the player can use the secondary character in conjunction with the primary character to launch a powerful dual attack . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> , a <unk> from the previous game , has plans to get married . However , during the night before <unk> 's marriage , Shino , Izuna 's best friend , disappears . Izuna frantically tries to find her and quickly locates her . Shino reveals that she was searching for her sister , Shizune , so Izuna and her friends decide to help Shino find Shizune . 
 Izuna enlists the help of the gods of Katamari Village , whom she aided in the previous game . Lord <unk> , one of the gods , reveals that both Shizune and Izuna are " portable shrines " , or people who allow the gods to leave their home villages . Because the existence of two portable shrines in one area would cause conflict among gods , <unk> sent Shizune to another region as a child . The foreign gods and their creatures from that region , <unk> , followed Shizune into Izuna 's homeland . 
 After defeating several foreign gods , Izuna successfully reunites Shino and Shizune . However , by defeating the foreign gods , Izuna angers the Dark Prince , the leader of these gods . Izuna is forced to defeat the Dark Prince . After doing so , she convinces him to return to his homeland , allowing peace to return to the region . 
 = = Development = = 
 According to the developer blog , the localization process for Izuna 2 was " surprisingly uncomplicated " and the original run through took less than a month . Success , the Japanese developer , provided Atlus , the North American developers , with well @-@ organized files , which helped make the translation and editing quick and easy . However , the quality assurance and debugging process was a " nightmare " due to the nature of the game and the randomized spawning of creatures . Additionally , the team looked closely at the bugs found by Japanese players and attempted to replicate every reported bug . This effort was marred by the lack of a debug menu , though <unk> were able to use both a one @-@ hit kill option and a floor @-@ skipping option . Unfortunately , the one @-@ hit kill option did not apply to the bosses , so <unk> still had to grind to gain enough levels to defeat the bosses . In total , six official testers found 104 system @-@ type bugs and 259 text bugs . 
 = = Release = = 
 On the Japanese release date of Izuna 2 , Success organized a series of fashion events at various stores in Akihabara . <unk> could compete for prizes by dressing up as either Izuna or Shino . Additionally , actors and members of the design staff attended to field questions and sign autographs . The game was also made available at Comiket 73 between December 21 and December 23 , 2007 . 
 In North America , Atlus initially announced plans to release an English version on April 17 , 2008 . Atlus released a trailer of the game in April 2008 , and in May 2008 , Izuna 2 appeared at the 2008 Run to the Sun convention in California . A competition was also held in the U.S. to help promote the release . Fans were asked to add text to a series of images involving interactions between different characters and could win a free copy of Izuna 2 and all of the posters given away as promotional items with the game . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Izuna 2 was released in several different containers . Sofmap , a Japanese retailer , released a collector 's box depicting Izuna and Shino bathing in an onsen , mirroring the design of many eroge games . Each American release contained one of two pinup @-@ styled mini @-@ posters of Izuna . Copies of the game purchased through either GameStop or Amazon each included an additional , retailer @-@ exclusive mini @-@ poster . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Izuna 2 received " mixed or average reviews " according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Many critics pointed to the game 's " quintessential roguelike RPG " nature as a drawback because it required a great deal of grinding to progress in the game , though some critics enjoyed the difficulty of the game . 
 Reviewers were also split with their impressions of the " tag " system . GameShark found it to be a " nice twist " while RPGFan found it to be " irrelevant and not good . " Nintendo World Report called Izuna 2 " a respectable and fun dungeon @-@ crawler " marred mostly by its gameplay mechanics and disappointing graphics . They also pointed out that the game is targeted at " very specific gamer crowd " . Likewise , GamePro commented that the game " might prove too challenging to casual DS gamers who are just looking for a quick round of fun " and would most likely fit best for " DS owners looking for a hardcore dungeon crawling experience . " In spite of this , they found that the game had several notable positive aspects , including a " solid " control scheme and " well done " Japanese voice acting and English subtitling . X @-@ Play pointed to the game 's " original visual style and a quirky sense of humor " as characteristics that distinguished the game from roguelikes . They greatly enjoyed the dialogue and voice acting and felt that the game " shouldn 't get lost " among other dungeon crawlers released to the DS . However , 1UP.com found that the " amusingly slapstick storyline " was the only point that stood out against dungeon crawlers , though the game was " a considerable improvement " over the original . In general , 1UP.com thought the game was " a challenge meant for hardcore RPG fanatics but amusing enough that newcomers might find it worthwhile , too . " Likewise , IGN commented that the game would take " a very specific gamer to cuddle up to this cute , comedic experience " and pointed out that the game was " most unlikely of sequels . " In contrast to 1UP.com , IGN found the game to be " undoubtedly more of the same , " leading to the same benefits and drawbacks . 
 = New York State Route 220 = 
 New York State Route 220 ( NY 220 ) is a state highway located in Chenango County , New York , in the United States . It is signed as an east – west highway , but its actual routing wanders considerably from north to south as it proceeds across the county . The western terminus of NY 220 is at an intersection with NY 41 near the western county line in the town of Smithville . Its eastern terminus is in the town of Oxford , where it becomes County Route 32 ( CR 32 ) east of the village of Oxford . The stub of NY 220 east of Oxford serves as a signed connection between NY 12 and the New York State Veterans ' Home at Oxford located east of the village along the Chenango River . 
 In 1916 , the New York State Legislature created Route 8 @-@ a , an unsigned legislative route connecting legislative Route 8 in the center of Oxford to the Relief Corps Home by way of the east bank of the Chenango River . The Route 8 @-@ a designation was removed in 1921 as part of a partial renumbering of New York 's legislative routes . Its former routing became part of NY 220 , a new route extending from Smithville Flats to Oxford , in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 220 was rerouted near Oxford in 1982 to follow a new bridge over the Chenango River . The realignment created a short overlap with NY 12 on North Canal Street between the former routing of NY 220 on Main Street and the new river crossing to the north . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 220 begins at an intersection with NY 41 north of the hamlet of Smithville Flats in the Chenango County town of Smithville . It heads to the northeast , paralleling a small creek as it progresses through the rural town consisting mostly of cultivated fields . NY 220 passes into the town of McDonough and enters a hamlet bearing the same name , where it turns eastward . The route winds its way through the eastern , forested portion of the town to the small community of East McDonough , located near the McDonough – Preston town line . Here , NY 220 turns southeast and continues into Preston . 
 In Preston , the open fields return as NY 220 follows another waterbody , this time the slightly larger Mill Brook . The route crosses the stream just before entering the town of Oxford , where they split . While Mill Brook curves around the western extents of the village of Oxford , NY 220 serves the village directly , entering it on Butler Street . It veers eastward at a junction with State Street and follows it to Washington Avenue . Here , State Street splits into a one @-@ block long one @-@ way couplet . Eastbound NY 220 shifts south to follow LaFayette Park ; NY 220 westbound , meanwhile , is routed on State Street . At the end of the couplet , NY 220 intersects NY 12 ( North Canal Street ) on the western bank of the Chenango River . 
 NY 220 turns north onto NY 12 , overlapping the latter for just over 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to an intersection with North Washington Avenue north of the village . The routes split here , with NY 220 turning southeast to cross the Chenango River and the New York , Susquehanna and Western Railroad ( <unk> ) . Past the railroad , NY 220 heads through unimproved fields to a junction with East River Road . The route turns northeast here to follow East River Road . It heads through a small residential neighborhood to the New York State Veterans ' Home at Oxford , a large old soldiers ' home located adjacent to both the eastern bank of the Chenango River and the <unk> rail line . State maintenance of NY 220 ends just east of the driveway to the home , at which point the road continues onward toward Norwich as CR 32 . 
 = = History = = 
 The New York State Woman 's Relief Corps Home ( now the New York State Veterans ' Home at Oxford ) , an old soldiers ' home dedicated to the care of soldiers and their immediate families , nurses employed by the United States Army , and widows and mothers of soldiers , was constructed on a 165 @-@ acre ( 67 ha ) plot of land east of the village of Oxford and opened April 19 , 1897 . In 1916 , the New York State Legislature created Route 8 @-@ a , an unsigned legislative route connecting the home to Route 8 ( now NY 12 ) in Oxford by way of pre @-@ existing highways . That year , the state of New York began a project to improve the 1 @.@ 40 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 25 km ) long highway . In all , the improvements cost just over $ 26 @,@ 150 ( equivalent to $ 308 @,@ 891 in 2016 ) . The improved roadway was accepted into the state highway system on March 20 , 1919 . Route 8 @-@ a left Route 8 in the center of Oxford and crossed the Chenango River on Main Street . On the opposite side of the river , it followed Albany Street and East River Road to the home , where it ended . The Route 8 @-@ a designation was eliminated on March 1 , 1921 , as part of a partial renumbering of the legislative route system . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the portion of Route 8 in the vicinity of Oxford became part of NY 12 ; however , the former routing of Route 8 @-@ a was not given a designation at this time . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the former routing of Route 8 @-@ a became part of NY 220 , a new route extending from Smithville Flats to Oxford via McDonough . The entirety of NY 220 west of Oxford was closed to traffic in July 1935 as a result of damage caused by severe statewide flooding earlier in the month . The portion of the route from McDonough to Oxford took approximately three days to repair and was reopened by July 17 . The remaining section from Smithville Flats from McDonough was reopened by the following year . 
 By 1980 , plans to construct a new bridge for NY 220 over the Chenango River had been set in motion . As planned , a 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) stretch of NY 220 in Oxford would be rerouted to follow the new structure over the river and a Conrail ( now New York , Susquehanna and Western Railroad ) line that ran along the riverbank . The initial price tag for the bridge was set at $ 2 @.@ 262 million ( equivalent to $ 6 @.@ 5 million in 2016 ) . Construction of the bridge was completed in 1982 , at which time NY 220 was rerouted to overlap NY 12 north to the bridge , where it turned east to cross the river and rejoin its former alignment on the east bank . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Chenango County . 
 = Family in advertising = 
 Since the industrial revolution , the image of the family in advertising has become a prominent symbol in advertising and is utilized in marketing campaigns to increase profits . While some sociologists argue that these advertisements are ways in which behavior and attitudes towards society are influenced , others merely argue that the image of family in advertising mirrors reality and therefore holds only a representative or symbolic role . Regardless , different members of the family are portrayed in different ways within advertising and such portrayals often reflect the traditional roles of each member during the time in history in which the advertisement is presented . 
 = = History = = 
 The family symbol in advertising may be observable before the industrial revolution , but it was not until after the industrial revolution that advertising boomed and the use of family images in advertising became prevalent . The industrial revolution changed advertising from informative flyers marking the availability of goods in 17th and 18th century Europe , whose audience were those within physical <unk> , to multimillion @-@ dollar campaigns that attempted to instantly connect and persuade peoples from across the world . After the industrial revolution , large companies emerged as mass @-@ producers , products became branded , and customers began establishing brand loyalties . Thus , persuading customers to purchase one brand rather than another became vital to advertising . An advertisement was responsible for making products and services salient in order to earn consumer attention in competitive industrial markets . During this period , not only did the immensity of the advertising industry drastically change , but so did its marketing strategies as it began to incorporate images and specify an audience . This change from largely informative to largely persuasive strategies and from general to specific audiences explains the increase in presence and usage of symbols , representations , and stereotypes in advertising — including those of the family . 
 Different societies and cultures have used family symbols in advertising to varying extents of success . Because family life stresses in @-@ group benefits , preferences , and successes over those of the individual , collectivist societies tend to use more family symbols in advertising than individualist societies . For example , Korea , which is <unk> <unk> , has more success with family advertisements than the United States , which is <unk> individualistic . 
 The modern post @-@ industrial era in advertising was one of reaffirming widely held social values , such as heterosexuality and the middle @-@ class , while neglecting alternative values or lifestyles . The advertising industry was conservative and did not deviate from images that were socially acceptable . Some countries , such as Japan , continue to present the family stereotypically , especially in their television advertisements . In the past decade , however , many advertising agencies have begun to more accurately capture reality and the diversity of lifestyles and family types of consumers . 
 = = Function = = 
 <unk> ' is a popular symbol in commercial advertising that is commonly used to persuade audiences into consuming one 's business ' goods or services over a competitors . Consequently , the symbol of family as used in advertisements is functional – it both increases profit and builds a positive reputation among customers . 
 The family symbol functions on three levels of persuasion : social , psychological , and personal . 
 Social persuasion appeals to one ’ s role in a group and corresponding expectations ; it appeals to reference groups , social class , culture , and subculture . The family symbol is socially persuasive in that it appeals to one ’ s role within the family and their corresponding expectations . 
 One does not only feel a social or external pressure to fulfill roles and expectations of being a good parent , sibling , or child , however . There is a distinctly emotional and internal pressure to be ‘ good ’ due to psychological attachments in spousal , sibling and / or parent @-@ children relationships . Psychological persuasion in advertisements appeals to one 's motives , attitudes and personalities . The family symbol is psychologically persuasive in that it appeals to the emotional attachments between spouses , siblings , or parent @-@ child relationships . To continue the above example , the mother not only wants to purchase a product that purportedly limits irritation or harm for her child due to her social role and expectations , but also because she feels an emotional attachment to her child . The attempt to activate the emotions of audiences and to psychologically persuade is popular among advertisements . Family affects us significantly on this psychological level – the level at which advertisements are most effective . 
 Personal persuasion appeals to one ’ s demographic identity or consumer behaviors . The family symbol is personally persuasive because families make buying decisions together as a unit . Furthermore , one person in a family may make the majority of the buying decisions . To target that person in advertising , referencing their location within the family and their responsibility to make purchasing decisions for the family , will be more profitable than targeting others . For an example of personal persuasion , the McDonald 's corporation in India has had great marketing success in designating themselves as the " McDonalds Family Restaurant " . 
 = = = Sociological interpretations = = = 
 Advertisements are used to attract customers to a business ’ products or services . In doing so , they are also making statements regarding race , social class , gender , values , and family . They not only describe these social categories , they prescribe behaviors or show one how it is that they should act in accordance with social ideals or norms . According to Belk and <unk> , “ not only do [ advertisements ] show us the ideal life , they instruct us [ on ] how to live . ” Through targeting specific groups of people for products and services , advertisements both reflect changes of social norms and are changers of social norms regarding acceptable behavior . Some argue that the image of family only plays a symbolic role by reflecting the current cultural values . Advertisements may not only reflect changes in social norms , but also be asserting that such behavior is acceptable . As a result , sociologists have challenged the public to study ads containing images of the family not just as marketing messages but also as vehicles for behavior and attitudes towards society . 
 Advertisements , specifically ones that show the family , commentate on the transition from modernity to postmodernity . This transition is the transition of middle class nuclear families where heterosexuality is the norm to the recognition and acceptance of a variety of different family types , an embracing of societal <unk> and plurality ; it is furthermore the transition from mass culture to the prevalence of sub @-@ cultures and multiculturalism . Literary critic Fredric Jameson says that " our advertising ... is fed by postmodernism in all the arts , and is inconceivable without it . " 
 = = Family members in advertising = = 
 = = = Wives = = = 
 In general , advertisements tend to reflect the popular attitudes surrounding the appropriate gender roles of the time . For example , in the 1920s , when such a tiny proportion of wives were working for economic gain outside of their homes , it was rare to see wives portrayed within advertising in a role in which they were working for monetary gain . Instead , women were primarily portrayed doing household tasks . The exceptions to this rule came about in times of economic hardship when wives were thrown into the labor force to ensure a families ’ economic survival . One of these times was the Great Depression during the 1930s . Since then , as housekeeping becomes less and less important of a family role , the amount of advertisements portraying women solely as performing household tasks have been on the decline . 
 = = = Husbands = = = 
 Just as the image of the wife in advertising has reflected the general views of the appropriate roles of a wife , images of the husband also reflect the cultural values surrounding what role was believed a husband should be engaged in . For example , over time , it is common find images of the husband as performing work outside of the home and taking care of the family finances . It has been noted that this role has been especially prevalent during 1920 , 1936 , and 1970 . On the other hand , one is not likely to find an advertisement depicting husbands engaged in household chores , except when they are depicted as particularly bad at performing the housework . In addition , it has been noted that over time , the portrayal of husbands and wives in an intimate , romantic relationship has been on the rise . 
 = = = Mothers and fathers = = = 
 Throughout history , mothers have been portrayed as the primary physical caregivers of children . Physical caregiving includes tasks such as breast @-@ feeding and changing diapers . Some theorize that this has to do with the idea of women as having a natural instinct towards motherhood . Fathers , on the other hand , have been more likely to be portrayed in play activities with their children and are often more likely to be shown interacting with sons than daughters . 
 Similar to the decline over time in wives as being portrayed solely as housekeepers , the portrayal of mothers as the primary physical care takers of children has been on the decline . Instead , there has been an increase in the portrayal of mothers as facilitating recreational activities with their offspring . 
 = = = Other family members = = = 
 Much like fathers are depicted primarily in recreational activities with their children , other male members of the family , including sons and male grandchildren , are portrayed in play activities the majority of the time . Interestingly , young female members of the family are depicted similarly in play activities , but nevertheless tend to be more likely shown in activities related to chores and child @-@ care . In addition , the image of the grandparent has been largely nonexistent in advertising . 
 It is important to also note that images of the family depend upon the specific source in which the image is found and the type of audience that the source aims to reach . For example , in a women ’ s magazine such as Good Housekeeping , one can expect to find women in the family portrayed solely as domestic housewives . 
 = The Real Housewives of Atlanta = 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta ( abbreviated <unk> ) is an American reality television series that premiered on October 7 , 2008 , on Bravo . Developed as the third installment of The Real Housewives franchise , following The Real Housewives of Orange County and New York City , it has aired eight seasons and focuses on the personal and professional lives of several women residing in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 The series originally focused on Lisa Wu @-@ Hartwell , DeShawn Snow , NeNe Leakes , Kim Zolciak , and Shereé Whitfield ; the eighth season lineup consists of Kandi Burruss , Cynthia Bailey , Phaedra Parks , Kenya Moore , Porsha Williams , and Kim Fields . Of the original housewives , Snow , Wu @-@ Hartwell , and Whitfield respectively left after the first , second , and fourth seasons ; Zolciak stopped filming during production of the fifth season ; and Leakes left after the seventh . The remaining housewives joined in later seasons ; Burruss in the second , Bailey and Parks in the third , Moore and Williams in the fifth ( the latter of whom was a friend of the housewives in the seventh ) , and Fields in the eight . Past housewives include Claudia Jordan ( season 7 ) . 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta has received moderately favorable reviews from critics and has been recognized as a " guilty pleasure " by several media outlets . However , the series has been criticized for appearing to fabricate portions of its storyline . As of February 2014 , it was the highest @-@ rated installment of The Real Housewives franchise and the most @-@ watched series airing on Bravo . Its success has resulted in the conceptions of the spin @-@ offs The Kandi Factory ( featuring Burruss ) , Don 't Be Tardy ( featuring Zolciak ) , I Dream of NeNe : The Wedding ( featuring Leakes ) , Kandi 's Wedding and Kandi 's Ski Trip ( again , featuring Burruss ) . 
 = = Overview and casting = = 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta was announced as the third installment in The Real Housewives franchise , intending to capitalize on the successes of its predecessors The Real Housewives of Orange County and New York City . Its television network Bravo stated that the series ' planned storyline focused on " [ balancing ] motherhood , demanding careers and a fast @-@ paced social calendar " . 
 Throughout its run , The Real Housewives of Atlanta has been led by five ( seasons 1 – 2 ) , six ( seasons 3 – 8 with the exception of some of season 5 ) , and seven ( some of season 5 ) housewives , who are credited by their first names , and is distinguished within The Real Housewives franchise in that it was , until the introduction of The Real Housewives of Potomac in 2016 , the only installment with a predominantly black cast . Its original main housewives were Lisa Wu @-@ Hartwell , DeShawn Snow , NeNe Leakes , Kim Zolciak , and Shereé Whitfield . Snow departed from the program after the first season , and alleged that producers considered her to be " too human for a circus show " and was replaced by Kandi Burruss in the second season . 
 The third season saw the departure of Hartwell and the addition of Cynthia Bailey and Phaedra Parks . The main lineup remained unchanged during the fourth season , although Marlo Hampton joined as a friend of the housewives . Whitfield exited the series upon the conclusion of the fourth season , and was replaced by Porsha Williams and Kenya Moore in the fifth season . Zolciak departed from the program in the middle of the fifth season , and was not replaced in the sixth season . The departure of Zolciak made Leakes the only remaining original cast member as of season six ; however , Zolciak commented that she might be interested in returning to the series . In the seventh season , Williams became a friend of the housewives , alongside new cast member <unk> McKinney , while Claudia Jordan was introduced as a main housewife . 
 In June 2015 , the network announced that The Real Housewives of Atlanta had been renewed for an eight season , with both NeNe Leakes and Claudia Jordan departing from the show . After Leakes ' departure , the series became the first Real Housewives franchise to not retain any original cast members as full @-@ time participants . In September 2015 , Bravo announced that Porsha Williams had assigned to be a full @-@ time housewife once again , along with newcomer actress Kim Fields . The network also announced that former housewife Shereé Whitfield , together with new cast member <unk> Morton , would join the series in a supporting capacity , with former cast members , Leakes , Hampton , Jordan and McKinney making guest appearances . 
 In April 2016 , Bravo announced that the series is renewed for a ninth season . Leakes revealed she would be returning to season 9 in some capacity . 
 = = = Timeline of housewives = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Storylines = = 
 In its series premiere , The Real Housewives of Atlanta introduced Wu @-@ Hartwell , Snow , Leakes , Zolciak , and Whitfield . Leakes and Whitfield were in the midst of a personal conflict , which was escalated after Leakes was excluded from Whitfield 's divorce party . Meanwhile , Zolciak was revealed to be dating a publicly unknown boyfriend nicknamed " Big Papa " , and later decided to pursue her aspirations of becoming a country music singer . Her friendship with Leakes deteriorated after she established a companionship with Whitfield , and was ended after Leakes made sarcastic remarks about Zolciak 's music career . Snow and Wu @-@ Hartwell additionally looked to establish prominence as a socialite and a jewelry designer , respectively . Whitfield attempted to launch her own fashion line and organize a lunch for the women to reconcile , although both ventures proved unsuccessful in the finale of the first season . 
 The second season saw the introduction of Burruss , who had recently become engaged to her boyfriend A.J. and expressed interest in reviving her music career . An attempted reconciliation between Leakes , Whitfield , and Zolciak failed to come to fruition , while a feud developed between Leakes and Burruss after the latter became friends with Zolciak and helped her record her single " Tardy for the Party " . Meanwhile , Zolciak attempted to launch her own wig line and became engaged to Big Papa , while Wu @-@ Hartwell and Whitfield launched their own clothing collections . 
 The third season saw the introduction of Bailey and Parks , while Leakes and Zolciak reconciled as the former contemplated divorcing her husband Gregg and the latter began a lesbian relationship . Parks , who was in the middle of her pregnancy , clashed with her husband Apollo Nida over their differing opinions on parenting ; she gave birth later in the season . Meanwhile , Zolciak and Burruss continued recording music together , although they clashed over their creative differences . Bailey later became engaged to her boyfriend Peter Thomas , while Zolciak set her affections on football player Kroy Biermann ; a conflict between Burruss , Leakes , and Zolciak later ensued while the latter two women embark on a promotional concert tour . Against the advice of her mother and sister , Bailey married Thomas in the third season finale . 
 The fourth season began as Zolciak was in the middle of her first pregnancy by her boyfriend Biermann ; she later gave birth to their son . Leakes continued divorce proceedings with Gregg , while Whitfield found herself in financial difficulties after her ex @-@ husband failed to pay child support . Meanwhile , Bailey opened her own modeling agency , while Parks looked to launch a family @-@ operated funeral home . Leakes 's new friendship with Hampton caused tension between all of the women , which escalated during a group vacation in South Africa ; while Zolciak , who had remained home with her children , became upset by negative comments Bailey ( not Burruss ) made about her during the group vacation . As the season closed , Leakes began to reconsider her divorce from Gregg . 
 As the fifth season introduced former Miss USA Moore and football player Kordell Stewart 's wife Williams , Leakes reconciled with Gregg and pondered the possibility of remarrying him . Zolciak was forced to move out of her mansion , which she and Biermann had attempted to purchase less than a year earlier , Leakes began to question Moore 's seemingly unfaithful behavior towards her boyfriend Walter during a group trip to Anguilla , which began a feud between Leakes and Williams against Moore . Moore wished to marry Walter although their relationship had begun to deteriorate , while Parks and Moore created competing workout DVDs after plans to make the project a joint venture proved unsuccessful . Toward the end of the season , Williams attempted to revive her failing marriage to Stewart with therapist sessions . 
 Williams came to the realization that her marriage was not salvageable as the sixth season commenced , while Leakes became upset with Moore after the later went against " girl code " by inappropriately communicating with Nida . Moore moved out of her rental property after being evicted , while Leakes returned to Atlanta full @-@ time after her television series The New Normal was canceled . Burruss struggled to manage the conflict between her estranged mother Joyce and her longtime boyfriend Todd Tucker , although they attempted to reconcile as the couple became engaged and began planning their nuptials . In a later attempt to salvage the relationships between the women , Leakes hosted a couples pajama party for their group , although the women continued to clash with one another ; a later spa gathering failed to resolve residual tension between Leakes and Moore . Meanwhile , Williams attempted to launch her career as an actress after being cast in Burruss 's musical . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta has been moderately well received by critics . Writing for Common Sense Media , Melissa Camacho spoke favorably of the series ' emphasis on " a successful and powerful segment of the African @-@ American community " that appears to be frequently neglected by the popular television . Tim Hall from the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer commented of his general distaste for reality television , particularly describing The Real Housewives of Orange County as " utterly ridiculous " . However , he admitted that the dynamic and conflict between the women , in addition to the wealthy lifestyles they led , to be " somewhat entertaining " . In a more mixed review , Alessandra Stanley from The New York Times joked that its portrayal of wealth served as " the best choice for a time capsule of the Bling Decade " when noting the economic downturn the United States experienced around the time that the series premiered , although more seriously stated that the housewives ' luxuries " was never all that enviable , and now it looks as if it might not be viable . " Hanh Nguyen from Zap2It shared a similar sentiment , criticizing that the " showy elite and rampant consumerism " that the women regularly display " seems rather out of touch " given the United States ' economic hardship , although she elaborated that the program " [ is ] not by any means boring , but you do have to be in the mood to watch . " 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta has been recognized as a " guilty pleasure " by several media outlets . Writing for About.com , Latoya West commented that the " self @-@ absorbed " nature of the housewives may become irritating to viewers , but noted that the series ' " <unk> drama might be addictive . " The staff from Entertainment Weekly joked that they " are never tardy for this party " ; they felt that " [ Leakes ] alone could keep [ The Real Housewives of Atlanta ] on the map " , and additionally credited Zolciak 's " slow train to <unk> , making all local stops " for helping to establish " the franchise for the ages . " In 2009 , a writer from Essence mentioned that they " couldn 't get enough of the ladies " from the program , and recognized it as the best reality show of the year . Writing for Today , Leslie Bruce commented that The Real Housewives franchise in general rose to prominence for its depiction of " foul @-@ mouthed , often <unk> and always self @-@ promoting " women , and stated that they " dominate water @-@ cooler discussions [ ... ] by showcasing at times the worst of female behavior . " 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta has been criticized for appearing to fabricate portions of its storyline . One source of speculation arose during the fifth season , when Kenya Moore allegedly requested that Walter Jackson pretend to be her boyfriend ; series producers were reportedly unaware of said arrangement . Moore commented that such claims were " completely false " , and further " [ urged ] viewers to stay tuned because the truth will come to light . " Moore was also criticized for alleging that she was financially stable , although she reportedly joined the series as a source of income to offset the difficulties with her lawsuits from several creditors . In May 2013 , Porsha Williams allegedly staged her divorce from Kordell Stewart to secure her position on the series , which she reportedly feared was in jeopardy . In December 2013 , Williams received additional criticism for comments made in an episode aired during the sixth season , where she indicated that she believed the Underground Railroad was an actual railroad line . 
 = = U.S. television ratings = = 
 The first season of The Real Housewives of Atlanta maintained an average of 1 @.@ 495 million weekly viewers ; Bravo announced that the series had become the first program from the network to " crack the two million viewer mark among adults 18 – 49 . " The premiere episode of the second season was watched by 2 @.@ 66 million people , setting the record for the highest @-@ rated The Real Housewives premiere episode in the franchise 's history at the time . The third season averaged a weekly viewership of 3 @.@ 6 million people , while the fourth and fifth seasons premiered with 2 @.@ 8 million and 3 @.@ 2 million viewers , respectively . The sixth season premiere was watched by 3 @.@ 1 million people ; with 1 @.@ 9 million viewers being classified in the adults 25 – 54 demographic , it became the highest @-@ rated episode in this target demographic . As of February 2014 , The Real Housewives of Atlanta is the highest @-@ rated installment of The Real Housewives franchise , and is additionally the most @-@ watched series airing on Bravo . The premiere episode of the seventh season attracted over 3 @.@ 8 million viewers during its initial broadcast on November 9 , 2014 , including 2 @.@ 2 million viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic via Nielsen ratings . It marked as the most watched season premiere ever to air on Bravo . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta airs regularly on Bravo in the United States ; most episodes are approximately one hour in length , and are broadcast in standard definition and high definition . Since its premiere , the series has alternated airing on Monday , Tuesday , Thursday , and Sunday evenings and has been frequently shifted between the 8 : 00 , 9 : 00 , and 10 : 00 PM timeslots . The first season of The Real Housewives of Atlanta included seven episodes and one reunion special , and aired from October 7 , 2008 , until November 25 , 2008 . The second season consisted of fourteen episodes , a two @-@ part reunion special , and a deleted scenes special ; it premiered on July 30 , 2009 , and concluded on November 5 , 2009 . The third season commenced airing on October 4 , 2010 , after airing sixteen episodes and a two @-@ part reunion special , it ended on January 30 , 2011 . The fourth season aired from November 6 , 2011 until April 22 , 2012 ; it included twenty episodes and a three @-@ part reunion special . The fifth season premiered on November 4 , 2012 , and concluded on April 21 , 2013 after broadcasting twenty episodes and a three @-@ part reunion special . The sixth season commenced airing on November 3 , 2013 , and ended on May 18 , 2014 . It included a three @-@ part reunion special , a secrets revealed special , and ( for the first time in Real Housewives history ) , a husbands revealed special . 
 The Real Housewives of Atlanta was renewed for a seventh season in April 2014 . The season premiered on November 9 , 2014 , and concluded with a three @-@ part reunion . The eighth season premiered on November 8 , 2015 . 
 = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = 
 Zolciak received the first spin @-@ off from The Real Housewives of Atlanta , titled Don 't Be Tardy for the Wedding , which documented the preparations for her nuptials to Kroy Biermann . It premiered on April 9 , 2012 and was renewed for a second season on April 16 , 2013 , at which time its title was shortened to Don 't Be Tardy . The show returned for a third season on July 17 , 2014 . Subsequent seasons follow the daily lives of Kim and her now @-@ husband Kroy as he tries to juggle between his professional career and personal life while Kim deals with her growing family . Originally planned as a one @-@ time television special , The Kandi Factory was launched as the second spin @-@ off from The Real Housewives of Atlanta in 2012 . It followed Burruss and her record producers as they attempted to launch the music careers of undiscovered artists , although it was confirmed in 2013 that the series was canceled after airing one season . After reconciling with her ex @-@ husband Gregg , Leakes received her own spin @-@ off series I Dream of NeNe : The Wedding , which documented the preparations for their second wedding ; it premiered on September 17 , 2013 . Bravo announced Burruss and Tucker 's wedding spin @-@ off , Kandi 's Wedding , on April 8 , 2014 . The series premiered on June 1 , 2014 , and concluded on July 6 , 2014 . Kandi 's Wedding brought in very high ratings for Bravo , and topped NeNe Leakes and Kim Zolciak 's previous spin @-@ offs . In March 2015 , Bravo renewed Don 't Be Tardy ... for a fourth season as well as announced another spin @-@ off show , NeNe and Kim : The Road to Riches , starring both Leakes and Zolciak . However , the network later decided not to move forward with the show . The network later announced another series titled Kandi 's Ski Trip , the third offshoot starring Burruss . The three @-@ part special premiered after the conclusion of the seventh season of The Real Housewives of Atlanta . 
 = Zach Hyman = 
 Zachary Martin " Zach " Hyman ( born June 9 , 1992 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player with the Toronto Maple Leafs of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He is currently on loan to the Toronto Marlies of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . Hyman is also a published author of children 's literature under contract with Penguin Random House . 
 Following an outstanding 2010 – 11 season , Hockey Canada named him the 2011 CJHL Player of the Year . During the 2014 – 15 season , Hyman won a plethora of awards , including being named the University of Michigan 's Athlete of the Year , a First Team All @-@ American and one of the finalists for the Hobey Baker Award . 
 Hyman was selected by the Florida Panthers in the 5th round of the 2010 NHL Entry Draft , however , the two parties were unable to agree on a contract , and Hyman 's rights were traded to the Maple Leafs on June 19 , 2015 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Hyman played for the Hamilton Red Wings from 2008 to 2011 . During his rookie season , Hyman recorded 13 goals and 24 assists in 49 regular season games , and two goals in five playoff games . He was named the Red Wings ' Rookie of the Year . During his sophomore season , Hyman was voted team captain . He recorded 35 goals and 40 assists in 49 regular season games , and seven goals and nine assists in 11 playoff games . 
 During his final season of Junior A hockey , Hyman was the leading scorer for the Red Wings , recording 42 goals and 60 assists in 43 regular season games , and three goals and five assists in seven playoff games . Hyman ranked second in the Canadian Junior Hockey League in scoring , recording 102 points in 43 games , and led all players with 2 @.@ 37 points per game . 
 Following an outstanding season with the Red Wings , Hyman was named to the OJHL 's North @-@ West Conference First All @-@ Star Team , and Hockey Canada awarded him the CJHL Player of the Year Award . He became just the second player from the OJHL to win the award , following Trent Walford in 1995 – 96 . In 2010 , Hyman was chosen as the OJHL 's Most <unk> Player . A two @-@ time Red Wings ' MVP , the OHA also selected him as the BJ Monroe Trophy recipient . The award recognized Zach Hyman as the Association 's Top Pro Prospect . At the conclusion of the 2010 – 11 season , Hyman 's jersey was displayed in the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Hyman was originally committed to play for Princeton during the 2010 – 11 season . However , he decommitted after Princeton head coach Guy <unk> left the school to start the Division I hockey program at Penn State . Following <unk> to Penn State was not an option , as the program did not have a varsity team at the time . In May 2011 , Hyman was offered a full Athletic Scholarship and committed to play for the University of Michigan for the 2011 – 12 season . 
 During his freshman season at Michigan , Hyman recorded two goals and seven assists in 41 games . He scored his first career goal on October 21 , 2011 , in a game against Northern Michigan . During his sophomore season , he recorded four goals and five assists in 38 games . During his junior season , he recorded seven goals and ten assists in 35 games . Zach Hyman was selected as the 2014 Bates / <unk> Award Winner , which is a prestigious honour bestowed upon the University of Michigan 's Top Junior Student Athlete . 
 During his senior season , Hyman was named alternate captain . He was Michigan 's leading scorer , and the Big Ten Scoring Champion setting a new record with 54 points , scoring 22 goals , and 32 assists in only 37 games . Hyman became the first Michigan player to record 20 goals in a season since Louie Caporusso , and the first player to record 50 points or more since Carl Hagelin during the 2009 – 10 season . Hyman led the team with 17 multiple @-@ point games , including six games with three or more points . On October 24 , 2014 , Hyman recorded a career @-@ high five points , and his first career hat @-@ trick against UMass Lowell . 
 In December 2014 , Hyman was named to the 50th Great Lakes Invitational Tournament team , where he scored both game @-@ winning goals against Michigan Tech and Michigan State , to help lead Michigan to its 16th Tournament Title . 
 Following an outstanding senior season with the Wolverines , Hyman was named to the 2014 – 15 All @-@ Big Ten First Team , and named an AHCA First Team All @-@ American . Hyman was also named a top @-@ ten finalist for the Hobey Baker Award . He was also selected as the SB Nation College Hockey Big Ten Media Most Valuable Player . 
 On March 27 , 2015 , Hyman received the 2015 All @-@ American Athlete Award by The National Strength and Conditioning Association ( <unk> ) and EAS Sports Nutrition . The award recognized Hyman 's athletic accomplishments and his dedication to strength and conditioning . 
 In a National awards ceremony at the Atlanta History Center on April 27 , 2015 , Hyman was honoured as one of five finalists for the 11th Annual Coach Wooden Citizenship Cup Award and was recognized as one of the most outstanding role models amongst athletes . 
 Hyman graduated from Michigan with a history major in the College of Literature , Science and the Arts . He was a three @-@ time Big Ten All @-@ Academic selection and a two @-@ time recipient of the Big Ten Distinguished Scholar Award having earned a minimum grade @-@ point average ( GPA ) of 3 @.@ 7 or higher for the previous academic year . 
 On May 4 , 2015 , Hyman was selected as a Senior Athlete of The Year Award winner for the 2014 – 2015 season at Michigan 's Bob Ufer Quarterback Club 's Annual Banquet , an award previously won by former standout Michigan quarterbacks Jim Harbaugh in 1987 and Tom Brady in 2000 . Past recipients include Heisman Winner Desmond Howard in 1992 , Brian Wiseman in 1994 , Marty Turco in 1998 , TJ <unk> in 2007 , Kevin Porter in 2008 , and Carl Hagelin in 2011 . 
 On May 14 , 2015 , Hyman was part of a quartet of University of Michigan student @-@ athletes that were named Capital One First Team Academic All @-@ District selections , the announcement coming from the College Sports Information Directors of America ( CoSIDA ) , and his name was put forward for Academic All @-@ American consideration . On June 11 , 2015 , Hyman was named to the 2015 Capital One Academic All @-@ America Division I Men 's At @-@ Large team , as selected by CoSIDA . Hyman is the second ice hockey player at Michigan to be named an Academic All @-@ America honoree , following Jeff <unk> in 2001 , and the first to be named First Team Academic All American . 
 On June 22 , 2015 , the University of Michigan Athletic Department named Hyman the 2014 – 15 Michigan Athlete of the Year . Hyman is the third ice hockey player to receive this honour , following Brendan Morrison in 1997 and Kevin Porter in 2008 . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Hyman was drafted 123rd overall by the Florida Panthers in the 2010 NHL Entry Draft . At the conclusion of his college career , the Panthers offered Hyman an NHL contract , but Hyman announced his intent not to sign with the Panthers , and opted for free agency . 
 On June 19 , 2015 , Hyman 's rights were acquired by the Toronto Maple Leafs from the Florida Panthers in exchange for centre Greg <unk> . On June 23 , Hyman signed a two @-@ year entry @-@ level contract with the Maple Leafs . 
 Hyman made his professional debut for the Toronto Marlies on October 9 , 2015 , where he recorded his first professional point , an assist on Byron Froese 's goal in the second period . On November 7 , Hyman recorded his first professional goal , a short @-@ handed goal against Matt O 'Connor of the Binghamton Senators . 
 On February 29 , 2016 , Hyman was recalled by the Toronto Maple Leafs . Prior to being recalled , he recorded 13 goals and 20 assists in 54 games for the Marlies this season . He made his NHL debut in a game against the Tampa Bay Lightning later that night , recording 15 : 58 of ice time , 22 shifts , two shots , and one hit . He subsequently scored his first career NHL goal one week later on March 7 against Chad Johnson of the Buffalo Sabres . 
 On March 31 , 2016 , Hyman was loaned to the Marlies in preparation for the AHL Calder Cup playoffs . 
 = = International play = = 
 In 2010 , as a 17 @-@ year @-@ old underage player , Hyman served as Assistant Captain and represented Canada in the U20 Three Nations tournament in <unk> , Sweden . He was named game MVP vs. Finland , after scoring two goals in the game . He finished the tournament with three goals and one assist in four games . 
 Hyman represented Canada East at the 2010 World Junior A Challenge . He was named MVP of the game vs. Russia . He was one of the tournament 's leading scorers recording two goals and three assists in five games , and won a silver medal . 
 In July 2013 , Hyman served as an Assistant Captain representing Canada at the 2013 <unk> Games held in Israel , where he recorded three goals and three assists in two games and won a gold medal . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 = = Writing career = = 
 Hyman is also a published author under contract with Random House . 
 His award winning children 's book The Bambino and Me conjures 1920s New York and tells the story of a young Yankees fan named George , who especially admires Babe Ruth and carries his baseball card everywhere . His other book , Hockey Hero was released in October 2015 and is about a shy hockey player who overcomes playing in his brother 's shadow and eventually makes his dream come true . 
 Hyman has signed another two book deal with Penguin Random House , with books to be published in 2016 and 2017 . 
 = Thomas Lee ( Virginia colonist ) = 
 Thomas Lee ( c . 1690 – November 14 , 1750 ) was a leading political figure of colonial Virginia . He was a member of the Lee family , a political dynasty which included many figures from the pre @-@ American Revolutionary War era until the late 20th century . Lee became involved in politics in 1710 and he became the resident manager of the Northern Neck Proprietary for Lady Catherine Fairfax . After his father died , he inherited land in Northumberland and Charles County . Lee later acquired vast holdings in what are now Arlington , Fairfax , Fauquier , Prince William , and Loudoun Counties . These properties were developed as tobacco plantations . 
 When Lee married Hannah Harrison Ludwell in 1722 , he benefited by the connections of the already established Harrison family . A year later he would become a member of the House of Burgesses . After Lee 's home was burnt down by criminals , he lost almost all of his possessions and a fair sum of money . With donations received from Caroline of Ansbach and English Commissioners , he built his new home on the Potomac River , naming it Stratford Hall . Four years later in 1733 , he was appointed to the Governor 's Council , upper house of the General Assembly . In 1747 , he founded the Ohio Company of Virginia with fellow Virginian colonists who wished to expand Virginia 's territory into the Ohio River Valley . For a period of less than a year , in 1749 , he became the de facto Governor of Virginia in place of the absent William Gooch . Lee was favored for an appointment as governor by George II but the colonist died in 1750 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Thomas Lee was born around 1690 at Mount Pleasant , on the Machodoc River in Westmoreland County , Virginia . His parents were Richard Lee II , " the scholar " , and Laetitia Corbin . His ancestors had immigrated from Coton , Shropshire , England to Virginia in 1642 . As the fourth son of the couple , Lee would not receive as large an inheritance as his older brothers . This did not prevent him from becoming successful in politics . 
 Lee attended college at The College of William and Mary around 1700 . Lee 's education was referred to as a " common Virginia education " . He soon became interested in the working of the tobacco industry . He left home to work with his uncle Thomas Corbin in the tobacco business . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Lee 's political career began in 1710 when he was appointed as Naval Officer of the Potomac River . The position was previously held by his father and upon his resignation , Lee was appointed as the new Naval Officer . In 1711 , Lee 's uncle Thomas Corbin helped him gain the position of Virginia agent for the Northern Neck Proprietary . As a result , he was appointed by Catherine ( Culpeper ) Fairfax , Lady Fairfax who was living in England , as her agent and resident manager for the Northern Neck Proprietary , which she had inherited from her father , Governor Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper . Catherine was the wife of Thomas Fairfax , 5th Baron Fairfax . This property , which consisted of approximately six million acres ( 24 @,@ 000 km ² ) , included all the land between the Potomac and <unk> rivers . 
 At one time Edmund <unk> , another Lee uncle , headed this Proprietary . While <unk> was in England , the offices of the agency were located at the plantation at Machodoc and under Lee 's supervision . Due to <unk> 's poor management , the agency was given to Governor Robert " King " Carter in 1720 . This event led to animosity between the competitive Lee and Carter families . The members of the families refused to marry each other until Henry " Light Horse Harry " Lee married Anne Hill Carter . Their most notable child was Robert E. Lee . 
 Thomas held this position until 1722 . In 1713 , Thomas succeeded his father as Naval Officer in charge of collecting customs for the south side of the Potomac . 
 In 1714 , upon his father 's death , Lee inherited lands in Northumberland County near Dividing Creek , as well as land in Maryland adjoining his brother Philip Lee , Sr. of “ Blenheim " . Thomas leased the estate “ Machodoc " from his brother Richard Lee III who was in London . That same year Thomas visited England , remaining for about a year . 
 Lee thought that marriage was not only important between two individuals but for their families . A nephew of his later said , " Our Late Hon [ ora ] ble & worthy Unkle <unk> [ ent ] Lee said that the first fall & ruin of families and estates was mostly Occasioned by <unk> Matches to <unk> families and estates & to beget a race of beggars . " He was engaged to Jenny Wilson in 1716 . That year he returned to England to formalize the lease to the plantation before he married . Before his return , Jenny Wilson had found another husband , James Roscoe . Lee learned this from William Byrd . 
 Lee and his brother Henry negotiated a lease for 99 years on the plantation . During his stay in England , Lee had decided to buy some property on the Potomac River called the " Clifts Plantation " in Westmoreland County . At the time , the property was owned by Nathaniel Pope , Jr . , a mariner , of London . Lee believed that when Virginia gained its independence , the capital would be located on the Potomac River . He later renamed it as Stratford . Thomas purchased his father 's old estate " Machodoc " , from his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Martha Silk , the former wife of his older brother , Richard Lee III . " Machodoc " was later known as " Mount Pleasant " . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In May 1722 , Thomas Lee married Hannah Harrison Ludwell ( December 5 , 1701 – January 25 , 1750 ) , a member of the prominent Harrison family , at " Greenspring " , James City County , Virginia . The marriage lasted his life and brought him increased wealth and status . Hannah was the daughter of Philip Ludwell II of " Greenspring " , and Hannah Harrison . The couple had eleven children ; eight survived to adulthood : 
 Richard Lee ( b . 1723 ) 
 Philip Ludwell Lee ( February 24 , 1726 – February 21 , 1775 ) 
 John Lee ( b. and d . January 1728 ) 
 Hannah Ludwell Lee ( February 1729 – 1782 ) 
 Thomas Ludwell Lee ( December 13 , 1730 – April 13 , 1778 ) ; a member of the Virginia Delegates and editor of the Virginia Declaration of Rights . 
 Richard Henry Lee ( January 20 , 1732 – January 19 , 1794 ) ; signer of the United States Declaration of Independence 
 Francis Lightfoot Lee ( October 14 , 1734 – January 11 , 1797 ) ; signer of the United States Declaration of Independence 
 Alice Lee ( June 4 , 1736 – March 25 , 1817 ) 
 William Lee ( August 31 , 1737 – June 27 , 1795 ) 
 James Lee ( b. and d . 1739 ) 
 Arthur Lee ( December 21 , 1740 – December 12 , 1792 ) 
 1728 was a tragic year for Lee and his family . On January 29 , thieves broke into the house stealing the Lee family plate , jewelry , and other articles of value , and upon leaving , set fire to the plantation house at Machodoc . The fire destroyed the entire plantation , including Thomas ' office , the barns , and outhouses . Almost all of the Lees ' possessions were destroyed , as well as up to 10 @,@ 000 pounds in cash ( equal to £ 1 @,@ 219 @,@ 726 today ) . The house quickly burned and Hannah Lee , being pregnant with her fourth child , had to be thrown from her chamber window on the second floor . This resulted in Hannah 's miscarriage of a son ( they named him John ) . also injured in the fire was a slave girl , who died . Virginia Governor William Gooch blamed transported convicts for the crime . It is said that Col. Lee 's loss was not less than 50 @,@ 000 pounds ( equal to £ 6 @,@ 098 @,@ 629 today ) . English Commissioners later gave Lee 300 pounds ( equal to £ 36 @,@ 592 today ) as compensation and Queen Caroline also gave him money from her private purse to help with rebuilding . The convicts and an accomplice were later found guilty . Their punishment is unknown because the trial records were destroyed . When construction began on the new Lee mansion , the family stayed with Thomas 's brother Henry at Lee Hall . Lee sold the " Machodoc " estate to Richard Lee III 's son , George Lee , who built " Mount Pleasant " . 
 Lee 's political career required trips to Williamsburg , causing him to be away from his family for extended periods of time . Lee managed to make the 80 @-@ mile ( 130 @-@ km ) journey to his family and to be with his wife at the births of each of their children . Several of the sons became high @-@ ranking political figures and were active in the American Revolutionary War and post @-@ Revolution politics . Richard Henry was a senator from Virginia to the United States Senate and Francis Lightfoot was in the Virginia Senate . Lee 's youngest sons William Lee and Arthur Lee served as diplomats to various European countries . William , along with Jan de <unk> , drafted an unofficial treaty between the United States and the Netherlands which Great Britain used as a reason for the Fourth Anglo @-@ Dutch War . 
 Lee later became a vestryman for <unk> Parish and Justice of the Peace in Westmoreland County . In 1723 , Lee became a member of the House of Burgesses . He held this office until he was appointed to the Governor 's Council in the Virginia General Assembly in 1733 . This position was a lifetime appointment . The Council was made up of twelve appointees who were selected by the Governor of Virginia and was the upper half of the Virginia General Assembly . The lower half was made up of the House of Burgesses . This position also gave Lee the rank of Colonel , a military rank that was second only to the governor . Members of the Council were advisers to the governor and judges in the General Court of the colony . Their work led them to spend about a third of the year in the capital Williamsburg . 
 When Governor William Gooch was recalled to England in 1749 , Lee was named President of the King 's Council of Virginia and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the colony . Nominated for appointment as Governor of Virginia by King George II , he died before it took place . 
 = = = Ohio Company = = = 
 Lee was appointed commissioner , along with William Beverley , to negotiate with the Six Nations of the Iroquois at the Treaty of Lancaster in 1744 . At the treaty , an agreement was made with the Six Nations for 400 pounds ( equal to £ 61 @,@ 424 today ) in return for the right for Virginians to travel through and settle in the Shenandoah Valley . 
 In 1747 , Lee co @-@ founded the Ohio Company of Virginia along with Lawrence Washington , Augustine Washington , Jr . , the Duke of Bedford , and John Hanbury . The Ohio Company was a land speculation venture which helped colonize the Ohio Country . Lee 's influence as a member of the Governor 's Council helped lead to the success of the Ohio Company and within seven years the company had 100 families living in Ohio . He was also the first president of the Company and after Lee died , was succeeded by Lawrence Washington . 
 = = = Stratford Hall = = = 
 With Lee 's higher rank in society and wealth , he decided he needed to build a mansion to secure his position as one of the Virginia <unk> he chose the " Clifts , " which he had owned since the mid @-@ 1710s . Lee decided on this site because it was located in Westmoreland County , where he was born , and because it was located on the Potomac River . The land was sufficient for having many construction laborers live there . Hannah had an influential say in the design and planning of the interior of the house . Philip , the couple 's eldest son , had said , " See what it is to be ruled by a woman . I should have been now living in a house like this ... had not my father been persuaded by his wife to put up this very inferior dwelling , now over my head . " The exact construction date of the house is unknown but it is estimated that construction began around 1725 @-@ 30 , as all of Lee 's sons were born at Stratford . Workers on the plantation were from all the working class : free people and indentured servants mostly from the British Isles , and African slaves . 
 Between 1719 and 1746 , Lee acquired vast holdings in what are now Arlington , Fairfax , Fauquier , Prince William , and Loudoun counties . The town of Leesburg , was named in his honor as recommended by his two sons , who were the founders and trustees . 
 Hannah Harrison died at " Stratford " on January 25 , 1749 , having borne eleven children . She was buried in the old family burying ground , called the " Burnt House Fields " , at " Mount Pleasant " . Her tombstone was later removed to " Stratford Hall " , probably by Henry Lee , who built the new vault at that place . On November 14 , 1750 , Thomas Lee died at age sixty and was buried in the old " Burnt House Fields " at Mount Pleasant . According to his will , he wished to be buried in between his wife and his mother . He bequeathed Stratford Hall to his eldest son , Philip Ludwell Lee , and the Machodoc plantation to his nephew , George Lee . 
 = Wihtred of Kent = 
 Wihtred ( c . 670 – 23 April 725 ) was king of Kent from about 690 or 691 until his death . He was a son of Ecgberht I and a brother of Eadric . Wihtred acceded to the throne after a confused period in the 680s , which included a brief conquest of Kent by Cædwalla of Wessex and subsequent dynastic conflicts . His immediate predecessor was Oswine of Kent , who was probably descended from Eadbald of Kent , though not through the same line as Wihtred . Shortly after the start of his reign , Wihtred issued a code of laws — the Law of Wihtred — that has been preserved in a manuscript known as the Textus Roffensis . The laws pay a great deal of attention to the rights of the Church , including punishment for irregular marriages and for pagan worship . Wihtred 's long reign had few incidents recorded in the annals of the day . He was succeeded in 725 by his sons , Æthelberht II , Eadberht I , and Ælfric . 
 = = Kent in the late seventh century = = 
 The dominant force in late @-@ seventh @-@ century politics south of the River Humber was Wulfhere of Mercia , who reigned from the late 650s to 675 . The king of Kent for much of this time was Ecgberht , who died in 673 . Ecgberht 's sons , Eadric and Wihtred , were probably no more than infants of two or three years old when their father died , and Wulfhere was their uncle by virtue of his marriage to Eormenhild , Ecgberht 's sister . Hlothhere , Ecgberht 's brother , became king of Kent , but not until about a year later , in 674 , and it may be that Wulfhere opposed the accession of Hlothhere and was the effective ruler of Kent during this year @-@ long interregnum . 
 Eadric raised an army against his uncle and Hlothhere died of wounds sustained in battle in February 685 or possibly 686 . Eadric died the following year , and according to Bede , whose Ecclesiastical History of the English People is one of the primary sources for this period , the kingdom fell apart into disorder . Cædwalla of Wessex invaded in 686 and established his brother Mul as king there ; Cædwalla may have ruled Kent directly for a period when Mul was killed in 687 . When Cædwalla departed for Rome in 688 , Oswine , who was probably supported by Æthelred of Mercia , took the throne for a time . Oswine lost power in 690 , but Swæfheard ( son of <unk> , the king of Essex ) , who had been a king in Kent for a year or two , remained . There is clear evidence that both Swæfheard and Oswine were kings at the same time , as each witnessed the other 's charters . It seems that Oswine was king of east Kent , which was usually the position of the dominant king , while Swæfheard was king of west Kent . 
 = = Accession and reign = = 
 Wihtred emerged from this disarray and became king in the early 690s . Bede describes his accession by saying that he was the " rightful " king , and that he " freed the nation from foreign invasion by his devotion and diligence " . Oswine was also of the royal family , and arguably had a claim to the throne ; hence it has been suggested that Bede 's comments here are strongly partisan . Bede 's correspondent on Kentish affairs was Albinus , abbot of the monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul ( subsequently renamed St. Augustine 's ) in Canterbury , and these views can almost certainly be ascribed to the Church establishment there . 
 Two charters provide evidence of Wihtred 's date of accession . One , dated April 697 , indicates Wihtred was then in the sixth year of his rule , so his accession can be dated to some time between April 691 and April 692 . Another , dated 17 July 694 , is in his fourth regnal year , giving a possible range of July 690 to July 691 . The overlap in date ranges gives April to July 691 as the likely date of his accession . Another estimate of the date of Wihtred 's accession can be made from the duration of his reign , given by Bede as thirty four and a half years . He died on 23 April 725 , which would imply an accession date in late 690 . 
 Initially Wihtred ruled alongside Swæfheard . Bede 's report of the election of <unk> as Archbishop of Canterbury in July 692 mentions that Swæfheard and Wihtred were the kings of Kent , but Swæfheard is not heard of after this date . It appears that by 694 Wihtred was the sole ruler of Kent , though it may also be that his son Æthelberht was a junior king in west Kent during Wihtred 's reign . Wihtred is thought to have had three wives . His first was called <unk> , but a charter of 696 names Æthelburh as the royal consort and co @-@ donor of an estate : the former spouse must have died or been dismissed after a short time . Near the end of his reign , a new wife , <unk> , attested with her husband and son , Alric . 
 It was also in 694 that Wihtred made peace with the West Saxon king Ine . Ine 's predecessor , Cædwalla , had invaded Kent and installed his brother Mul as king , but the Kentishmen had subsequently revolted and burned Mul . Wihtred agreed compensation for the killing , but the amount paid to Ine is uncertain . Most manuscripts of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle record " thirty thousand " , and some specify thirty thousand pounds . If the pounds are equal to sceattas , then this amount is the equal of a king 's <unk> — that is , the legal valuation of a man 's life , according to his rank . It seems likely that Wihtred ceded some border territory to Ine as part of this settlement . 
 = = Laws = = 
 The earliest Anglo @-@ Saxon law code to survive , which may date from 602 or 603 , is that of Æthelberht of Kent , whose reign ended in 616 . In the 670s or 680s , a code was issued in the names of Hlothhere and Eadric of Kent . The next kings to issue laws were Ine of Wessex and Wihtred . 
 The dating of Wihtred ’ s and Ine ’ s laws is somewhat uncertain , but there is reason to believe that Wihtred ’ s laws were issued on 6 September 695 , while Ine ’ s laws were written in 694 or shortly before . Ine had recently agreed peaceful terms with Wihtred over compensation for the death of Mul , and there are indications that the two rulers collaborated to some degree in producing their laws . In addition to the coincidence of timing , there is one clause that appears in almost identical form in both codes . Another sign of collaboration is that Wihtred ’ s laws use <unk> , a West Saxon term for noble , in place of the Kentish term <unk> . It is possible that Ine and Wihtred issued the law codes as an act of prestige , to re @-@ establish authority after periods of disruption in both kingdoms . 
 Wihtred 's laws were issued at " <unk> " ; it is not known for certain where this was , but the best candidate is Bearsted , near Maidstone . The laws are primarily concerned with religious affairs ; only the last four of its twenty @-@ eight chapters do not deal with ecclesiastical affairs . The first clause of the code gives the Church freedom from taxation . Subsequent clauses specify penalties for irregular marriages , heathen worship , work on the sabbath , and breaking fasts , among other things ; and also define how members of each class of society — such as the king , bishops , priests , ceorls , and <unk> — can clear themselves by giving an oath . In addition to the focus of the laws themselves , the introduction makes clear the importance of the Church in the legislative process . <unk> , the Archbishop of Canterbury , was present at the assembly which devised the decrees , and so was <unk> , the Bishop of Rochester ; and " every order of the Church of that nation spoke in unanimity with the loyal people " . 
 The privileges given to the Church are notable : in addition to the freedom from taxation , the oath of a bishop is " incontrovertible " , which places it at the same level as the oath of a king , and the Church receives the same level of compensation for violence done to dependents as does the king . This has led one historian to describe the Church 's power , less than a century after the original Roman mission landed in Kent , as " all but co @-@ ordinate with the king himself in the Kentish state " , and it has also been described as <unk> " a frightening degree of royal power " . However , the presence of clauses that provide penalties for any of Wihtred 's subjects who " sacrifice to devils " makes it clear that although Christianity was dominant , the older pagan beliefs of the population had by no means died out completely . 
 Clause 21 of the code specifies that a ceorl must find three men of his own class to be his " oath @-@ helpers " . An oath @-@ helper would swear an oath on behalf of an accused man , to clear him from the suspicion of the crime . The laws of Ine were more stringent than this , requiring that a high @-@ ranking person must be found to be an oath @-@ helper for everyone , no matter what class they were from . The two laws taken together imply a significant weakening of an earlier state in which a man 's kin were legally responsible for him . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 On his death , Wihtred left Kent to his three sons : Æthelberht II , Eadberht I , and Alric . The chronology of the reigns following Wihtred is unclear , although there is evidence of both an Æthelbert and at least one Eadbert in the following years . After Wihtred 's death , and the departure of Ine of Wessex for Rome the following year , Æthelbald of Mercia became the dominant power in the south of England . 
 = Muckaty Station = 
 Muckaty Station , also known as Warlmanpa , is a 2 @,@ 380 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 920 sq mi ) Aboriginal freehold landholding in Australia 's Northern Territory , 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) north of Tennant Creek , and approximately 800 kilometres ( 500 mi ) south of Darwin . Originally under traditional Indigenous Australian ownership , the area became a pastoral lease in the late 19th century and for many years operated as a cattle station . It is traversed by the Stuart Highway , built in the 1940s along the route of the service track for the Australian Overland Telegraph Line . It is also crossed by a natural gas pipeline built in the mid @-@ 1980s , and the Adelaide – Darwin railway , completed in early 2004 . Muckaty Station was returned to its Indigenous custodians in 1999 . 
 The area comprises semi @-@ arid stony ridges , <unk> and a stony plateau , and experiences a sub @-@ tropical climate , with a wet season between January and March . The vegetation is mostly scrubland , including spinifex grasslands . The fauna is generally typical of Australian desert environments , and includes the red kangaroo , the eastern wallaroo , the northern nail @-@ tail wallaby , and the spinifex hopping mouse . 
 A site within Muckaty was being considered for Australia 's low @-@ level and intermediate @-@ level radioactive waste storage and disposal facility . Indigenous custodians of Muckaty Station were divided over the proposal , which also met resistance from environmental organisations and the Northern Territory government . The plan was abandoned after a Federal Court of Australia case in 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 Indigenous Australians have lived in parts of the Northern Territory for around 40 @,@ 000 years . Pre @-@ European settlement numbers are not known with any precision , although the Indigenous population of the Northern Territory has been estimated at " well over 10 @,@ 000 " . The area now known as Muckaty Station ( often referred to as just " Muckaty " , though the origin of this name and near variants such as " <unk> " is unknown ) was – and is – the responsibility of seven clans of traditional Indigenous owners : <unk> , Ngapa , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The country is known by the Indigenous name Warlmanpa , which is also the name of a local language . 
 Although there had been several unsuccessful attempts by British or colonial authorities to settle in the Northern Territory , there was no permanent European presence until surveyor George Goyder in 1869 established what is now known as Darwin . The timing was auspicious : in October 1870 the South Australian government decided to construct an overland telegraph line , from Port Augusta on the continent 's south coast , to the new settlement just established in the country 's tropical north . The line traversed what is now Muckaty Station , with repeater stations built at Powell 's Creek to the north and Tennant 's Creek to the south . At the same time as the telegraph line was completed in August 1872 , a cattle industry was beginning to develop in central and northern Australia . The first pastoral lease in the Northern Territory was granted in 1872 , and by 1911 there were at least 250 such leases covering over 180 @,@ 000 square miles ( 470 @,@ 000 km2 ) of the jurisdiction . The Muckaty pastoral lease was created in the late 19th century . Currently the property is surrounded by other leases including Powell Creek to the north , Helen Springs Station to the east with Philip Creek and Banka Banka Stations to the south . In the 1930s , the Australian government was sufficiently concerned about the condition and lack of development of these leases that it held two inquiries between 1932 and 1938 . Historian Ted Ling 's accounts of those inquiries , however , make no mention of Muckaty , which was not singled out for comment by either investigation . 
 Throughout the history of Australia 's pastoral industry , Indigenous Australians were a major part of the workforce . In 1928 for example , 80 per cent of Indigenous people with jobs were employed on the stations , including Muckaty , with many living on and travelling across the pastoral leases . The local language , Warlmanpa , was recognised in some publications from the 1930s onward , while anthropologists and administrators made some records of language and population in the region of Muckaty Station . Only one record from the period lists both Muckaty Station as a location and Warlmanpa as a language . A record of Aboriginal wards of the state , it showed only three Indigenous adults living on Muckaty , compared to almost fifty on Banka Banka Station , to the east . This reflects the fact that , by 1940 , " Warlmanpa country had been depopulated " . 
 By the 1940s the lessee at Muckaty was Fred <unk> . The 1940s also marked a significant change in the region 's road infrastructure . A dirt track had been formed to service the telegraph line in the late nineteenth century . This became the Stuart Highway , crossing the eastern part of Muckaty , and it was upgraded to an all @-@ weather road in late 1940 , before being <unk> in 1944 . Sources do not say who leased the property between the 1940s and 1982 , at which point the lease was held by James and Miriam Hagan . In 1988 it was transferred to <unk> Pty Limited and <unk> Pty Limited . Between 1985 and 1987 a natural gas pipeline was built across the station , carrying gas from Palm Valley in the Amadeus Basin to Channel Island near Darwin . 
 In 1991 , the cattle station was taken over by the Muckaty Aboriginal Corporation . The Corporation focused on rehabilitating the land , which had been degraded by excessive numbers of cattle , and by late 1993 Muckaty had been <unk> of cattle for several seasons . On 20 December 1991 , the Northern Land Council lodged a claim over Muckaty on behalf of traditional owners under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 . The claim was made by members of the seven groups that each has responsibility for different sites and dreamings in the area . In 1997 , the Aboriginal Land Commissioner recommended that Muckaty Station be handed back to the traditional owners , and in February 1999 , title to the land was returned . At the time there were about 400 formal traditional owners , among 1 @,@ 000 people with traditional attachments to the land ; some lived on the station , but others were elsewhere in the region , including in the nearby towns of Tennant Creek and Elliott . As Aboriginal Freehold land it is inalienable communal title , and cannot be bought or sold . The pastoral lease holder and manager of the station since 1997 has been Ray Aylett . The Adelaide – Darwin railway , which passes through the western part of Muckaty Station , was completed in early 2004 . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 Muckaty Station covers an area of 2 @,@ 380 square kilometres ( 920 sq mi ) and lies 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) north of Tennant Creek , in Australia 's Northern Territory . It includes a homestead that lies 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) west of the Stuart Highway and 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) east of the railway . The residence has associated cattle yards , an airstrip , and workers ' accommodation . It is adjacent to Banka Banka Station to the east , and Powell Creek Station ( also referred to as an outstation ) to the north . 
 The climate is subtropical , with a wet season between January and March , during which the area receives monthly rainfall of between 50 and 125 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 and 4 @.@ 9 in ) . For the rest of the year there is usually less than 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) of rain each month . 
 The station 's geology is dominated by the Tomkinson Group , a formation comprising sedimentary rocks of the <unk> era that is over 1 @.@ 6 billion years old . The Tomkinson Group includes layers of coarse sandstones and conglomerates , with some claystone and siltstone , deposited in a fluvial to shallow marine environment . There are also Cambrian basaltic rocks , particularly near the homestead . The eastern parts of the station form a stony plateau within the Ashburton Range . The central parts are flat and include <unk> , while to the west are stony ridges . The region is drained by an ephemeral waterway , Tomkinson Creek , and is considered a good candidate to contain manganese deposits , the mineral having been extracted in the 1950s and 1960s at the <unk> mine just east of Muckaty Station . 
 The region is semi @-@ arid , and the vegetation is generally scrubland . Muckaty Station lies at the boundary of two bioregions , Tanami and Sturt Plateau . The Tanami bioregion is made up primarily of sandplains vegetated with bootlace oak ( Hakea <unk> ) , desert <unk> ( Corymbia species ) , acacias and grevilleas , together with spinifex grasslands . The Sturt Plateau bioregion also includes spinifex grasslands , but with a canopy of bloodwood trees . 
 Most of the region 's fauna is typical of desert environments . Species include the red kangaroo , the eastern wallaroo ( also known as the euro ) , the northern nail @-@ tail wallaby , and the spinifex hopping mouse . The central pebble @-@ mound mouse also occurs in the region , and other mammal species including the Forrest 's mouse , desert mouse and short @-@ beaked echidna have been predicted by biologists to occur on the station . The station may lie within the range of the critically endangered night parrot ( <unk> occidentalis ) . There is relatively high diversity and abundance of reptiles , including the military dragon ( <unk> <unk> gularis ) and the sand goanna ( Varanus gouldii <unk> ) . 
 = = Radioactive waste facility = = 
 The search for a site at which to dispose of or store Australia 's low and intermediate @-@ level radioactive wastes commenced in 1980 . A formal public process of site selection that had commenced in 1991 finally failed in 2004 . On 7 December 2005 , the Australian government passed legislation , the Commonwealth Radioactive Waste Management Act , to facilitate the siting of a radioactive waste facility in the Northern Territory . Section four of the Act allowed the Australian government to schedule potential sites for a waste facility , and three Northern Territory sites were proposed under the legislation . Following criticisms made by the Northern Land Council , in December 2006 the legislation was revised to also allow Aboriginal Land Councils to nominate potential sites for a facility . In May 2007 the Northern Land Council , on behalf of Ngapa clan traditional owners , nominated a small area within Muckaty Station ( for which the Ngapa had traditional responsibility ) to be considered as a possible site for the facility . In September 2007 , the government accepted the nomination , bringing the total number of possible sites to four . The Government of the Northern Territory opposed the nomination , but could not prevent it . Ngapa clan members volunteered a 4 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) area to be considered for the facility , which was expected to require 1 square kilometre of land . 
 A parliamentary inquiry and media reports indicated that the Indigenous traditional owners of Muckaty Station were divided over whether it should host a radioactive waste facility . Some members of the Ngapa clan supported hosting the facility , while other traditional owners of Muckaty opposed it . There were also claims that some members of the Ngapa clan were among those who had signed a petition opposing the facility . Political scientist Rebecca Stringer criticised the federal government 's approach to the siting of the waste facility , arguing that it undermined the Indigenous owners ' sovereignty and control of their own lands . Environmental organisations and the Australian Greens are opposed to using the site for a dump . 
 In 2009 , the Australian government received a consultant 's report that examined Muckaty Station as one of four possible sites for a nuclear waste facility in the Northern Territory . The report was released in 2010 . In February 2012 , the Muckaty Station site was the only one under consideration by the government . 
 = = = Legal action = = = 
 In 2010 , Mark Lane <unk> and other traditional owners instructed law firms Maurice Blackburn , Surry Partners ( a firm that includes human rights lawyer George Newhouse ) , and lawyer Julian Burnside to commence legal proceedings against the Northern Land Council and the Australian government in the Federal Court of Australia to stop the nomination of Muckaty Station as a nuclear waste storage facility . The Federal Court challenge was due to commence early in 2013 before Justice Tony North , who handled the Tampa affair . According to a June 2012 report in The Age , some indigenous owners would " testify they were never consulted , while others [ will ] say that they were not properly consulted and never consented to the nomination " . The court did not begin hearing the case until 2 June 2014 , for what was expected to be a five @-@ week trial . However , on 18 June , the Northern Land Council withdrew the nomination of Muckaty as part of a legal settlement between the parties . The Australian government indicated there would be a three @-@ month period during which the Northern Land Council and traditional owners could determine whether they wished to nominate an alternative site for the dump elsewhere on Muckaty Station . 
 = Prepatellar bursitis = 
 Prepatellar bursitis is an inflammation of the prepatellar bursa at the front of the knee . It is marked by swelling at the knee , which can be tender to the touch but which does not restrict the knee 's range of motion . It is most commonly caused by trauma to the knee , either by a single acute instance or by chronic trauma over time . As such , prepatellar bursitis commonly occurs among individuals whose professions require frequent kneeling . 
 A definitive diagnosis of the condition can usually be made once a clinical history and physical examination have been obtained , though determining whether or not the bursitis is septic is not as straightforward . Treatment of prepatellar bursitis depends on the severity of the symptoms . Mild cases may only require rest and icing of the knee . A number of different treatment options have been used for severe septic cases , including intravenous antibiotics , surgical irrigation of the bursa , and <unk> . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The primary symptom of prepatellar bursitis is the swelling of the area around the kneecap . It generally does not produce a significant amount of pain unless pressure is applied directly to the swelling . The area of swelling may be red ( erythema ) , warm to the touch , or surrounded by cellulitis , particularly if the area has become infected . In such cases , the bursitis is often accompanied by fever . Unlike arthritis , prepatellar bursitis generally does not affect the range of motion of the knee , though it may cause some discomfort when the knee is completely flexed . <unk> and extension of the knee may cause crepitus . 
 = = Causes = = 
 In human anatomy , a bursa is a small pouch filled with synovial fluid . Its purpose is to reduce friction between adjacent structures . The prepatellar bursa is one of several bursae of the knee joint , and is located between the patella and the skin . Prepatellar bursitis is an inflammation of this bursa . <unk> are readily inflamed when irritated , as their walls are very thin . Along with the pes <unk> bursa , the prepatellar bursa is one of the most common bursae to cause knee pain when inflamed . 
 Prepatellar bursitis is caused by either a single instance of acute trauma to the knee , or repeated minor trauma to the knee . The trauma can cause <unk> of nearby fluids into the bursa , which stimulates an inflammatory response . This response occurs in two phases : The vascular phase , in which the blood flow to the surrounding area increases , and the cellular phase , in which leukocytes migrate from the blood to the affected area . Other possible causes include gout , sarcoidosis , <unk> syndrome , diabetes mellitus , alcohol abuse , uremia , and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Some cases are idiopathic , though these may be caused by trauma that the patient does not remember . 
 The prepatellar bursa and the olecranon bursa are the two bursae that are most likely to become infected , or septic . Septic bursitis typically occurs when the trauma to the knee causes an abrasion , though it is also possible for the infection to be caused by bacteria traveling through the blood from a pre @-@ existing infection site . In approximately 80 % of septic cases , the infection is caused by Staphylococcus aureus ; other common infections are Streptococcus , Mycobacterium , and Brucella . It is highly unusual for septic bursitis to be caused by anaerobes , fungi , or Gram @-@ negative bacteria . In very rare cases , the infection can be caused by tuberculosis . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 There are several types of inflammation that can cause knee pain , including sprains , bursitis , and injuries to the meniscus . A diagnosis of prepatellar bursitis can be made based on a physical examination and the presence of risk factors in the person 's medical history ; swelling and tenderness at the front of the knee , combined with a profession that requires frequent kneeling , suggest prepatellar bursitis . Swelling of multiple joints along with restricted range of motion may indicate arthritis instead . 
 A physical examination and medical history are generally not enough to distinguish between infectious and non @-@ infectious bursitis ; aspiration of the bursal fluid is often required for this , along with a cell culture and Gram stain of the aspirated fluid . Septic prepatellar bursitis may be diagnosed if the fluid is found to have a neutrophil count above 1500 per microliter , a threshold significantly lower than that of septic arthritis ( 50 @,@ 000 cells per microliter ) . A tuberculosis infection can be confirmed using a <unk> and urinalysis . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 It is possible to prevent the onset of prepatellar bursitis , or prevent the symptoms from worsening , by avoiding trauma to the knee or frequent kneeling . Protective knee pads can also help prevent prepatellar bursitis for those whose professions require frequent kneeling and for athletes who play contact sports , such as American football , basketball , and wrestling . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Non @-@ septic prepatellar bursitis can be treated with rest , the application of ice to the affected area , and anti @-@ inflammatory drugs , particularly ibuprofen . Elevation of the affected leg during rest may also expedite the recovery process . Severe cases may require fine @-@ needle aspiration of the bursa fluid , sometimes coupled with cortisone injections . However , some studies have shown that steroid injections may not be an effective treatment option . After the bursitis has been treated , rehabilitative exercise may help improve joint mechanics and reduce chronic pain . 
 Opinions vary as to which treatment options are most effective for septic prepatellar bursitis . McAfee and Smith recommend a course of oral antibiotics , usually <unk> sodium or <unk> , and assert that surgery and drainage are unnecessary . Wilson @-@ MacDonald argues that oral antibiotics are " inadequate " , and recommends intravenous antibiotics for managing the infection . Some authors suggest surgical irrigation of the bursa by means of a subcutaneous tube . Others suggest that <unk> may be necessary for intractable cases ; the operation is an outpatient procedure that can be performed in less than half an hour . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The various nicknames associated with prepatellar bursitis arise from the fact that it commonly occurs among those individuals whose professions require frequent kneeling , such as carpenters , carpet layers , gardeners , housemaids , mechanics , miners , plumbers , and roofers . The exact incidence of the condition is not known ; it is difficult to estimate because only severe septic cases require hospital admission , and mild non @-@ septic cases generally go unreported . Prepatellar bursitis is more common among males than females . It affects all age groups , but is more likely to be septic when it occurs in children . 
 = Egbert of Wessex = 
 Egbert ( 771 / 775 – 839 ) , also known as Ecgberht , Ecgbert , or <unk> , was King of Wessex from 802 until his death in 839 . His father was Ealhmund of Kent . In the 780s Egbert was forced into exile by Offa of Mercia and Beorhtric of Wessex , but on Beorhtric 's death in 802 Egbert returned and took the throne . 
 Little is known of the first 20 years of Egbert 's reign , but it is thought that he was able to maintain the independence of Wessex against the kingdom of Mercia , which at that time dominated the other southern English kingdoms . In 825 Egbert defeated Beornwulf of Mercia , ended Mercia 's supremacy at the Battle of Ellandun , and proceeded to take control of the Mercian dependencies in southeastern England . In 829 Egbert defeated Wiglaf of Mercia and drove him out of his kingdom , temporarily ruling Mercia directly . Later that year Egbert received the submission of the Northumbrian king at Dore . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle subsequently described Egbert as a bretwalda , or " Ruler of Britain " . 
 Egbert was unable to maintain this dominant position , and within a year Wiglaf regained the throne of Mercia . However , Wessex did retain control of Kent , Sussex , and Surrey ; these territories were given to Egbert 's son Æthelwulf to rule as a subking under Egbert . When Egbert died in 839 , Æthelwulf succeeded him ; the southeastern kingdoms were finally absorbed into the kingdom of Wessex after Æthelwulf 's death in 858 . 
 = = Family = = 
 Historians do not agree on Egbert 's ancestry . The earliest version of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , the Parker Chronicle , begins with a genealogical preface tracing the ancestry of Egbert 's son Æthelwulf back through Egbert , Ealhmund ( thought to be Ealhmund of Kent ) , and the otherwise unknown <unk> and <unk> to Ingild , brother of King Ine of Wessex , who abdicated the throne in 726 . It continues back to Cerdic , founder of the House of Wessex . Egbert 's descent from Ingild was accepted by Frank Stenton , but not the earlier genealogy back to Cerdic . Heather Edwards in her Online Dictionary of National Biography article on Egbert argues that he was of Kentish origin , and that the West Saxon descent may have been manufactured during his reign to give him legitimacy , whereas Rory Naismith considered a Kentish origin unlikely , and that it is more probable that " Egbert was born of good West Saxon royal stock " . 
 Egbert 's wife 's name is unknown . A fifteenth century chronicle now held by Oxford University names Egbert 's wife as <unk> who was supposedly a relation of Charlemagne that he married when he was banished to Francia , but this is dismissed by academic historians in view of its late date . He is reputed to have had a half @-@ sister <unk> , later to be recognised as a saint for her founding of Wilton Abbey . She was married to Wulfstan , ealdorman of Wiltshire , and on his death in 802 she became a nun , Abbess of Wilton Abbey . He was believed at one time to also be the father of Saint Eadgyth of Polesworth and Æthelstan of Kent . 
 = = Political context and early life = = 
 Offa of Mercia , who reigned from 757 to 796 , was the dominant force in Anglo @-@ Saxon England in the second half of the eighth century . The relationship between Offa and Cynewulf , who was king of Wessex from 757 to 786 , is not well documented , but it seems likely that Cynewulf maintained some independence from Mercian overlordship . Evidence of the relationship between kings can come from charters , which were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen , and which were witnessed by the kings who had power to grant the land . In some cases a king will appear on a charter as a subregulus , or " subking " , making it clear that he has an overlord . Cynewulf appears as " King of the West Saxons " on a charter of Offa 's in 772 ; and he was defeated by Offa in battle in 779 at <unk> , but there is nothing else to suggest Cynewulf was not his own master , and he is not known to have acknowledged Offa as overlord . Offa did have influence in the southeast of the country : a charter of 764 shows him in the company of Heahberht of Kent , suggesting that Offa 's influence helped place Heahberht on the throne . The extent of Offa 's control of Kent between 765 and 776 is a matter of debate amongst historians , but from 776 until about 784 it appears that the Kentish kings had substantial independence from Mercia . 
 Another Egbert , Egbert II of Kent , ruled in that kingdom throughout the 770s ; he is last mentioned in 779 , in a charter granting land at Rochester . In 784 a new king of Kent , Ealhmund , appears in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . According to a note in the margin , " this king Ealhmund was Egbert 's father [ i.e. Egbert of Wessex ] , Egbert was Æthelwulf 's father . " This is supported by the genealogical preface from the A text of the Chronicle , which gives Egbert 's father 's name as Ealhmund without further details . The preface probably dates from the late ninth century ; the marginal note is on the F manuscript of the Chronicle , which is a Kentish version dating from about 1100 . 
 Ealhmund does not appear to have long survived in power : there is no record of his activities after 784 . There is , however , extensive evidence of Offa 's domination of Kent during the late 780s , with his goals apparently going beyond overlordship to outright annexation of the kingdom , and he has been described as " the rival , not the overlord , of the Kentish kings " . It is possible that the young Egbert fled to Wessex in 785 or so ; it is suggestive that the Chronicle mentions in a later entry that Beorhtric , Cynewulf 's successor , helped Offa to exile Egbert . 
 Cynewulf was murdered in 786 . His succession was contested by Egbert , but he was defeated by Beorhtric , maybe with Offa 's assistance . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that Egbert spent three years in Francia before he was king , exiled by Beorhtric and Offa . The text says " iii " for three , but this may have been a scribal error , with the correct reading being " xiii " , that is , thirteen years . Beorhtric 's reign lasted sixteen years , and not thirteen ; and all extant texts of the Chronicle agree on " iii " , but many modern accounts assume that Egbert did indeed spend thirteen years in Francia . This requires assuming that the error in transcription is common to every manuscript of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ; many historians make this assumption but others have rejected it as unlikely , given the consistency of the sources . In either case Egbert was probably exiled in 789 , when Beorhtric , his rival , married the daughter of Offa of Mercia . 
 At the time Egbert was in exile , Francia was ruled by Charlemagne , who maintained Frankish influence in Northumbria and is known to have supported Offa 's enemies in the south . Another exile in Gaul at this time was Odberht , a priest , who is almost certainly the same person as Eadberht , who later became king of Kent . According to a later chronicler , William of Malmesbury , Egbert learned the arts of government during his time in Gaul . 
 = = Early reign = = 
 Beorhtric 's dependency on Mercia continued into the reign of Cenwulf , who became king of Mercia a few months after Offa 's death . Beorhtric died in 802 , and Egbert came to the throne of Wessex , probably with the support of Charlemagne and perhaps also the papacy . The Mercians continued to oppose Egbert : the day of his accession , the Hwicce ( who had originally formed a separate kingdom , but by that time were part of Mercia ) attacked , under the leadership of their ealdorman , Æthelmund . Weohstan , a Wessex ealdorman , met him with men from Wiltshire : according to a 15th @-@ century source , Weohstan had married <unk> , Egbert 's sister , and so was Egbert 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . The Hwicce were defeated , though Weohstan was killed as well as Æthelmund . Nothing more is recorded of Egbert 's relations with Mercia for more than twenty years after this battle . It seems likely that Egbert had no influence outside his own borders , but on the other hand there is no evidence that he ever submitted to the overlordship of Cenwulf . Cenwulf did have overlordship of the rest of southern England , but in Cenwulf 's charters the title of " overlord of the southern English " never appears , presumably in consequence of the independence of the kingdom of Wessex . 
 In 815 the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that Egbert ravaged the whole of the territories of the remaining British kingdom , Dumnonia , known to the author of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle as the West Welsh ; their territory was about equivalent to what is now Cornwall . Ten years later , a charter dated 19 August 825 indicates that Egbert was campaigning in Dumnonia again ; this may have been related to a battle recorded in the Chronicle at <unk> in 823 , between the men of Devon and the Britons of Cornwall . 
 = = The battle of Ellendun = = 
 It was also in 825 that one of the most important battles in Anglo @-@ Saxon history took place , when Egbert defeated Beornwulf of Mercia at Ellendun — now Wroughton , near Swindon . This battle marked the end of the Mercian domination of southern England . The Chronicle tells how Egbert followed up his victory : " Then he sent his son Æthelwulf from the army , and <unk> , his bishop , and Wulfheard , his ealdorman , to Kent with a great troop . " Æthelwulf drove Baldred , the king of Kent , north over the Thames , and according to the Chronicle , the men of Kent , Essex , Surrey and Sussex then all submitted to Æthelwulf " because earlier they were wrongly forced away from his relatives . " This may refer to Offa 's interventions in Kent at the time Egbert 's father Ealhmund became king ; if so , the chronicler 's remark may also indicate Ealhmund had connections elsewhere in southeast England . 
 The Chronicle 's version of events makes it appear that Baldred was driven out shortly after the battle , but this was probably not the case . A document from Kent survives which gives the date , March 826 , as being in the third year of the reign of Beornwulf . This makes it likely that Beornwulf still had authority in Kent at this date , as Baldred 's overlord ; hence Baldred was apparently still in power . In Essex , Egbert expelled King Sigered , though the date is unknown . It may have been delayed until 829 , since a later chronicler associates the expulsion with a campaign of Egbert 's in that year against the Mercians . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle does not say who was the aggressor at Ellendun , but one recent history asserts that Beornwulf was almost certainly the one who attacked . According to this view , Beornwulf may have taken advantage of the Wessex campaign in Dumnonia in the summer of 825 . Beornwulf 's motivation to launch an attack would have been the threat of unrest or instability in the southeast : the dynastic connections with Kent made Wessex a threat to Mercian dominance . 
 The consequences of Ellendun went beyond the immediate loss of Mercian power in the southeast . According to the Chronicle , the East Anglians asked for Egbert 's protection against the Mercians in the same year , 825 , though it may actually have been in the following year that the request was made . In 826 Beornwulf invaded East Anglia , presumably to recover his overlordship . He was slain , however , as was his successor , Ludeca , who invaded East Anglia in 827 , evidently for the same reason . It may be that the Mercians were hoping for support from Kent : there was some reason to suppose that Wulfred , the Archbishop of Canterbury , might be discontented with West Saxon rule , as Egbert had terminated Wulfred 's currency and had begun to mint his own , at Rochester and Canterbury , and it is known that Egbert seized property belonging to Canterbury . The outcome in East Anglia was a disaster for the Mercians which confirmed West Saxon power in the southeast . 
 = = Defeat of Mercia = = 
 In 829 Egbert invaded Mercia and drove Wiglaf , the king of Mercia , into exile . This victory gave Egbert control of the London Mint , and he issued coins as King of Mercia . It was after this victory that the West Saxon scribe described him as a bretwalda , meaning " wide @-@ ruler " or " Britain @-@ ruler " , in a famous passage in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . The relevant part of the annal reads , in the [ C ] manuscript of the Chronicle : 
 ⁊ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> cing <unk> rice ⁊ <unk> þæt be <unk> <unk> wæs , ⁊ he wæs <unk> cing se ðe <unk> wæs . 
 In modern English : 
 And the same year King Egbert conquered the kingdom of Mercia , and all that was south of the Humber , and he was the eighth king who was ' Wide Ruler ' . 
 The previous seven bretwaldas are also named by the Chronicler , who gives the same seven names that Bede lists as holding imperium , starting with Ælle of Sussex and ending with Oswiu of Northumbria . The list is often thought to be incomplete , omitting as it does some dominant Mercian kings such as Penda and Offa . The exact meaning of the title has been much debated ; it has been described as " a term of encomiastic poetry " but there is also evidence that it implied a definite role of military leadership . 
 Later in 829 , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Egbert received the submission of the Northumbrians at Dore ( now a suburb of Sheffield ) ; the Northumbrian king was probably Eanred . According to a later chronicler , Roger of Wendover , Egbert invaded Northumbria and plundered it before Eanred submitted : " When Egbert had obtained all the southern kingdoms , he led a large army into Northumbria , and laid waste that province with severe pillaging , and made King Eanred pay tribute . " Roger of Wendover is known to have incorporated Northumbrian annals into his version ; the Chronicle does not mention these events . However , the nature of Eanred 's submission has been questioned : one historian has suggested that it is more likely that the meeting at Dore represented a mutual recognition of sovereignty . 
 In 830 Egbert led a successful expedition against the Welsh , almost certainly with the intent of extending West Saxon influence into the Welsh lands previously within the Mercian orbit . This marked the high point of Egbert 's influence . 
 = = Reduction in influence after 829 = = 
 In 830 , Mercia regained its independence under Wiglaf — the Chronicle merely says that Wiglaf " obtained the kingdom of Mercia again " , but the most likely explanation is that this was the result of a Mercian rebellion against Wessex rule . 
 Egbert 's dominion over southern England came to an end with Wiglaf 's recovery of power . Wiglaf 's return is followed by evidence of his independence from Wessex . Charters indicate Wiglaf had authority in Middlesex and Berkshire , and in a charter of 836 Wiglaf uses the phrase " my bishops , duces , and magistrates " to describe a group that included eleven bishops from the episcopate of Canterbury , including bishops of sees in West Saxon territory . It is significant that Wiglaf was still able to call together such a group of notables ; the West Saxons , even if they were able to do so , held no such councils . Wiglaf may also have brought Essex back into the Mercian orbit during the years after he recovered the throne . In East Anglia , King Æthelstan minted coins , possibly as early as 827 , but more likely c . 830 after Egbert 's influence was reduced with Wiglaf 's return to power in Mercia . This demonstration of independence on East Anglia 's part is not surprising , as it was Æthelstan who was probably responsible for the defeat and death of both Beornwulf and Ludeca . 
 Both Wessex 's sudden rise to power in the late 820s , and the subsequent failure to retain this dominant position , have been examined by historians looking for underlying causes . One plausible explanation for the events of these years is that Wessex 's fortunes were to some degree dependent on Carolingian support . The Franks supported Eardwulf when he recovered the throne of Northumbria in 808 , so it is plausible that they also supported Egbert 's accession in 802 . At Easter 839 , not long before Egbert 's death , he was in touch with Louis the Pious , king of the Franks , to arrange safe passage to Rome . Hence a continuing relationship with the Franks seems to be part of southern English politics during the first half of the ninth century . 
 Carolingian support may have been one of the factors that helped Egbert achieve the military successes of the late 820s . However , the Rhenish and Frankish commercial networks collapsed at some time in the 820s or 830s , and in addition , a rebellion broke out in February 830 against Louis the Pious — the first of a series of internal conflicts that lasted through the 830s and beyond . These distractions may have prevented Louis from supporting Egbert . In this view , the withdrawal of Frankish influence would have left East Anglia , Mercia and Wessex to find a balance of power not dependent on outside aid . 
 Despite the loss of dominance , Egbert 's military successes fundamentally changed the political landscape of Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Wessex retained control of the south @-@ eastern kingdoms , with the possible exception of Essex , and Mercia did not regain control of East Anglia . Egbert 's victories marked the end of the independent existence of the kingdoms of Kent and Sussex . The conquered territories were administered as a subkingdom for a while , including Surrey and possibly Essex . Although Æthelwulf was a subking under Egbert , it is clear that he maintained his own royal household , with which he travelled around his kingdom . Charters issued in Kent described Egbert and Æthelwulf as " kings of the West Saxons and also of the people of Kent . " When Æthelwulf died in 858 his will , in which Wessex is left to one son and the southeastern kingdom to another , makes it clear that it was not until after 858 that the kingdoms were fully integrated . Mercia remained a threat , however ; Egbert 's son Æthelwulf , established as king of Kent , gave estates to Christ Church , Canterbury , probably to counter any influence the Mercians might still have there . 
 In the southwest , Egbert was defeated in 836 at Carhampton by the Danes , but in 838 he won a battle against them and their allies the West Welsh at the Battle of Hingston Down in Cornwall . The <unk> royal line continued after this time , but it is at this date that the independence of one of the last British kingdoms may be considered to have ended . The details of Anglo @-@ Saxon expansion into Cornwall are quite poorly recorded , but some evidence comes from place names . The river Ottery , which flows east into the Tamar near Launceston , appears to be a boundary : south of the Ottery the placenames are overwhelmingly Cornish , whereas to the north they are more heavily influenced by the English newcomers . 
 = = Succession = = 
 At a council at Kingston upon Thames in 838 , Egbert and Æthelwulf granted land to the sees of Winchester and Canterbury in return for the promise of support for Æthelwulf 's claim to the throne . The archbishop of Canterbury , Ceolnoth , also accepted Egbert and Æthelwulf as the lords and protectors of the monasteries under Ceolnoth 's control . These agreements , along with a later charter in which Æthelwulf confirmed church privileges , suggest that the church had recognised that Wessex was a new political power that must be dealt with . Churchmen consecrated the king at coronation ceremonies , and helped to write the wills which specified the king 's heir ; their support had real value in establishing West Saxon control and a smooth succession for Egbert 's line . Both the record of the Council of Kingston , and another charter of that year , include the identical phrasing : that a condition of the grant is that " we ourselves and our heirs shall always hereafter have firm and unshakable friendships from Archbishop Ceolnoth and his congregation at Christ Church . " 
 Although nothing is known of any other claimants to the throne , it is likely that there were other surviving descendants of Cerdic ( the supposed progenitor of all the kings of Wessex ) who might have contended for the kingdom . Egbert died in 839 , and his will , according to the account of it found in the will of his grandson , Alfred the Great , left land only to male members of his family , so that the estates should not be lost to the royal house through marriage . Egbert 's wealth , acquired through conquest , was no doubt one reason for his ability to purchase the support of the southeastern church establishment ; the <unk> of his will indicates he understood the importance of personal wealth to a king . The kingship of Wessex had been frequently contested among different branches of the royal line , and it is a noteworthy achievement of Egbert 's that he was able to ensure Æthelwulf 's untroubled succession . In addition , Æthelwulf 's experience of kingship , in the subkingdom formed from Egbert 's southeastern conquests , would have been valuable to him when he took the throne . 
 Egbert was buried in Winchester , as were his son , Æthelwulf , his grandson , Alfred the Great , and his great @-@ grandson , Edward the Elder . During the ninth century , Winchester began to show signs of urbanisation , and it is likely that the sequence of burials indicates that Winchester was held in high regard by the West Saxon royal line . 
 = Las Meninas = 
 Las Meninas ( pronounced : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Spanish for The Ladies @-@ in @-@ Waiting ) is a 1656 painting in the Museo del Prado in Madrid , by Diego Velázquez , the leading artist of the Spanish Golden Age . Its complex and enigmatic composition raises questions about reality and illusion , and creates an uncertain relationship between the viewer and the figures depicted . Because of these complexities , Las Meninas has been one of the most widely analyzed works in Western painting . 
 The painting shows a large room in the Royal Alcazar of Madrid during the reign of King Philip IV of Spain , and presents several figures , most identifiable from the Spanish court , captured , according to some commentators , in a particular moment as if in a snapshot . Some look out of the canvas towards the viewer , while others interact among themselves . The young Infanta Margaret Theresa is surrounded by her entourage of maids of honour , chaperone , bodyguard , two dwarfs and a dog . Just behind them , Velázquez portrays himself working at a large canvas . Velázquez looks outwards , beyond the pictorial space to where a viewer of the painting would stand . In the background there is a mirror that reflects the upper bodies of the king and queen . They appear to be placed outside the picture space in a position similar to that of the viewer , although some scholars have speculated that their image is a reflection from the painting Velázquez is shown working on . 
 Las Meninas has long been recognised as one of the most important paintings in Western art history . The Baroque painter Luca Giordano said that it represents the " theology of painting " and in 1827 the president of the Royal Academy of Arts Sir Thomas Lawrence described the work in a letter to his successor David Wilkie as " the true philosophy of the art " . More recently , it has been described as " Velázquez 's supreme achievement , a highly self @-@ conscious , calculated demonstration of what painting could achieve , and perhaps the most searching comment ever made on the possibilities of the easel painting " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Court of Philip IV = = = 
 In 17th @-@ century Spain , painters rarely enjoyed high social status . Painting was regarded as a craft , not an art such as poetry or music . Nonetheless , Velázquez worked his way up through the ranks of the court of Philip IV , and in February 1651 was appointed palace chamberlain ( <unk> mayor del <unk> ) . The post brought him status and material reward , but its duties made heavy demands on his time . During the remaining eight years of his life , he painted only a few works , mostly portraits of the royal family . When he painted Las Meninas , he had been with the royal household for 33 years . 
 Philip IV 's first wife , Elizabeth of France , died in 1644 ; and their only son , Balthasar Charles , died two years later . Lacking an heir , Philip married Mariana of Austria in 1649 , and Margaret Theresa ( 1651 – 1673 ) was their first child , and their only one at the time of the painting . Subsequently , she had a short @-@ lived brother Philip Prospero ( 1657 – 1661 ) , and then Charles ( 1661 – 1700 ) arrived , who succeeded to the throne as Charles II at the age of three . Velázquez painted portraits of Mariana and her children , and although Philip himself resisted being portrayed in his old age he did allow Velázquez to include him in Las Meninas . In the early 1650s he gave Velázquez the <unk> Principal ( " main room " ) of the late Balthasar Charles 's living quarters , by then serving as the palace museum , to use as his studio . It is here that Las Meninas is set . Philip had his own chair in the studio and would often sit and watch Velázquez at work . Although constrained by rigid etiquette , the art @-@ loving king seems to have had an unusually close relationship with the painter . After Velázquez 's death , he wrote " I am crushed " in the margin of a memorandum on the choice of his successor . 
 During the 1640s and 1650s , Velázquez served as both court painter and curator of Philip IV 's expanding collection of European art . He seems to have been given an unusual degree of freedom in the role . He supervised the decoration and interior design of the rooms holding the most valued paintings , adding mirrors , statues and tapestries . He was also responsible for the sourcing , attribution , hanging and inventory of many of the Spanish king 's paintings . By the early 1650s , Velázquez was widely respected in Spain as a connoisseur . Much of the collection of the Prado today — including works by Titian , Raphael , and Rubens — were acquired and assembled under Velázquez 's <unk> . 
 = = = Provenance and condition = = = 
 The painting was referred to in the earliest inventories as La Familia ( " The Family " ) . A detailed description of Las Meninas , which provides the identification of several of the figures , was published by Antonio Palomino ( " the Giorgio Vasari of the Spanish Golden Age " ) in 1724 . Examination under infrared light reveals minor pentimenti , that is , there are traces of earlier working that the artist himself later altered . For example , at first Velázquez 's own head inclined to his right rather than his left . 
 The painting has been cut down on both the left and right sides . It was damaged in the fire that destroyed the Alcázar in 1734 , and was restored by court painter Juan García de Miranda ( 1677 – 1749 ) . The left cheek of the Infanta was almost completely repainted to compensate for a substantial loss of pigment . After its rescue from the fire , the painting was inventoried as part of the royal collection in 1747 – 48 , and the Infanta was misidentified as Maria Theresa , Margaret Theresa 's older half @-@ sister , an error that was repeated when the painting was inventoried at the new Madrid Royal Palace in 1772 . A 1794 inventory reverted to a version of the earlier title , The Family of Philip IV , which was repeated in the records of 1814 . The painting entered the collection of the Museo del Prado on its foundation in 1819 . In 1843 , the Prado catalogue listed the work for the first time as Las Meninas . 
 In recent years , the picture has suffered a loss of texture and hue . Due to exposure to pollution and crowds of visitors , the once @-@ vivid contrasts between blue and white pigments in the costumes of the <unk> have faded . It was last cleaned in 1984 under the supervision of the American conservator John Brealey , to remove a " yellow veil " of dust that had gathered since the previous restoration in the 19th century . The cleaning provoked , according to the art historian Federico <unk> , " furious protests , not because the picture had been damaged in any way , but because it looked different " . However , in the opinion of López @-@ Rey , the " restoration was impeccable " . Due to its size , importance , and value , the painting is not lent out for exhibition . 
 = = = Painting materials = = = 
 A thorough technical investigation including a pigment analysis of Las Meninas was conducted around 1981 in Museo Prado . The analysis revealed the usual pigments of the baroque period frequently used by Velázquez in his other paintings . The main pigments used for this painting were lead white , azurite ( for the skirt of the kneeling <unk> ) , vermilion and red lake , ochres and carbon blacks . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Subject matter = = = 
 Las Meninas is set in Velázquez 's studio in Philip IV 's Alcázar palace in Madrid . The high @-@ ceilinged room is presented , in the words of Silvio <unk> , as " a simple box that could be divided into a perspective grid with a single vanishing point " . In the centre of the foreground stands the Infanta Margaret Theresa ( 1 ) . The five @-@ year @-@ old <unk> , who later married Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I , was at this point Philip and Mariana 's only surviving child . She is attended by two ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting , or <unk> : doña Isabel de Velasco ( 2 ) , who is poised to curtsy to the princess , and doña María Agustina Sarmiento de Sotomayor ( 3 ) , who kneels before Margaret Theresa , offering her a drink from a red cup , or <unk> , that she holds on a golden tray . To the right of the Infanta are two dwarfs : the <unk> German , Maribarbola ( 4 ) ( Maria <unk> ) , and the Italian , Nicolas <unk> ( 5 ) , who playfully tries to rouse a sleepy mastiff with his foot . Behind them stands doña Marcela de Ulloa ( 6 ) , the princess 's chaperone , dressed in mourning and talking to an unidentified bodyguard ( or <unk> ) ( 7 ) . 
 To the rear and at right stands Don José Nieto Velázquez ( 8 ) — the queen 's chamberlain during the 1650s , and head of the royal tapestry works — who may have been a relative of the artist . Nieto is shown pausing , with his right knee bent and his feet on different steps . As the art critic Harriet Stone observes , it is uncertain whether he is " coming or going " . He is rendered in silhouette and appears to hold open a curtain on a short flight of stairs , with an unclear wall or space behind . Both this backlight and the open doorway reveal space behind : in the words of the art historian <unk> <unk> , they lure " our eyes inescapably into the depths " . The royal couple 's reflection pushes in the opposite direction , forward into the picture space . The vanishing point of the perspective is in the doorway , as can be shown by extending the line of the meeting of wall and ceiling on the right . Nieto is seen only by the king and queen , who share the viewer 's point of view , and not by the figures in the foreground . In the footnotes of Joel Snyder 's article , the author recognizes that Nieto is the queen 's attendant and was required to be at hand to open and close doors for her . Snyder suggests that Nieto appears in the doorway so that the king and queen might depart . In the context of the painting , Snyder argues that the scene is the end of the royal couple 's sitting for Velázquez and they are preparing to exit , explaining that is " why the <unk> to the right of the Infanta begins to curtsy " . 
 Velázquez himself ( 9 ) is pictured to the left of the scene , looking outward past a large canvas supported by an easel . On his chest is the red cross of the Order of Santiago , which he did not receive until 1659 , three years after the painting was completed . According to Palomino , Philip ordered this to be added after Velázquez 's death , " and some say that his Majesty himself painted it " . From the painter 's belt hang the symbolic keys of his court offices . 
 A mirror on the back wall reflects the upper bodies and heads of two figures identified from other paintings , and by Palomino , as King Philip IV ( 10 ) and Queen Mariana ( 11 ) . The most common assumption is that the reflection shows the couple in the pose they are holding for Velázquez as he paints them , while their daughter watches ; and that the painting therefore shows their view of the scene . 
 Of the nine figures depicted , five are looking directly out at the royal couple or the viewer . Their glances , along with the king and queen 's reflection , affirm the royal couple 's presence outside the painted space . Alternatively , art historians H. W. Janson and Joel Snyder suggest that the image of the king and queen is a reflection from Velázquez 's canvas , the front of which is obscured from the viewer . Other writers say the canvas Velázquez is painting is unusually large for a portrait by Velázquez , and is about the same size as Las Meninas . Las Meninas contains the only known double portrait of the royal couple painted by Velázquez . 
 The point of view of the picture is approximately that of the royal couple , though this has been widely debated . Many critics suppose that the scene is viewed by the king and queen as they pose for a double portrait , while the Infanta and her companions are present only to relieve their boredom . Leo Steinberg suggests that the King and Queen are to the left of the viewer and the reflection in the mirror is that of the canvas , a portrait of the king and queen . Others speculate that Velázquez represents himself painting the Infanta Margaret Theresa . No single theory has found universal agreement . 
 The back wall of the room , which is in shadow , is hung with rows of paintings , including one of a series of scenes from Ovid 's Metamorphoses by Peter Paul Rubens , and copies , by Velázquez 's son @-@ in @-@ law and principal assistant Juan del Mazo , of works by Jacob <unk> . The paintings are shown in the exact positions recorded in an inventory taken around this time . The wall to the right is hung with a grid of eight smaller paintings , visible mainly as frames owing to their angle from the viewer . They can be identified from the inventory as more Mazo copies of paintings from the Rubens Ovid series , though only two of the subjects can be seen . 
 The paintings on the back wall are recognized as representing Minerva <unk> Arachne and Apollo 's Victory Over Marsyas . Both stories involve Minerva , the Goddess of Wisdom and patron of the arts . These two legends are both stories of mortals challenging gods and the dreadful consequences . One scholar points out that the legend dealing with two women , Minerva and Arachne , is on the same side of the mirror as the queen 's reflection while the male legend is on the side of the king . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The painted surface is divided into quarters horizontally and sevenths vertically ; this grid is used to organise the elaborate grouping of characters , and was a common device at the time . Velázquez presents nine figures — eleven if the king and queen 's reflected images are included — yet they occupy only the lower half of the canvas . 
 According to López @-@ Rey , the painting has three focal points : the Infanta Margaret Theresa , the self @-@ portrait and the half @-@ length reflected images of King Philip IV and Queen Mariana . In 1960 , the art historian Kenneth Clark made the point that the success of the composition is a result first and foremost of the accurate handling of light and shade : 
 Each focal point involves us in a new set of relations ; and to paint a complex group like the Meninas , the painter must carry in his head a single consistent scale of relations which he can apply throughout . He may use all kinds of devices to help him do this — perspective is one of them — but ultimately the truth about a complete visual impression depends on one thing , truth of tone . Drawing may be summary , colours drab , but if the relations of tone are true , the picture will hold . 
 However , the focal point of the painting is widely debated . Leo Steinberg argues that the orthogonals in the work are intentionally disguised so that the picture 's focal center shifts . Similar to Lopez @-@ Rey , he describes three foci . The man in the doorway , however , is the vanishing point . More specifically , the crook of his arm is where the orthogonals of the windows and lights of the ceiling meet . 
 Depth and dimension are rendered by the use of linear perspective , by the overlapping of the layers of shapes , and in particular , as stated by Clark , through the use of tone . This compositional element operates within the picture in a number of ways . First , there is the appearance of natural light within the painted room and beyond it . The pictorial space in the midground and foreground is lit from two sources : by thin shafts of light from the open door , and by broad streams coming through the window to the right . The 20th @-@ century French philosopher and cultural critic Michel Foucault observed that the light from the window illuminates both the studio foreground and the unrepresented area in front of it , in which the king , the queen , and the viewer are presumed to be situated . For José Ortega y Gasset , light divides the scene into three distinct parts , with foreground and background planes strongly illuminated , between which a darkened intermediate space includes silhouetted figures . 
 Velázquez uses this light not only to add volume and definition to each form but also to define the focal points of the painting . As the light streams in from the right it brightly glints on the braid and golden hair of the female dwarf , who is nearest the light source . But because her face is turned from the light , and in shadow , its tonality does not make it a point of particular interest . Similarly , the light glances obliquely on the cheek of the lady @-@ in @-@ waiting near her , but not on her facial features . Much of her lightly coloured dress is dimmed by shadow . The Infanta , however , stands in full illumination , and with her face turned towards the light source , even though her gaze is not . Her face is framed by the pale gossamer of her hair , setting her apart from everything else in the picture . The light models the volumetric geometry of her form , defining the conic nature of a small torso bound rigidly into a corset and stiffened bodice , and the <unk> skirt extending around her like an oval candy @-@ box , casting its own deep shadow which , by its sharp contrast with the bright brocade , both emphasises and locates the small figure as the main point of attention . 
 Velázquez further emphasises the Infanta by his positioning and lighting of her maids of honour , whom he sets opposing one another : to left and right , before and behind the Infanta . The maid to the left faces the light , her brightly lit profile and sleeve creating a diagonal . Her opposite number creates a broader but less defined reflection of her attention , making a diagonal space between them , in which their charge stands protected . 
 A further internal diagonal passes through the space occupied by the Infanta . There is a similar connection between the female dwarf and the figure of Velázquez himself , both of whom look towards the viewer from similar angles , creating a visual tension . The face of Velázquez is dimly lit by light that is reflected , rather than direct . For this reason his features , though not as sharply defined , are more visible than those of the dwarf who is much nearer the light source . This appearance of a total face , full @-@ on to the viewer , draws the attention , and its importance is marked , tonally , by the contrasting frame of dark hair , the light on the hand and brush , and the skilfully placed triangle of light on the artist 's sleeve , pointing directly to the face . 
 From the figure of the artist , the viewer 's eye leaps again diagonally into the pictorial space . Another man stands , echoing and opposing the form of the artist , outside rather than inside , made clearly defined and yet barely identifiable by the light and shade . The positioning of such an area of strong tonal contrast right at the rear of the pictorial space is a daring compositional tactic . The shapes of bright light are similar to the irregular light shapes of the foreground Maid of Honour , but the sharply defined door @-@ frame repeats the border of the mirror . 
 The mirror is a perfectly defined unbroken pale rectangle within a broad black rectangle . A clear geometric shape , like a lit face , draws the attention of the viewer more than a broken geometric shape such as the door , or a shadowed or oblique face such as that of the dwarf in the foreground or that of the man in the background . The viewer cannot distinguish the features of the king and queen , but in the opalescent sheen of the mirror 's surface , the glowing ovals are plainly turned directly to the viewer . Jonathan Miller points out that apart from " adding suggestive gleams at the bevelled edges , the most important way the mirror betrays its identity is by disclosing imagery whose brightness is so inconsistent with the dimness of the surrounding wall that it can only have been borrowed , by reflection , from the strongly illuminated figures of the King and Queen " . 
 As the maids of honour are reflected in each other , so too do the king and queen have their doubles within the painting , in the dimly lit forms of the chaperone and guard , the two who serve and care for their daughter . The positioning of these figures sets up a pattern , one man , a couple , one man , a couple , and while the outer figures are nearer the viewer than the others , they all occupy the same horizontal band on the picture 's surface . 
 Adding to the inner complexities of the picture and creating further visual interactions is the male dwarf in the foreground , whose raised hand echoes the gesture of the figure in the background , while his playful demeanour , and distraction from the central action , are in complete contrast with it . The informality of his pose , his shadowed profile , and his dark hair all serve to make him a mirror image to the kneeling attendant of the Infanta . However , the painter has set him forward of the light streaming through the window , and so minimised the contrast of tone on this foreground figure . 
 Despite certain spatial ambiguities this is the painter 's most thoroughly rendered architectural space , and the only one in which a ceiling is shown . According to López @-@ Rey , in no other composition did Velázquez so dramatically lead the eye to areas beyond the viewer 's sight : both the canvas he is seen painting , and the space beyond the frame where the king and queen stand can only be imagined . The <unk> of the dark ceiling , the back of Velázquez 's canvas , and the strict geometry of framed paintings contrast with the animated , brilliantly lit and sumptuously painted foreground entourage . Stone writes : 
 We cannot take in all the figures of the painting in one glance . Not only do the life @-@ size proportions of the painting preclude such an appreciation , but also the fact that the heads of the figures are turned in different directions means that our gaze is deflected . The painting communicates through images which , in order to be understood , must thus be considered in sequence , one after the other , in the context of a history that is still unfolding . It is a history that is still unframed , even in this painting composed of frames within frames . 
 According to Kahr , the composition could have been influenced by the traditional Dutch Gallery Pictures such as those by Frans <unk> the Younger , Willem van <unk> , or David Teniers the Younger . Teniers ' work was owned by Philip IV and would have been known by Velázquez . Like Las Meninas , they often depict formal visits by important collectors or rulers , a common occurrence , and " show a room with a series of windows dominating one side wall and paintings hung between the windows as well as on the other walls " . Gallery Portraits were also used to glorify the artist as well as royalty or members of the higher classes , as may have been Velázquez 's intention with this work . 
 = = = Mirror and reflection = = = 
 The spatial structure and positioning of the mirror 's reflection are such that Philip IV and Mariana appear to be standing on the viewer 's side of the pictorial space , facing the Infanta and her entourage . According to Janson , not only is the gathering of figures in the foreground for Philip and Mariana 's benefit , but the painter 's attention is concentrated on the couple , as he appears to be working on their portrait . Although they can only be seen in the mirror reflection , their distant image occupies a central position in the canvas , in terms of social hierarchy as well as composition . As spectators , our position in relation to the painting is uncertain . It has been debated whether the ruling couple are standing beside the viewer or have replaced the viewer , who sees the scene through their eyes . Lending weight to the latter idea are the gazes of three of the figures — Velázquez , the Infanta , and Maribarbola — who appear to be looking directly at the viewer . 
 The mirror on the back wall indicates what is not there : the king and queen , and in the words of Harriet Stone , " the generations of spectators who assume the couple 's place before the painting " . Writing in 1980 , the critics Snyder and Cohn observed : 
 Velázquez wanted the mirror to depend upon the useable painted canvas for its image . Why should he want that ? The luminous image in the mirror appears to reflect the king and queen themselves , but it does more than just this : the mirror outdoes nature . The mirror image is only a reflection . A reflection of what ? Of the real thing — of the art of Velázquez . In the presence of his divinely ordained monarchs ... Velázquez exults in his artistry and counsels Philip and Maria not to look for the revelation of their image in the natural reflection of a looking glass but rather in the penetrating vision of their master painter . In the presence of Velázquez , a mirror image is a poor imitation of the real . 
 In Las Meninas , the king and queen are supposedly " outside " the painting , yet their reflection in the back wall mirror also places them " inside " the pictorial space . 
 Snyder proposes it is " a mirror of majesty " or an allusion to the mirror for princes . While it is a literal reflection of the king and queen , Snyder writes " it is the image of exemplary monarchs , a reflection of ideal character " Later he focuses his attention on the princess , writing that Velázquez 's portrait is " the painted equivalent of a manual for the education of the princess — a mirror of the princess " 
 The painting is likely to have been influenced by Jan van Eyck 's Arnolfini Portrait , of 1434 . At the time , van Eyck 's painting hung in Philip 's palace , and would have been familiar to Velázquez . The Arnolfini Portrait also has a mirror positioned at the back of the pictorial space , reflecting two figures who would have the same angle of vision as does the viewer of Velázquez 's painting ; they are too small to identify , but it has been speculated that one may be intended as the artist himself , though he is not shown in the act of painting . According to Lucien <unk> : 
 The mirror [ in Las Meninas ] faces the observer as in Van Eyck 's painting . But here the procedure is more realistic to the degree that the " rearview " mirror in which the royal couple appears is no longer convex but flat . Whereas the reflection in the Flemish painting recomposed objects and characters within a space that is condensed and deformed by the curve of the mirror , that of Velázquez refuses to play with the laws of perspective : it projects onto the canvas the perfect double of the king and queen positioned in front of the painting . Moreover , in showing the figures whom the painter observes , and also , through the mediation of the mirror , the figures who are observing him , the painter achieves a reciprocity of gazes that makes the interior oscillate with the exterior and which causes the image to " emerge from its frame " at the same time that it invites the visitors to enter the painting . 
 Jonathan Miller asks : " What are we to make of the blurred features of the royal couple ? It is unlikely that it has anything to do with the optical imperfection of the mirror , which would , in reality , have displayed a focused image of the King and Queen " . He notes that " in addition to the represented mirror , he teasingly implies an unrepresented one , without which it is difficult to imagine how he could have shown himself painting the picture we now see " . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 The elusiveness of Las Meninas , according to Dawson Carr , " suggests that art , and life , are an illusion " . The relationship between illusion and reality were central concerns in Spanish culture during the 17th century , figuring largely in Don Quixote : the best @-@ known work of Spanish Baroque literature . In this respect , Calderón de la Barca 's play Life is a Dream is commonly seen as the literary equivalent of Velázquez 's painting : 
 Jon <unk> White notes that the painting can be seen as a résumé of the whole of Velázquez 's life and career , as well as a summary of his art to that point . He placed his only confirmed self @-@ portrait in a room in the royal palace surrounded by an assembly of royalty , courtiers , and fine objects that represent his life at court . The art historian Svetlana <unk> suggests that , by portraying the artist at work in the company of royalty and nobility , Velázquez was claiming high status for both the artist and his art , and in particular to propose that painting is a liberal rather than a mechanical art . This distinction was a point of controversy at the time . It would have been significant to Velázquez , since the rules of the Order of Santiago excluded those whose occupations were mechanical . Kahr asserts that this was the best way for Velázquez to show that he was " neither a craftsman or a tradesman , but an official of the court " . Furthermore , this was a way to prove himself worthy of acceptance by the royal family . 
 Michel Foucault devoted the opening chapter of The Order of Things ( 1966 ) to an analysis of Las Meninas . Foucault describes the painting in meticulous detail , but in a language that is " neither prescribed by , nor filtered through the various texts of art @-@ historical investigation " . Foucault viewed the painting without regard to the subject matter , nor to the artist 's biography , technical ability , sources and influences , social context , or relationship with his patrons . Instead he analyses its conscious artifice , highlighting the complex network of visual relationships between painter , subject @-@ model , and viewer : 
 We are looking at a picture in which the painter is in turn looking out at us . A mere confrontation , eyes catching one another 's glance , direct looks superimposing themselves upon one another as they cross . And yet this slender line of reciprocal visibility embraces a whole complex network of uncertainties , exchanges , and feints . The painter is turning his eyes towards us only in so far as we happen to occupy the same position as his subject . 
 For Foucault , Las Meninas illustrates the first signs of a new <unk> , or way of thinking . It represents a midpoint between what he sees as the two " great discontinuities " in European thought , the classical and the modern : " Perhaps there exists , in this painting by Velázquez , the representation as it were of Classical representation , and the definition of the space it opens up to us ... representation , freed finally from the relation that was impeding it , can offer itself as representation in its pure form . " 
 Now he ( the painter ) can be seen , caught in a moment of stillness , at the neutral centre of his oscillation . His dark torso and bright face are half @-@ way between the visible and the invisible : emerging from the canvas beyond our view , he moves into our gaze ; but when , in a moment , he makes a step to the right , removing himself from our gaze , he will be standing exactly in front of the canvas he is painting ; he will enter that region where his painting , neglected for an instant , will , for him , become visible once more , free of shadow and free of reticence . As though the painter could not at the same time be seen on the picture where he is represented and also see that upon which he is representing something . " 
 In the conclusion of Order of Things Foucault explained why he undertook such a forensic analysis of Las Meninas : 
 let us , if we may , look for the previously existing law of that interplay [ ie the law of representation ] in the painting of Las Meninas ... In Classical thought , the personage for whom the representation exists , and who represents himself within it , recognizing himself therein as an image or reflection , he who ties together all the interlacing threads of the ' representation in the form of a picture or table ' – he is never to be found in that table himself . Before the end of the eighteenth century , man did not exist @-@ any more than the potency of life , the fecundity of labour , or the historical density of language . He is a quite recent creature , which the demiurge of knowledge fabricated with its own hands less than two hundred years ago : but he has grown old so quickly that it has been only too easy to imagine that he had been waiting for thousands of years in the darkness for that moment of illumination in which he would finally be known . 
 Foucault 's analysis of Las Meninas , although on one level a contribution to art history , is more about epistemology , specifically the ' cognitive status of the modern human sciences ' , based on the possibility , suggested by Ludwig Wittgenstein , that a picture is a model of reality ( TLP 2 @.@ 22 ) 
 = = Las Meninas as culmination of themes in Velázquez = = 
 Many aspects of Las Meninas relate to earlier works by Velázquez in which he plays with conventions of representation . In the Rokeby Venus — his only surviving nude — the face of the subject is visible , blurred beyond any realism , in a mirror . The angle of the mirror is such that although " often described as looking at herself , [ she ] is more disconcertingly looking at us " . In the early Christ in the House of Martha and Mary of 1618 , Christ and his companions are seen only through a serving hatch to a room behind , according to the National Gallery ( London ) , who are clear that this is the intention , although before restoration many art historians regarded this scene as either a painting hanging on the wall in the main scene , or a reflection in a mirror , and the debate has continued . The dress worn in the two scenes also differs : the main scene is in contemporary dress , while the scene with Christ uses conventional iconographic biblical dress . This is also a feature of Los <unk> of 1629 , where contemporary peasants consort with the god Bacchus and his companions , who have the conventional undress of mythology . In this , as in some of his early <unk> , the figures look directly at the viewer as if seeking a reaction . 
 In Las <unk> , probably painted the year after Las Meninas , two different scenes from Ovid are shown : one in contemporary dress in the foreground , and the other partly in antique dress , played before a tapestry on the back wall of a room behind the first . According to the critic Sira <unk> , " aspects of representation and power are addressed in this painting in ways closely connected with their treatment in Las Meninas " . In a series of portraits of the late 1630s and 1640s — all now in the Prado — Velázquez painted clowns and other members of the royal household posing as gods , heroes , and philosophers ; the intention is certainly partly comic , at least for those in the know , but in a highly ambiguous way . 
 Velázquez 's portraits of the royal family themselves had until then been straightforward , if often <unk> direct and highly complex in expression . On the other hand , his royal portraits , designed to be seen across vast palace rooms , feature more strongly than his other works the bravura handling for which he is famous : " Velázquez 's handling of paint is exceptionally free , and as one approaches Las Meninas there is a point at which the figures suddenly dissolve into smears and blobs of paint . The long @-@ handled brushes he used enabled him to stand back and judge the total effect . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 In 1692 , the Neapolitan painter Luca Giordano became one of the few allowed to view paintings held in Philip IV 's private apartments , and was greatly impressed by Las Meninas . Giordano described the work as the " theology of painting " , and was inspired to paint A Homage to Velázquez ( National Gallery , London ) . By the early 18th century his oeuvre was gaining international recognition , and later in the century British collectors ventured to Spain in search of acquisitions . Since the popularity of Italian art was then at its height among British connoisseurs , they concentrated on paintings that showed obvious Italian influence , largely ignoring others such as Las Meninas . 
 An almost immediate influence can be seen in the two portraits by Mazo of subjects depicted in Las Meninas , which in some ways reverse the motif of that painting . Ten years later , in 1666 , Mazo painted Infanta Margaret Theresa , who was then 15 and just about to leave Madrid to marry the Holy Roman Emperor . In the background are figures in two further receding doorways , one of which was the new King Charles ( Margaret Theresa 's brother ) , and another the dwarf Maribarbola . A Mazo portrait of the widowed Queen Mariana again shows , through a doorway in the Alcázar , the young king with dwarfs , possibly including Maribarbola , and attendants who offer him a drink . Mazo 's painting of The Family of the Artist also shows a composition similar to that of Las Meninas . 
 Francisco Goya etched a print of Las Meninas in 1778 , and later used Velázquez 's painting as the model for his Charles IV of Spain and His Family . As in Las Meninas , the royal family in Goya 's work is apparently visiting the artist 's studio . In both paintings the artist is shown working on a canvas , of which only the rear is visible . Goya , however , replaces the atmospheric and warm perspective of Las Meninas with what Pierre <unk> calls a sense of " imminent suffocation " . Goya 's royal family is presented on a " stage facing the public , while in the shadow of the wings the painter , with a grim smile , points and says : ' Look at them and judge for yourself ! ' " 
 The 19th @-@ century British art collector William John Bankes travelled to Spain during the Peninsular War ( 1808 – 1814 ) and acquired a copy of Las Meninas painted by Mazo , which he believed to be an original preparatory oil sketch by Velázquez — although Velázquez did not usually paint studies . Bankes described his purchase as " the glory of my collection " , noting that he had been " a long while in treaty for it and was obliged to pay a high price " . The copy was admired throughout the 19th century in Britain . 
 The art world developed a new appreciation for Velázquez 's less Italianate paintings after 1819 , when Ferdinand VII opened the royal collection to the public . In 1879 John Singer Sargent painted a small @-@ scale copy of Las Meninas , and in 1882 painted a homage to the painting in his The Daughters of Edward Darley <unk> , while the Irish artist Sir John Lavery chose Velázquez 's masterpiece as the basis for his portrait The Royal Family at Buckingham Palace , 1913 . George V visited Lavery 's studio during the execution of the painting , and , perhaps remembering the legend that Philip IV had daubed the cross of the Knights of Santiago on the figure of Velázquez , asked Lavery if he could contribute to the portrait with his own hand . According to Lavery , " Thinking that royal blue might be an appropriate colour , I mixed it on the palette , and taking a brush he [ George V ] applied it to the Garter ribbon . " 
 Between August and December 1957 , Pablo Picasso painted a series of 58 interpretations of Las Meninas , and figures from it , which currently fill the Las Meninas room of the Museu Picasso in Barcelona , Spain . Picasso did not vary the characters within the series , but largely retained the naturalness of the scene ; according to the museum , his works constitute an " exhaustive study of form , rhythm , colour and movement " . A print of 1973 by Richard Hamilton called Picasso 's Meninas draws on both Velázquez and Picasso . Photographer Joel @-@ Peter Witkin was commissioned by the Spanish Ministry of Culture to create a work titled Las Meninas , New Mexico ( 1987 ) which references Velázquez 's painting as well as other works by Spanish artists . 
 The American novelist David Foster Wallace titled an unpublished short story after this painting ; the story was incorporated into his 1995 magnum opus Infinite Jest as the " <unk> " section , but without the Velásquez allusion . 
 In 2004 , the video artist Eve Sussman filmed 89 Seconds at Alcázar , a high @-@ definition video tableau inspired by Las Meninas . The work is a recreation of the moments leading up to and directly following the approximately 89 seconds when the royal family and their courtiers would have come together in the exact configuration of Velázquez 's painting . Sussman had assembled a team of 35 , including an architect , a set designer , a choreographer , a costume designer , actors , actresses , and a film crew . 
 A 2008 exhibit at the Museu Picasso titled " Forgetting Velázquez : Las Meninas " included art responding to by Velázquez 's painting by Fermín Aguayo , <unk> <unk> , Claudio Bravo , Juan Carreño de Miranda , Michael Craig @-@ Martin , Salvador Dalí , Juan Downey , Goya , Hamilton , Mazo , Vik Muniz , Jorge <unk> , Picasso , Antonio Saura , Franz von Stuck , Sussman , Manolo Valdés , and Witkin , among others . 
 = = A version in England = = 
 A smaller version of the painting , thought to be a draft , is preserved in the country house of Kingston Lacy in Dorset , England . Several experts , including the former Curator of the Department of Renaissance and Baroque Painting in the Museo del Prado and current Director of the Moll Institute of Studies of Flemish Paintings , in Madrid , Professor Matías Díaz <unk> , suggest that this " could be a model " painted by Velázquez before the completed work which hangs in the Museo del Prado , perhaps to be approved by the king . Conflicting with this is the fact that the Kingston Lacy version represents the final state of Las Meninas , not the earlier state of the painting revealed by radiographs , suggesting that it was painted after the completed work , not before it . 
 Another possibility is that the Kingston Lacy painting is a copy by Juan Bautista Martínez del Mazo ( c . 1612 @-@ 1667 ) , son @-@ in @-@ law and close follower of Velázquez . The version is missing some of the final work 's details and nuances such as the royal couple 's reflection in the mirror . Its composition is almost identical to the original . Although its colors are lighter , the light is less strong . Pencil lines outlining the Infanta 's face , eyes , and hair are also visible . 
 The Kingston Lacy painting was previously owned by Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos and then by Ceán Bermúdez , who were both friends of Goya whose portraits he painted . Bermúdez 's writings on the painting were published posthumously in 1885 . 
 = Tropical cyclogenesis = 
 Tropical cyclogenesis is the development and strengthening of a tropical cyclone in the atmosphere . The mechanisms through which tropical cyclogenesis occurs are distinctly different from those through which mid @-@ latitude cyclogenesis occurs . Tropical cyclogenesis involves the development of a warm @-@ core cyclone , due to significant convection in a favorable atmospheric environment . There are six main requirements for tropical cyclogenesis : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to develop a low pressure center , a preexisting low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . 
 Tropical cyclones tend to develop during the summer , but have been noted in nearly every month in most basins . Climate cycles such as ENSO and the Madden – Julian oscillation modulate the timing and frequency of tropical cyclone development . There is a limit on tropical cyclone intensity which is strongly related to the water temperatures along its path . An average of 86 tropical cyclones of tropical storm intensity form annually worldwide . Of those , 47 reach hurricane / typhoon strength , and 20 become intense tropical cyclones ( at least Category 3 intensity on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . 
 = = Requirements for tropical cyclone formation = = 
 There are six main requirements for tropical cyclogenesis : sufficiently warm sea surface temperatures , atmospheric instability , high humidity in the lower to middle levels of the troposphere , enough Coriolis force to sustain a low pressure center , a preexisting low level focus or disturbance , and low vertical wind shear . While these conditions are necessary for tropical cyclone formation , they do not guarantee that a tropical cyclone will form . 
 = = = Warm waters , instability , and mid @-@ level moisture = = = 
 Normally , an ocean temperature of 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) spanning through at least a 50 @-@ metre depth is considered the minimum to maintain the special mesocyclone that is the tropical cyclone . These warm waters are needed to maintain the warm core that fuels tropical systems . This value is well above 16 @.@ 1 ° C ( 60 @.@ 9 ° F ) , the global average surface temperature of the oceans . However , this requirement can be considered only a general baseline because it assumes that the ambient atmospheric environment surrounding an area of disturbed weather presents average conditions . 
 Tropical cyclones are known to form even when normal conditions are not met . For example , cooler air temperatures at a higher altitude ( e.g. , at the 500 hPa level , or 5 @.@ 9 km ) can lead to tropical cyclogenesis at lower water temperatures , as a certain lapse rate is required to force the atmosphere to be unstable enough for convection . In a moist atmosphere , this lapse rate is 6 @.@ 5 ° C / km , while in an atmosphere with less than 100 % relative humidity , the required lapse rate is 9 @.@ 8 ° C / km . 
 At the 500 hPa level , the air temperature averages − 7 ° C ( 18 ° F ) within the tropics , but air in the tropics is normally dry at this level , giving the air room to wet @-@ bulb , or cool as it moistens , to a more favorable temperature that can then support convection . A wetbulb temperature at 500 hPa in a tropical atmosphere of − 13 @.@ 2 ° C is required to initiate convection if the water temperature is 26 @.@ 5 ° C , and this temperature requirement increases or decreases proportionally by 1 ° C in the sea surface temperature for each 1 ° C change at 500 hpa . Under a cold cyclone , 500 hPa temperatures can fall as low as − 30 ° C , which can initiate convection even in the driest atmospheres . This also explains why moisture in the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere , roughly at the 500 hPa level , is normally a requirement for development . However , when dry air is found at the same height , temperatures at 500 hPa need to be even colder as dry atmospheres require a greater lapse rate for instability than moist atmospheres . At heights near the tropopause , the 30 @-@ year average temperature ( as measured in the period encompassing 1961 through 1990 ) was − 77 ° C ( − 132 ° F ) . A recent example of a tropical cyclone that maintained itself over cooler waters was Epsilon of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = = = Role of Maximum Potential Intensity ( MPI ) = = = = 
 Kerry Emanuel created a mathematical model around 1988 to compute the upper limit of tropical cyclone intensity based on sea surface temperature and atmospheric profiles from the latest global model runs . Emanuel 's model is called the maximum potential intensity , or MPI . Maps created from this equation show regions where tropical storm and hurricane formation is possible , based upon the thermodynamics of the atmosphere at the time of the last model run ( either 0000 or 1200 UTC ) . This does not take into account vertical wind shear . 
 = = = Coriolis force = = = 
 A minimum distance of 500 km ( 310 mi ) from the equator is normally needed for tropical cyclogenesis . The Coriolis force imparts rotation on the flow and arises as winds begin to flow in toward the lower pressure created by the pre @-@ existing disturbance . In areas with a very small or non @-@ existent Coriolis force ( e.g. near the Equator ) , the only significant atmospheric forces in play are the pressure gradient force ( the pressure difference that causes winds to blow from high to low pressure ) and a smaller friction force ; these two alone would not cause the large @-@ scale rotation required for tropical cyclogenesis . The existence of a significant Coriolis force allows the developing vortex to achieve gradient wind balance . This is a balance condition found in mature tropical cyclones that allows latent heat to concentrate near the storm core ; this results in the maintenance or intensification of the vortex if other development factors are neutral . 
 = = = Low level disturbance = = = 
 Whether it be a depression in the intertropical <unk> zone ( ITCZ ) , a tropical wave , a broad surface front , or an outflow boundary , a low level feature with sufficient vorticity and convergence is required to begin tropical cyclogenesis . Even with perfect upper level conditions and the required atmospheric instability , the lack of a surface focus will prevent the development of organized convection and a surface low . Tropical cyclones can form when smaller circulations within the Intertropical Convergence Zone merge . 
 = = = Weak vertical wind shear = = = 
 Vertical wind shear of less than 10 m / s ( 20 kt , 22 mph ) between the surface and the tropopause is favored for tropical cyclone development . A weaker vertical shear makes the storm grow faster vertically into the air , which helps the storm develop and become stronger . If the vertical shear is too strong , the storm cannot rise to its full potential and its energy becomes spread out over too large of an area for the storm to strengthen . Strong wind shear can " blow " the tropical cyclone apart , as it displaces the mid @-@ level warm core from the surface circulation and dries out the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere , halting development . In smaller systems , the development of a significant mesoscale convective complex in a sheared environment can send out a large enough outflow boundary to destroy the surface cyclone . Moderate wind shear can lead to the initial development of the convective complex and surface low similar to the mid @-@ latitudes , but it must relax to allow tropical cyclogenesis to continue . 
 = = = = Favorable trough interactions = = = = 
 Limited vertical wind shear can be positive for tropical cyclone formation . When an upper @-@ level trough or upper @-@ level low is roughly the same scale as the tropical disturbance , the system can be steered by the upper level system into an area with better diffluence aloft , which can cause further development . Weaker upper cyclones are better candidates for a favorable interaction . There is evidence that weakly sheared tropical cyclones initially develop more rapidly than non @-@ sheared tropical cyclones , although this comes at the cost of a peak in intensity with much weaker wind speeds and higher minimum pressure . This process is also known as baroclinic initiation of a tropical cyclone . Trailing upper cyclones and upper troughs can cause additional outflow channels and aid in the intensification process . It should be noted that developing tropical disturbances can help create or deepen upper troughs or upper lows in their wake due to the outflow jet emanating from the developing tropical disturbance / cyclone . 
 There are cases where large , mid @-@ latitude troughs can help with tropical cyclogenesis when an upper @-@ level jet stream passes to the northwest of the developing system , which will aid divergence aloft and inflow at the surface , spinning up the cyclone . This type of interaction is more often associated with disturbances already in the process of recurvature . 
 = = Times of formation = = 
 Worldwide , tropical cyclone activity peaks in late summer when water temperatures are warmest . Each basin , however , has its own seasonal patterns . On a worldwide scale , May is the least active month , while September is the most active . 
 In the North Atlantic , a distinct hurricane season occurs from June 1 through November 30 , sharply peaking from late August through October . The statistical peak of the North Atlantic hurricane season is September 10 . The Northeast Pacific has a broader period of activity , but in a similar time frame to the Atlantic . The Northwest Pacific sees tropical cyclones year @-@ round , with a minimum in February and a peak in early September . In the North Indian basin , storms are most common from April to December , with peaks in May and November . 
 In the Southern Hemisphere , tropical cyclone activity generally begins in early November and generally ends on April 30 . Southern Hemisphere activity peaks in mid @-@ February to early March . Virtually all the Southern Hemisphere activity is seen from the southern African coast eastward , toward South America . Tropical cyclones are rare events across the south Atlantic ocean and the southeastern Pacific ocean . 
 = = Unusual areas of formation = = 
 = = = Middle latitudes = = = 
 Areas farther than 30 degrees from the equator ( except in the vicinity of a warm current ) are not normally conducive to tropical cyclone formation or strengthening , and areas more than 40 degrees from the equator are often very hostile to such development . The primary limiting factor is water temperatures , although higher shear at increasing latitudes is also a factor . These areas are sometimes frequented by cyclones moving poleward from tropical latitudes . On rare occasions , such as in 2004 , 1988 , and 1975 , storms may form or strengthen in this region . Typically , tropical cyclones will undergo extratropical transition after recurving polewards , and typically become fully extratropical after reaching 45 – 50 ˚ of latitude . The majority of extratropical cyclones tend to restrengthen after completing the transition period . 
 = = = Near the Equator = = = 
 Areas within approximately ten degrees latitude of the equator do not experience a significant Coriolis Force , a vital ingredient in tropical cyclone formation . However , recently a few tropical cyclones have been observed forming within five degrees of the equator . 
 = = = South Atlantic = = = 
 A combination of wind shear and a lack of tropical disturbances from the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) makes it very difficult for the South Atlantic to support tropical activity . Over four tropical cyclones have been observed here such as — a weak tropical storm in 1991 off the coast of Africa near Angola , Hurricane Catarina , which made landfall in Brazil in 2004 at Category 2 strength , and a smaller storm in January 2004 , east of Salvador , Brazil . The January storm is thought to have reached tropical storm intensity based on scatterometer wind measurements . 
 = = = Mediterranean and Black Seas = = = 
 Storms that appear similar to tropical cyclones in structure sometimes occur in the Mediterranean basin . Examples of these " Mediterranean tropical cyclones " formed in September 1947 , September 1969 , September 1973 , August 1976 , January 1982 , September 1983 , December 1984 , December 1985 , October 1994 , January 1995 , October 1996 , September 1997 , December 2005 , September 2006 , and November 2011 . However , there is debate on whether these storms were tropical in nature . 
 The Black Sea has , on occasion , produced or fueled storms that begin cyclonic rotation , and that appear to be similar to cyclones seen in the Mediterranean . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Tropical cyclogenesis is rare in the southeastern Pacific Ocean due to the cold sea @-@ surface temperatures generated by the Humboldt Current and to unfavourable wind shear ; there are no records of a tropical cyclone hitting western South America . But in mid @-@ 2015 , a rare subtropical cyclone was identified in early May relatively close to Chile . This system was unofficially dubbed Katie by researchers . 
 Vortices have been reported off the coast of Morocco in the past . However , it is debatable if they are truly tropical in character . 
 Tropical activity is also extremely rare in the Great Lakes . However , a storm system that appeared similar to a subtropical or tropical cyclone formed in 1996 on Lake Huron . It formed an eye @-@ like structure in its center , and it may have briefly been a subtropical or tropical cyclone . 
 = = Influence of large @-@ scale climate cycles = = 
 = = = Influence of ENSO = = = 
 Warm waters during the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation lower the potential of tropical cyclone formation primarily in the Atlantic Basin and around Australia . Because tropical cyclones in the northeastern Pacific and north Atlantic basins are both generated in large part by tropical waves from the same wave train , decreased tropical cyclone activity in the north Atlantic translates to increased tropical cyclone activity in the Eastern North Pacific . 
 In the Northwestern Pacific , El Niño shifts the formation of tropical cyclones eastward . During El Niño episodes , tropical cyclones tend to form in the eastern part of the basin , between 150 ° E and the International Date Line ( IDL ) . Coupled with an increase in activity in the North @-@ Central Pacific ( IDL to 140 ° W ) and the South @-@ Central Pacific ( east of 160 ° E ) , there is a net increase in tropical cyclone development near the International Date Line on both sides of the equator . While there is no linear relationship between the strength of an El Niño and tropical cyclone formation in the Northwestern Pacific , typhoons forming during El Niño years tend to have a longer duration and higher intensities . Tropical cyclogenesis in the Northwestern Pacific is suppressed west of 150 ° E in the year following an El Niño event . 
 = = = Influence of the MJO = = = 
 In general , westerly wind increases associated with the Madden – Julian oscillation lead to increased tropical cyclogenesis in all basins . As the oscillation propagates from west to east , it leads to an eastward march in tropical cyclogenesis with time during that hemisphere 's summer season . There is an inverse relationship between tropical cyclone activity in the western Pacific basin and the north Atlantic basin , however . When one basin is active , the other is normally quiet , and vice versa . The main reason for this appears to be the phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation , or MJO , which is normally in opposite modes between the two basins at any given time . 
 = = = Influence of equatorial Rossby waves = = = 
 Research has shown that trapped equatorial Rossby wave packets can increase the likelihood of tropical cyclogenesis in the Pacific Ocean , as they increase the low @-@ level westerly winds within that region , which then leads to greater low @-@ level vorticity . The individual waves can move at approximately 1 @.@ 8 m / s ( 4 mph ) each , though the group tends to remain stationary . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 Since 1984 , Colorado State University has been issuing seasonal tropical cyclone forecasts for the north Atlantic basin , with results that are better than climatology . The university has found several statistical relationships for this basin that appear to allow long range prediction of the number of tropical cyclones . Since then , numerous others have followed in the university 's steps , with some organizations issuing seasonal forecasts for the northwest Pacific and the Australian region . The predictors are related to regional oscillations in the global climate system : the Walker circulation which is related to the El Niño @-@ Southern Oscillation ; the North Atlantic oscillation or NAO ; the Arctic oscillation or AO ; and the Pacific North American pattern or PNA . 
 = Wings ( Little Mix song ) = 
 " Wings " is a song by British girl group Little Mix . It was co @-@ written by the group in collaboration with Iain James , Erika Nuri , Michelle Lewis , Mischke , Heidi Rojas and the song 's producers , TMS . It was released as their second single after winning the eighth series of The X Factor in 2011 , and the lead single from their debut studio album DNA ( 2012 ) . Syco Music serviced the single to BBC Radio 1 in the United Kingdom on 2 July 2012 and it was released for digital download on 24 August 2012 . The uptempo song , which features modern beats , drums , horns and clapping , is a pop arrangement with elements of R & B and old school . Lyrically , the song has themes of girl power , maternal advice and individuality . 
 " Wings " was well received by contemporary music critics , who praised its lyrical message , upbeat sound and vocals . " Wings " was the group 's most successful single to date , until they released " Black Magic " in 2015 . It topped the UK Singles Chart with sales of 107 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The single also reached number one in Ireland and Scotland and number three in Australia , where it was certified triple platinum . It charted in the top 40 in three other countries , peaking at number 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and number 26 on the US Billboard Pop Songs chart . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Max and Dania at an abandoned warehouse . The clip shows the group dancing and singing in front of colourful backdrops and a pink Union Jack flag , wearing urban @-@ styled outfits corresponding to the backdrops . The video received favorable reviews from critics , who praised the group 's fashion sense , dancing and confidence . Little Mix promoted the song by performing it live on a number of television shows ( including Red or Black ? and The X Factor Australia ) and during their 2013 DNA Tour . 
 = = Inspiration and writing = = 
 In December 2011 , Little Mix won the eighth series of The X Factor ( UK ) , becoming the first group to do so and subsequently signing a recording deal with Syco Music . A cover of Damien Rice 's 2002 single " Cannonball " was released as the group 's debut single and winner 's single that month . Although " Cannonball " became their first number one single in the UK and Ireland , the group were adamant on writing an original single to follow it up . " Wings " was primarily written by Little Mix , Iain James , and TMS members Thomas Barnes , Peter Kelleher and Ben Kohn . However , Little Mix continued to collaborate with other writers until they felt the song was complete , including Erika Nuri of The Writing Camp , singer Michelle Lewis , Mischke , and Heidi Rojas . It was the first song written for the group 's debut studio album , DNA . 
 According to group member Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock , the line " Mama told me not to waste my time " was considered an important part during the development of " Wings " ; the song was in part based on the group 's personal experiences of overcoming bullying . Little Mix wanted the single to be something listeners could relate to without sounding cheesy . The lyrics were written as an uplifting message for both the group and their fans . Group member Jesy Nelson said : " There 's nothing wrong with writing songs about clubs and partying but I think it 's cool to do a song with meaning . " The song specifically drew inspiration from the group 's experience on The X Factor where they felt discouraged , being the favourites to be eliminated after the competition 's first live show . Nelson explained : " On our first week on X Factor the <unk> were all shouting ' See you on This Morning on Monday ' because that 's where all the losers go . I was like : ' Oh , right , thanks ! ' " 
 Other inspiration came from a time when Nelson aspired to be a singer as a teenager , but was discouraged by her teachers who told her she needed a back @-@ up plan or she would end up working at the retailer Tesco . The song in turn has a theme of maternal advice ; Nelson advised that listeners of " Wings " should listen to their mothers " because they 're always right " . Group member Jade Thirlwall stated that they also wanted the song to promote girl power and to return girl groups to prominence , inspired by 1990s girl groups such as the Spice Girls . " Wings " was further inspired by songs by Beyoncé and Michael Jackson . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 Little Mix immediately began recording after taking a short break to spend time with their families , following their win on The X Factor . During the early stages of the song 's development in January 2012 , group member Perrie Edwards revealed : " We 're going a bit urban , old school with a bit of pop . We wanna bring back old school harmonies . And Jesy beat @-@ boxes and Leigh Anne raps , so we 're trying out different things . " The recording of " Wings " continued while the group were embarking on The X Factor Live Tour ( 25 February – 4 April 2012 ) . Recording took place at The Music Shed in London . The group knew on first @-@ listen that " Wings " had to be a single . In March 2012 , Little Mix played a demo to Syco owner Simon Cowell who was impressed , believing the group 's input bettered the quality of their music . 
 The song was produced by TMS with vocal production by James F. Reynolds . While oldschool @-@ sounding , the song was developed with a modern beat , so listeners could also dance to it . The group envisioned " Wings " to be " a bit different " from other singles released at the time , and a combination of pop , hip hop and R & B. The track was also composed with an American audience in mind . 
 = = Composition and structure = = 
 " Wings " is an upbeat , bubblegum pop and R & B song with elements of 1990s music and a length of 3 : 39 ( 3 minutes and 39 seconds ) . It is composed in simple time and in the key of E minor with a fast tempo of 112 beats per minute . The song has a minimal beat . It contains a varying kick and snare drum arrangement throughout , pertaining to a sound reminiscent of a marching band . A number of other instruments are also used , including : an alto saxophone , a Baritone saxophone , guitar , keyboards , a tenor saxophone , a trombone and trumpet . Little Mix 's vocals span the notes B3 to E5 . 
 The track opens with a brief instrumental introduction comprising rhythmic clapping and a brass backbeat . Before leading into the first verse , the group chant the chorus : " Mama told me not to waste my life / She said spread your wings my little butterfly / Don 't let what they say keep you up at night / And if they give you <unk> / Then they can walk on by . " The arrangement is primarily four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor during this segment ( 0 : 03 – 0 : 17 ) , leading to a sparser sound than that on the later double @-@ chorus . The lyric " <unk> " is sung as a replacement for the word " shit " . A bass synthesizer plays on the lyric " running up your mouth " ( 0 : 26 ) in the first verse . 
 Halfway on the double chorus – on the lyric " fly " ( 1 : 01 ) – the group harmonize altogether and a major chord substitution takes place . This is preceded by a build @-@ up of a variety of transition effects and a brief return to the four @-@ on @-@ the @-@ floor kick drum sequence . When the substitution takes place , Little Mix 's vocals ( along with the backing vocals by James and singer Carmen Reece ) become more sustained and melismatic as the stereo widens and their pitch increases . 
 The second verse is introduced with eighth note delay taps ( 1 : 20 – 1 : 22 ) on the verse 's first lyric " I 'm " which gradually increases until properly sung . The lyric features an A – B pitch change which increases harmonic momentum for the second verse by implying a return to the cadential D chord in the chorus , instead of a continuation of the tonic E. The second verse is shorter than the first , although it also features bass synthesizer , on " ready steady go , no " ( 1 : 29 ) . A dubstep @-@ influenced breakdown occurs after the second double chorus during which the group chant the lyric " hey " repeatedly at the end of each line . Following the breakdown and a third double chorus , the song ends in an outro harmony . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Wings " served as the lead single from DNA . Little Mix first announced the single 's title during a live <unk> with their fans on 30 May 2012 , and shared the single 's cover art on Facebook the following day . It features them against a sky @-@ blue background , as well as a new logo comprising four icons ( one for each member ) . The cover art was designed by Studio Output . The group previewed a short snippet of " Wings " during an interview on Alan Carr : Chatty Man on 1 June 2012 . The same day , the single was made available for pre @-@ order with a release date of 22 July 2012 . However , it was announced on 11 June 2012 that the single 's release was postponed to 19 August 2012 . " Wings " received its radio premiere on BBC Radio 1 on 2 July 2012 . An accompanying lyric video was posted on the group 's Vevo channel the same day . 
 Syco first released " Wings " for digital download in Ireland on 24 August 2012 , and in the UK on 26 August 2012 , after being pushed back a second time . The single was later made available in New Zealand on 4 October 2012 , and in Australia on 5 October 2012 . It was also released as a CD single in the UK on 26 August 2012 , and in Australia on 30 October 2012 . In January 2013 , Little Mix signed to Columbia Records ; " Wings " was released by the label for digital download on 5 February 2013 as the group 's debut single in Canada and the US . The single impacted contemporary hit radio in the US on 19 February 2013 . The group recorded a Korean version of " Wings " featuring verses mainly sung in Korean ; it was released in South Korea on 19 August 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Wings " received acclaim from critics . Joe Rivers of No Ripcord gave the song a rating of nine out of ten , describing it as " vivacious , fun , brash and confident " , and praising its " absolute belter of a chorus " . Rivers concluded : " ' Wings ' is really pretty darn good . Not just good @-@ for @-@ X @-@ Factor good , but good @-@ in @-@ the @-@ context @-@ of @-@ all @-@ pop @-@ music good . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , and said it resoundingly lived up to expectations and was " a seriously promising start " for the group . John Earls of the Daily Star rated the track eight out of ten , writing : " Their modern , confident attitude fits in nicely with the song , while the military drums and <unk> vocals show Little Mix have big ideas . " Daniella Graham from Metro found the inspirational lyrics to be a good fit for the group who she believed " were styled as perfect role models for teenage girls during their time on X Factor " . 
 Michael Cragg of The Guardian said the group were poised to succeed " where other X Factor winners have failed by releasing a great single at the right time " . Cragg wrote that the song 's production made it " brilliant " and had " everything you 'd want to hear in a pop song in 2012 " , and likened Little Mix 's " ridiculous vocal runs " to those of Christina Aguilera . Gordon Smart from The Sun regarded the track as a " polished slice of pop " and its lyrics " straight from the Spice Girls ' book of inspirational girl power lines " , comparing it to Aguilera 's 2007 single " Candyman " . Popjustice also compared " Wings " to songs by Aguilera , and praised its outro as " so astounding that it will probably be the best outro of any song to be released this summer " . They complimented the track 's " really breezily defiant and carefree " take on anti @-@ bullying lyrics , and opined : " There 's enough intense greatness in this song to launch Little Mix in at least eight countries that aren 't the UK . " The website went on to deem " Wings " the best girl group single since Girls Aloud 's " Call the Shots " ( 2007 ) . 
 Elizabeth Thompson of Paper magazine called it " an effervescent single with a debt to En Vogue " . Similarly , Bill Lamb from About.com likened the group 's vocal style to that of En Vogue , and deemed the track " irresistibly catchy " , concluding : " it 's impossible to dismiss the pop power of a record like ' Wings ' " . Ailbhe Malone of The Irish Times commented that " Wings " was " a stomper " reminiscent of a combination of Beyoncé 's " Get Me Bodied " and Lisa Lopes ' " The Block Party " , explaining : " Basically , this means hand claps , vocal harmonies and an X Factor 's worth of attitude . " Ian Gittins from Virgin Media described " Wings " as a " swoon of pop bliss suggestive of Sugababes <unk> Tamla Motown . " James Robertson of the Daily Mirror cited the track as " exactly what made the girls so popular " , and in his opinion , Little Mix " made history " by becoming the first winner from The X Factor to release a second single that was a vast improvement on their first . Al Fox from BBC Music deemed the song " addictive " , while Vicki Newman of the Shields Gazette wrote that it " firmly cemented the girls ' signature sound " . Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle viewed it as " ridiculously catchy " , and quipped , " All hail the Spice Girls 2 @.@ 0 ! " 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 " Wings " placed at number 21 on Popjustice 's list of The Top 45 Singles of 2012 . It was ranked at number 35 on No Ripcord 's Top 40 Tracks of 2012 list . The song was nominated for the 2012 Popjustice £ 20 Music Prize , but lost to Will Young 's " Jealousy " . The single also placed at number three on About.com 's list of Top 100 Pop Songs of 2013 . It received a nomination for Best Song to Dance To at the 2014 Radio Disney Music Awards , losing to Selena Gomez 's " Birthday " . In 2015 , " Wings " was voted the favourite girl group single by Billboard magazine readers , ahead of the Spice Girls ' " Wannabe " and <unk> 's " All the Things She Said " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Wings " debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart – for the week ending 8 September 2012 – with first @-@ week sales of 106 @,@ 766 copies , becoming Little Mix 's second consecutive number @-@ one single on the chart after 2011 's " Cannonball " . The single fell to number four in its second week , selling 59 @,@ 355 copies . The group became only the third winner from The X Factor ( UK ) , after Leona Lewis and Alexandra Burke , to follow up their winner 's single with a second number one single . By the end of 2012 , " Wings " had sold more than 380 @,@ 000 copies , placing at number 40 on the year @-@ end chart . It spent a total of 25 weeks on the chart . On 22 July 2013 , the single was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting sales in excess of 400 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . As of 24 July 2015 , " Wings " has sold 526 @,@ 717 units in the UK . 
 The track had similar success in Ireland where it bowed at number one on the Irish Singles Chart . It marked Little Mix 's second consecutive number @-@ one single and accumulated a total of 25 weeks on the chart . The song became the group 's highest @-@ charting single in Australia , debuting at number 34 and peaking at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart in its fourth week . " Wings " is among the best @-@ selling girl group singles in Australia , having been certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 210 @,@ 000 copies . The track entered at number 17 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and reached a peak of number 15 in its third week . It received a gold certification from Recorded Music NZ ( RMNZ ) , denoting sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 " Wings " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 98 for the week ending 11 April 2013 . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the single had already sold 97 @,@ 000 copies prior to its chart debut . Brian Mansfield of USA Today wrote that " Wings " was poised to become " [ 2013 's ] ' What Makes You Beautiful ' " in the US . However , it stalled at number 79 and spent a total of nine weeks on the chart . The single fared better on the US Mainstream Top 40 chart where it reached number 26 . On 16 August 2013 , " Wings " received a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting sales in excess of 500 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the song peaked at number 69 on the Canadian Hot 100 , and was certified gold by Music Canada for sales of 40 @,@ 000 copies . " Wings " became Little Mix 's highest @-@ charting single in Japan where it climbed as high as number seven on the Japan Hot 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Wings " was directed by Max & Dania . The group began rehearsing choreography for the video on 3 May 2012 . It was filmed at Elstree Studios on 6 – 7 June 2012 . As a result of several re @-@ takes of the group 's dance routine , the video was shot over a 22 @-@ hour period from 04 : 00 to 02 : 00 BST . The group 's wardrobe included outfits from Topshop , American Apparel and Dr. Martens . The set used was an abandoned warehouse . The group regard " Wings " as their " first proper video " ; their previous music video for " Cannonball " was a montage of scenes from their experiences on The X Factor . The music video premiered on The Box on 25 July 2012 . 
 The music video follows no storyline . Each group member wears three different outfits throughout , all of which portray their individual styles . The video is introduced with a screen split into four in which each member is shown singing to the camera . They then dance separately in front of different , brightly @-@ coloured backdrops which manifest their individual personalities : a flower and gramophone record backdrop ( Edwards ) , a bow tie backdrop ( Thirlwall ) , graffiti @-@ decorated ( Pinnock ) , and boomboxes ( Nelson ) . Near the end of the video , the group are accompanied by male backing dancers for a hip hop and chair @-@ dance dance routine in front of a large Union Jack . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Newman opined that the visual had viral video popularity and poised " Wings " for commercial success . The video was accidentally released on the iTunes Store in the US the same day as its premiere to instant sales success , before being promptly taken down . When released in December 2012 , Gary Trust of Billboard magazine noted that the video was a consistent seller for the group ahead of the US debut of " Wings " in February 2013 . 
 The music video was well received among critics . Sam Lansky from MTV News called it dazzling and colourful , and cited the chair @-@ dancing sequence as his favourite since that of Britney Spears ' " Stronger " ( 2000 ) . Lansky concluded : " Who needs to be high @-@ concept when you have this much attitude ? " Similarly , Lewis Corner from Digital Spy highlighted the group 's " sassy poses , on @-@ point strutting and [ ... ] whole lot of attitude . " Rebecca Martin of Sky Living complimented their " quirky outfits " and " fun dance moves " , concluding that the video " proves [ Little Mix are ] ready to give other <unk> on the scene a serious run for their money . " Sarah Deen of Metro wrote that the visual demonstrated the group 's dancing abilities and " truly shows off their individual style " . Deen said it made sure the song " leaves a lasting impression " , describing it as " eye @-@ catching " and a " vibrant and attitude @-@ packed pop video " . Ellie Ross from The Sun deemed the video " sassy " and felt it portrayed Little Mix as " fully grown up " , noting that " they 've stepped up their game even more since [ The X Factor ] " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Little Mix gave their first live performance of " Wings " at T4 on the Beach on 1 July 2012 . The group promoted the single in the UK with televised performances of it on This Morning on 20 August 2012 , Red or Black ? on 25 August 2012 , and Daybreak on 3 September 2012 . They also performed the song along with " DNA " at the BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards on 7 October 2012 . In Australia , Little Mix promoted " Wings " with live performances of the track on Sunrise and the fourth series of The X Factor ( Australia ) on 30 October 2012 . In the US , the group performed the song on Good Morning America on 7 June 2013 , and twice on The Today Show ( 17 June 2014 and 19 August 2015 ) . 
 " Wings " was the sixth song , and encore reprise on the setlist for Little Mix 's 2013 DNA Tour . The group sported 1990s style outfits for the renditions with each member wearing baggy jeans and personalised crop tops with their names printed in graffiti font . For 2014 's The Salute Tour , " Wings " was also the setlist 's encore closer . Performances of the song ended in confetti showers . 
 = = Usage in the media = = 
 English pop @-@ rock band Scouting for Girls performed a cover of the song for BBC 's Live Lounge on 30 August 2012 . On 1 May 2013 , American Idol ( season 12 ) finalists Candice Glover , Angie Miller , Kree Harrison and Amber Holcomb performed " Wings " during the quarterfinal round of the live shows . The dance troupe of Lancaster , Lancashire performed a routine to " Wings " joint appearance with the dance troupe of York in the 2013 Roses Tournament . Many of the group 's fans designed tattoos based on the song 's inspirational message . Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock later inked a tattoo featuring a musical note and four butterflies as a tribute to Little Mix fans and " Wings " . The song was performed by Jessica Sanchez in the fourth @-@ season finale of Glee , " All or Nothing " , which aired on 9 May 2013 . " Wings " was featured twice during the 21st episode of the third season of Hawaii Five @-@ 0 . 
 It was also featured in Baggage Claim ( film ) movie in 2013 . In 2014 , the song was covered on the television series Rising Star by contestant Alice Lee . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes of DNA , and the single liner notes of " Wings " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = David Clyde = 
 David Eugene Clyde ( born April 22 , 1955 in Kansas City , Kansas ) is a former left @-@ handed Major League Baseball pitcher who played for five seasons with the Texas Rangers ( 1973 – 1975 ) and Cleveland Indians ( 1978 – 1979 ) . He is noted for his once promising baseball career , which ended at age 26 because of arm and shoulder injuries . 
 Billed as the next Sandy Koufax , Clyde had a stellar high school career at Westchester High School . He was drafted with the first overall pick in the 1973 Major League Baseball draft . The Rangers planned to have Clyde pitch his first two professional games in the major leagues before moving him down to the minor leagues , but Rangers owner Bob Short decided to keep him in the roster for monetary purposes , where he had a 5 @.@ 01 earned run average in 18 starts . Journalists criticized the Rangers for promoting Clyde too soon , and after an uneventful 1974 campaign , he developed shoulder trouble and was sent down to the minor leagues in 1975 , where he pitched three seasons . He was traded to the Cleveland Indians in 1978 , and played two seasons before being demoted . Clyde attempted to make a comeback with the Houston Astros but was unsuccessful . 
 Clyde 's career made him the " poster @-@ boy " for bringing up young players prematurely and dealing with arm injuries . He was named by journalist Randy Galloway as among the worst cases of " mishandling " a young player in baseball history . He is considered by many as a savior of the Texas Rangers franchise because of the significant attendance boost that Clyde 's hype brought to the team , preventing it from a possible bankruptcy or American League takeover . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of a telephone executive , Clyde was born in Kansas City , Kansas , the oldest of four brothers . After living for a time in New Jersey , his family moved to Houston , Texas in 1969 . He played football and baseball at Westchester High School in Houston where he became known as a perfectionist and was an excellent student . During his senior year at Westchester , Clyde had a stellar record of 18 – 0 , giving up only three earned runs in 148 innings pitched , while pitching five no @-@ hitters and setting 14 national high school records . His dominance at the high school level attracted the attention of many MLB team scouts , many of whom billed Clyde as the " next Sandy Koufax " and others called him the " best pitching prospect they had ever seen " . 
 Clyde was praised by national publications such as Sports Illustrated and Newsweek prior to the 1973 MLB draft , and was the consensus among scouts as the best player available in the draft . That year the Texas Rangers held the first overall pick , having the worst record in baseball the previous year at 54 – 100 . He was the first player selected in the 1973 draft by the Rangers . He received a $ 125 @,@ 000 ( $ 666 @,@ 323 today ) signing bonus , the highest bonus ever given to a draft pick at the time , and a free college education . After signing his contract , Clyde stated that his career goal was to " become the greatest pitcher ever " . 
