 = = Major League career = = 
 Prior to the draft , the Texas Rangers held the second lowest attendance in the American League , ahead of only the Cleveland Indians despite having Baseball Hall of Famer Ted Williams as manager at one point . They had moved from Washington , D.C. , two years prior , and owner Bob Short expanded Arlington Stadium an extra 20 @,@ 000 seats . Short was looking for some sort of way to boost attendance , and found it using fellow Texas native Clyde . When Clyde agreed to sign his rookie contract , part of the deal was to make his first two professional starts with the Rangers at their home field before heading to the minors to develop . 
 Twenty days after pitching his last high school game , Clyde won his first ever Major League start before over 35 @,@ 000 fans in Arlington Stadium , the first sellout in stadium history . After a poor start in which he walked the first two batters he faced , he settled down , pitched five innings , giving up only one hit ( a home run to Mike Adams ) while striking out eight batters in a 4 – 3 victory over the Minnesota Twins . Clyde later called it his most memorable game in his Major League career . 
 Clyde then pitched well in his second start against the Chicago White Sox , pitching six innings before a blister in his finger forced him out of the game . However , with his performance in the two starts , the Rangers dropped all plans to send him to the minors . The youngest player to play in a major league game in 1973 , Clyde pitched a total of eighteen games ( all starts ) that season , finishing with a record of 4 – 8 , with a 5 @.@ 01 earned run average ( ERA ) . Questioned about the difference between high school or professional baseball , Clyde stated that MLB hitters " see the ball better , thus they make contact more often " . 
 Clyde began 1974 season with a 3 – 0 record , but became embroiled in controversy following a dispute between new manager Billy Martin and general manager Bobby Brown . Martin and Brown argued about what was the best way on handling Clyde 's future development , which led to Brown 's resignation and forced Clyde caused to miss a month before remaining in the Rangers roster for the rest of the year . He played in 28 games ( 21 starts ) and finished with 3 – 9 record , and a 4 @.@ 38 ERA . He started one game in 1975 ( a loss ) before injuring his shoulder and was demoted to the Pittsfield Rangers of the Eastern League . He stayed in the minors for three seasons , having a shoulder operation in 1976 . The Rangers organization lost so much faith in Clyde 's ability that he was left unprotected in the 1976 Major League Baseball expansion draft , but was not chosen . He played for the Sacramento Solons in 1976 , and the Tucson Toros of the Pacific Coast League in 1977 where he had 5 – 7 record with a 5 @.@ 84 ERA . When the season ended , the Rangers traded Clyde and veteran Willie Horton to the Cleveland Indians for Tom <unk> and John Lowenstein on February 28 , 1978 . 
 Clyde started for the Indians that year , playing in 28 games and finished with a record of 8 – 11 , with a 4 @.@ 28 ERA and 83 strikeouts . In his first start with the Indians , he gave up four hits in a 3 – 2 complete game victory against the Oakland Athletics . Clyde also finished fourth in the American League with 11 wild pitches . He pitched in nine games with the Indians in 1979 ( 3 – 4 , 5 @.@ 91 ERA ) before tearing his rotator cuff and was demoted to the minors , playing in what would be his last Major League game on August 7 , 1979 . He was traded back to the Rangers after the 1979 season , but injured his shoulder for the second time , and was released prior to the 1980 season with the Rangers claiming that Clyde was " damaged goods " . 
 In 1981 , Clyde tried to restart his career with the Houston Astros , but he spent the season in the minor leagues splitting time between the Columbus Astros and Tucson Toros . He dominated for Columbus , having a 6 – 0 record with a 0 @.@ 76 ERA , but struggled with the Toros , having a 6 @.@ 85 earned run average . Clyde retired from professional baseball on February 5 , 1982 , while participating in an instructional league . 
 In his five @-@ year career , Clyde had an 18 – 33 win – loss record with a 4 @.@ 63 earned run average and 228 strikeouts in 84 games pitched . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Named a " sensation " , " phenomenon " , or other hyped up words in his first two years in the league , most of Clyde 's troubles were attributed to the rush to get him into the majors before he was ready . This was due to the fact the Rangers finances were weak at the time . The Rangers averaged a near @-@ capacity crowd in Clyde 's six home starts , but 6 @,@ 000 fans for the other 75 home dates . Prior to Clyde 's debut , the highest crowd in Rangers history was 24 @,@ 000 . At the end of the 1973 season , Clyde drew nearly a third of all fans in attendance for Rangers home games throughout the year . According to journalist Randy Galloway , Clyde put baseball on the map in Dallas , as the city started to get interested on the sport , even after Clyde 's inconsistency forced him out of the league . Longtime Rangers coach Jackie Moore agreed with Galloway , stating that Clyde and Corbett buying the team " went a long way toward saving the franchise " . Using Clyde success of bringing attendance up as an example , Short sold the Rangers to Brad Corbett in 1974 , which prevented the American League from taking over the team , thus potentially saving the franchise . 
 Clyde 's unsuccessful career made him the " poster @-@ boy " for bringing up young players . In his autobiography White Rat his first big league manager , future Baseball Hall of Famer Whitey Herzog stated that he was often forced to leave Clyde in the game much longer than usual because fans wanted to see the 18 @-@ year @-@ old " phenom " pitch . It led to Clyde 's arm burning out at an early age , Herzog argued . In a 2003 interview with The New York Times , Herzog criticized Bob Short , stating that " ( Short ) sure wasn 't going to send him down without getting some people in the ballpark to see him . The kid should have gone to the minors after two starts . " He also said that Clyde " was one of the best young left @-@ handed pitchers I 've ever seen . " Former teammate Tom Grieve said that keeping Clyde in the roster was the " dumbest thing you could ever do to a high school pitcher . " 
 In a 2003 interview with the Associated Press , Clyde looked back on his career , recognizing that he was rushed too early , calling his career " a classic case not to handle a young talent " , and stating that his case had a " black side " to it but that he made a contribution to the sport . One week before the thirtieth anniversary of his first career game , Clyde threw the ceremonial first pitch to his ex – teammate Ken Suarez during an Rangers @-@ Astros game . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Following the problems Clyde had during the 1974 and 1975 seasons , he became dependent on alcohol , which he later called " the lowest point of my life " . He had two failed marriages , the first one with his high school sweetheart , before settling down with his third wife , Robin , having two boys , Ryan and Reed , and a daughter , Lauren . He worked in his father @-@ in @-@ law 's lumber business in <unk> , Texas for 20 years , which he called one of the best periods of his life , giving him a " peace of mind " . He retired in 2003 as vice president of the company and worked as a coach for a local youth baseball team . He is now a caregiver for his elderly father . 
 = Matt Hardy = 
 Matthew Moore " Matt " Hardy ( born September 23 , 1974 ) is an American professional wrestler and wrestling promoter currently signed with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . He is best known for his work in the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , later renamed to World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . 
 Matt ( with brother Jeff ) gained notoriety in WWE 's tag team division due to their participation in Tables , Ladders , and Chairs matches . As a tag team wrestler , Hardy is a nine @-@ time world tag team champion , having held six World Tag Team Championships , one WWE Tag Team Championship , one WCW Tag Team Championship , and one TNA World Tag Team Championship . 
 Apart from his success as a tag team wrestler , Hardy is a three @-@ time world champion , having held the TNA World Heavyweight Championship twice and the ECW Championship once . He has also won the WWE 's United States , European , Hardcore , and Cruiserweight Championships once each . All totaled , Hardy has won 16 total championships between WWE and TNA . 
 Hardy has also won numerous championships in independent promotions , including OMEGA Championship Wrestling , where he is the founder , co @-@ owner , and current Heavyweight Champion in his second reign . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Son to Gilbert and Ruby Moore Hardy , he is the older brother of Jeff Hardy . Their mother died of brain cancer in 1987 . Hardy played baseball as a child and throughout high school , but had stopped by his senior year . He also played football , either as a linebacker or a defensive end . Hardy was a good student at Union Pines High School in North Carolina , and was a nominee for the " Morehead Award " , a scholarship to any university in North Carolina . Hardy attended University of North Carolina at Charlotte , where he majored in engineering ; after a year , however , he dropped out due to his father being ill . He then attended Sandhills Community College in Pinehurst to gain his associate degree . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1992 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Hardy , along with his brother Jeff and friends , started their own federation , the Trampoline Wrestling Federation ( TWF ) and mimicked the moves they saw on television . They later created their own wrestling promotion , OMEGA Championship Wrestling , in which Hardy competed under the name High Voltage . Shortly after Hardy sent in a tape for the World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) Amateur Challenge using the ring name High Voltage , a tag team named High Voltage began competing in WCW , causing Hardy to change his name to Surge . A few years later , it was revealed to him by Chris Kanyon that the tape had been kept in the WCW Power Plant , watched multiple times , and that the name High Voltage was blatantly stolen from it . 
 The Hardys also wrestled for several other North Carolina @-@ based wrestling organizations and adapted a number of alter @-@ egos . As The Wolverine , Hardy captured the New England Wrestling Alliance ( NEWA ) Championship in May 1994 . As High Voltage , he teamed with Venom to claim the New Frontier Wrestling Association ( NFWA ) Tag Team Championship in March 1995 . A month later , High Voltage defeated the Willow for the NFWA Championship . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = The Hardy Boyz ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 Hardy worked as a jobber for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) from 1994 up until he signed a full @-@ time contract . His first WWF match was against Nikolai Volkoff on May 23 , 1994 , which he lost by submission He wrestled sporadically throughout 1994 in the WWF , losing matches against Crush , Razor Ramon , Hakushi , Owen Hart and the imposter Undertaker . Hardy continued wrestling with the WWF sporadically , including matches against Hunter Hearst Helmsley and " The Ringmaster " Steve Austin . It was not until 1998 , however , ( at the height of the attitude era ) that the Hardy brothers were given full @-@ time WWF contracts , and sent to train with former wrestler Dory Funk , Jr . The Hardy Boyz used a cruiserweight , fast @-@ paced high flying style in their matches , often leaping from great heights to do damage to their opponents ( and themselves in the process ) . Although Jeff was better known for his extreme moves , Hardy was a prodigious high @-@ flier himself . In 1999 , while feuding with Edge and Christian , the duo briefly picked up Michael Hayes as a manager . On July 5 , they won their first WWF Tag team Championship by defeating The Acolytes , but lost it to them a month later . However , they soon dumped Hayes , and joined the short lived stable The New Brood with Gangrel . After breaking away from Gangrel , Hardy and Jeff were briefly managed by Terri Runnels , after they won her services in the first ever tag team ladder match . 
 In 2000 , the Hardy Boyz found a new manager in their real @-@ life friend Lita . Together , the three became known as " Team Xtreme " . Throughout 2000 they continued feuding with Edge and Christian , defeating them for the WWF Tag Team Championship on two occasions . Hardy won the Hardcore Championship on April 24 , 2000 , on Raw Is War , by defeating Crash Holly , but lost it back to Holly three days later on SmackDown ! . At SummerSlam , The Hardy Boyz competed in the first ever Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match , for the WWF Tag Team , Championship against The Dudley Boyz and Edge and Christian , but were unsuccessful . 
 = = = = Version 1 ( 2001 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 In 2001 , after Jeff 's Intercontinental Championship run , Hardy was given a singles championship push . He won the European Championship on SmackDown ! four days before Backlash . Hardy believes that he was pushed to win the title because of Jeff winning the Intercontinental Championship , and because of the effort he put into his previous storyline with Triple H and Stone Cold Steve Austin . He became the second @-@ longest reigning European Champion in history and the longest @-@ reigning American @-@ born European Champion . 
 Throughout the year , the Hardy Boyz continued to win as a tag team , winning the WWF Tag Team Titles two more times , and the WCW Tag Team Championship during the Invasion . By the end of the year , the Hardy Boyz began a storyline where they were having trouble co @-@ existing . This culminated in a match between the two , with Lita as the guest referee , at the Vengeance pay @-@ per @-@ view , which Jeff won . 
 At the beginning of 2002 , it seemed Team Xtreme had patched things up . After the Brand Extension , however , Hardy was relegated to Heat while Jeff wrestled on the main show , Raw . On the August 12 episode of Raw , Hardy turned against Jeff during Jeff 's match against Rob Van Dam , because Hardy was frustrated at not receiving a match against Van Dam for the number one contendership for the Intercontinental Championship , making Hardy a heel in the process . A short time later , Hardy joined the SmackDown ! roster . On the October 3 episode of the show , Hardy took advantage of a run @-@ in from Brock Lesnar to defeat The Undertaker in a falls count anywhere match . 
 Hardy began dubbing himself " Matt Hardy : Version 1 " , complete with a " version 1 " hand signal . Along with his MF 'er ( Mattitude Follower ) Shannon Moore in his corner , 2003 began with Hardy frantically trying to lose weight to get under the 215 lb ( 98 kg ) weight limit to compete for the Cruiserweight Championship . After just barely making weight , Hardy defeated Billy Kidman at No Way Out to win the Cruiserweight title . At WrestleMania XIX , he successfully defended it against Rey Mysterio . The Mattitude faction then expanded to include Crash Holly as Moore 's " Moore @-@ on " ( follower ) . He later disbanded the group in November and returned to Raw in order to be able to travel and work with his then girlfriend Lita , who just returned from an injury . On his first night back , he turned on Lita in storyline after teasing a proposal to her . Hardy spent little time on Raw until he turned into a fan favorite after saving Lita from getting attacked by Kane in April 2004 . After losing a match against Kane at Summerslam , Lita was forced to marry Kane on the August 23 episode of Raw , Hardy was <unk> off the stage by Kane . Hardy then spent almost a year off from wrestling due to a severe knee injury . 
 = = = = Release and sporadic appearances ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Along with his friend Rhyno , Hardy was released by WWE on April 11 , 2005 . Edge and Lita received jeers from the crowds at WWE events , often resulting in chants , " You screwed Matt " , and , " We want Matt " . Paul Heyman , in a " shoot " promo , mocked Edge for his actions at One Night Stand . Lita , for the first time in over five years , became a heel as a result of the affair becoming public knowledge . Fans began a petition on the internet , wanting WWE to re @-@ sign Hardy , and amassed over fifteen thousand signatures . 
 Hardy released two character promotional vignettes , that he was planning to use before he was offered a new contract by WWE . Hardy called himself The Angelic Diablo with the tagline " the scar will become a symbol " in reference to the way in which he had been treated by Lita and WWE . On the June 20 episode of Raw , during the storyline wedding of Edge and Lita , Hardy 's entrance music and video were played when the priest asked if anyone had a reason why Edge and Lita should not be wed . On the July 11 episode of Raw , Hardy made his return , attacking Edge as he made his way to the ring . On the July 13 episode of WWE 's webcast Byte This ! , which featured Lita as its guest , one of the callers was Hardy himself . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2005 ) = = = 
 Hardy appeared at a scheduled Ring of Honor ( ROH ) event on July 16 , 2005 , in Woodbridge , Connecticut where he defeated Christopher Daniels via submission . Hardy also cut a brief promo where he continued in full " worked shoot " mode , attacking WWE and John Laurinaitis . Following his official return to WWE , Hardy was met with backlash following a match with Homicide from the fans at a subsequent ROH event , which Hardy won . The next day at his final ROH appearance , he lost to Roderick Strong . 
 = = = Return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Feud with Edge ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 On July 11 , 2005 , Hardy posted on his website that he was finally " free " , that wrestling fans had not seen the last of him , and that he had a surprise for the fans who had supported him . That night on Raw , Hardy attacked Edge backstage and again later during Edge 's match with Kane , leaving the commentators speechless . Before being escorted out of the building by security , Hardy stated that Edge and Lita would pay for their actions and told fans that they could see him at Ring of Honor while security officials and event staff were trying to restrain him . Hardy also called out Johnny Ace as security had him in handcuffs taking him out of the arena . This caused an uproar amongst fans , who were confused and wondered if the whole thing was a work or a shoot . Similar occurrences repeated during the following two weeks . 
 On the August 1 episode of Raw , Vince McMahon officially announced Hardy 's return to WWE , adding that Hardy would face Edge at SummerSlam . Hardy made his in @-@ ring return , defeating Snitsky on the August 8 Raw . Seconds after the victory , Hardy was attacked by Edge , and as he was being carried backstage , Matt counterattacked Edge in the locker room . On August 21 at SummerSlam , their match came to a premature end when Edge dropped Hardy onto the top of a ring post , causing him to bleed heavily . The referee ended the match on the grounds that Hardy could not continue , and Edge was declared the winner . After SummerSlam , the two continued fighting on Raw , including a Street Fight that resulted in Hardy performing a Side Effect on Edge off the entrance stage and into electrical equipment below . At Unforgiven , Edge faced Hardy in a steel cage match . Hardy caught an interfering Lita with the Twist of Fate and won the match with a leg @-@ drop off the top of the cage . Hardy and Edge faced each other at WWE Homecoming in a Loser Leaves Raw ladder match . Edge 's briefcase holding the contract for his WWE World title shot was suspended above the ring . The winner of the match received the contract and the loser was forced to leave Raw . After a contentious match , Edge tied Hardy 's arms in the ropes , and Lita trapped Hardy in a crucifix hold , leaving Hardy only able to watch Edge win . When the match ended , Edge and Lita gloated over the victory , but Hardy took it in stride and left the arena . With his defeat at the hands of Edge , Hardy was moved to the SmackDown ! brand where he re @-@ debuted with a win over Simon Dean on October 21 in Reno , Nevada . One week later , Hardy won the fan vote to represent Team Smackdown ( alongside the second @-@ highest vote @-@ getter Rey Mysterio ) to challenge team RAW ( Edge and Chris Masters ) at Taboo Tuesday . Edge , however , refused to wrestle and sent Snitsky in place of him in the match , which Hardy and Mysterio would win . 
 Back on SmackDown ! , Hardy started an angle with MNM ( Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury ) and their manager Melina when Melina approached Hardy , seemingly wanting Hardy to join with her team . Hardy refused the offer , which led to him facing the tag team on several occasions with a variety of partners . One of his partners , Road Warrior Animal , brutally attacked him after they were defeated – sick of " pulling all the weight in tag teams " . Animal , who was renamed The Road Warrior , and Hardy feuded for a while after this , with Hardy picking up several wins over the veteran , including a qualifying match for a spot in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 22 . The match would be won by Rob Van Dam . 
 Hardy next competed in the SmackDown ! King of the Ring tournament , losing to eventual winner Booker T in the opening round thanks to a low blow and distraction from Sharmell . Hardy also became the first man to defeat Mr. Kennedy in singles ' competition . On July 25 , after the SmackDown ! taping , Hardy was taken out of action after doctors found the remnants of the staph infection that had plagued him the previous year . He was sidelined until August 25 while he healed . Hardy made a surprise appearance backstage at Unforgiven after Jeff 's match against Johnny Nitro . Lita joined the two in the segment , making this the first time the three had been seen together on WWE television since February 2003 . Hardy then began a rivalry against Gregory Helms which saw both winning over each other time and time again . Then at No Mercy , in both of their hometown , Cameron , North Carolina , Hardy beat Helms . The two met again one more time at Survivor Series , where Hardy 's team won in a clean sweep . 
 = = = = The Hardy Boyz reunion ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 On the November 21 , 2006 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , Hardy and Jeff competed in a match together for the first time in almost five years , defeating The Full Blooded Italians . At Survivor Series , the Hardy Boyz competed with CM Punk and D @-@ Generation X ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) as part of Team DX versus Team Rated @-@ RKO ( which included Edge , Randy Orton , Johnny Nitro with Melina , Mike Knox , and Gregory Helms ) in a traditional Survivor Series match . Team DX won in a clean sweep , last eliminating Orton . At December to Dismember , the Hardy Boyz issued an open challenge to any tag team who wanted to face them . MNM answered their challenge by reuniting at December to Dismember , a match that the Hardy Boyz would be victorious in . At Armageddon , Hardy and Jeff competed against Paul London and Brian Kendrick , MNM , and Dave Taylor and William Regal in a Ladder match for the WWE Tag Team Championship but lost . Subsequently , he and Jeff feuded with Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro after the legitimate incident where they injured Mercury 's face at Armageddon 2006 . This led to a bitter long term rivalry , and at the 2007 Royal Rumble , Hardy and Jeff defeated MNM . Mercury and Hardy continued to feud until Mercury was released from WWE in March . Before Mercury 's release , however , Hardy defeated him to earn a spot in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23 , which was ultimately won by Mr. Kennedy . 
 The night after WrestleMania on Raw , the Hardys competed in a 10 @-@ team battle royal for the World Tag Team Championship . They won the titles for the sixth time from then WWE Champion John Cena and Shawn Michaels after last eliminating Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch . After briefly feuding with Cade and Murdoch , the Hardys retained their World Tag Team Championship in their first title defense at Backlash . The Hardy Boyz would also successfully retained their titles at Judgment Day . One month later at One Night Stand , they defeated The World 's Greatest Tag Team to retain the titles in a Ladder match . The following night on Raw , Vince McMahon demanded that The Hardys once again defend their championships against Cade and Murdoch . The Hardys were defeated after Murdoch pushed Jeff 's foot off the bottom rope during Cade 's pinfall , causing the three count to continue . They invoked their rematch clause against Cade and Murdoch at Vengeance : Night of Champions , but were unsuccessful . 
 = = = = Feud with MVP ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 On the July 6 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , Hardy won a non @-@ title match against United States Champion Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) , which resulted in a feud between the two . Hardy was unsuccessful to defeat MVP at The Great American Bash for the United States Championship . MVP then claimed that he was " better than Hardy at everything " , which led to a series of contests between Hardy and MVP , such as a basketball game , an arm wrestling contest , and a chess match which MVP " sneezed " on and ruined when Hardy put him in check . MVP challenged Hardy to a boxing match at Saturday Night 's Main Event , however MVP was legitimately diagnosed with the heart condition Wolff @-@ Parkinson @-@ White syndrome . Since MVP was unable to compete , Hardy faced his replacement , former world champion boxer , Evander Holyfield . The match ended in a no contest after MVP entered the ring to verbally abuse Holyfield , who then knocked him out . MVP also challenged Hardy to a beer drinking contest at SummerSlam , but as revenge for what happened at <unk> , Hardy allowed Stone Cold Steve Austin to replace him ; Austin simply performed a stunner on MVP then kept drinking . 
 After a segment involving MVP inadvertently choosing Hardy as his tag @-@ team partner , Theodore Long promptly set up a match against Deuce ' n Domino for the WWE Tag Team Championship which the duo were able to win , therefore setting up Hardy 's first reign as WWE Tag Team Champion . It was the first time Hardy held a tag team championship with someone other than his brother . Hardy and MVP retained the titles at Unforgiven in a rematch against former champions Deuce ' n Domino . Hardy was scheduled to face MVP at Cyber Sunday , but due to a head injury sustained on the previous episode of SmackDown ! , he was not medically cleared to compete . As part of the storyline , Hardy continually asked MVP for a shot at the United States Championship but MVP refused stating that he was more focused on the Tag Team Championship . During this time , MVP teased a babyface turn as he seemingly got along better with Hardy during matches , even when they were on opposite sides . 
 On the November 16 episode of SmackDown ! , Hardy and MVP dropped the WWE Tag Team Championship to John Morrison and The Miz . Despite the fact that Hardy was hurt , MVP immediately invoked the rematch clause . After the rematch , in which Hardy was forced to tap out , MVP attacked Hardy , repeatedly targeting his knee . It was later confirmed by WWE.com that Hardy had suffered an injury at his former partner 's hands and that he might not be able to compete at Survivor Series . But his team however won the match despite his absence . Despite his absence at the pay @-@ per @-@ view , his team was able to win the match . On November 21 , WWE 's official website reported that Hardy underwent an emergency appendectomy in Tampa , Florida . A CAT scan revealed an inflamed appendix after Hardy was feeling extreme pain . Later surgery revealed that his appendix had already burst . According to Hardy himself , on December 8 doctors back in North Carolina found an abscess of infection that had not been caught , and he had it drained , spending an additional several days in the hospital . Hardy made an appearance at the December 31 episode of Raw supporting his brother Jeff . To further Jeff 's storyline with Randy Orton , however , Hardy was attacked by Orton . Hardy made his return at a live event in Muncie , Indiana on March 1 , 2008 . 
 On March 30 , 2008 , at WrestleMania XXIV , Hardy made his televised return to WWE programming in the Money in the Bank ladder match by cutting through the crowd , and attacking MVP to prevent him from winning the match . He made his official in @-@ ring return the next night on Raw , losing a singles match to WWE Champion Randy Orton . On the April 4 episode of SmackDown ! , Hardy faced MVP in a non @-@ title match , which he won , re @-@ igniting their storyline rivalry . On April 27 , 2008 , Hardy defeated MVP to win the United States Championship at Backlash , and successfully retained his title against MVP five days later on Smackdown . 
 After some sporadic feuds for the title , Hardy was drafted to the ECW brand on the June 23 , 2008 episode of Raw during the 2008 WWE Draft , in the process making the United States Championship exclusive to ECW . After a successful title defense against Chavo Guerrero at Night of Champions , he dropped the United States Championship to Shelton Benjamin at the Great American Bash pay @-@ per @-@ view on July 20 , 2008 , which meant that the title returned to SmackDown . 
 = = = = ECW Champion ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 On the July 22 episode of ECW , Hardy became the number one contender to Mark Henry 's ECW Championship after defeating John Morrison , The Miz and Finlay in a fatal four @-@ way match . He won the title match at SummerSlam by disqualification due to interference from Henry 's manager , Tony Atlas , thus he failed to win the title . Due to the ending of the pay @-@ per @-@ view match , Hardy received a rematch for the title on the next episode of ECW , but again failed to win the title when Henry pinned him after a distraction by Atlas . 
 At Unforgiven , Hardy won the ECW Championship during the Championship scramble match , defeating then @-@ champion Henry , The Miz , Finlay and Chavo Guerrero by pinning the Miz with three minutes left , thus making Hardy the first person in history to win a championship scramble in WWE , and marking his first world heavyweight championship win . He continued to feud with Henry until No Mercy , where Hardy successfully retained the title . After successful defenses against Henry , Chavo , Finlay , and Evan Bourne , Hardy lost the title to Jack Swagger on the January 13 , 2009 episode of ECW , which was taped on January 12 . 
 = = = = Feud with Jeff and departure ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 At the 2009 Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view , after losing an ECW Championship rematch to Swagger , Hardy turned on his brother when he hit Jeff with a steel chair , allowing Edge to win the WWE Championship turning him heel for the first time since 2004 . On the January 27 , 2009 episode of ECW , it was announced by General Manager Theodore Long that Hardy had requested , and been granted , his release from ECW , and had re @-@ signed with the SmackDown brand . On the January 30 episode of SmackDown ! , Hardy explained that his actions at the Royal Rumble were due to him being fed up with " sharing the spotlight " with Jeff and taking care of Jeff when he was nothing more than a " self @-@ destructive screw @-@ up " and a " constant mistake " , and that , from that point onward , he no longer considered Jeff as a partner or sibling . As part of the buildup to this feud , Hardy implied that he was responsible for all of Jeff 's accidents leading back to November , including an assault in a hotel stairwell that prevented him from appearing at Survivor Series , an automobile accident and a pyrotechnics accident , in an attempt to stop Jeff holding the WWE Championship , and , on the March 3 episode of SmackDown ! , he also implied that he was responsible for the fire that burned down Jeff 's house , going so far as to reveal that he had in his possession a dog collar that supposedly belonged to Jeff 's dog , who perished in the fire , that he supposedly salvaged from the wreckage of the house , which provoked Jeff into viciously attacking him . At WrestleMania XXV , Hardy defeated Jeff in an Extreme Rules match , and in a stretcher match on the following episode of SmackDown . 
 On the April 13 episode of Raw , Hardy was drafted to the Raw brand as part of the WWE draft . Two weeks later , in a rematch from WrestleMania , Hardy lost to Jeff in an " I Quit " match at Backlash , in which he broke his hand . Hardy continued to wrestle with his hand in a cast , incorporating it into his persona and claiming that he was wrestling under protest . He reignited his feud with MVP on Raw again for the United States Championship ; this time with Hardy as the heel . He also formed a tag team with William Regal , and the two acted as henchmen for General Manager Vickie Guerrero . At the June 22 taping of WWE Superstars , Hardy suffered yet another injury , when his intestines " exploded " through his abdominal wall , during a triple threat match against MVP and Kofi Kingston . Hardy had suffered a tear in his abdominal muscle two years previously , but had not needed surgery until it worsened , and became a danger to his health . 
 He was then traded to the SmackDown brand on June 29 , and underwent surgery for the torn abdominal muscle on July 2 . He made his return on the August 7 episode of SmackDown as the special guest referee in the World Heavyweight Championship match between his brother , Jeff , and CM Punk , and helped Jeff retain the championship by counting the pinfall . The following week Hardy saved his brother when CM Punk and The Hart Dynasty attacked both Jeff and John Morrison , turning into a fan favorite again . On the August 21 episode of SmackDown , after apologizing for his past actions towards Jeff , he had his first match back after his injury when he teamed with Jeff and John Morrison to defeat The Hart Dynasty and CM Punk , when Matt pinned Punk . 
 In early 2010 , Hardy began an on @-@ screen relationship with Maria ; but was brief and the relationship ended when Maria was released from her WWE contract . On the February 16 , 2010 episode of ECW , it was announced that Hardy would be mentoring Justin Gabriel on NXT . On the March 5 episode of SmackDown , Hardy qualified for the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXVI by defeating Drew McIntyre , but was unsuccessful at WrestleMania , as the match was won by Jack Swagger . Hardy was suspended by Vince McMahon because he attacked Drew McIntyre after McIntyre lost to Kofi Kingston at Over the Limit . He was able to get his revenge on McIntyre during the Viewer 's Choice episode of Raw when chosen as the opponent for McIntyre , with Theodore Long stating that Hardy was suspended from SmackDown , but not from Raw . On the following episode of SmackDown , however , Vickie Guerrero announced that , per orders of Vince McMahon , Hardy had been suspended from all WWE programming . However , at Fatal 4 @-@ Way , Hardy prevented McIntyre from regaining the Intercontinental Championship , thus continuing their feud . On the following edition of SmackDown he was reinstated by General Manager Theodore Long and had a match with McIntyre which Hardy won . After the match , it was announced that McIntyre 's visa had legitimately expired and was sent back to Scotland , thus ending their feud . Hardy would then qualify for the Money in the Bank pay @-@ per @-@ view 's Smackdown ladder match , which would be won by Kane . 
 On September 12 , WWE confirmed they had sent Hardy home from a European tour . Following this , Hardy began posting videos on his YouTube channel expressing his disinterest in the WWE product and insisting that he wanted to be released from the company . On October 15 , 2010 , WWE announced that Hardy had been released from his contract . Hardy later stated that his release had been in effect two weeks before WWE made the announcement . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2011 ) = = = 
 On January 9 , 2011 , Hardy made his debut for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) at the Genesis pay @-@ per @-@ view , as part of the heel stable Immortal . He was the surprise opponent for Rob Van Dam , and defeated him to prevent Van Dam from receiving a match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , held by Hardy 's brother Jeff . In the main event , Hardy attempted to interfere in Jeff 's World Heavyweight Championship match with Mr. Anderson , but was stopped by Van Dam , which led to Jeff losing both the match and the championship . On the January 13 episode of Impact ! , the Hardy Boyz reunited to defeat Anderson and Van Dam in a tag team match , following interference from Beer Money , Inc .. Two weeks later , Hardy suffered his first loss in TNA when he was defeated by Mr. Anderson . On February 13 at Against All Odds , Rob Van Dam defeated Hardy in a rematch . 
 On the following episode of Impact ! , Hardy , along with the rest of Immortal and Ric Flair , betrayed Fortune . On March 13 at Victory Road Hardy was defeated by Flair 's previous protégé , A.J. Styles . On April 17 at Lockdown , Immortal , represented by Hardy , Abyss , Bully Ray and Ric Flair , was defeated by Fortune members James Storm , Kazarian and Robert Roode and Christopher Daniels , who replaced an injured A.J. Styles , in a Lethal Lockdown match . On the April 21 episode of Impact ! , Hardy faced Sting for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , Hardy 's first World Title match in TNA , but was defeated . The following month Hardy was granted a shot at the TNA World Tag Team Championship against James Storm and Robert Roode , Beer Money , Inc . While the champions looked to defend the title against the Hardy Boyz , Matt instead introduced the returning Chris Harris , Storm 's old tag team partner , as his partner for the title match . The match took place at Sacrifice , where Storm and Roode retained their title . 
 On June 20 , Hardy announced that he was taking a few weeks off from TNA . The following day , it was reported that the promotion had actually suspended Hardy . On August 20 , Hardy was released from TNA following a DUI arrest that occurred earlier that same day . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 Hardy announced his retirement from full @-@ time professional wrestling due to injuries on September 1 , 2011 . He issued a challenge to his long @-@ time rival MVP , who was wrestling in Japan at the time , to one final match at " Crossfire Live ! " in Nashville . The event was held May 19 , 2012 and benefited the Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation . Hardy won the match . 
 Throughout 2012 , Hardy would wrestle sporadically on the independent circuit , working with promotions such as Mid Atlantic Championship Wrestling , Pro Wrestling Syndicate and Northeast Wrestling . On September 22 , 2012 , Hardy defeated Sami Callihan at Northeast Wrestling 's Under the Stars event . On October 5 , Hardy was defeated by Kevin Steen at Pro Wrestling Xperience 's An Evil Twist of Fate . On October 19 , Hardy was defeated by Eddie Edwards at <unk> Circle Wrestling 's V2 event . On October 26 , Hardy defeated Chris Masters in the Big Time Wrestling <unk> Anniversary Show . On November 11 , Hardy , as the masked wrestler <unk> Reaper , defeated the Pro Wrestling Syndicate Kevin Matthews , winning the championship . On November 17 in the main event of Extreme Rising Remember November iPPV Hardy wrestled Shane Douglas to a no contest after Luke Hawx interfered and pushed Hardy off the top rope to the floor , legitimately injuring him . At Extreme Rising 's third iPPV on December , 29 Hardy defeated Sabu . On February 9 , 2013 Hardy lost the Pro Wrestling Syndicate Championship back to Kevin Matthews . 
 On January 15 , 2013 , Hardy announced the return of OMEGA in Durham , North Carolina the main event featured Matt Hardy , Jeff Hardy , James Storm and Shane " Hurricane " Helms defeating Lodi , Gunner , Steve Corino and C.W. Anderson . On February 16 , at Family Wrestling Entertainment 's No Limit , Hardy wrestled a TLC match for the FWE Heavyweight Championship against the champion Carlito and Tommy Dreamer , but he was defeated . On October 12 , Hardy defeated C.W. Anderson to advance in the finals of the OMEGA Heavyweight Championship tournament . After the match , Willow would appear saving Hardy and the rest from an after match beatdown . On November 9 , 2013 , Hardy and Devon defeated Homicide and Eddie Kingston at House of Hardcore 3 . On November 30 , 2013 , at WrestleCade , Hardy defeated Carlito to become the first ever WrestleCade Champion . On December 28 , at Extreme Rising <unk> Business iPPV , Hardy was defeated by Luke Hawx in a steel cage grudge match , ending their year @-@ long feud . 
 On April 26 , 2014 , at OMEGA Chaos in Cameron The Hardys defeated The Briscoe Brothers . On May 3 , 2014 , following a match between Christian York and Drolix , Hardy defeated Drolix to become the new MCW Heavyweight Champion . On June 14 , 2014 at House of Hardcore 6 , Hardy defeated Tommy Dreamer and Carlito in a three @-@ way TLC match . At Maryland Championship Wrestling 's Shane Shamrock Cup , Hardy defeated Luke Hawx in a TLC match for Hardy 's MCW Heavyweight title and Hawx Extreme Rising World title . Hardy won the match , but he gave back the title to Hawx . On October 4 , Hardy lost the MCW Heavyweight <unk> back to Drolix , following outside interference from Kevin Eck . On November 1 , 2014 , Hardy made his debut for the Japanese Wrestle @-@ 1 promotion , losing to Seiya Sanada in a three @-@ way match , which also included Tajiri . 
 On February 9 , 2015 , Hardy appeared on FWE 's " No Limits 2015 " iPPV , challenging Drew Galloway for the ICW World Heavyweight Championship , but was defeated . 
 On November 21 , 2015 , Hardy won the OMEGA Heavyweight Championship for the second time , defeating former student Trevor Lee . Following this , Hardy ( upon regaining the TNA World Title as part of his villainous egotistical " Iconic " gimmick ) began proclaiming himself to be the only world champion that matters , and the only " true " world champion in wrestling , as he held both the TNA and OMEGA Championships , which ( according to him ) put him above any other promotions ' world champions . 
 On November 28 , 2015 , Hardy lost the WrestleCade Championship to Jeff Jarrett at WrestleCade IV in Winston @-@ Salem , NC after taking two guitar shots to the head , which opened a six @-@ inch gash on his head , which later required 38 stitches to close . Hardy regained the <unk> Championship in a triple @-@ threat cage match against Jarrett and Ethan Carter III in Hickory , NC on May 20 , 2016 . 
 In 2016 , Hardy would defend the TNA and OMEGA Titles jointly at OMEGA events as part of his " only true world champion " gimmick . 
 = = = Return to ROH ( 2012 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On September 11 , 2012 , ROH announced that Hardy would be returning to the promotion , with his first appearance being at Death Before Dishonor X : State of Emergency . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Hardy confronted Adam Cole and challenged him to a match for the ROH World Television Championship , thus establishing himself as a babyface character . On December 16 at Final Battle 2012 : Doomsday , Hardy defeated Cole in a non @-@ title match . 
 At the following iPPV , 11th Anniversary Show on March 2 , 2013 , Hardy joined the villainous S.C.U.M. stable . On April 5 at the Supercard of Honor VII iPPV , Hardy unsuccessfully challenged Matt Taven for the ROH World Television Championship in a three way elimination match , which also included Adam Cole . On June 22 at Best in the World 2013 , Hardy defeated former S.C.U.M. stablemate Kevin Steen in a No Disqualification match to become the number one contender to the ROH World Championship . Hardy received his title shot at the following day 's Ring of Honor Wrestling tapings , but was defeated by the defending champion , Jay Briscoe . Later that same day , S.C.U.M. was forced to disband after losing a Steel Cage Warfare match against Team ROH . On December 14 , 2013 at Final Battle 2013 , Hardy defeated Adam Page in a singles match , later on in the main event Hardy aided Adam Cole in retaining his title and forming a tag team with him . 
 After Hardy 's client Adam Cole defeated Jay Briscoe to become the Undisputed Ring of Honor World Champion , Cole presented Jay Briscoe 's custom made world championship belt ( Briscoe claimed to still be the Ring of Honor champion as he forfeited the title due to injury and never officially lost it ) to Hardy as a show of appreciation , Hardy re @-@ branded the belt as the Ring of Honor Iconic ( Innovative Creator and <unk> of a New @-@ Found Industry Champion ) Championship , however , the title has not been sanctioned as an official championship by Ring of Honor . On June 22 , 2014 at Best in the World , Hardy and Michael Bennett were defeated by The Briscoe Brothers in a no disqualification tag team match . In July , Hardy opted out of his ROH contract and went back to TNA . 
 = = = Return to TNA = = = 
 = = = = The Hardys reunion ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 On July 24 , 2014 , Matt returned to TNA as a face and reunited with Jeff Hardy to reform The Hardys . At the Destination X episode of Impact Wrestling , The Hardys were defeated by The Wolves in a match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . The next week , Matt was one of many TNA wrestlers who stopped Dixie Carter from running away from Team 3D , which led to Carter being put through a table . On the August 14 episode of Impact Wrestling , Team 3D ( formerly the Dudley Boyz ) challenged The Hardys to a match , which Team 3D won . At the Hardcore Justice episode of Impact Wrestling , The Hardys and Team 3D talked about a match involving themselves and The Wolves . When The Wolves were asked by the two teams , they agreed . Later that night , Kurt Angle announced all three teams would compete in a best of three series for the TNA World Tag Team Championship with the winners of the first match choosing the stipulation of the next one . The Hardys won the second match of the series on the September 10 episode of Impact Wrestling in a tables match and choose a ladder match for the third match of the series . The Hardys were unsuccessful in winning that match on the September 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , as the Wolves won that match . The Wolves then went on to pick the final match of the series to be a Full Metal Mayhem match to take place on the October 8 episode of Impact Wrestling . The Hardys were unsuccessful in that match as the Wolves won that match . 
 On October 22 , The Hardys entered a number one contenders tournament for the TNA World Tag Team Championship defeating The BroMans ( Jessie Godderz and DJ Z ) in the first round of the tournament . On the October 29 episode of Impact Wrestling , The Hardys defeated Team Dixie ( Ethan Carter III and Tyrus ) in the semifinals to advance to the finals of the tournament , where they defeated Samoa Joe and Low Ki to become number one contenders for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . On the January 16 , 2015 episode of Impact Wrestling , The Hardys defeated the Wolves . At the Lockdown episode of Impact Wrestling , The Hardy Boyz were defeated by The Revolution in a six sides of steel cage match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship . On the February 20 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy and The Wolves defeated The Revolution in a six @-@ man tag team match . 
 On March 10 , 2015 , TNA announced that Hardy has signed a full @-@ time contract with the company . In March , The Hardys participated in a tournament for the vacant TNA World Tag Team Championship . On March 16 , 2015 , Matt and Jeff won an Ultimate X match for the titles . On May 8 , 2015 , Hardy vacated the TNA World Tag Team Championship due to his brother Jeff being injured . 
 = = = = TNA World Heavyweight Champion ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 On June 28 , 2015 , Matt was among the five wrestlers who competed for the TNA King of the Mountain Championship at Slammiversary , with Jeff Jarrett ultimately emerging victorious . On the July 8 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy requested a world title shot against Ethan Carter III , but was denied and forced to face the Dirty Heels ( Austin Aries and Bobby Roode ) in a handicap match , which he lost . On the July 22 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy defeated Roode in a Tables match to become the # 1 contender for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . On the August 5 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy got his shot at the title against EC3 in a Full Metal Mayhem match , but failed to win the title . On the August 5 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy defeated Tyrus . On the September 2 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy got another shot at the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against EC3 , but again failed to win the title ; as part of the storyline , Jeff Hardy was forced to act as Ethan Carter 's personal assistant . On the September 30 episode of Impact Wrestling , Hardy was added to the Ethan Carter III vs. Drew Galloway main event match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at Bound for Glory after he and Galloway defeated Carter and Tyrus , making it a three @-@ way match , following which Jeff , who EC3 had just " fired " in the previous episode , was revealed to be the special guest referee . 
 On October 4 at Bound for Glory , Matt won the TNA World Heavyweight Championship by pinning Galloway , making Hardy the third man in professional wrestling history to win the ECW Championship and the TNA World Heavyweight Championship since Rob Van Dam and Lashley . However , EC3 filed an injunction ( kayfabe ) that banned Hardy from appearing on Impact Wrestling for a month , which forced Hardy to relinquish the title in order to stay on the show . However , Hardy has been participating in the TNA World Title Series for the vacant title . He qualified to the round of 16 by defeating Davey Richards , Robbie E and Eddie Edwards . He then advanced to the round of 8 by defeating the King of the Mountain Champion Bobby Roode and then to Jessie Godderz to continue his winning streak . The semifinals and finals were held on the January 5 , 2016 , live episode of Impact Wrestling during its debut on Pop TV , in which he defeated Eric Young to advance to the final round . Hardy faced EC3 in the TNA World Title Series finals , but lost the match via pinfall . 
 Hardy won the TNA World Title from EC3 on the January 19 , 2016 episode of Impact Wrestling , becoming the first man to defeat him in a one @-@ on @-@ one match in TNA . During the match a double turn took place ; Hardy turned heel after Tyrus betrayed EC3 . The following week on Impact Wrestling , Jeff Hardy had confronted him about last week and issued a challenge to Matt for the World Heavyweight title in the main event and Matt accepted . However , later before the main event could begin , Eric Young and Bram would attack Jeff from behind . Kurt Angle would then come out to try save Jeff and Matt would have Tyrus attack Angle from behind . While Matt watched from the ramp , Young hit Jeff with the Piledriver off the apron through a table . The following week , he successfully retained his title against Kurt Angle . At Lockdown , he retained his title in a Six @-@ side of steel match against Ethan Carter III , with the help of Rockstar Spud . He lost his title against Drew Galloway , after a match featuring EC3 and Jeff Hardy . Two weeks later , he had his title match , but again in a losing effort . Angry with Jeff for it , he wanted an I Quit Match and had it after defeating Jeff and Drew Galloway in a tag team match . At the main event , an I Quit Match , the match eventually ended up in a no @-@ contest as both Matt and Jeff were badly injured and Matt was taken out to the hospital on a stretcher , ending the show . 
 = = = = Broken Matt Hardy ( 2016 – present ) = = = = 
 Hardy returned on May 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , revealing himself to be one of the impostor Willows behind the attacks on his brother Jeff . He would later attack Jeff during that episode 's main event , pushing him off the turnbuckle when he was attempting the Swanton Bomb on Mike Bennett . In the following weeks , Hardy would debut a new persona as a disheveled man with a strange accent , blaming Jeff ( who he began to refer to as " Brother Nero " ) for breaking him . At Slammiversary Matt was defeated by Jeff in a Full Metal Mayhem match . Matt was also defeated by Jeff in a Six Sides of Steel match on the June 21 edition of Impact Wrestling . On the June 28 episode , Matt challenged Jeff to a final battle with the Hardy brand on the line , to take place at their home in Cameron , North Carolina the next week , ending with Matt attacking Jeff . On the July 5 episode , Matt defeated Jeff in the match ( dubbed " The Final Deletion " ) to become sole owner of the Hardy brand . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 1999 , Matt Hardy , along with his brother Jeff , appeared as an uncredited wrestler on That ' 70s Show episode " That Wrestling Show " . Matt and Jeff also appeared on Tough Enough in early 2001 , talking to and wrestling the contestants . He appeared in the February 25 , 2002 episode of Fear Factor competing against five other World Wrestling Federation wrestlers . He won $ 50 @,@ 000 for the American Cancer Society . Hardy also appeared on the October 13 , 2009 episode of Scare Tactics , as a mental patient who threatens to attack the prank 's victim . 
 In 2001 , Matt , Jeff and Lita appeared in Rolling Stone magazine 's 2001 Sports Hall of Fame issue . In 2003 , Matt and Jeff , with the help of Michael Krugman , wrote and published their autobiography The Hardy Boyz : Exist 2 Inspire . As part of WWE , Matt appeared in their DVD , The Hardy Boyz : Leap of Faith in 2001 . On April 29 , 2008 , WWE released " Twist of Fate : The Matt and Jeff Hardy Story " . The DVD featured footage of the brothers in OMEGA and WWE . Hardy also appears on The Hardy Show , an internet web show which features the Hardys , Shannon Moore and many of their friends . 
 Hardy plays himself in the 2013 film Pro Wrestlers vs. Zombies in which he and his real @-@ life wife Reby Sky battle the undead . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 His brother Jeff Hardy is also a professional wrestler , currently competing in Total Nonstop Action . Hardy is good friends with Marty Garner , Shannon Moore and Gregory Helms . Hardy was in a six @-@ year relationship with former WWE Diva Amy Dumas , known by the ring name " Lita " . They first met in January 1999 , at a NWA Mid @-@ Atlantic show , but did not begin dating until a few months later . The couple broke up when she had an affair with one of Hardy 's close friends , fellow wrestler Adam " Edge " Copeland in February 2005 . Hardy previously dated former WWE Diva Ashley Massaro . 
 In February 2011 , Hardy stated he was dating Rebecca " Reby Sky " Reyes . Hardy married Reyes on October 5 , 2013 . On December 5 , 2014 Hardy announced that he and Reby were expecting their first child , a boy . On June 23 , 2015 , Hardy and Sky welcomed their first child , a boy named <unk> " Max " Hardy . Reby and <unk> were in attendance at Bound for Glory in 2015 , in Hardy 's home state of North Carolina , when Hardy won the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and were seen celebrating with him afterwards . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Twist of Fate ( WWF / E , TNA ) Twist of Hate ( TNA ) ( Front facelock cutter , sometimes from the top rope / front facelock stunner ) 
 Ice Pick ( TNA ) White Light Experience ( Independent circuit ) ( Double underhook with bodyscissors ) 
 Signature moves 
 Corner clothesline followed by a running bulldog 
 Corner sitout powerbomb 
 Diving elbow drop , sometimes to the back of a bent @-@ over or kneeling opponent 's head , with theatrics 
 Diving leg drop , with theatrics 
 Forearm smash 
 Inverted DDT 
 Moonsault 
 Northern Lights suplex 
 Ricochet ( Belly to back suplex lifted and dropped into an elbow drop to the opponent 's midsection ) – 2003 
 Russian legsweep 
 Side Effect ( Sitout side slam ) 
 Splash Mountain ( Sitout crucifix powerbomb ) 
 Managers 
 Gangrel 
 Lita 
 Michael Hayes 
 Reby Sky / Hardy 
 Ric Flair 
 Terri Runnels 
 Tyrus 
 Vanguard 1 
 Nicknames 
 " Version 1 ( V1 ) " ( WWE ) 
 " The Sensei of Mattitude " ( WWE ) 
 " The Angelic Diablo " ( WWE ) 
 " The Man Who Will Not Die " ( WWE ) 
 " ( Arguably ) Everyone 's Favorite Wrestler " ( WWE ) 
 " Broken " ( TNA ) 
 " Big Money Matt " ( TNA ) 
 " The ( self @-@ proclaimed ) Icon ( ic ) " ( ROH , TNA ) 
 Entrance themes 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 " Loaded " by Zack Tempest ( Independent Circuit ; used while teaming with his brother Jeff ) 
 " Live for the Moment " by Monster Magnet ( 2002 – September 7 , 2010 ) 
 Ring of Honor 
 " Something for You " by David Rolfe ( used while part of The Kingdom ) 
 " Another White Lie " by Voodoo Johnson 
 " Dirty Angel " by Voodoo Johnson ( used while part of S.C.U.M. ) 
 Independent Circuit 
 " Unbroken ( Hotel Baby ) " by Monster Magnet 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 " Rogue and Cold Blooded " by Dale Oliver ( January 9 , 2011 – August 20 , 2011 ) 
 " Immortal Theme " by Dale Oliver ( used while a part of Immortal ) 
 " <unk> " ( Creatures Intro ) by Peroxwhy ? gen ( July 31 , 2014 – January 19 , 2016 ; used as a member of The Hardys ) 
 " <unk> Theme " ( w / " I Am Iconic " Intro ) by Dale Oliver ( February 4 , 2016 – June 7 , 2016 ) 
 " No. 14 , Moonlight Sonata : III " performed by Nicolas James ( June 12 , 2016 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Future Stars of Wrestling 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Maryland Championship Wrestling 
 MCW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Extreme Rising World Championship ( 1 time ) 
 National Championship Wrestling 
 NCW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NCW Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 New Dimension Wrestling 
 NDW Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NDW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 1 – with Jeff Hardy 
 New England Wrestling Alliance 
 NEWA Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NEWA Hall of Fame ( Class of 2012 ) 
 New Frontier Wrestling Association 
 NFWA Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NFWA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Venom 
 NWA 2000 
 NWA 2000 Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 OMEGA Championship Wrestling 
 OMEGA Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times , current ) 
 OMEGA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 Pro Wrestling South 
 PWS Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Feud of the Year ( 2005 ) vs. Edge and Lita 
 Match of the Year ( 2000 ) with Jeff Hardy vs. The Dudley Boyz and Edge and Christian in a Triangle Ladder match at WrestleMania 2000 
 Match of the Year ( 2001 ) with Jeff Hardy vs. The Dudley Boyz and Edge and Christian in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2000 ) with Jeff Hardy 
 PWI ranked him # 17 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2003 
 Pro Wrestling Syndicate 
 PWS Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Remix Pro Wrestling 
 Remix Pro Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Facade 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA World Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 TNA World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 TNA World Tag Team Championship # 1 Contenders Tournament ( 2014 ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment 
 ECW Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WCW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 6 times ) – with Jeff Hardy 
 WWE Cruiserweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF European Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWF Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Montel Vontavious Porter 
 Bragging Rights Trophy ( 2009 ) – with Team SmackDown ( Chris Jericho , R @-@ Truth , Kane , Finlay and The Hart Dynasty ( David Hart Smith and Tyson Kidd ) ) 
 Terri Invitational Tournament – with Jeff Hardy 
 WrestleCade 
 WrestleCade Championship ( 2 times , current ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Gimmick ( 2002 ) 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 2004 ) with Lita vs. Kane 
 1 The title was vacated in 1999 due to The Hardy Boyz signing contracts with the WWF . 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = SM U @-@ 14 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 14 or U @-@ XIV was a U @-@ boat or submarine of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy during the First World War . She was launched in 1912 as the French Brumaire @-@ class submarine Curie ( Q 87 ) , but captured and rebuilt for service in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . At war 's end , the submarine was returned to France and restored to her former name . 
 Curie was launched in July 1912 at Toulon and completed in 1914 . She measured just under 171 feet ( 52 m ) long and displaced nearly 400 metric tons ( 390 long tons ) on the surface and just over 550 metric tons ( 540 long tons ) when submerged . At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Curie was assigned to duty in the Mediterranean . In mid @-@ December , Curie 's commander conceived a plan to infiltrate the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy 's main base at Pola , but during the 20 December attempt , the vessel became ensnared in harbor defenses . Two Austro @-@ Hungarian ships sank Curie , killing three of her crew ; the remainder were taken prisoner . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , which had a small and largely obsolete U @-@ boat fleet , immediately began salvage efforts and succeeded in raising the lightly damaged submarine in early February 1915 . After a refit , the boat was commissioned as SM U @-@ 14 in June , but had little success early in her career . When her commander fell ill in October , he was replaced by Georg Ritter von Trapp . U @-@ 14 was damaged by a depth charge attack in February 1916 , and underwent an extensive modernization through November . Resuming duty under von Trapp , U @-@ 14 sank her first ship in April 1917 , but had her most successful patrol in August , when she sank five ships — including Milazzo , reportedly the largest cargo ship in the world — in a six @-@ day span . 
 In January 1918 , von Trapp was replaced as commander , but neither of his two successors were able to match his accomplishments . In all , U @-@ 14 sank 11 ships with a combined gross register tonnage of nearly 48 @,@ 000 tons . Returned to France at the end of the war , she rejoined the French Navy in July 1919 under her former name of Curie . She remained in service until 1928 and was scrapped in 1929 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Curie was a part of the 16 @-@ boat Brumaire class authorized under the 1906 program . The Brumaire @-@ class boats were diesel @-@ powered versions of the steam @-@ powered Pluviôse class submarines ( which had been authorized the year before ) , and , like the Pluviôse boats , were named after either months of the French Republican Calendar or scientists . Curie was named after Pierre and Marie Curie . 
 The <unk> @-@ class was designed by French naval designer Maxime <unk> and featured a double hull . The boats were 170 feet 11 inches ( 52 @.@ 10 m ) long , 17 feet 9 inches ( 5 @.@ 41 m ) abeam , with a draft of 10 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 10 m ) when surfaced . They had a displacement of 397 metric tons ( 391 long tons ) surfaced and 551 metric tons ( 542 long tons ) submerged . Curie , like the other 15 submarines of the class , featured one 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) bow torpedo tube and could carry as many as eight torpedoes . As built , Curie did not have a deck gun . 
 The Brumaire @-@ class featured twin propeller shafts driven by two French license @-@ built MAN 6 @-@ cylinder diesel engines on the surface , or by two electric motors when submerged . Curie 's diesel engines generated a total of 840 brake horsepower ( 630 kW ) and could move the submarine at up to 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) on the surface ; her electric motors generated 660 shaft horsepower ( 490 kW ) and could propel the boat up to 8 @.@ 8 knots ( 16 @.@ 3 km / h ; 10 @.@ 1 mph ) submerged . While traveling on the surface at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , Curie had a range of 1 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 100 km ; 2 @,@ 000 mi ) ; the submarine 's range while submerged was 84 nautical miles ( 156 km ; 97 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 Curie was laid down at the Arsenal de Toulon and launched on 18 July 1912 , completed by 1914 , and commissioned into the French Navy . 
 = = French career and sinking = = 
 Like all the Brumaire @-@ class submarines , Curie began her First World War service in the Mediterranean , and was one of the first French submarines to appear in the Adriatic . 
 On 17 December 1914 , Curie , at the insistence of her French @-@ Irish commander Gabriel O 'Byrne , departed her base in the Ionian Sea under tow by the French armored cruiser Jules Michelet . <unk> her charge 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ; 170 mi ) from Pola , the site of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy 's main base , Jules Michelet departed , leaving Curie to proceed to the Austro @-@ Hungarian base . Curie arrived the next day and began reconnoitering the entrance to the harbor . O 'Byrne observed the entrance and exit paths of Austro @-@ Hungarian vessels and plotted a course through the deployed defensive mines . On 19 December , O 'Byrne took Curie in to observe the anti @-@ submarine net that ran across the opening in a long , defensive breakwater built to keep submarines from infiltrating the naval base . 
 Believing that he had accounted for all of the defensive measures , O 'Byrne took Curie to a depth of 65 feet ( 20 m ) early on 20 December and , attempting an incursion into the harbor , heard the sounds of chains and wires dragging on the submarine 's hull . When the sounds stopped after half a minute , O 'Byrne brought Curie up to periscope depth to discover that he had only penetrated the outer net . Curie 's forward momentum carried her into the second net where she became " inextricably entangled " . When the submarine , still trapped in the net , was forced to surface for fresh air , Curie came under fire from the Austro @-@ Hungarian destroyer Magnet and torpedo boat Tb 63 T which quickly sank her . Three of the twenty @-@ six men on board were killed in the attack ; the survivors — who included Curie 's commander , O 'Byrne — were all taken prisoner . 
 = = Salvage and Austro @-@ Hungarian career = = 
 At the beginning of the First World War , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy 's U @-@ boat fleet consisted of six largely experimental submarines of three classes . The Navy had five larger , more modern submarines ( what would have been the U @-@ 7 class ) under construction in Germany at the outbreak of war , but when the Navy became convinced that delivery of the U @-@ 7 boats would be impossible , they were sold to Germany in November 1914 . 
 Amidst Austro @-@ Hungarian efforts to replace the now @-@ unavailable U @-@ 7 boats , the largely intact Curie , resting at a depth of 39 metres ( 128 ft ) , became the focus of salvage efforts . Beginning on 21 December , the day after Curie 's sinking , salvage crews raised the submarine in stages , finally bringing her to the surface on 2 February 1915 . 
 The former Curie , now assigned the designation U @-@ 14 , was reconditioned and commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy under the command of Korvettenkapitän Otto Zeidler on 1 June . Zeidler remained in command until he fell ill , and was replaced in mid @-@ October by Linienschiffsleutnant Georg Ritter von Trapp . Under Zeidler 's command and the first months of von Trapp 's command , U @-@ 14 had no successes . 
 In early February 1916 , U @-@ 14 joined U @-@ 4 for a patrol near Durazzo . U @-@ 4 came closest to scoring a success when she narrowly missed hitting HMS Lowestoft , a British Birmingham @-@ class cruiser on 7 February . U @-@ 14 survived a depth charge attack , but made it back to port with all of her externally mounted torpedoes crushed and both fuel tanks leaking . 
 When she put in for repairs , U @-@ 14 was extensively modernized in a refit that kept her in port from February to November . The submarine was given a German @-@ style conning tower that replaced the French @-@ designed wet lookout platform . She was equipped with more powerful diesel engines , which increased her power output from 480 to 840 brake horsepower ( 360 to 630 kW ) . U @-@ 14 's fighting potential was further enhanced by the installation of larger fuel tanks , which nearly quadrupled her range to 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ) , up from her former maximum of 1 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 100 km ) . 
 On 28 April 1917 , U @-@ 14 was patrolling off the coast of Greece when she scored her first success , Teakwood , a 5 @,@ 315 @-@ ton British tanker headed from Port Arthur , Texas , to Port Said . On 3 May , on patrol in the same vicinity , von Trapp and U @-@ 14 sank another ship , this one the 1 @,@ 905 @-@ ton Italian steamer Antonio <unk> . 
 In another patrol in July , U @-@ 14 sailed on the north side of the island of Corfu while headed for Santi Quaranta , Albania . Because the harbor at Corfu was occupied by the French fleet at the time , U @-@ 14 conducted a ruse de guerre by flying the submarine 's former national flag , the French tricolor , in order to pass unmolested . Even though U @-@ 14 's new conning tower made her look unlike any other Brumaire @-@ class boat , one French patrol plane was successfully fooled by the ruse . When U @-@ 14 's crew first spotted the aircraft , flying towards them from the direction of the sun , there was not enough time to submerge . As the aircraft drew near , its French markings — and its cargo of bombs — became apparent to the crew . With no other course of action possible , U @-@ 14 's crew waved their hats and handkerchiefs at the plane . As the French pilot passed overhead , he returned the waves , apparently unaware of the U @-@ boat 's true nationality . The only success by U @-@ 14 on this cruise was the sinking of <unk> <unk> , a Greek steamer , near Cape Matapan . 
 U @-@ 14 's next war patrol was very successful , sinking five ships with a combined tonnage of 24 @,@ 814 , over half of her total tonnage sunk . U @-@ 14 departed from the submarine base at Cattaro on 20 August and headed through the Straits of Otranto , successfully evading the Otranto Barrage , and Allied blockade of the passageway between Italy and Albania . Heading into the Ionian Sea , von Trapp and U @-@ 14 sank the French steamer Constance on 23 August 142 nautical miles ( 263 km ; 163 mi ) northeast of Malta . The following day , U @-@ 14 sank Kilwinning , a British steamer loaded with coal and a general cargo headed for Port Said . Two days after that , the British steamer Titian was sunk by U @-@ 14 while on en route to Alexandria . U @-@ 14 's next victim was the British steamer Nairn . The 3 @,@ 627 @-@ ton turret deck ship , on her way from Malta to Port Said with coal , was sunk on the night of 27 / 28 August 125 nautical miles ( 232 km ; 144 mi ) from Benghazi . 
 On 29 August , von Trapp sank the Italian steamer Milazzo 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) east of Malta . Milazzo , at 11 @,@ 744 tons , was the largest ship sunk by U @-@ 14 , and among the largest ships sunk by a U @-@ boat in World War I. Milazzo , reported by The New York Times in 1916 as the largest cargo ship in the world , was the second @-@ largest ship sunk by an Austro @-@ Hungarian submarine . U @-@ 14 concluded her patrol on 1 September , when she returned to Cattaro . 
 U @-@ 14 sank three more ships during a five @-@ day span in October . On 19 October , U @-@ 14 sank the British ship <unk> 150 nautical miles ( 280 km ; 170 mi ) from Malta . One person aboard <unk> , which was carrying military stores between Malta and Suda Bay , was killed in the attack . Nearby , and on the same day , von Trapp sank the 3 @,@ 618 @-@ ton Good Hope , a British ship laden with iron ore for Middlesbrough . The next ship sunk by U @-@ 14 was the Italian steamer Capo di Monte , sunk 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) from Candia while on her way from Karachi to Malta . 
 In January 1918 , Friedrich Schlosser replaced von Trapp as commander of U @-@ 14 . Schlosser was , in turn , replaced in June by Hugo <unk> , who remained in command until the end of the war . Neither of the later commanders was able to duplicate von Trapp 's success in U @-@ 14 ; the U @-@ boat sank no more ships through the rest of the war . 
 After Austria @-@ Hungary 's surrender and the end of the First World War , U @-@ 14 was returned to France and on 17 July 1919 rejoined the French Navy under her former name of Curie . She was stricken in 1928 and scrapped in 1929 . 
 = = Ships sunk by U @-@ 14 = = 
 = Swimming at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men 's 100 metre butterfly = 
 The men 's 100 metre butterfly event at the 2008 Olympic Games took place on 14 – 16 August at the Beijing National Aquatics Center in Beijing , China . 
 U.S. swimmer Michael Phelps set a new Olympic record of 50 @.@ 58 to defend his title in the event , edging out Serbia 's Milorad Čavić ( 50 @.@ 59 ) by one hundredth of a second ( 0 @.@ 01 ) . He also earned his seventh Olympic gold at a single Games , tying Mark Spitz 's 1972 record for the most gold medals . Australia 's Andrew Lauterstein earned a bronze in 51 @.@ 12 , finishing in a close race against world record holder Ian Crocker by the slimmest margin . Phelps ' triumph occurred after Čavić had remarked that it would be better for the sport if Phelps was defeated . Phelps ' margin of triumph was so close that the Serbian team filed a protest , but after officials reviewed the video , the International Swimming Federation ( FINA ) announced that Phelps did touch the wall first and his victory would be upheld . 
 Kenya 's Jason Dunford finished fifth with a time of 51 @.@ 47 , and was followed in the sixth spot by Japan 's Takuro Fujii , in an Asian record of 51 @.@ 50 . Ukraine 's Andriy Serdinov ( 51 @.@ 59 ) , the bronze medalist in Athens four years earlier , and Papua New Guinea 's Ryan Pini , gold medalist at the 2006 Commonwealth Games , ( 51 @.@ 86 ) closed out the field . Dunford and Pini also made history as the first swimmer for their respective nation to reach an Olympic final . 
 Out of six individual events from his Olympic program , Phelps did not break the current world record in a final , finishing 0 @.@ 18 of a second behind Crocker 's time of 50 @.@ 40 , set in 2005 . In the entire event , other records were established , the Olympic record , five continental records , and several national records . 
 = = Preview = = 
 Due to a combination of the venue , Beijing National Aquatics Center ( better known as the Water Cube ) , which was claimed to be built to increase the speed of the swimmers , and the recently introduced LZR Racer swim suits , which had been proven to give the swimmer a lower time by 1 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 2 % , some analysts were predicting that many fast times and world records would be set in all the swimming events . 
 As with almost every event that he entered in at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Michael Phelps was the favorite to win the men 's 100 metre butterfly . Since winning the gold medal at the previous Games , in Athens , Phelps had demonstrated his superiority in this event , by also becoming world champion at the Melbourne 2007 World Championships , and achieving victory at the United States Olympic Trials . Therefore , the 100 metre butterfly was one of the eight Olympic events where Phelps was attempting to win a gold medal . 
 Going into the event , Phelps ' compatriot Ian Crocker was seen as the swimmer with the best chance of beating Phelps . Crocker beat Phelps ' 100 metre butterfly world record in 2003 , and had since lowered it twice : once at the 2004 United States Olympic trials , and then at the 2005 World Championships in Montreal . Before the Olympics , Crocker and Phelps held the seventeen fastest times ever in the event . In 2004 , Crocker was the favorite in the men 's 100 metre butterfly , but lost to Phelps by four one @-@ hundredths of a second . This victory gave Phelps the right to swim in the final of the 4 × 100 metre medley relay , however he gave up the spot to Crocker , and took his turn in the semifinals . Although holding the world record , Crocker had lost the last four times that he was up against Phelps in the 100 metre butterfly , including the 2008 United States Olympic Trials . Some thought that Crocker was not in the same shape that he was when we broke the world record , including Canadian Broadcasting Company ( CBC ) analyst Byron MacDonald who said that " If he 's ( Crocker ) going to beat Phelps in Beijing , Crocker has to get close to his world record time of 50 @.@ 40 . He just hasn 't shown it [ he ] can do it this year " . 
 Another threat to Phelps ' goal was Serbia 's Milorad Čavić . In Athens 2004 , Čavić was leading in a semifinal of the 100 metre butterfly , but right after his final turn , his suit opened at the neck and sucked in water , causing Čavić to finish last with a time of 53 @.@ 12 seconds . At the 2008 European Championships , Čavić won the men 's 50 metre butterfly and was the heavy favorite to win at twice that distance , but was suspended for wearing a " Kosovo is Serbia " T @-@ shirt on the medal podium . American swimmer Gary Hall , Jr. told The New York Times that although " Mike ( Phelps ) has been saying he ’ s going to win the 100 fly at the Olympics for the last year " , he thought that Čavić would be the winner . 
 Other possible medal contenders included Andriy Serdinov of Ukraine , who had won the Olympic bronze medal in 2004 , and Venezuelan Albert <unk> , a bronze medalist at the 2007 World Championships and seen as a potential spoiler , if he could match or improve on his 51 @.@ 82 time , in Beijing . 
 = = Competition = = 
 = = = Heats = = = 
 The heats began on August 14 , at 19 : 57 local time ( CST or UTC + 8 ) . There were nine preliminary heats , but all sixteen qualifiers came from the last five heats . Only three swimmers participated in the first heat , which was won by <unk> Duda of Latvia with a time of 55 @.@ 20 seconds . Heats 2 , 3 , and 4 were won by Shaune Fraser ( Cayman Islands ) , Rimvydas <unk> ( Lithuania ) , and Jakob <unk> <unk> ( Denmark ) , respectively . <unk> , Jeremy Knowles ( Bahamas ) , and Alon Mandel ( Israel ) all broke their countries ' previous records , while in heat 4 , <unk> , Michal <unk> of the Czech Republic , <unk> <unk> of Greece , and Ioan Stefan <unk> of Romania also set new national records . South African Lyndon Ferns was the first swimmer to qualify for the semifinals , winning heat 5 with a time of 52 @.@ 04 seconds , while national records were broken by Mario Todorović ( Croatia ) , Simão Morgado ( Portugal ) , and Douglas Lennox @-@ Silva ( Puerto Rico ) . <unk> <unk> ( Ukraine ) and Shi Feng ( China ) , finished first and second in heat 6 , with times of 51 @.@ 82 and 51 @.@ 87 seconds , respectively , that allowed them to reach the semifinals . Five of the eight swimmers in heat 7 advanced as well , including Jason Dunford ( Kenya ) , Andrew Lauterstein ( Australia ) , Takuro Fujii ( Japan ) , Frédérick Bousquet ( France ) , and Ryan Pini ( Papua New Guinea ) . Dunford , with a 51 @.@ 14 time , set a new Olympic record , beating Phelps ' previous record of 51 @.@ 25 seconds , achieved in the final of the 100 metre butterfly in Athens ; he also set new African and Kenyan records . Andrew Lauterstein 's 51 @.@ 37 time was a new Oceanic and Australian best . Takuro Fujii set a Japanese and an Asian record with his 51 @.@ 50 time . The swimmers qualifying from heat 8 were Albert <unk> Altes ( Venezuela ) , Corney Swanepoel ( New Zealand ) , and Ian Crocker ( United States ) . Records broken in this heat included the South American and Venezuelan records ( by Altes ) , and the New Zealand record ( by Swanepoel ) . Heat 9 was the fastest one , with Milorad Čavić ( Serbia ) , Michael Phelps ( United States ) , <unk> Serdinov ( Ukraine ) , Peter <unk> ( Slovenia ) , and Kaio de Almeida ( Brazil ) all earning spots in the next round . Čavić , the heat 's winner with a 50 @.@ 76 time , beat the Olympic record set by Dunford two heats earlier , thus also setting a new European and Serbian record . Serdinov and <unk> also managed to break their national records . 
 = = = Semifinals = = = 
 The semifinals were held on August 15 and started at 11 : 26 CST . The first semifinal was won by Michael Phelps with a time of 50 @.@ 97 seconds . Other three swimmers qualified from this semifinal : Andrew Lauterstein ( 51 @.@ 27 seconds ) , Jason Dunford ( 51 @.@ 33 seconds ) , and Ryan Pini ( 51 @.@ 62 seconds ) . Surprisingly , Albert <unk> Altes , the bronze medalist at the 2007 World Championships , failed to qualify , after finishing in the sixth place . Also missing the cut was the host nation 's representative Shi Feng , <unk> <unk> , and Kaio de Almeida . The second semifinal was won in 50 @.@ 92 seconds by Milorad Čavić , once again . The remaining three qualifiers were Ian Crocker ( 51 @.@ 27 seconds ) , Andriy Serdinov ( 51 @.@ 41 seconds ) , and Takuro Fujii ( 51 @.@ 59 seconds ) . New time bests set in the semifinals included the Oceanic and Australian records ( set by Lauterstein ) , and the Chinese record ( set by Shi ) . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 The final took place on August 16 , at 10 : 10 CST . Before the race , Milorad Čavić made headlines by saying in an interview that it would be better for swimming if he beat Phelps . Phelps ' coach Bob Bowman used the quote to provide motivation to his protégé . In an interview , Phelps said that doubters like Čavić " fires me up more than anything , I always welcome comments . It definitely motivates me even more . " Almost immediately after the race started , Čavić took the lead with Phelps getting off to a slow start . At the turn , Čavić was first , followed by Ian Crocker , while Phelps made the split in seventh place , just 0 @.@ 62 seconds behind Čavić . As the two approached the finish , Čavić tried to coast to the wall on one last stroke , while Phelps , who had misjudged the end , took an extra half @-@ stroke , causing both competitors to touch the wall at almost exactly the same time . It turned out that Phelps had actually finished one one @-@ hundredth of a second ahead of Čavić , with a time of 50 @.@ 58 seconds . Phelps even admitted that , at first , he thought the extra stroke he took had cost him the gold medal , until he looked at the scoreboard displaying the results . Andrew Lauterstein won the bronze medal , also beating Crocker by one one @-@ hundredth of a second . 
 Several records were broken at the final . For the first time at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Phelps did not break the current world record in a final , finishing eighteen one @-@ hundredths of a second behind team @-@ mate Crocker 's 50 @.@ 40 @-@ second world record from 2005 ; he did though set a new Olympic record . Three continental records were broken in the final , with Fujii setting a new Asian record , Čavić a new European record , and Lauterstein a new Oceanic record . Although he finished last , swimmer Ryan Pini made history as the first swimmer from Papua New Guinea to swim in an Olympic final , and even received a call from the prime minister Michael <unk> congratulating him . Most notably though , Phelps won his seventh gold medal at these Games , tying Mark Spitz 's record for most gold medals won at a single Olympic Games . For being able to emulate Spitz 's record , Speedo , a sponsor of Michael Phelps , awarded him a US $ 1 million bonus , which had already been offered to him at the 2004 Summer Olympics , under the same conditions . After the final , the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) arranged a joint interview with Phelps and Spitz , where Spitz praised Phelps ' effort , telling him that " what you did tonight was epic " and even though at one point , Phelps was more than half a second behind Čavić , Spitz " never thought for one moment you ( Phelps ) were out of that race . " 
 = = = = Protest = = = = 
 Almost immediately after the end of the race , the Serbian team filed a protest claiming that Čavić touched the wall first but did not use enough force to trigger the timing sensor . Officials of the International Swimming Federation ( FINA ) watched the video in slow motion , and announced that Phelps ' victory would be upheld . Ben <unk> , a FINA referee announced that " It 's very clear that the Serbian swimmer touched second after Michael Phelps . " Although Serbia conceded their protest , not everyone was convinced that Phelps had won the gold medal ; Branislav Jevtić , Serbia 's deputy chef de mission for all sports , was quoted as saying " in my opinion , it 's not right , but we must follow the rules . Everybody saw what happened . " In one interview following the race , Čavić said " I am completely happy with where I am " , while in another he revealed that he expects that " people will be bringing this up for years and saying you ( Čavić ) won that race . If we got to do this again , I would win it " . While the result is still controversial , a high speed photograph shows Phelps touching the wall , while Čavić is still a short distance away . In April 2015 , Spitz said that he had been sent an email posted by Omega which stated that Phelps had lost the 100m butterfly final . 
 = = Records = = 
 Prior to this competition , the existing world and Olympic records were as follows . 
 The following records were established during the competition : 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Heats = = = 
 = = = Semifinals = = = 
 = = = = Semifinal 1 = = = = 
 = = = = Semifinal 2 = = = = 
 = = = Final = = = 
 = Design management = 
 Design management is a business discipline that uses project management , design , strategy , and supply chain techniques to control a creative process , support a culture of creativity , and build a structure and organization for design . The objective of design management is to develop and maintain a business environment in which an organization can achieve its strategic and mission goals through design , and by establishing and managing an efficient and effective system . Design management is a comprehensive activity at all levels of business ( operational to strategic ) , from the discovery phase to the execution phase . " Simply put , design management is the business side of design . Design management encompasses the ongoing processes , business decisions , and strategies that enable innovation and create effectively @-@ designed products , services , communications , environments , and brands that enhance our quality of life and provide organizational success . " The discipline of design management overlaps with marketing management , operations management , and strategic management 
 Traditionally , design management was seen as limited to the management of design projects , but over time , it evolved to include other aspects of an organization at the functional and strategic level . A more recent debate concerns the integration of design thinking into strategic management as a cross @-@ disciplinary and human @-@ centered approach to management . This paradigm also focuses on a collaborative and iterative style of work and an abductive mode of inference , compared to practices associated with the more traditional management paradigm . 
 Over recent years , design has become a strategic asset in brand equity , differentiation , and product quality for many companies . More and more organizations apply design management to improve design @-@ relevant activities and to better connect design with corporate strategy . 
 = = Extended definition = = 
 The multifaceted nature of design management leads to varied opinion , making it difficult to give an overall definition ; furthermore , design managers have a broad range of roles and responsibilities . These factors , combined with a multitude of other influences such as the industry involved , company size , the market situation , and the importance of design within the organization 's activities . As a result , design management is not restricted to a single design discipline and usually depends on the context of its application within an individual organization . 
 On an abstract level , design management plays three key roles in the interface of design , organization , and market . The three key roles are to : 
 <unk> design strategy with corporate or brand strategy , or both 
 Manage quality and consistency of design outcomes across and within different design disciplines ( design classes ) 
 Enhance new methods of user experience , create new solutions for user needs and differentiation from competitor 's designs 
 = = = Defining quotes = = = 
 Design management is the effective deployment by line managers of the design resources available to an organization in the pursuance of its corporate objectives . It is therefore directly concerned with the organizational place of design , with the identification with specific design disciplines which are relevant to the resolution of key management issues , and with the training of managers to use design effectively . 
 Design management is a complex and multi @-@ faceted activity that goes right to the heart of what a company is or does [ ... ] it is not something susceptible to pat formulas , a few bullet points or a manual . Every company 's structure and internal culture is different ; design management is no exception . But the fact that every firm is different does not diminish the importance of managing design tightly and effectively . 
 = = Definition of related terms = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Unlike unique sciences such as mathematics , the perspective , activity , or discipline of design is not brought to a generally accepted common denominator . The historical beginnings of design are complex and the nature of design is still the subject of ongoing discussion . In design , there are strong differentiations between theory and practice . The fluid nature of the theory allows the designer to operate without being constrained by a rigid structure . In practice , decisions are often referred to as intuition . In his Classification of Design ( 1976 ) , Gorb divided design into three different classes . Design management operates in and across all three classes : product ( e.g. industrial design , packaging design , service design ) , information ( e.g. graphic design , branding , media design , web design ) , and environment ( e.g. retail design , exhibition design , interior design ) . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 Management in all business and organizational activities is the act of getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives efficiently and effectively . Management comprises planning , organizing , staffing , leading or directing , and controlling an organization ( a group of one or more people or entities ) , or effort for the purpose of accomplishing a goal . <unk> encompasses the deployment and manipulation of human resources , financial resources , technological resources , and natural resources . Towards the end of the 20th century , business management came to consist of six separate branches , namely human resource management , operations management ( or production management ) , strategic management , marketing management , financial management , and information technology management , which was responsible for management information systems . Although it is difficult to subdivide management into functional categories in this way , it helps in navigating the discipline of management . Design management overlaps mainly with the branches marketing management , operations management , and strategic management . 
 = = = Design leadership = = = 
 Design managers often operate in the area of design leadership ; however , design management and design leadership are interdependent rather than interchangeable . Like management and leadership , they differ in their objectives , achievements of objectives , accomplishments , and outcomes . Design leadership leads from creation of a vision to changes , innovations , and implementation of creative solutions . It stimulates communication and collaboration through motivation , sets ambitions , and points out future directions to achieve long @-@ term objectives . In contrast , design management is reactive and responds to a given business situation by using specific skills , tools , methods , and techniques . Design management requires design leadership to know where to go and design leadership requires design management to know how to get there . 
 = = History = = 
 Difficulties arise in tracing the history of design management . Even though design management as an expression is first mentioned in literature in 1964 , earlier contributions created the context in which the expression could arise . Throughout its history , design management was influenced by a number of different disciplines : architecture , industrial design , management , software development , engineering ; and movements such as system theory , design methodologies . It cannot be attributed directly to either design nor to management . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 = = = = Managing product aesthetics and corporate design ( early contributions ) = = = = 
 Early contributions to design management show how different design disciplines were coordinated to achieve business objectives at a corporate level , and demonstrate the early understanding of design as a competitive force . In that context , design was merely understood as an aesthetic function , and the management of design was at the level of project planning . 
 The practice of managing design to achieve a business objective was first documented in 1907 . The Deutscher Werkbund ( German Work Federation ) was established in Munich by twelve architects and twelve business firms as a state @-@ sponsored effort to better compete with Great Britain and the United States by integrating traditional craft and industrial mass @-@ production techniques . A German designer and architect , Peter Behrens , created the entire corporate identity ( logotype , product design , publicity , etc . ) of Allgemeine <unk> Gesellschaft ( AEG ) , and is regarded as the first industrial designer in history . His work for AEG was the first large @-@ scale demonstration of the viability and vitality of the Werkbund 's initiatives and objectives and can be considered as first contribution to design management . 
 In the following years , companies applied the principles of corporate identity and corporate design to increase awareness and recognition by consumers and differentiation from competitors . Olivetti became famous for its attention to design through their corporate design activities . In 1936 Olivetti hired Giovanni <unk> in their publicity department and promoted Marcello <unk> from the product design department to develop design in a comprehensive corporate philosophy . In 1956 , inspired by the compelling brand character of Olivetti , Thomas Watson , Jr . , CEO of IBM , retained American architect and industrial designer Eliot Noyes to develop a corporate @-@ wide IBM Design Program consisting of coherent brand @-@ design strategy together with a design management system to guide and oversee the comprehensive brand identity elements of : products , graphics , exhibits , architecture , interiors and fine art . This seminal effort by Noyes , with his inclusion of Paul Rand and Charles Eames as consultants , is considered to be the first comprehensive corporate design program in America . Up to and during the 1960s , debates in the design community were focused on ergonomics , functionalism , and corporate design , while debates in management addressed Just in time , Total quality management , and product specification . The main proponents of design management at that time were AEG , Bauhaus , HfG Ulm , the British Design Council , Deutscher Werkbund , Olivetti , IBM , Peter Behrens , and Walter Paepcke . 
 = = = = Managing design systematically ( 1960s – 1970s ) = = = = 
 The work of designers in the 1960s was influenced by industry , as the debate on design evolved from an aesthetic function into active cooperation with industry . Designers had to work in a team with engineers and marketers , and design was perceived as one part of the product development process . In the early years , design management was strongly influenced by system science and the emergence of a design science ( e.g. the " blooming period of design methodologies " in Germany , the US , and Great Britain ) , as its main contributors had backgrounds in architecture . Early discussions on design management were strongly influenced by Anglo @-@ Saxon literature ( e.g. Farr and Horst <unk> ) , methodological studies ( e.g. HfG Ulm and Christopher Alexander ) , and theories in business studies . Design management dealt with two main issues : 
 how to develop corporate systems of planning aims 
 how to solve problems of methodological information processing 
 Instruments and checklists were developed to structure the processes and decisions of companies for successful corporate development . In this period the main contributors to design management were Michael Farr , Horst <unk> , HfG Ulm , Christopher Alexander , the London Business School , Peter Gorb , the Design Management Institute , and the Royal Society of Arts . Debates in design disciplines were focusing on design science , design methodology , wicked problems , Ulm methodology , new German design , and semiotic and scenario technique . 
 = = = = Managing design as a strategic asset ( 1980s – 1990s ) = = = = 
 In the 1980s several managers realized the economic effect of design , which increased the demand for design management . As companies were unsure how to manage design , there was a market for consultancy ; focusing on helping organizations manage the product development process , including market research , product concepts , projects , communications , and market launch phases — as well as the positioning of products and companies . 
 Three important works were published in 1990 : the Publication of Design Management – A Handbook of Issues and Methods by Mark Oakley ( Editor ) , the book Design Management by French researcher Brigitte Borja de Mozota , and the Publication of Design Management – Papers from the London Business School by Peter Gorb ( Editor ) . This new method @-@ based design management approach helped to improve communication amongst technical and marketing managers . Examples of the new methods included trend research , the product effect triad , style mapping , milieus , product screenings , empiric design methods , and service design , giving design a more communicative and central role within organizations . 
 In the management community the topics of management theory , positioning strategy , brand management , strategic management , advertisement , competitive strategy , leadership , business ethics , mass customization , core competencies , strategic intent , reputation management , and system theory were discussed . Main issues and debates in design management included the topics of design leadership , design thinking , and corporate identity ; plus the involvement of design management at the operational , tactical , and strategic levels . 
 In 1980 Robert <unk> , the senior managing director of design at Philips , introduced a design management system that regards design , production , and marketing as a single unit . This was an important contribution to the definition of design as a core element in business . At Philips Design , Stefano Marzano became CEO and Chief Creative Director in 1991 , continuing the work of Robert <unk> to align design processes with business processes and furthering design strategy as an important asset of the overall business strategy . 
 Upon being appointed corporate head of the IBM Design Program in 1989 , Tom Hardy , initiated a strategic design management effort , in collaboration with IBM design consultant Richard Sapper , to return to the roots of the IBM Design Program first established in 1956 by Eliot Noyes , Paul Rand and Charles Eames . The intent was to reprise IBM 's brand image with customer experience @-@ driven quality , approachability and contemporary product innovation . The highly successful IBM <unk> was the first product to emerge from this strategy in 1992 and , together with other innovative , award @-@ winning products that followed , served to position design as a strategic asset for IBM 's brand turnaround efforts initiated in 1993 by newly appointed CEO Louis V. Gerstner , Jr . 
 As a consultant following his 22 @-@ year tenure at IBM , Hardy served as Corporate Design Advisor to Samsung from 1996 @-@ 2003 where his integration of a brand @-@ design philosophy and guiding principles , together with a comprehensive design management system , became a strategic corporate asset that significantly helped elevate Samsung 's image from follower to global brand @-@ design leader and dramatically increased brand equity value . 
 = = = = Managing design for innovation ( 2000s – 2010s ) = = = = 
 Design management has taken a more strategic role within business since 2000 , and more academic programs for design management have been established . Design management has been recognized ( and subsidized ) throughout the European Union as a function for corporate advantage of both companies and nations . The main issues and debates included the topics of design thinking , strategic design management , design leadership , and product service systems . Design management was influenced by the following design trends : sustainable design , inclusive design , interactive design , design probes , product clinics , and co @-@ design . It was also influenced by the later management trends of open innovation and design thinking . 
 = = = Notion of the term " design management " = = = 
 The term " architectural management " was coined by the architects Brunton , Baden <unk> and Boobyer in 1964 where they highlighted the tension and synergy between the management of individual projects ( job management ) and the management of the business ( office management ) . Although they did not use the term " design management " , they stressed identical issues ; while the design community discussed methodologies for design . Christopher Alexander 's work played an important role in the development of the design methodology , where he devoted his attention to the problems of form and context ; and focused on disassembling complex design challenges into constituent parts to approach a solution . His intention was to bring more rationalism and structure into the solving of design problems . 
 In 1965 the term design management was first published in a series of articles in the Design Journal . This series includes a pre @-@ publication of the first chapter of the book Design Management by Michael Farr , which is considered as the first comprehensive literature on design management . His thoughts on system theory and project management led to a framework on how to deal with design as a business function at the corporate management level by providing the language and methodology to effectively manage it . 
 = = = Politic ( till 2000s ) = = = 
 Design policies have a history reaching back to the end of the 19th century , when design programs with roots in the crafts sector were implemented in Sweden ( 1845 ) and Finland ( 1875 ) . In 1907 the Deutscher Werkbund ( German Work Federation ) was established in Munich to better compete with Great Britain and United States . The success of the Deutscher Werkbund inspired a group of British designers , industrialists and business people after they had seen the Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne in 1914 , to found the Design and Industries Association and campaign for a greater involvement of government in the promotion of good design . In 1944 design management by managing design policies was used by the British Government . The British Design Council was founded by Hugh Dalton , president of the Board of Trade in the British wartime government , as the Council of Industrial Design with the objective " to promote by all practicable means the improvement of design in the products of British industry " . 
 Germany also realized the national importance of design during World War II . Between 1933 and 1945 Adolf Hitler used design , architecture and propaganda to increase his power ; shown through the annual <unk> in Nürnberg on September 5 . Heinrich Himmler coordinated several design activities for Hitler , including : the all @-@ black SS @-@ uniform designed by Professor Karl Diebitsch and Walter Heck in 1933 ; the Dachau concentration camp , designed by Theodor Eicke , and prototypes for other Nazi concentration camps ; and the Wewelsburg redesign commissioned by Heinrich Himmler in 1944 . 
 Since the 1990s the practice of design promotion is evolving , and governments have used policy management and design management to promote design as part of their efforts of fostering technology , manufacturing and innovation . 
 = = = Promotion and conference ( till 2000s ) = = = 
 In America the Chicago industrialist Walter Paepcke , of the Container Corporation of America , founded the Aspen Design Conference after World War II as a way of bringing business and designers together – to the benefit of both . In 1951 the first conference topic , " Design as a function of management " , was chosen to ensure the participation of the business community . After several years , business leaders stopped attending because the increased participation of designers changed the dialogue , focusing not on the need for collaboration between business and design , but rather on the business community 's failure to understand the value of design . 
 The Royal Society of Arts ( RSA ) Presidential Medals for Design Management were instituted in June 1964 . These were to recognize outstanding examples of design policy in organizations that maintained a consistently high standard in all aspects of design management , throughout all industries and disciplines . With these awards the RSA introduced the term design management . In 1965 the first medals were given to four companies ; Conran & Co Ltd , Jaeger & Co Ltd , S. Hille & Co Ltd and W. & A. Gilbey Ltd. in the category " current achievements " and two companies London Transport and Heal and Son Ltd. in the category " long pioneering in the field of design management " . The medal selection committee included representatives of the RSA council and the faculty of Royal Designers for Industry . 
 The Design Management Institute ( DMI ) was founded in 1975 at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston . Since the mid @-@ 1980s the DMI has been an international non @-@ profit organization that seeks to heighten the awareness of design as an essential part of business strategy , and become the leading resource and international authority on design management . One year later the first conference was organized . The DMI increased its international presence and established the " European International Conference on Design Management " in 1997 , and a professional development program for design management . 
 In 2007 the European Commission funded the Award for Design Management <unk> and Reinforcing Enterprises ( <unk> ) project for two years , as part of the Pro Inno Europe Initiative , which is the EU 's " focal point for innovation policy analysis , learning and development " . The aim was to encourage companies – especially small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) – to introduce design management procedures to ; improve their competitiveness , stimulate innovation , establish a European knowledge @-@ sharing platform , organize the Design Management Europe Award , and to identify and test new activities to promote Design Management . 
 = = = Education ( 1970 on ) = = = 
 Teaching design to managers was pioneered at the London Business School ( LBS ) in 1976 by Peter Gorb ( 1926 @-@ 2013 ) , the first Honorary Fellow of the DMI and a long @-@ standing Fellow of the RSA . Gorb had previously embedded design management in the Burton Retail Group before joining LBS where he later founded the Design Management Unit in 1982 ( in collaboration with Charles Handy ) which he led for over 20 years . In 1979 his talk at the RSA entitled Design and its Use by Managers provided a background introduction to the wide scope of design within industry and commerce , and an appreciation of the power of design as a management resource . Gorb produced two books based on seminars at the Design Management Unit at LBS , Design Talks ( 1988 ) with Eric Schneider and Design Management : Papers from the London Business School ( 1990 ) . Gorb is also remembered as introducing the concept of Silent Design , design undertaken by non @-@ designers , in an influential paper with Angela Dumas ( 1987 ) . 
 In 1991 the University of Art and Design Helsinki founded the Institute of Design Leadership and Management and established an international training program . The International Design Management Conference was organized in the same year by them . In 1995 the Helsinki School of Economics ( HSE ) , University of Art and Design Helsinki ( <unk> ) , and University of Technology ( <unk> ) cooperated to create the International Design Business Management Program ( IDBM ) , which aims to bring together experts from different fields within the concept of design business management . 
 The Design Leadership Fellowship at the University of Oxford was founded in 2005 . In the same year the Stanford University Institute of Design founded the D @-@ school , a faculty intended to advance multidisciplinary innovation . The Finnish Aalto University was founded in 2010 and is a merger of the three established Finnish universities – the Helsinki School of Economics ( HSE ) , University of Art and Design Helsinki ( <unk> ) , and University of Technology ( <unk> ) – that had been cooperating on the IDBM design management program since 1995 . Since 2006 the Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts in Switzerland offers one of the few undergraduate studies in design management , completely taught in English . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 The first international research project on design management , the <unk> research project , was initiated by Earl Powell , then president of DMI and the Harvard Business School in 1989 . In the same year Earl Powell and Thomas Walton , Ph.D. developed the Design Management Review and DMI published the first issue . The publication is solely focusing on design management and has become the flagship publication of the discipline . 
 Design and design management have experienced different generations of theories . In its first generation design focused on the object , in the second on the process , and in the third on the user . Similar shifts can be seen in management and design management in almost parallel steps . For design management this has been illustrated by Brigitte Borja de Mozota , using <unk> 's Bremen Model as a framework . Design management research organised itself into : 
 Organizational studies : design in an economic sector or design in large firms , such as Philips or Olivetti 
 Descriptive studies of specific methods of design management 
 It is difficult to predict where design management research is heading . 
 = = Different types = = 
 Different types of design management depend on the type and strategic orientation of the business . 
 = = = Product design management = = = 
 In product @-@ focused companies , design management focuses mainly on product design management , including strong interactions with product design , product marketing , research and development , and new product development . This perspective of design management is mainly focused on the aesthetic , semiotic , and ergonomic aspects of the product to express the product 's qualities and to manage diverse product groups and product design platforms and can be applied together with a user @-@ centered design perspective . 
 = = = Brand design management = = = 
 In market and brand focused companies , design management focuses mainly on brand design management , including corporate brand management and product brand management . Focusing on the brand as the core for design decisions results in a strong focus on the brand experience , customer touch points , reliability , recognition , and trust relations . The design is driven by the brand vision and strategy . 
 Corporate brand design management 
 Market and brand focused organizations are concerned with the expression and perception of the corporate brand . Corporate design management implements , develops , and maintains the corporate identity , or brand . This type of brand management is strongly anchored in the organization to control and influence corporate design activities . The design program plays the role of a quality program within many fields of the organization to achieve uniform internal branding . It is strongly linked to strategy , corporate culture , product development , marketing , organizational structure , and technological development . Achieving a consistent corporate brand requires the involvement of designers and a widespread design awareness among employees . A creative culture , knowledge sharing processes , determination , design leadership , and good work relations support the work of corporate brand management . 
 Product brand design management 
 The main focus of product brand management lies on the single product or product family . Product design management is linked to research and development , marketing , and brand management , and is present in the fast @-@ moving consumer goods ( <unk> ) industry . It is responsible for the visual expressions of the individual product brand , with its diverse customer – brand touch points and the execution of the brand through design . 
 = = = Service design management = = = 
 Service design management deals with the newly emerging field of service design . It is the activity of planning and organizing people , infrastructure , communication , and material components of a service . The aim is to improve the quality of the service , the interaction between the service provider and its customers , and the customer 's experience . The increasing importance and size of the service sector in terms of people employed and economic importance requires that services should be well @-@ designed in order to remain competitive and to continue to attract customers . Design management traditionally focuses in the design and development of manufactured products ; service design managers can apply many of the same theoretical and methodological approaches . Systematic and strategic management of service design helps the business gain competitive advantages and conquer new markets . Companies that proactively identify the interests of their customers and use this information to develop services that create good experiences for the customer will open up new and profitable business opportunities . 
 Companies in the service sector innovate by addressing the intangibility , heterogeneity , inseparability , and <unk> of service ( the <unk> challenge ) : 
 Services are intangible ; they have no physical form and they cannot be seen before purchase or taken home . 
 Services are heterogenous ; unlike tangible products , no two service delivery experiences are alike . 
 Services are inseparable ; the act of supplying a service is inseparable from the customer 's act of consuming it . 
 Services are perishable ; they can not be inventoried . 
 Service design management differs in several ways from product design management . For example , the application of international trading strategies of services is difficult because the evolution of service ' from a craftsmanship attitude to industrialization of services ' requires the development of new tools , approaches , and policies . Whereas goods can be manufactured centrally and delivered around the globe , services have to be performed at the place of consumption , which makes it difficult to achieve global quality consistency and effective cost control . 
 = = = Business design management = = = 
 Business design management deals with the newly emerging field of integrating design thinking into management . In organisation and management theory , design thinking forms part of the Architecture / Design / Anthropology ( A / D / A ) paradigm which characterizes innovative , human @-@ centered enterprises . This paradigm focuses on a collaborative and iterative style of work and an adductive mode of thinking , compared to practices associated with the more traditional Mathematics / Economics / Psychology ( M / E / P ) management paradigm . Since 2006 , the term Business Design is trademarked by the Rotman School of Management ; they define business design as the application of design thinking principles to business practice . The <unk> way of problem solving is an integrative way of thinking that is characterized by a deep understanding of the user , creative resolution of tensions , collaborative prototyping , and continuous modification and enhancement of ideas and solutions . This approach to problem solving can be applied to all components of business , and the management of the problem solving process forms the core of business design management activity . Universities other than the Rotman School of Management are offering similar academic education concepts , including the Aalto University in Finland , which initiated their International Design Business Management ( IDBM ) program in 1995 . 
 = = = Engineering design management = = = 
 [ Engineering Design Management ] is a knowledge area within engineering management . It represents the adaptation and application of customary management practices , with the intention of achieving a productive [ engineering design process ] . Engineering design management is primarily applied in the context of engineering design teams , whereby the activities , outputs and influences of design teams are planned , guided , monitored and controlled . The output of an engineering design process is ultimately a description of a technical system . That technical system may either be an artifact ( technical object ) , production facility , a process plant or any infrastructure for the benefit of society . Therefore , the domain of engineering design management includes high volume , mass production as well as low @-@ volume , infrastructure . 
 = = = Urban design management = = = 
 Urban design management involves mediation among a range of self @-@ interested stakeholders engaged in the production of the built environment . Such mediation can encourage a joint search for mutually beneficial outcomes or integrative development . Integrative development aims to produce sustainable solutions by increasing stakeholder satisfaction with the process and with the resulting urban development . 
 Conventional real estate development and urban planning activities are subject to conflicting interests and positional bargaining . The integrative negotiation approach emphasises mutual gains . The approach has been applied in land use planning and environmental management , but has not been used as a coordinated approach to real estate development , city design , and urban planning . Urban design management involves reordering the chain of events in the production of the built environment according to the principles of integrative negotiation . Such principled negotiation can be used in urban development and planning activities to reach more efficient agreements . This leads to integrative developments and more sustainable ways to produce the built environment . 
 Urban design management offers prescriptive advice for practitioners trying to organise city planning activities in a way that will increase sustainability by increasing satisfaction levels . Real estate development and urban planning often occur at very different decision @-@ making scales . The practitioners involved may have diverse educational and professional backgrounds . They certainly have conflicting interests . Providing prescriptive advice for differing , possibly conflicting , groups requires construction of a framework that accommodates all of their daily activities and responsibilities . Urban design management provides a common framework to help bring together the conventional practices of urban and regional planning , real estate development , and urban design . 
 The work on Integrative Negotiation Consensus Building and the Mutual Gains Approach provide a helpful theoretical framework for developing the theory of urban design management . Negotiation theory provides a useful framework for merging the perspectives of urban planning , city design , and real estate project proposals regarding production of the built environment . Interests , a key construct in negotiation theory , is an important variable that will allow integrated development , as defined above , to occur . The path @-@ breaking work of Roger Fisher and William Ury ( 1981 ) , Getting to yes , advises negotiators to focus on interests and mutual gains instead of bargaining over positions . 
 = = = Architectural management = = = 
 Architectural management can be defined as an ordered way of thinking which helps to realise a quality building for an acceptable cost or as a process function with the aim of delivering greater architectural value to the client and society . Research by Kiran Gandhi describes architectural management as a set of practical techniques for an architect to successfully operate his practice . The term architectural management has been in use since the 1960s . The evolution of the field of architectural management has not been a smooth affair . Architectural practice was merely considered a business until after the Second World War , and even then practitioners appeared to be concerned about the conflict between art and commerce , demonstrating indifference to management . There was apparent conflict between the image of an architect and the need for professional management of the architectural business . <unk> to embrace management and business as an inherent part of architectural practice could also be seen in architectural education programmes and publications . It appears that the management of architectural design , as well as architectural management in general , is still not being given enough importance . Architectural management falls into two distinct parts : office or practice management and project management . Office management provides an overall framework within which many individual projects are commenced , managed , and completed . Architectural management extends between the management of the design process , construction , and project management , through to facilities management of buildings in use . It is a powerful tool that can be applied to the benefit of professional service firms and the total building processes , yet it continues to receive too little attention both in theory and in practice . 
 = = Business = = 
 = = = Value for business = = = 
 Design plays a vital role in product and brand development , and is of great economic importance for organisations and companies . Creativity and design in particular ( as an activity : design skills , methods and processes ) play a growing role in creating products and services with high added value to consumers . Design generates 50 % of world export revenue in the creative industries ' products ( goods and services ) . The creative industry workforce is 3 @.@ 1 % of total employment in the European Union ( EU ) , which creates a revenue that is 2 @.@ 6 % of the EU gross value . Creative industries have attained an unprecedented average annual growth rate of 8 @.@ 7 per cent across the EU between 2000 and 2005 . 
 The increasing importance of creative industries ( and especially design ) in knowledge @-@ intense industries is reflected not only in the policies and studies on EU levels , but has initiated design and creative policies and programmes in the most advanced economies . Furthermore , design and creativity has been recognised on a regional and local level as a driving force for competitiveness , economic growth , job market , and citizen 's satisfaction . The investment in creative and cultural industries are considered a significant component of EU growth in the Lisbon Strategy and the Europe 2020 strategy ; and designers are increasingly involved in innovation issues . 
 To better understand the value of design and its role in innovation , the EU holds a public consultation on the basis of their publication Design as a driver of user @-@ centred innovation and have published the mini @-@ study Design as a tool for innovation . The report highlights the importance of design in user @-@ centred innovation and recommends the integration of design into the EU innovation policy . In addition to the design share in the export of all creative industry products , design can also have a positive impact on all business performance indicators ; from turnover and profit to market share and competitiveness . Design management research results can be classified as follows : 
 Design improves the performance of the innovation policy and of the communications policy of the firm 
 Design improves the global performance of the firm ; it is a profitable investment 
 Design is a profession that creates value on a macro economic level 
 Design improves the competitive edge of a country in the international competition ; it develops exports 
 Design can help the restructuring of an economic sector in regional economic policy 
 If and how design management is applied in a company correlates with the importance and integration of design in the company , but depends also on industry type , company size , ownership for design and type of competitive competence . A research from the Danish Design Centre ( DDC ) led to the " Danish Design Ladder " , which shows how companies interpreted and applied design in differing depth : 
 Non @-@ design : Companies that do not use design ( 15 % in 2007 ) . 
 Design as styling : Companies that use design as styling appearance ( 17 % in 2007 ) . 
 Design as process : Companies that integrate design into the development process ( 45 % in 2007 ) . 
 Design as innovation : Companies that consider design as key strategic element ( 21 % in 2007 ) . 
 The research showed that companies that considered design on a higher level of the ladder were constantly growing . Additionally , the Danish Design Centre published an Evaluation of the Importance of Design in 2006 , with the result that most companies considered design as a promoter for innovation ( 71 % ) , as a growth potential for the company ( 79 % ) , and to make products more user friendly ( 71 % ) . With increasing importance of design for the company , design management also becomes more important . 
 The value of design can be leveraged if it is managed well . Research by <unk> and Alegre shows that there is no link between the level of design investment and business success , but instead a strong correlation between design management skills and business success . This means that efficient and effective design management is crucial for maximising the value of design . Effective design management increases the efficiency of operations and process management , has a significant positive impact on process management , improves quality performance ( internal and external quality ) , and increases operating performance . To measure and communicate the value of design management , Borja de Mozota suggests adapting the Balanced Score Card model and structuring the values in the following four categories : 
 Internal business processes : Design management as an innovation process , providing improvements in company performance and processes . Here , these innovations and processes are totally invisible to outsiders . 
 Learning and growing : Beyond advanced design management . Design explicit knowledge is applied to strategic focus and improves the quality of staff . 
 Customer and brand : Design management as perception and brand . Design knowledge is applied to corporate difference building and strategic positioning . 
 Financial : The historic design management economic model . Design management as an explicit and measurable value for company reputation and stock market performance . 
 = = = Relation to other disciplines and departments = = = 
 Three different orientations for the choice of design management can be identified in companies . These orientations influence the perception of management and the responsibility of design managers within the organisation . The strategic orientations are ; market focus , product focus and brand focus . 
 Product @-@ driven organisations often have design responsibility in their research and development ( R & D ) departments . 
 Market @-@ focus driven organisation often have design responsibility in their marketing departments . 
 Brand @-@ focus driven organisations often have design responsibility in corporate communication . 
 Depending on the strategic orientation , design management overlaps with other management branches to differing extents : 
 Marketing management : The concepts and elements of brand management overlap with those of design management . In practice , design management can be part of the job profile of a marketing manager , though the discipline includes aspects that are not in the domain of marketing management . This intersection is called " brand design management " and consists of positioning , personality , purpose , personnel , project and practice , where the objective is to increase brand equity . 
 Operations management : At the operational level design management deals with the management of design projects . Processes and tools from operations management can be applied to design management in the execution of design projects . 
 Strategic management : Due to the increasing importance of design as a differentiator and its supporting role in brand equity , design management deals with strategic design issues and supports the strategic direction of the business or enterprise . The debate on design thinking suggests the integration of design thinking into strategic management . Design thinking and strategic thinking have some commonalities in their characteristics , both are synthetic , adductive , hypothesis @-@ driven , opportunistic , dialectical , enquiring and value @-@ driven . 
 Innovation management : The value of the coordinating role of design in new product development has been well documented . Design management can help to improve innovation management , which can be measured by three variables : it reduces time @-@ to @-@ market , by improving sources and communication skills and developing cross @-@ functional innovation ; it stimulates networking innovation , by managing product and customer information flows with internal ( e.g. teams ) and external ( e.g. suppliers , society ) actors ; it improves the learning process by promoting a continuous learning process . 
 = = = Hierarchy = = = 
 Like the management of strategy , design can be managed on three levels : strategic ( corporate level or enterprise wide ) , tactical ( business level or individual business units ) , and operational ( individual project level ) . These three levels have been termed differently by various authors over the last 50 years . 
 Operational level 
 Operational design management involves the management of individual design projects and design teams . Its goal is to achieve the objectives set by strategic design management . Success of good design management can be measured by evaluating the quality of operational design management outcomes . It includes the selection and management of design suppliers and encompasses the documentation , supervision , and evaluation of design processes and results . It deals with personal leadership , emotional intelligence , and the cooperation with and management of internal communications . Regular management functions , tools , and concepts can often be applied to the management of design on the operational level . It is implemented to achieve specific design objectives and manage the judgment of design proposals . It can help to build brand equity through the consistent creation and implementation of high @-@ quality design solutions that best fit the brand identity and desired consumer experience , in the most efficient way . Depending on the type of company and industry , the following job titles are associated with this role : operational design manager , senior designer , team leader , visual communication manager , corporate design coordinator , and others . 
 Tactical level 
 Tactical design management addresses the organisation of design resources and design processes . Its goal is to create a structure for design in the company , bridging the gap between objectives set through strategic design management and the implementation of design on the operational level . It defines how design is organised within the company . This includes the use of a central body to coordinate different design projects and activities . It deals with defining activities , developing design skills and competencies , managing processes , systems and procedures , assigning of roles and responsibilities , developing innovative products and service concepts , and finding new market opportunities . Outcomes of tactical design management are related to the creation of a structure for design within the company , to build internal resources and competencies for the implementation of design . Depending on the type of company and industry , the following job titles are associated with this function : tactical design manager , design director , design & innovation manager , brand design manager , new product development ( NPD ) manager , visual identity manager , and others . 
 Strategic level 
 Strategic design management involves the creation of strategic long @-@ term vision and planning for design , and deals with defining the role of design within the company . The goal of strategic design management is to support and strengthen the corporate <unk> by creating a relationship between the design and corporate strategy . It includes the creation of design , brand and product strategies , ensuring that design management becomes a central element in the corporate strategy formulation process . Strategic design management is responsible for the development and implementation of a corporate design programme that influences the design vision , mission , and positioning . It allows design to interact with the needs of corporate management and focuses on the long @-@ term capabilities of design . Where strategic design management is applied , there is often a strong belief in the potential to differentiate the company and gain competitive advantage by design . As a result , design thinking becomes integrated into the corporate culture . Depending on the type of company and industry the following job titles are associated with this function : strategic design manager , chief design officer , vice president design and innovation , chief creative officer , innovation design director , and others . 
 = = = Role and responsibility = = = 
 Design management is not a standard model that can be projected onto every enterprise , nor is there a specific way of applying it that leads to guaranteed success . Design management processes are carried out by humans with different responsibilities and backgrounds , who work in different industries and enterprises with different sizes and traditions , whilst having different target groups and markets to serve . Design management is multifaceted , and so are the different applications of and views on design management . The function of design management in an organisation depends on its tasks , authority , and practice . 
 Task 
 Similar tasks can be grouped into categories to describe the job profile of a design manager . Different categories in management that encompass design were defined by several authors ; those tasks occur on all three design management levels ( strategic , tactical , and operational ) : 
 Authority and position 
 The authority and position of the design management function has a large influence on what the design manager does in his or her daily job . <unk> ( 2006 ) distinguishes design management types by organisational function : design management as line function , design management as staff function , and design management as support function . Design management as a " line function " is directly responsible for design execution in the " primary " organisational process and can take place on all levels of the design management hierarchy . The main attributes for design managers in the line are authority over and direct responsibility for the result . Design management as a staff function is not directly responsible for design execution in the " primary " organisational process , but consults as a specialist on all levels of the design management hierarchy . The main attributes for design managers in this function are their limited authority and the need to consult line managers and staff . When the design process is defined as a " secondary " organisational process , design management is seen as " supportive function " . In this function it has only a supportive character , classifying the design manager as a creative specialist towards product management , brand management , marketing , R & D , and communication . Various authors use different concepts to describe the authority and position of design management ; they can be grouped as follows : 
 = = Design Policy ( since the 2010s ) = = 
 Today , most developed countries have some kind of design promotion programme . The Design Management Institute has dedicated three issues to design policy development . Although initiatives promote design in different complexities , scopes and focuses , specific targets tend to address the following objectives : 
 support business : increase use of design by companies , particularly by small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) , and grow the design sector ( use dimension ) ; 
 promote to the public : increase exports of design and attract international investment ( international dimension ) ; 
 educate designers : improve design education and research ( academic dimension ) . 
 A very comprehensive analysis on the situation of design on national level in Britain is the Cox review . The chairman of the Design Council , Sir George Cox , published the Cox Review of Creativity in Business in 2005 to communicate the competitive advantage of design for the British industry . 
 Innovation policies have been excessively focused on the supply of technologies , neglecting the demand side ( the user ) . There have been several initiatives by the European Commission to support and research design and design management in recent years . However , a European @-@ wide policy to support design has never been planned , due to the inconsistencies and differences in design policies in each nation . Nonetheless , there are currently plans to include design in the EU innovation policy . 
 = = Education ( since the 2010s ) = = 
 While design management had its origins in business schools , it has increasingly become embedded in the curriculum in design schools , particularly at the postgraduate level . Teaching design to managers was pioneered at the London Business School in 1976 , and the first programme of design management at a design school was started in the 1980s at the Royal College of Art ( RCA ) , <unk> , Middlesex , Staffordshire . Although , in the UK , some design management courses have not been sustainable , including those at the RCA , Westminster and Middlesex , other postgraduate courses have flourished including ones at Brunel , Lancaster and more recently the University of the Arts with each providing a specific point of view on design management . 
 BusinessWeek annually publishes a lists of the best programmes that combine design thinking and business thinking ( D @-@ schools 2009 and D @-@ school Programmes to Watch 2009 ) . The article Finland – World ´ s Innovation Hot Spot in the Harvard Business Review shows the interest of business leaders in the blended education of design and management . Business Schools ( such as the Rotman School of Management , Wharton University of Pennsylvania and MIT Sloan Executive Education ) have acted on this interest and developed new academic curricula . 
 Integrated education models are emerging in the academic world , a model which is referred to as T @-@ shape and π @-@ shaped education . T @-@ shaped professionals are taught general knowledge in a few disciplines ( e.g. management and engineering ) and specific , deep knowledge in a single domain ( e.g. design ) . This model also applies to companies , when they shift their focus from small T innovations ( innovations involving only one discipline , like chemists ) to big T innovations ( innovations involving several disciplines , like design , ethnography , lead user , etc . ) . Like in education , this shift makes breaking down silos of departments and disciplines of knowledge essential . 
 = Ben @-@ Hur ( 1959 film ) = 
 Ben @-@ Hur is a 1959 American epic historical drama film , directed by William Wyler , produced by Sam Zimbalist for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer and starring Charlton Heston , Stephen Boyd , Jack Hawkins , Hugh Griffith and Haya Harareet . A remake of the 1925 silent film with the same name , Ben @-@ Hur was adapted from Lew Wallace 's 1880 novel Ben @-@ Hur : A Tale of the Christ . The screenplay is credited to Karl Tunberg but includes contributions from Maxwell Anderson , S. N. Behrman , Gore Vidal , and Christopher Fry . 
 Ben @-@ Hur had the largest budget ( $ 15 @.@ 175 million ) as well as the largest sets built of any film produced at the time . Costume designer Elizabeth <unk> oversaw a staff of 100 wardrobe fabricators to make the costumes , and a workshop employing 200 artists and workmen provided the hundreds of friezes and statues needed in the film . Filming commenced on May 18 , 1958 and wrapped on January 7 , 1959 , with shooting lasting for 12 to 14 hours a day , six days a week . Pre @-@ production began at Cinecittà around October 1957 , and post @-@ production took six months . Under cinematographer Robert L. Surtees , MGM executives made the decision to film the picture in a widescreen format , which Wyler strongly disliked . More than 200 camels and 2 @,@ 500 horses were used in the shooting of the film , with some 10 @,@ 000 extras . The sea battle was filmed using miniatures in a huge tank on the back lot at the MGM Studios in Culver City , California . The nine @-@ minute chariot race has become one of cinema 's most famous sequences , and the film score , composed and conducted by Miklós Rózsa , is the longest ever composed for a film and was highly influential on cinema for more than 15 years . 
 Following a $ 14 @.@ 7 million marketing effort , Ben @-@ Hur premiered at Loew 's State Theatre in New York City on November 18 , 1959 . It was the fastest @-@ grossing as well as the highest grossing film of 1959 , in the process becoming the second @-@ highest grossing film in history at the time after Gone with the Wind . It won a record 11 Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Director ( Wyler ) , Best Actor in a Leading Role ( Heston ) , Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( Griffith ) , and Best Cinematography – Color ( Surtees ) , an accomplishment that was not equaled until Titanic in 1997 and then again by The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King in 2003 . Ben @-@ Hur also won three Golden Globe Awards , including Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Director and Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture for Stephen Boyd . Today , Ben @-@ Hur is widely considered to be one of the greatest films ever made , and in 1998 the American Film Institute ranked it the 72nd best American film and the 2nd best American epic film in the AFI 's 10 Top 10 . In 2004 , the National Film Preservation Board selected Ben @-@ Hur for preservation by the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress for being a " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " motion picture . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In AD 26 , Judah Ben @-@ Hur ( Charlton Heston ) is a wealthy prince and merchant in Jerusalem , who lives with his mother , Miriam ( Martha Scott ) ; his sister , Tirzah ( Cathy O 'Donnell ) ; their loyal slave , Simonides ( Sam Jaffe ) and his daughter , Esther ( Haya Harareet ) . Esther loves Judah but is betrothed to another . Judah 's childhood friend , the Roman citizen Messala ( Stephen Boyd ) , is now a tribune . After several years away from Jerusalem , Messala returns as the new commander of the Roman garrison . Messala believes in the glory of Rome and its imperial power , while Judah is devoted to his faith and the freedom of the Jewish people . This difference causes tension between the friends , and results in their split after Messala issues an ultimatum to Judah . 
 During the parade for the new governor of Judea , Valerius Gratus , loose tiles fall from the roof of Judah 's house . Gratus is thrown from his spooked horse and nearly killed . Although Messala knows this was an accident , he condemns Judah to the galleys and imprisons Miriam and Tirzah . By punishing a known friend and prominent citizen , he hopes to intimidate the Jewish populace . Judah swears to take revenge . 
 After three years as a galley slave , Judah is assigned to the flagship of the Roman Consul Quintus Arrius ( Jack Hawkins ) , who has been charged with destroying a fleet of Macedonian pirates . Arrius admires Judah 's determination and self @-@ discipline and offers to train him as a gladiator or charioteer . Judah declines the offer , declaring that God will aid him in his quest for vengeance . When the Roman fleet encounters the Macedonians , Arrius orders all the rowers except Judah to be chained to their oars . Arrius ' galley is rammed and sunk , but Judah <unk> the other rowers , and rescues Arrius . In despair , Arrius wrongly believes the battle ended in defeat and attempts to atone in the Roman way by " falling on his sword " , but Judah stops him . They are rescued , and Arrius is credited with the Roman fleet 's victory . 
 Arrius successfully petitions Emperor Tiberius ( George Relph ) to free Judah , and adopts him as his son . Another year passes . Wealthy again , Judah learns Roman ways and becomes a champion charioteer , but still longs for his family and homeland . 
 Judah returns to Judea . Along the way , he meets Balthasar ( Finlay Currie ) and an Arab , Sheik Ilderim ( Hugh Griffith ) . The sheik has heard of Judah 's prowess as a charioteer , and asks him to drive his quadriga in a race before the new Judean governor Pontius Pilate ( Frank Thring ) . Judah declines , even after he learns that Messala will also compete . 
 Judah returns to his home in Jerusalem . He meets Esther , and learns her arranged marriage did not occur and that she is still in love with him . He visits Messala and demands his mother and sister 's freedom . The Romans discover that Miriam and Tirzah contracted leprosy in prison , and expel them from the city . The women beg Esther to conceal their condition from Judah so that he may remember them as they were before , so she tells him that they died . It is then that he changes his mind and decides to seek vengeance on Messala by competing against him in the chariot race . 
 During the chariot race , Messala drives a Greek chariot with blades on the hubs to tear apart competing vehicles ; he attempts to destroy Judah 's chariot but destroys his own instead . Messala is fatally injured , while Judah wins the race . Before dying , Messala tells Judah that " the race is not over " and that he can find his family " in the Valley of the <unk> , if you can recognize them . " Judah visits the nearby leper colony , where ( hidden from their view ) he sees his mother and sister . 
 Blaming Roman rule for his family 's fate , Judah rejects his patrimony and Roman citizenship . Learning that Tirzah is dying , Judah and Esther take her and Miriam to see Jesus Christ ( Claude Heater ) , but the trial of Jesus before Pontius Pilate has begun . Judah witnesses the crucifixion of Jesus , and Miriam and Tirzah are miraculously healed during the rainstorm following the crucifixion . Judah declares , " And I felt His voice take the sword out of my hand . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Charlton Heston as Judah Ben @-@ Hur 
 Jack Hawkins as Quintus Arrius 
 Haya Harareet as Esther 
 Stephen Boyd as Messala 
 Hugh Griffith as Sheik Ilderim 
 Martha Scott as Miriam 
 Cathy O 'Donnell as Tirzah 
 Sam Jaffe as Simonides 
 Finlay Currie as Balthasar and the narrator 
 Frank Thring as Pontius Pilate 
 Terence Longdon as Drusus 
 George Relph as Tiberius Caesar 
 André Morell as Sextus 
 Claude Heater as Jesus Christ ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) originally announced a remake of the 1925 silent film Ben @-@ Hur in December 1952 , ostensibly as a way to spend its Italian assets . Stewart Granger and Robert Taylor were reported to be in the running for the lead . Nine months later , MGM announced it would make the film in CinemaScope , with shooting beginning in 1954 . In November 1953 , MGM announced it had assigned producer Sam Zimbalist to the picture and hired screenwriter Karl Tunberg to write it . Sidney Franklin was scheduled to direct , with Marlon Brando intended for the lead . In September 1955 , Zimbalist , who continued to claim that Tunberg 's script was complete , announced that a $ 7 million , six @-@ to @-@ seven month production would begin in April 1956 in either Israel or Egypt in MGM 's new 65mm widescreen process , MGM Camera 65 . MGM , however , suspended production in early 1956 , following Franklin 's resignation . 
 By the late 1950s , the consent decree of 1948 forcing film studios to divest themselves of theater chains and the competitive pressure of television had caused significant financial distress at MGM . In a gamble to save the studio , and inspired by the success of Paramount Pictures ' 1956 Biblical epic The Ten Commandments , studio head Joseph Vogel announced in 1957 that MGM would again move forward on a remake of Ben @-@ Hur . Filming started in May 1958 and wrapped in January 1959 , and post @-@ production took six months . Although the budget for Ben @-@ Hur was initially $ 7 million , it was reported to be $ 10 million by February 1958 , reaching $ 15 @.@ 175 million by the time shooting began — making it the costliest film ever produced up to that time . When adjusted for inflation , the budget of Ben Hur was approximately $ 123 million in constant dollars . 
 One notable change in the film involved the opening titles . Concerned that a roaring Leo the Lion ( the MGM mascot ) would create the wrong mood for the sensitive and sacred nativity scene , Wyler received permission to replace the traditional logo with one in which Leo the Lion is quiet . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Lew Wallace 's 1880 novel , Ben @-@ Hur : A Tale of the Christ , ran to about 550 pages . Zimbalist hired a number of screenwriters to cut the story down and turn the novel into a script . According to Gore Vidal , more than 12 versions of the script had been written by various writers by the spring of 1958 . Vidal himself had been asked to write a version of the script in 1957 , refused , and been placed on suspension for his decision . According to Vidal , Karl Tunberg was one of the last writers to work on the script . Other sources place Tunberg 's initial involvement much earlier . Tunberg cut out everything in the book after the crucifixion of Jesus , omitted the sub @-@ plot in which Ben @-@ Hur fakes his death and raises a Jewish army to overthrow the Romans , and altered the manner in which the <unk> women are healed . According to Wyler , Vidal , their biographers ( see bibliography below ) and the sources that follow them , Zimbalist was unhappy with Tunberg 's script , considering it to be " pedestrian " and " <unk> " . 
 The writing effort changed direction when director Sidney Franklin fell ill and was removed from the production . Zimbalist offered the project to William Wyler , who had been one of 30 assistant directors on the 1925 film , in early 1957 . Wyler initially rejected it , considering the quality of the script to be " very primitive , elementary " and no better than hack work . Zimbalist showed Wyler some preliminary storyboards for the chariot race and informed him that MGM would be willing to spend up to $ 10 million , and as a result Wyler began to express an interest in the picture . MGM permitted Wyler to start casting , and in April 1957 , mainstream media outlets reported that Wyler was giving screen tests to Italian leading men , such as Cesare <unk> . 
 Wyler did not formally agree to direct the film until September 1957 , and MGM did not announce his hiring until January 3 , 1958 . Even though he still lacked a leading man , Wyler took the assignment for many reasons : He was promised a base salary of $ 350 @,@ 000 as well as 8 percent of the gross box office ( or 3 percent of the net profits , whichever was greater ) , and he wanted to work in Rome again ( where he had filmed Roman Holiday ( 1954 ) . His base salary was , at the time , the largest ever paid to a director for a single film . Professional competitive reasons also played a role in his decision to direct , and Wyler later admitted that he wished to outdo Cecil B. DeMille , and make a " thinking man 's " Biblical epic . In later years , William Wyler would joke that it took a Jew to make a good film about Christ . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Wyler felt Tunberg 's draft was too much of a morality play overlaid with current Western political overtones , and that the dialogue was too modern @-@ sounding . Zimbalist brought in playwright S. N. Behrman ( who also wrote the script for Quo Vadis ) and then playwright Maxwell Anderson to write drafts . Gore Vidal biographer Fred Kaplan states that British poet and playwright Christopher Fry was hired simultaneously with Vidal , although most sources ( including Vidal himself ) state that Vidal followed Anderson , and that Fry did not come aboard until Vidal was close to leaving the picture . Vidal arrived in Rome in early March 1958 to meet with Wyler . Vidal claimed that Wyler had not read the script , and that when he did so ( at Vidal 's urging ) on his flight from the U.S. to Italy , he was upset with the modernist dialogue . Vidal agreed to work on the script for three months so that he would come off suspension and fulfill his contract with MGM , although Zimbalist pushed him to stay throughout the entire production . Vidal was researching a book on the 4th century Roman emperor Julian and knew a great deal about ancient Rome . 
 Vidal 's working style was to finish a scene and review it with Zimbalist . Once Vidal and Zimbalist had come to agreement , the scene would be passed to Wyler . Vidal said he kept the structure of the Tunberg / Behrman / Anderson script , but rewrote nearly all the dialogue . Vidal admitted to William Morris in March 1959 that Fry rewrote as much as a third of the dialogue which Vidal had added to the first half of the script . Vidal made one structural change which was not revised , however . The Tunberg script had Ben @-@ Hur and Messala reuniting and falling out in a single scene . Vidal broke the scene in two , so that the men first reunite at the Castle Antonia and then later argue and end their friendship at Ben @-@ Hur 's home . Vidal also added small character touches to the script , such as Messala 's purchase of a brooch for Tirzah and Ben @-@ Hur 's purchase of a horse for Messala . Vidal claimed that he worked on the first half of the script ( everything up to the chariot race ) , and scripted 10 versions of the scene where Ben @-@ Hur confronts Messala and begs for his family 's freedom . 
 Vidal 's claim about a homoerotic subtext is hotly debated . Vidal first made the claim in an interview in the 1995 documentary film The Celluloid Closet , and asserted that he persuaded Wyler to direct Stephen Boyd to play the role as if he were a spurned homosexual lover . Vidal said that he believed that Messala 's vindictiveness could only be motivated by the feeling of rejection that a lover would feel , and claimed to have suggested to Wyler that Stephen Boyd should play the role that way , and that Heston be kept in the dark about the Messala character 's motivations . Whether Vidal wrote the scene in question or had the acting conversation with Wyler , and whether Wyler shot what Vidal wrote , remain issues of debate . Wyler himself says that he does not remember any conversation about this part of the script or Boyd 's acting with Gore Vidal , and that he discarded Vidal 's draft in favor of Fry 's . Morgan Hudgens , publicity director for the film , however , wrote to Vidal in late May 1958 about the crucial scene , and implied there was a homosexual context : " ... the big <unk> [ the crew 's nickname for Heston ] really threw himself into your ' first meeting ' scene yesterday . You should have seen those boys embrace ! " Film critic F. X. Feeney , in a comparison of script drafts , concludes that Vidal made significant and extensive contributions to the script . 
 The final writer on the film was Christopher Fry . Charlton Heston has claimed that Fry was Wyler 's first choice as screenwriter , but that Zimbalist forced him to use Vidal . Whether Fry worked on the script before Vidal or not , sources agree that Fry arrived in Rome in early May 1958 and spent six days a week on the set , writing and rewriting lines of dialogue as well as entire scenes , until the picture was finished . In particular , Fry gave the dialogue a slightly more formal and archaic tone without making it sound stilted and medieval . A highly publicized bitter dispute later broke out over screenplay credits to the film , involving Wyler , Tunberg , Vidal , Fry and the Screen Writers ' Guild . 
 The final script ran 230 pages . The screenplay differed more from the original novel than did the 1925 silent film version . Some changes made the film 's storyline more dramatic . Others inserted an admiration for Jewish people ( who had founded the state of Israel by this time ) and the more pluralistic society of 1950s America rather than the " Christian superiority " view of Wallace 's novel . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 MGM opened a casting office in Rome in mid @-@ 1957 to select the 50 @,@ 000 people who would act in minor roles and as extras in the film , and a total of 365 actors had speaking parts in the film , although only 45 of them were considered " principal " performers . In casting , Wyler placed heavy emphasis on characterization rather than looks or acting history . He typically cast the Romans with British actors and the Jews with American actors to help underscore the divide between the two groups . The Romans were the aristocrats in the film , and Wyler believed that American audiences would interpret British accents as patrician . 
 Several actors were offered the role of Judah Ben @-@ Hur before it was accepted by Charlton Heston . Burt Lancaster stated he turned down the role because he found the script boring and belittling to Christianity . Paul Newman turned it down because he said he didn 't have the legs to wear a tunic . Marlon Brando , Rock Hudson , Geoffrey Horne , and Leslie Nielsen were also offered the role , as were a number of muscular , handsome Italian actors ( many of whom did not speak English ) . Kirk Douglas was interested in the role , but was turned down in favor of Heston , who was formally cast on January 22 , 1958 . His salary was $ 250 @,@ 000 for 30 weeks , a <unk> salary for any time over 30 weeks , and travel expenses for his family . 
 Stephen Boyd was cast as the antagonist , Messala , on April 13 , 1958 . William Wyler originally wanted Heston for the role , but sought another actor after he moved Heston into the role of Judah Ben @-@ Hur . Because both Boyd and Heston had blue eyes , Wyler had Boyd outfitted with brown contact lenses as a way of contrasting the two men . Marie Ney was originally cast as Miriam , but was fired after two days of work because she could not cry on cue . Heston says that he was the one who suggested that Wyler cast Martha Scott as Miriam , and she was hired on July 17 , 1958 . Cathy O 'Donnell was Wyler 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , and although her career was in decline , Wyler cast her as Tirzah . 
 More than 30 actresses were considered for the role of Esther . The Israeli actress Haya Harareet , a relative newcomer to film , was cast as Esther on May 16 , 1958 , after providing a 30 @-@ second silent screen test . Wyler had met her at the Cannes Film Festival , where she impressed him with her conversational skills and force of personality . Sam Jaffe was cast as Simonides on April 3 , 1958 , and Finlay Currie was cast as Balthasar on the same day . Wyler had to persuade Jack Hawkins to appear in the film , because Hawkins was unwilling to act in another epic motion picture so soon after The Bridge on the River Kwai . Hugh Griffith , who gained acclaim in the post @-@ World War II era in Ealing Studios comedies , was cast as the colorful Sheik Ilderim . The role of Jesus was played by Claude Heater ( uncredited ) , an American opera singer performing with the Vienna State Opera in Rome when he was asked to do a screen test for the film . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Robert L. Surtees , who had already filmed several of the most successful epics of the 1950s , was hired as cinematographer for the film . Early on in the film 's production , Zimbalist and other MGM executives made the decision to film the picture in a widescreen format . Wyler strongly disliked the widescreen format , commenting that " Nothing is out of the picture , and you can 't fill it . You either have a lot of empty space , or you have two people talking and a flock of others surrounding them who have nothing to do with the scene . Your eye just wanders out of curiosity . " The cameras were also quite large , heavy , and difficult and time @-@ consuming to move . To overcome these difficulties , Surtees and Wyler collaborated on using the widescreen lenses , film stocks , and projection technologies to create highly detailed images for the film . Wyler was best known for composition in depth , a visual technique in which people , props , and architecture are not merely composed horizontally but in depth of field as well . He also had a strong preference for long takes , during which his actors could move within this highly detailed space . 
 The movie was filmed in a process known as " MGM Camera 65 " . 1957 's Raintree County was the first MGM film to use the process . The MGM Camera 65 used special 65mm Eastmancolor film stock with a 2 @.@ 76 : 1 aspect ratio . 70mm anamorphic camera lenses developed by the Mitchell Camera Company were manufactured to specifications submitted by MGM . These lenses squeezed the image down 1 @.@ 25 times to fit on the image area of the film stock . Because the film could be adapted to the requirements of individual theaters , movie houses did not need to install special , expensive 70mm projection equipment . Six of the 70mm lenses , each worth $ 100 @,@ 000 , were shipped to Rome for use by the production . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Pre @-@ production began at Cinecittà Studios around October 1957 . The MGM Art Department produced more than 15 @,@ 000 sketches and drawings of costumes , sets , props , and other items needed for the film ( 8 @,@ 000 alone for the costumes ) ; <unk> each item ; and cross @-@ referenced and catalogued them for use by the production design team and fabricators . More than a million props were ultimately manufactured . Construction of miniatures for the entrance of Quintus Arrius into Rome and for the sea battle were under way by the end of November 1957 . MGM location scouts arrived in Rome to identify shooting locations in August 1957 . Location shooting in Africa was actively under consideration , and in mid @-@ January 1958 , MGM said that filming in North Africa ( later revealed to be Libya ) would begin on March 1 , 1958 , and that 200 camels and 2 @,@ 500 horses had already been procured for the studio 's use there . The production was then scheduled to move to Rome on April 1 , where Andrew Marton had been hired as second unit director and 72 horses were being trained for the chariot race sequence . However , the Libyan government canceled the production 's film permit for religious reasons on March 11 , 1958 , just a week before filming was to have begun . It is unclear whether any second unit filming took place in Israel . A June 8 , 1958 , reported in The New York Times said second unit director Andrew Martin had roamed " up and down the countryside " filming footage . However , the American Film Institute claims the filming permit was revoked in Israel for religious reasons as well ( although when is not clear ) , and no footage from the planned location shooting near Jerusalem appeared in the film . 
 Principal photography began in Rome on May 18 , 1958 . The script was still unfinished when cinematography began , so that Wyler had only read the first 10 to 12 pages of it . Shooting lasted for 12 to 14 hours a day , six days a week . On Sundays , Wyler would meet with Fry and Zimbalist for story conferences . The pace of the film was so grueling that a doctor was brought onto the set to give a vitamin B complex injection to anyone who requested it ( shots which Wyler and his family later suspected may have contained amphetamines ) . To speed things up , Wyler often kept principal actors on stand @-@ by , in full costume and make @-@ up , so that he could shoot pick @-@ up scenes if the first unit slowed down . Actresses Martha Scott and Cathy O 'Donnell spent almost the entire month of November 1958 in full leprosy make @-@ up and costumes so that Wyler could shoot " leper scenes " when other shots didn 't go well . Wyler was unhappy with Heston 's performances , feeling they did not make Judah Ben @-@ Hur a plausible character , and Heston had to reshoot " I 'm a Jew " 16 times . Shooting took nine months , which included three months for the chariot race scene alone . Principal photography ended on January 7 , 1959 , with filming of the crucifixion scene , which took four days to shoot . 
 = = = Production design = = = 
 Italy was MGM 's top choice for hosting the production . However , a number of countries — including France , Mexico , Spain , and the United Kingdom — were also considered . Cinecittà Studios , a very large motion picture production facility constructed in 1937 on the outskirts of Rome , was identified early on as the primary shooting location . Zimbalist hired Wyler 's long @-@ term production supervisor , Henry <unk> , to oversee the film , and art directors William A. Horning and Edward <unk> created the overall look of the film , relying on the more than five years of research which had already been completed for the production . A skeleton crew of studio technicians arrived in the summer of 1956 to begin preparing the Cinecittà soundstages and back lot . 
 The Ben @-@ Hur production utilized 300 sets scattered over 148 acres ( 60 ha ) and nine sound stages . Several sets still standing from Quo Vadis in 1951 were refurbished and used for Ben @-@ Hur . By the end of the production more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 @,@ 000 kg ) of plaster and 40 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m3 ) of lumber were used . The budget called for more than 100 @,@ 000 costumes and 1 @,@ 000 suits of armor to be made , for the hiring of 10 @,@ 000 extras , and the procurement of hundreds of camels , donkeys , horses , and sheep . Costume designer Elizabeth <unk> oversaw a staff of 100 wardrobe fabricators who began manufacturing the costumes for the film a year before filming began . Special silk was imported from Thailand , the armor manufactured in West Germany , and the <unk> made and embroidered in the United Kingdom and various countries of South America . Many leather goods were hand @-@ tooled in the United Kingdom as well , while Italian shoemakers manufactured the boots and shoes . The lace for costumes came from France , while costume jewelry was purchased in Switzerland . More than 400 pounds ( 180 kg ) of hair were donated by women in the Piedmont region of Italy to make wigs and beards for the production , and 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of track laid down for the camera dollies . A workshop employing 200 artists and workmen provided the hundreds of friezes and statues needed . The mountain village of <unk> Romano , 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Rome , served as a stand @-@ in for the town of Nazareth . Beaches near Anzio were also used , and caves just south of the city served as the leper colony . Some additional desert panoramas were shot in Arizona , and some close @-@ up inserts taken at the MGM Studios , with the final images photographed on February 3 , 1958 . 
 The sea battle was one of the first sequences created for the film , filmed using miniatures in a huge tank on the back lot at the MGM Studios in Culver City , California in November and December 1957 . More than 40 miniature ships and two 175 @-@ foot ( 53 m ) long Roman galleys , each of them seaworthy , were built for the live @-@ action segment . The ships were constructed based on plans found in Italian museums for actual ancient Roman galleys . An artificial lake with equipment capable of generating sea @-@ sized waves was built at the Cinecittà studios to accommodate the galleys . A massive backdrop , 200 feet ( 61 m ) wide by 50 feet ( 15 m ) high , was painted and erected to hide the city and hills in the background . To make the scene bloodier , Dunning sought out Italian extras who had missing limbs , then had the makeup crews rig them with fake bone and blood to make it appear as if they had lost a hand or leg during the battle . When Dunning edited his own footage later , he made sure that these men were not on screen for long so that audiences would be upset . The above @-@ decks footage was integrated with the miniature work using process shots and traveling mattes . 
 One of the most lavish sets was the villa of Quintus Arrius , which included 45 working fountains and 8 @.@ 9 miles ( 14 @.@ 3 km ) of pipes . Wealthy citizens and nobles of Rome , who wanted to portray their ancient selves , acted as extras in the villa scenes . To recreate the ancient city streets of Jerusalem , a vast set covering 0 @.@ 5 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) was built , which included a 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) high Joppa Gate . The sets were so vast and visually exciting that they became a tourist attraction , and various film stars visited during production . The huge sets could be seen from the outskirts of Rome , and MGM estimated that more than 5 @,@ 000 people were given tours of the sets . 
 Dismantling the sets cost $ 125 @,@ 000 . Almost all the filmmaking equipment was turned over to the Italian government , which sold and exported it . MGM turned title to the artificial lake over to Cinecittà . MGM retained control over the costumes and the artificial lake background , which went back to the United States . The chariots were also returned to the U.S. , where they were used as promotional props . The life @-@ size galleys and pirate ships were dismantled to prevent them from being used by competing studios . Some of the horses were adopted by the men who trained them , while others were sold . Many of the camels , donkeys , and other exotic animals were sold to circuses and zoos in Europe . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 A total of 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 feet ( 340 @,@ 000 m ) was shot for the film . According to editor John D. Dunning , the first cut of the film was four and one @-@ half hours long . William Wyler stated that his goal was to bring the running time down to three and a half hours . The most difficult editing decisions , according to Dunning , came during scenes which involved Jesus Christ , as these contained almost no dialogue and most of the footage was purely reaction shots by actors . Dunning also believed that in the final cut the leper scene was too long and needed trimming . Editing was also complicated by the 70mm footage being printed . Because no editing equipment ( such as the Moviola ) existed which could handle the 70mm print , the 70mm footage would be reduced to 35mm and then cut . This caused much of the image to be lost . When the film was edited into its final form , it ran 213 minutes and included just 19 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 800 m ) of film . It was the third @-@ longest motion picture ever made at the time , behind Gone With The Wind and The Ten Commandments . 
 = = = Musical score = = = 
 The film score was composed and conducted by Miklós Rózsa , who scored most of MGM 's epics , although Zimbalist had previously commissioned and then set aside a score from Sir William Walton . Rózsa conducted research into Greek and Roman music of the period to give his score an archaic sound while still being modern . Rózsa himself directed the 100 @-@ piece MGM Symphony Orchestra during the 12 recording sessions ( which stretched over 72 hours ) . The soundtrack was recorded in six @-@ channel stereo . More than three hours of music were composed for the film , and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours of it were finally used , making it ( as of 2001 ) the longest score ever composed for a motion picture . The score contains no leitmotifs for the main characters . While not a leitmotif , the score does transition from full orchestra to pipe organ whenever Jesus Christ appears . 
 Rózsa won his third Academy Award for his score . As of 2001 , it was the only musical score in the ancient and medieval epic genre of film to win an Oscar . Like most film musical soundtracks , it was issued as an album for the public to enjoy as a distinct piece of music . The score was so lengthy that it had to be released in 1959 on three LP records , although a one @-@ LP version with Carlo <unk> conducting the Symphony Orchestra of Rome was also issued . In addition , to provide a more " listenable " album , Rózsa arranged his score into a " Ben @-@ Hur Suite " , which was released on Lion Records ( an MGM subsidiary which issued low @-@ priced records ) in 1959 . This made the Ben @-@ Hur film musical score the first to be released not only in its entirety but also as a separate album . 
 The Ben @-@ Hur score is considered to be the best of Rózsa 's career . The musical soundtrack to Ben @-@ Hur remained deeply influential into the mid 1970s , when film music composed by John Williams for films such as Jaws , Star Wars , and Raiders of the Lost Ark became more popular among composers and film @-@ goers . Rózsa 's score has since seen several notable re @-@ releases , including by the Nuremberg Symphony Orchestra on Capitol Records in 1967 , several of the tracks by the United Kingdom 's National Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus on Decca Records in 1977 and a Sony Music reissue as a two @-@ CD set in 1991 . In 2012 , Film Score Monthly and WaterTower Music issued a limited edition five @-@ CD set of music from the film . 
 = = Chariot race sequence = = 
 The chariot race in Ben @-@ Hur was directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt , filmmakers who often acted as second unit directors on other people 's films . Each man had an assistant director , who shot additional footage . Among these were Sergio Leone , who was senior assistant director in the second unit and responsible for retakes . William Wyler shot the " pageantry " sequence that occurs before the race , scenes of the jubilant crowd , and the victory scenes after the race concludes . The " pageantry " sequence before the race begins is a shot @-@ by @-@ shot remake of the same sequence from the 1925 silent film version . Wyler added the parade around the track because he knew that the chariot race would be primarily composed of close @-@ up and medium shots . To impress the audience with the grandeur of the arena , Wyler added the parade in formation ( even though it was not historically accurate ) . 
 = = = Set design = = = 
 The chariot arena was modeled on a historic circus in Jerusalem . Covering 18 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 ha ) , it was the largest film set ever built at that time . Constructed at a cost of $ 1 million , it took a thousand workmen more than a year to carve the oval out of a rock quarry . The racetrack featured 1 @,@ 500 @-@ foot ( 460 m ) long straightaways and five @-@ story @-@ high grandstands . Over 250 miles ( 400 km ) of metal tubing were used to erect the grandstands . Matte paintings created the illusion of upper stories of the grandstands and the background mountains . More than 40 @,@ 000 short tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) of sand were brought in from beaches on the Mediterranean to cover the track . Other elements of the circus were also historically accurate . Imperial Roman racecourses featured a raised 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high spina ( the center section ) , <unk> ( columnar goalposts at each end of the spina ) , dolphin @-@ shaped lap counters , and carceres ( the columned building in the rear which housed the cells where horses waited prior to the race ) . The four statues atop the spina were 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high . A chariot track identical in size was constructed next to the set and used to train the horses and lay out camera shots . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Planning for the chariot race took nearly a year to complete . Seventy eight horses were bought and imported from Yugoslavia and Sicily in November 1957 , exercised into peak physical condition , and trained by Hollywood animal handler Glenn Randall to pull the quadriga ( a Roman Empire chariot drawn by four horses abreast ) . Andalusian horses played Ben @-@ Hur 's Arabians , while the others in the chariot race were primarily Lipizzans . A veterinarian , a harness maker , and 20 stable boys were employed to care for the horses and ensure they were outfitted for racing each day . The firm of <unk> Brothers built 18 chariots , nine of which were used for practice , each weighing 900 pounds ( 410 kg ) . Principal cast members , stand @-@ ins , and stunt people made 100 practice laps of the arena in preparation for shooting . 
 Heston and Boyd both had to learn how to drive a chariot . Heston , an experienced horseman , took daily three @-@ hour lessons in chariot driving after he arrived in Rome and picked up the skill quickly . Heston was outfitted with special contact lenses to prevent the grit kicked up during the race from injuring his eyes . For the other charioteers , six actors with extensive experience with horses were flown in from Hollywood , including Giuseppe Tosi , who had once been a bodyguard for Victor Emmanuel III of Italy . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The chariot scene took five weeks ( spread over three months ) to film at a total cost of $ 1 million and required more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) of racing to complete . Marton and Canutt filmed the entire chariot sequence with stunt doubles in long shot , edited the footage together , and showed the footage to Zimbalist , Wyler , and Heston to show them what the race should look like and to indicate where close @-@ up shots with Heston and Boyd should go . Seven thousand extras were hired to cheer in the stands . Economic conditions in Italy were poor at the time , and as shooting for the chariot scene wound down only 1 @,@ 500 extras were needed on any given day . On June 6 , more than 3 @,@ 000 people seeking work were turned away . The crowd rioted , throwing stones and assaulting the set 's gates until police arrived and dispersed them . Dynamite charges were used to show the chariot wheels and axles splintering from the effects of Messala 's barbed @-@ wheel attacks . Three lifelike dummies were placed at key points in the race to give the appearance of men being run over by chariots . 
 The cameras used during the chariot race also presented problems . The 70mm lenses had a minimum focusing distance of 50 feet ( 15 m ) , and the camera was mounted on a small Italian @-@ made car so the camera crew could keep in front of the chariots . The horses , however , accelerated down the 1 @,@ 500 @-@ foot ( 460 m ) straightaway much faster than the car could , and the long focal length left Marton and Canutt with too little time to get their shots . The production company purchased a more powerful American car , but the horses were still too fast , and even with a head start , the filmmakers only had a few more seconds of shot time . As filming progressed , vast amounts of footage were shot for this sequence . The ratio of footage shot to footage used was 263 : 1 , one of the highest ratios ever for a film . 
 One of the most notable moments in the race came from a near @-@ fatal accident when stunt man Joe Canutt , Yakima Canutt 's son , was tossed into the air by accident ; he incurred a minor chin injury . Marton wanted to keep the shot , but Zimbalist felt the footage was unusable . Marton conceived the idea of showing that Ben @-@ Hur was able to land on and cling to the front of his chariot , then scramble back into the quadriga while the horses kept going . The long shot of Canutt 's accident was cut together with a close @-@ up of Heston climbing back aboard , resulting in one of the race 's most memorable moments . Boyd did all but two of his own stunts . For the sequence where Messala is dragged beneath a chariot 's horses and trampled , Boyd wore steel armor under his costume and acted out the close @-@ up shot and the shot of him on his back , attempting to climb up into the horses ' harness to escape injury . A dummy was used to obtain the trampling shot in this sequence . 
 Several urban legends exist regarding the chariot sequence . One claims that a stuntman died during filming , which <unk> Powell claims in his autobiography , and another states that a red Ferrari can be seen during the chariot race . The book Movie Mistakes claims this is a myth . Heston , in a DVD commentary track for the film , mentions that a third urban legend claims that he wore a wristwatch during the chariot race , but points out that he wore leather bracers up to the elbow . 
 = = Release = = 
 A massive $ 14 @.@ 7 million marketing effort helped promote Ben @-@ Hur . MGM established a special " Ben @-@ Hur Research Department " which surveyed more than 2 @,@ 000 high schools in 47 American cities to gauge teenage interest in the film . A high school study guide was also created and distributed . <unk> and Company was hired to conduct a nationwide survey to gauge the impact of the marketing campaign . In 1959 and 1960 , more than $ 20 million in candy ; children 's tricycles in the shape of chariots ; gowns ; hair <unk> ; items of jewelry ; men 's ties ; bottles of perfume ; " Ben @-@ Her " and " Ben @-@ His " towels ; toy armor , helmets , and swords ; umbrellas ; and hardback and paperback versions of the novel ( tied to the film with cover art ) were sold . 
 Ben @-@ Hur premiered at Loew 's State Theatre in New York City on November 18 , 1959 . Present at the premiere were William Wyler , Charlton Heston , Stephen Boyd , Haya Harareet , Martha Scott , Ramon Novarro ( who played Judah Ben @-@ Hur in the 1925 silent film version ) , Spyros Skouras ( president of the 20th Century Fox ) , Barney Balaban ( president of Paramount Pictures ) , Jack L. Warner ( president of Warner Bros. ) , Leonard Goldenson ( president of the American Broadcasting Company ) , Moss Hart ( playwright ) , Robert Kintner ( an ABC Television executive ) , Sidney Kingsley ( playwright ) , and Adolph Zukor ( founder of Paramount Pictures ) . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 During its initial release the film earned $ 33 @.@ 6 million in North American theater rentals ( the distributor 's share of the box office ) , generating approximately $ 74 @.@ 7 million in box office sales . Outside of North America , it earned $ 32 @.@ 5 million in rentals ( about $ 72 @.@ 2 million at the box office ) for a worldwide total of $ 66 @.@ 1 million in rental earnings , roughly equivalent to $ 146 @.@ 9 million in box office receipts . It was the fastest @-@ grossing film as well as the highest grossing film of 1959 , in the process becoming the second @-@ highest grossing film of all @-@ time ( at that time ) behind Gone with the Wind . Ben @-@ Hur saved MGM from financial disaster , making a profit of $ 20 @,@ 409 @,@ 000 on its initial release , and another $ 10 @.@ 1 million in profits when re @-@ released in 1969 . By 1989 , Ben @-@ Hur had earned $ 90 million in worldwide theatrical rentals . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Ben @-@ Hur received overwhelmingly positive reviews upon its release . Bosley Crowther , writing for The New York Times , called Ben @-@ Hur " a remarkably intelligent and engrossing human drama " . While praising the acting and William Wyler 's " close @-@ to " direction , he also had high praise for the chariot race : " There has seldom been anything in movies to compare with this picture 's chariot race . It is a stunning complex of mighty setting , thrilling action by horses and men , panoramic observation and overwhelming use of dramatic sound . " Jack <unk> , writing for United Press International , also had praise for the acting , calling it full of " genuine warmth and fervor and finely acted intimate scenes " . Philip K. Scheuer of the Los Angeles Times called it " magnificent , inspiring , awesome , enthralling , and all the other adjectives you have been reading about it . " He also called the editing " generally expert " although at times abrupt . Ronald Holloway , writing for Variety , called Ben @-@ Hur " a majestic achievement , representing a superb blending of the motion picture arts by master craftsmen , " and concluded that " Gone With the Wind , Metro 's own champion all @-@ time top grosser , will eventually have to take a back seat . " The chariot race " will probably be preserved in film archives as the finest example of the use of the motion picture camera to record an action sequence . The race , directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt , represents some 40 minutes of the most hair @-@ raising excitement that film audiences have ever witnessed . " 
 There was some criticism , however . Crowther felt the film was too long . Scheuer , whilst mostly praising the film , felt that its biggest fault was " overstatement " , and that it hammered home at points long after they had been made . He singled out the galley rowing sequence , Jesus ' journey to the place of crucifixion , and nearly all the sequences involving the lepers . He also lightly criticized Charlton Heston for being more physically than emotionally compelling . John McCarten of The New Yorker was more critical of Heston , writing that he " speaks English as if he 'd learned it from records . " Even William Wyler later privately admitted he was disappointed with Heston 's acting . Film critic Dwight Macdonald also was largely negative . He found the film so uninvolving and lengthy that he said , " I felt like a motorist trapped at a railroad crossing while a long freight train slowly <unk> by . " British film critic John Pym , writing for Time Out , was equally dismissive , calling the film a " four @-@ hour Sunday school lesson " . Many French and American film critics who believed in the auteur theory of filmmaking saw the film as confirmation of their belief that William Wyler was " merely a commercial craftsman " rather than a serious artist . 
 The film currently has an 88 % " Certified Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes . The consensus reads , " Uneven , but in terms of epic scope and grand spectacle , Ben @-@ Hur still ranks among Hollywood 's finest examples of pure entertainment . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Ben @-@ Hur was nominated for 12 Academy Awards and won an unprecedented 11 . As of 2016 , only Titanic in 1998 and The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King in 2004 have matched the film 's wins . The lone category where Ben @-@ Hur did not win was for Best Adapted Screenplay ( losing to Room at the Top ) , and most observers attributed this to the controversy over the writing credit . MGM and Panavision shared a special technical Oscar in March 1960 for developing the Camera 65 photographic process . 
 Ben @-@ Hur also won three Golden Globe Awards – Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Director , Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture for Stephen Boyd – and received a Special Achievement Award ( which went to Andrew Marton for directing the chariot race sequence ) . Heston was nominated for a Golden Globe in the Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama category , but did not win . The picture also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film , the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film , and the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in a Motion Picture for William Wyler 's masterful direction . 
 Ben @-@ Hur also appears on several " best of " lists generated by the American Film Institute , an independent non @-@ profit organization created by the National Endowment for the Arts in 1967 . The " AFI 100 Years ... series " were created by juries consisting of over 1 @,@ 500 artists , scholars , critics , and historians , with movies selected based on the film 's popularity over time , historical significance , and cultural impact . Ben @-@ Hur appeared at # 72 on the 100 Movies , # 49 on the 100 Thrills , # 21 on the Film Scores , # 56 on the 100 Cheers and # 2 on the AFI 's 10 Top 10 Epic film lists . Judah Ben @-@ Hur was also nominated as a hero and Messala nominated as a villain in the AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains list . In 2004 , the National Film Preservation Board selected Ben @-@ Hur for preservation by the National Film Registry for being a " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " motion picture . It was listed as number 491 on Empire 's 500 Greatest films of all time . 
 = = = Broadcast and home video releases = = = 
 The film 's first telecast took place on Sunday , February 14 , 1971 . In what was then a television first for a Hollywood film , it was broadcast over five hours ( including commercials ) during a single evening by CBS , preempting all of that network 's regular programming for that one evening . It was watched by 85 @.@ 82 million people for a 37 @.@ 1 average rating . It was one of the highest rated movies ever screened on television at the time ( behind the broadcast premiere of Bridge on the River Kwai ) . 
 Ben @-@ Hur has been released on home video on several occasions . Recent releases have all been on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc . A two @-@ sided single disc widescreen release occurred in the United States on March 13 , 2001 . This release included several featurettes , including a commentary by Charlton Heston , a making @-@ of documentary ( made for a laserdisc release in 1993 ) , screen tests , and a photo gallery . This edition was released soon thereafter as a two @-@ disc set in other countries . The film saw another DVD release on September 13 , 2005 . This four @-@ disc edition included remastered images and audio , an additional commentary , two additional featurettes , and a complete version of the 1925 silent version of Ben @-@ Hur . A boxed " Deluxe Edition " , issued in the U.S. in 2002 , included postcard @-@ sized reprints of lobby cards , postcard @-@ sized black @-@ and @-@ white stills with machine @-@ reproduced autographs of cast members , a matte @-@ framed color image from the film with a 35mm film frame mounted below it , and a 27 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ inch ( 69 by 102 cm ) reproduction film poster . 
 In 2011 , Warner Home Video released a 50th anniversary edition on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD , making it the first home video release where the film is present on its original aspect ratio . For this release , the film was completely restored frame by frame from an 8K scan of the original 65mm negative . The restoration cost $ 1 million , and was one of the highest resolution restorations ever made by Warner Bros. A new musical soundtrack @-@ only option and six new featurettes ( one of which was an hour long ) were also included . 
 = = Remake = = 
 On April 25 , 2014 , Paramount Pictures and MGM announced that they will co @-@ produce another Ben @-@ Hur film with Mark Burnett and Roma Downey , who also made the 2013 miniseries The Bible . The film is set for release in August 2016 . On September 11 , Morgan Freeman was added to the cast to play the role of <unk> , the man who teaches the slave Ben @-@ Hur to become a champion @-@ caliber chariot racer . 
 = Cyberpunk ( album ) = 
 Cyberpunk is the fifth studio album by English rock vocalist Billy Idol . A concept album , it was released in 1993 by Chrysalis Records . Inspired by his personal interest in technology and his first attempts to use computers in the creation of his music , Idol based the album on the <unk> subculture of the late 1980s and early 1990s . Heavily experimental in its style , the album was an attempt by Idol to take control of the creative process in the production of his albums , while simultaneously introducing Idol 's fans and other musicians to the opportunities presented by digital media . 
 The album featured a cyberpunk @-@ styled narrative as well as synthesized vocals and industrial influences . Despite the critical and financial failure of the album , Billy Idol set several precedents in the process of promoting the album . These included his use of the internet , e @-@ mail , virtual communities , and multimedia software – each a first for a mainstream celebrity . Idol also based his fashion style , music videos , and stage shows on cyberpunk themes and aesthetics . 
 Released to negative reviews , Cyberpunk polarised the internet communities of the period . Detractors viewed it as an act of <unk> and opportunistic commercialisation . It was also seen as part of a process that saw the overuse of the term " cyberpunk " until the word lost meaning . Alternatively , supporters saw Idol 's efforts as harmless and well @-@ intentioned , and were encouraged by his new interest in cyberculture . 
 = = Conception = = 
 During the release of 1990 's Charmed Life , Idol suffered a broken leg in a motorcycle accident . While in recovery , he was interviewed by Legs McNeil . McNeil noticed the electronic muscle stimulator on Idol 's leg and referred to him as a " cyberpunk " , citing the cyborg qualities of his appearance . This led to Idol taking a serious interest in the works of William Gibson for the first time , although he had read Neuromancer in the mid- ' 80s . In the following months , Idol continued to investigate cyberpunk fiction and technology . He also read Neal Stephenson 's Snow Crash , works by Robert Anton Wilson , and others . 
 At approximately the same time , he began to work with Trevor Rabin to create his music , having parted ways with his former producer , Keith Forsey . Rabin introduced Idol to his home studio , which was centralised around Rabin 's Macintosh computer and music software . The ability to personally produce music from his home , rather than at a professional studio , appealed to Idol 's " do it yourself " ethic . He felt that working through a team of producers and sound engineers cut into his personal vision for previous albums , and was interested in being more directly in control of his future work . Idol asked his producer , Robin Hancock , to educate himself and his guitarist , Mark Younger @-@ Smith , on the use of software for musical production . 
 With his increasing exposure to technology and science fiction , Idol decided to base his upcoming album on the cyberpunk genre , and quickly set about educating himself in <unk> counter culture . Idol saw the convergence of affordable technology with the music industry and anticipated its impact on a new era for DIY punk music . " It 's 1993 , " Idol said during a New York Times interview . " I better wake up and be part of it . I 'm sitting there , a 1977 punk watching Courtney Love talk about punk , watching Nirvana talk about punk , and this is my reply . " 
 Reading Mondo 2000 and Gareth Branwyn 's 1992 manifesto , " Is There a Cyberpunk Movement ? " , Idol resolved to base an opening sequence on Branwyn 's essay , contacting the writer for permission . He also read Branwyn 's Beyond Cyberpunk ! HyperCard stack , a collection of essays based on fanzines , political tracts , conspiracy theories , and which referred to itself as " a do @-@ it @-@ yourself guide to the future . " Idol proceeded to consult with various writers familiar with the computer related magazines , such as Mondo 2000 , and Boing Boing . Idol also hosted a " cyber @-@ meeting " attended by the likes of Timothy Leary , famed counterculture guru ; Jaime Levy , author of books published on disks under the " Electronic Hollywood " imprint ; R. U. Sirius , co @-@ founder of Mondo 2000 ; and Brett Leonard , director of The Lawnmower Man . 
 Asked by Idol about how he could become further involved in cyberculture , Branwyn and Mark Frauenfelder advised him to investigate The WELL , one of the oldest online communities . Idol did so , discussing the album project online with WELL users , and creating a personal e @-@ mail account which he released on printed advertisements for the upcoming album , so that fans could communicate with him . Idol also made occasional postings to alt.cyberpunk , a Usenet newsgroup . Later in an interview for MTV News promoting the album , Idol expressed excitement over the medium . " This means I can be in touch with millions of people , but on my own terms . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Cyberpunk was created in Idol 's home studio in Los Angeles , centred around his Macintosh computer and accompanying software . Programs used in the production included Studio Vision , by <unk> Systems , and Pro Tools , by Digidesign . Idol later recalled that the beginning of the recording sessions coincided with the onset of the 1992 Los Angeles riots . " We 'd just installed the computer in my music room , and there was a window above it overlooking the whole city . And there was a fire raging . There was smoke just pouring across the whole of LA . It was LA burning . And so I just straight quickly wrote the lyrics and sang them three times . What you 're hearing on the single ' Shock to the System ' is my news reportage of what I 'm seeing . " Idol recalled for a German broadcast . " We started the album with a riot . So that 's really rock and roll . " 
 Excited by the DIY aspects of the production process , Idol took only ten months to record the album , which he often contrasted with the combined period of eight years it took to create his two previous albums . Working with his computer over time also gave him the sense that the computer was itself an instrument , and that the performer 's style was also presented by the technology . Its versatility also allowed him to switch roles with Mark Younger @-@ Smith and Robin Hancock , allowing each to experiment with their different talents and blurring the lines of their specialised roles , leading Idol to repeatedly compare the production process to that of being in a garage band . Keyboards were also used to drive much of the music through the album . Together , the trio comprised what Idol considered to be the " core " production group , although a number of artists contributed to a various tracks . In particular , he credited his drummer Tal Bergman and bassist Doug Wimbish for their contributions to numerous tracks . Wimbish had recorded his work from a studio in New York City , and sent it to Los Angeles for use in the production . 
 = = Cyberpunk themes = = 
 Cyberpunk was a departure from Idol 's previous style of pop @-@ rock music . Several spoken or sound @-@ effect segues were placed between the album tracks to create a linear narrative . The effect of these segues caused the album to become a concept album . Karen Schoemer , of the New York Times , commented that " [ w ] ith its booming techno beats , screeching guitar riffs , sampled computer voices and songs like ' Power Junkie ' ( ' I feel tonight we 're bought and sold / Ah yeah , I think I 'll overload ' ) , the album functions as Mr. Idol 's interpretation of cyber culture . " 
 When asked why he was pursuing such a shift in his musical style by adopting electronic music , Idol responded that he had attempted to incorporate technology in his older work , but found the equipment of the late ' 70s and early ' 80s too limiting and gave up . With the computers of the ' 90s , Idol finally felt that the technology was able to quickly and easily make changes as he saw fit . Idol came to expound on his belief in their future importance for the music industry , and quoting Gareth Branwyn , referred to the computer as " the new cool tool . " 
 However , he rejected the idea of referring to the music as " computerized " , on the grounds that nothing was done for the album that couldn 't have been done with standard recording equipment , and that the computer had simply sped up and simplified the creative process . Placing emphasis on the contribution of the performers over the computer tools they used , Idol felt the album achieved a " garage band " spirit , that had captured the " Sturm und Drang " he found in rock and roll , and had simply modified it digitally . Idol thus felt that the album could be best identified as a rock album , rather than a techno album . Idol later agreed with an interviewer who commented that the album 's digital production and themes were ahead of their time . 
 = = = Futurism = = = 
 Idol was keen to share his ideas regarding the future of Cyberculture and its impact on the music industry , and was noted for his enthusiastic speculation in the future of computers throughout the promotion of the album . " You 're using very sort of extreme and raw ideas , but with very high level technology ... it 's probably whats going to be happening — or in fact , it is what is happening now — because that 's how we made this album , Cyberpunk . " Some of the predictions Idol made for the future of the internet , computers , and musicians , was that it would allow for cheap and efficient recording from home ; that musicians could record their music and send it to producers and fellow band members from great distances , perhaps while on tour ; and that musicians would be able to directly communicate with their fans and critics . Idol also hoped that the rapid ability to do whatever he desired with the production would allow raw forms of rock music to remain relevant after the Grunge movement swept America in the early 90s . " [ The computer ] can do anything ... If you want the music backwards , it can be backwards in a snap . This is in a way my sort of answer to grunge . I know there 's a way of using this modern technology to bring a lot of rawness back . " 
 = = = Fashion = = = 
 On 24 September 1992 , Billy Idol took part in a benefit fashion show by Jean @-@ Paul Gaultier . The event , entitled the " Jean Paul Gaultier in L.A. " , was a fashion benefit for amfAR AIDS research , at the Shrine Auditorium . Idol modelled a leather jacket and pants , covered in black sunglasses , to the yet @-@ unreleased song " Neuromancer " . This coincided with Idol 's decision to change his fashion style to match the cyberpunk aesthetic of the album . Idol changed his hair to dreadlocks , and wore sleek , futuristic clothing by New York fashion designer Stephen Sprouse . In a photo shoot published in Details July 1993 issue , highlighting Billy Idol 's new " cyberpunk " aesthetic , Idol modelled in a distressed @-@ velvet jacket and matching trousers designed by Paul Smith . In the background , Idol stood amongst computers and chaotically strewn cables representing his home studio . Idol wore the same suit during the " Shock to The System " music video and the 1993 Billboard Music Award presentation spot . 
 = = = Special edition software = = = 
 During his initial research into cyberculture , Idol ordered Beyond Cyberpunk ! from Gareth Branwyn . The HyperCard stack , which included collections of essays on cyberpunk culture , inspired Idol to include similar material within the Cyberpunk album as a special edition digipak feature . Discussing the matter with Branwyn , Idol received an initial bid for the job of producing the disk from the writer . While this bid was under consideration by Idol 's management company , Idol had purchased a book @-@ on @-@ disk by Jaime Levy at a Los Angeles bookstore . At the time , Levy was the author and publisher of Electronic Hollywood , one of the first magazines produced on floppy disk . Impressed by its contents , Idol set about contacting her for the job of producing the disk . Successfully under @-@ bidding Branwyn , she was then given the job and a master tape of recorded songs – which were not yet compiled into CD format – for use in sampling . Levy was given permission to include whatever content she desired . Meeting Idol to find what he was interested in presenting in the disk , his only concern was that the whole cyberpunk genre be represented as much as possible . 
 The special edition diskette , a Macintosh press kit entitled " Billy Idol 's Cyberpunk " , was an industry first . It included album clip art , sample sound bytes , a biography by Mark Frauenfelder , lyrics , and a cyberculture bibliography by Gareth Branwyn . Frauenfelder appeared on a segment of MTV News to describe the diskette 's features . Plans were considered by EMI / Chrysalis to re @-@ release the album in the following fall with an updated CD @-@ ROM if the album was successful . As CD @-@ ROMs were prohibitively expensive at the time of production , this was anticipated as a potential benchmark event for the music industry . However , this failed to materialise due to the critical and financial failure of the album . 
 = = = Computer graphic design = = = 
 After reading the work of Mark Frauenfelder on Boing <unk> , Idol hired him to use graphics software in the design of artwork associated with the album . This included its use for the album and singles ' cover art , the Billy Idol 's Cyberpunk floppy disk , and in the press pack released to the media . 
 Frauenfelder worked with Adobe Photoshop , while Idol was present for the design process to provide suggestions . The album cover itself was the first image created , following the initial five minutes of editing on Idol 's personal computer at the singer 's home . 
 = = = " Blendo " cinematography = = = 
 Inspired by The Lawnmower Man , Idol conceived of using " Blendo " imagery throughout the promotion of the album . Six music videos were produced with the use of what Idol dubbed " Blendo " cinematography , five for " Heroin " and a final one for " Shock to the System . " 
 = = = 1993 No Religion Tour = = = 
 To promote the release of Cyberpunk , Idol began the 1993 No Religion Tour . The title of the tour came from a lyric in the album 's first track , " Wasteland " , which described a man travelling through a dystopia . In keeping with the album 's theme , the performance stages were set to a computerised , high @-@ tech aesthetic . Idol wished to use Blendo imagery on massive television screens behind the stage to rapidly shift in time with the music . Some of the video and photography was shot by Idol and Brett Leonard , including photos of Idol during acupuncture , himself at a spa , various LA landscapes , and imagery which referenced heroin use . An engineer on stage , whom Idol fashioned as another band member , would be charged with altering the images in rhythm with the music , as though it were also an instrument . Multiple engineers with video equipment would also roam the audience , beaming images of the crowd onto the screen as well , creating an interactive show . The tour took place in Europe , performing a total of 19 shows in 18 cities across 11 countries . It began on 18 August 1993 in Berlin , and concluded on 20 September 1993 in London . 
 Idol hoped to advance the way stagecraft and lighting were used at rock concerts . " Part of the idea is to create an element of visible language , " Idol explained during an interview with the New York Times , " so that you feel as if you 're being talked to through images . I think you have to start looking to get to the future of what rock @-@ and @-@ roll concerts should be like . We 're working ; we 're pushing the technology to the edge . " 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 Three of four Cyberpunk singles were promoted by music videos : " Heroin " , " Shock to the System " , and " Adam in Chains " . The fourth single , " Wasteland " , did not receive a music video . 
 The first single , " Heroin " , was accompanied with the most music videos , with a total of five for several different remixed versions of the cover . Each was a " Blendo " video which rapidly shifted random imagery and colours in time with the music . Four of the music videos for the song were directed by Brett Leonard , with a fifth being credited to Howard <unk> . Each used stock footage shot by Idol and Leonard , filmed personally and edited on Idol 's computer . Idol did so with the intention of sending a " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " message that mocked and rejected the standards of MTV music video creation . " We did it all on camcorder and we sort of wanted to say you can make your own videos , and you don 't always have to do it in a very MTV way . " None were released for rotation on television ; instead , one was included in the video album release , Cyberpunk : Shock to the System . 
 A " <unk> " video was also produced for " Shock to the System " , being included in the Cyberpunk : Shock to the System VHS cassette . 
 The second single , " Shock to the System " , which was inspired by the Los Angeles riots of 1992 , received the first music video put into MTV rotation . As Idol explained for MTV News , he had originally created the song with an entirely different set of lyrics , but upon witnessing the riots on television he immediately rewrote and recorded them that day . Idol explained that he was trying to capture the political and economic conflict that had created the LA Riots . Idol further felt that the camcorder – as displayed in the witnessing of the Rodney King beating – was a " potent way of conveying ideas " and an important metaphor for technology used in rebellion . 
 The music video was set in a dystopian future controlled by Cyber @-@ cops ( referred to as such by director Brett Leonard . ) It depicted an individual who records the Cyber @-@ cops beating a man , only to be noticed and attacked himself . His camera is destroyed and the Cyber @-@ cops leave him unconscious on the ground , as they are busy trying to put down a riot elsewhere in the city . Alone , his camera equipment lands on him and is absorbed into his body , causing him to dramatically morph into a cyborg . The cyborg then joins the riot , leading the rebels to victory . 
 The make @-@ up effects were achieved through stop motion , with Billy Idol moving in slow stages during points of the filming , allowing the make up effects to gradually cover more of his body to create the illusion of metamorphosis . Stan Winston , who had previously worked on the Terminator series and Jurassic Park , supervised and created the special effects for the video . The music video for " Shock to the System " was nominated for " Best Special Effects in a Video " and " Best Editing in a Video " at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards , losing both times to Peter Gabriel 's video for " Steam " . 
 The final music video , " Adam in Chains " , was directed by Julien Temple . It depicted Billy Idol being bound into a chair as he is monitored by scientists . He struggles before being hypnotised , and is then inserted into a virtual reality simulator . There he is treated to an ethereal water fantasy . Idol eventually rejects the fantasy , which is consumed in flames as , in the real world , his body violently <unk> . The scientists end the experiment and Idol is brought back into reality , only to fall unconscious . 
 = = = Cyberpunk : Shock to the System = = = 
 A supplementary VHS cassette was also produced to promote the album . Cyberpunk : Shock to the System included a director 's cut version of the " Shock to the System " music video ; Shockumentary , a mini @-@ documentary on the making of the aforementioned video ; and two music videos which made use of Blendo images , one for " Heroin " ( Overlords mix ) and " Shock to the System " . The production was directed by Brett Leonard , having already directed the " Shock to the System " music video . Its cover art featured images of the cyborg freedom fighter played by Billy Idol in the " Shock to the System " music video , and included taglines that suggested a story of a dystopian world of high technology and rebellion . 
 = = Release = = 
 A press pack was distributed to the media prior to its release to promote the album . The centerpiece of the pack was a copy of the Billy Idol 's Cyberpunk custom stickered 3 ½ " floppy disk , which was housed in a custom multi @-@ coloured folder with artist and title logo on the front and contact information on the back . The pack included a 5 @-@ page version of the biography in the diskette , for the benefit of any journalist who lacked the equipment to operate the floppy disk . Also included in the pack were three black @-@ and @-@ white publicity photographs . Two pictures of Idol were taken by Peter Gravelle and the other was a digitally edited image of Idol as he appeared in the <unk> video , " Heroin " . 
 As part of press junkets promoting the album , Idol reportedly insisted attending journalists be familiar with cyberpunk fiction . It was also revealed that Idol was not entirely as familiar with the genre as he had proclaimed . William Gibson reported in an interview , " A London journalist told me when Billy did his ' Cyberpunk ' press junket over there , he made it a condition of getting an interview with him , that every journalist had to have read Neuromancer ... Anyway , they all did but when they met with Billy , the first thing that became really apparent was that Billy hadn 't read it . So they called him on it , and he said he didn 't need to .. he just absorbed it through a kinda osmosis . " 
 Upon release , the album did not fare well , failing to make the top 20 in either the UK or United States . Instead , the album debuted at No. 48 on the Billboard 200 on 17 July 1993 , and quickly plummeted to No. 192 in seven weeks before falling off the chart completely . The album saw slightly better chart placings in Europe , where it peaked at No. 5 in Austria , and No. 15 in Switzerland . 
 The first two singles fared slightly better . " Heroin " , a cover of The Velvet Underground 's " Heroin " , peaked at No. 16 on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . " Shock to the System " peaked at No. 7 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart , No. 23 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart , and No. 5 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . The last two singles , " Adam in Chains " and " Wasteland " , both failed to achieve any chart ratings within the United States , but did in other countries . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Cyberpunk was mostly slammed by critics , with some stating that the album was pretentious and meandering . They said Idol sounded like a man desperate to keep up with current trends . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic considered the album a failed attempt by Idol to recast himself for the ' 90s , and judged the content of the album as being mostly " ... padded with pretentious speeches , sampled dialog , and underdeveloped songs . " He also referred to the cover of " Heroin " as " one of the worst covers ever recorded . " 
 Taking note of Idol 's assertion that he had attempted to use technology in creating his early music , Ira Robbins of Newsday was sceptical . " [ It ] is hardly obvious in his work . " Though if his early work had been mild attempts to use technology , Cyberpunk itself , Robbins wrote , was " the sound of science gone too far . " The ideology of futurism Idol adopted was panned by Robbins , while the music itself was hardly different from his previous work . " For the most part , other than keyboards that add a pervasive nod to the <unk> beat of techno @-@ rave music , Cyberpunk sounds pretty much like every other Idol album . " 
 Manuel Esparza of The Daily Cougar wrote a more mixed review , praising some elements , such as the track " <unk> " , the use of sound space echo effects , and Idol 's talent as a singer . However , Esparza felt that Idol attempted the same techniques across too many songs , and referred to the lyrics as " ... [ just barely making ] more sense than a monkey pounding away on a typewriter ... " The " Billy Idol " entry on <unk> skewered Cyberpunk as a " third @-@ rate self @-@ parody ... that trusses him up in sci @-@ fi lingo and futurist mumbo jumbo . " Noting Idol 's attempt to infuse Cyberpunk with themes of social change , Paul <unk> of The Daily Collegian judged the album to be a repetitive and poorly developed attempt to create a socially relevant album . " There is a positive message to be found in Cyberpunk , " <unk> wrote , " the only problem is that techno plus early- ' 80s equals a big yawn , especially when the lyrics that accompany are annoyingly repetitive . " 
 Entertainment Weekly presented a favourable review of the album , giving it a " B + " rating and stating , " ... this is old @-@ fashioned glam @-@ pop — as dumb , and occasionally glorious , as it gets . " Two months later , Weekly included Idol on a list of " surprise losers " , following the album 's ranking of No. 48 on the Billboard charts . 
 = = = Cyberculture reception = = = 
 Prior to the album 's release , Idol was asked if he feared his new interest in technology would be seen as an attempt to co @-@ opt cyberculture . Idol denied this , stating that his belief in the relevancy of cyberpunk culture was genuine , and that he didn 't care what others thought of him . However , the reaction by the majority of the online community was openly hostile and suspicious of Idol 's motives . It was reported that his e @-@ mail account on the WELL received mail from angry computer users , and was occasionally flooded with e @-@ mail spam to antagonise him . Idol was also cast by many as a naive , tech @-@ illiterate poseur . The charge of illiteracy was not entirely false , as at the time of the album 's release , Idol was still typing using the " hunt and peck " system , and needed notes to log onto the internet . 
 In defending himself from what he believed was the elitism of his online critics , Idol admitted that he was still learning about computers , but compared it to the early punk ethic of simply trying your best as a musician , even if you had difficulty . He also pointed out that William Gibson was computer illiterate when he wrote Neuromancer . " I don 't know much about computers , but I have the desire to learn and I have a computer and a modem , so I go for it . <unk> my head sometimes , but continuing on . " 
 Idol was also criticised for his use of the term " cyberpunk " for his album title , as detractors alleged that he had no claim to a title which belonged to the entire movement . Idol responded that he was not approaching the movement with a sense of entitlement . " I ain 't no rock star . I 'm an eager student , " Idol wrote on a post to the WELL . Regarding his use of the " cyberpunk " moniker , Idol refuted claims that he had ever called himself one , and instead used the name as an ode to the subculture . " I was revved up by the DIY energy of Gibson and the high @-@ tech underground . " 
 Gareth Branwyn , who was among the initial tech @-@ experts Idol consulted , defended Idol 's interest in cyberpunk . " Billy is genuinely interested in and excited by cyberculture , and like all the rest of us , wants to factor that interest into his work , which happens to be pop music . Whether presenting cyberculture in that forum is ultimately a good thing or not is beside the point of Billy 's right to bring it to that forum . After all , access to information should be free and total , right ? Or at least that 's how the mythology goes . " An update to Branwyn 's Beyond Cyberpunk ! hyper @-@ card stack included a new introduction , which referred to the Cyberpunk controversy , frankly stating " The release of Billy Idol 's album Cyberpunk was met with a hailstorm of controversy on the Net , as young cyber @-@ Turks whined about how he had ripped them off and destroyed their secret club . " 
 Mark Frauenfelder also defended Idol , pointing out the elitist hypocrisy of the WELL community , and highlighted the perceived pointlessness of the conflict . " There are all these 16- and 17 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> who are afraid that everybody 's going to learn their secret handshake or something . " Andy Hawks , original maintainer of the alt.cyberpunk Frequently Asked Questions list , and founder of the Future Culture mailing list , criticized what he perceived to be a double @-@ standard among Idol 's critics in questioning his motivation behind creating the album and his choice of associating on internet forums . 
 Penn Jillette , then a columnist for PC / Computing , accepted that Idol wasn 't well versed in computers , but considered it a non @-@ issue . " I 'm tempted to call him a computer ' poser ' but that 's not the point . [ ... ] He 's not a poser . He 's a fan of computers , and he doesn 't claim to be more . [ ... ] He 's not a fan of computers because he can write code , he 's a fan because he knows that whatever is really happening nowadays is happening around computers . " 
 Regardless , Cyberpunk is still seen as having been an act of hyped commercialisation . In Escape Velocity : Cyberculture at the End of the Century , Mark Dery commented on the mainstreaming of the cyberpunk subculture . He viewed Idol as representing some of the worst abuses this took , deriding Cyberpunk as " a bald @-@ faced appropriation of every cyberpunk cliché that wasn 't nailed down . " In 1995 , when writer Jack Boulware asked " When did cyberpunk die ? " at a meeting of former staff members of Mondo 2000 , a response was " 1993 . The release of the Billy Idol record . " In a section on " cyberpunk music " , The Cyberpunk Project website notes , " ... [ the ] usual opinion is that Billy Idol 's album is just commercialization and it has nothing to do with cyberpunk . " The <unk> for alt.cyberpunk , mirrored on the website , rejects the notion that there is a " cyberpunk fashion " . Of Billy Idol 's attempts to base his fashion and music on it , it states , " No matter how sincere his intentions might have been , scorn and charges of commercialization have been heaped upon him in this and other forums . " 
 Well known music critic , Robert Christgau , excoriated what he considered to be Idol 's attempt to co @-@ opt cyberpunk for commercial gain . In particular , he compared Idol 's new interest in cyberpunk to the musician 's previous co @-@ optation of the punk subculture . " Even if his interest was originally piqued by the dollar signs that appear in front of his eyes whenever he encounters the magic rune p @-@ u @-@ n @-@ k , that 's the fate of any good idea — sooner or later it touches people who have no deep connection to it . " However , unlike some critics who asserted Idol had no genuine interest in cyberculture , Christgau assumed he did and that this was to be expected , as many subcultures are eventually adopted by mainstream society . The problem , Christgau asserted , was that Idol had no genuine understanding of the concept , and that ultimately Idol could only " [ struggle ] for , over , or with authenticity , a rock obsession [ he 's ] always kept at arm 's length and never escaped . " 
 As one of the founders of the cyberpunk genre , William Gibson has repeatedly been asked for his opinion on the subject of the mainstreaming of cyberpunk , which has often brought up the topic of Idol 's album . In a 1994 interview , Gibson said that he did not approve of the way the term " cyberpunk " was being increasingly commercialised by popular culture , and that Idol had " turned it into something very silly . " Gibson also said in another interview that to understand cyberpunk as a movement was " something of a joke , as wonderfully demonstrated , not too long ago , by Billy Idol 's Cyberpunk album . " Despite his negative comments , Gibson was bemused , rather than angered , by Idol 's creation . Stating that he 'd tried to withhold judgment before hearing the album , he eventually did and said " ... I just don 't get what he 's on about . I don 't see the connection . [ ... ] I had lunch with Billy years ago in Hollywood ... and I thought he was a very likeable guy . He had a sense of humour about what he was doing that is not apparent in the product he puts out . If I run into him again , we can have a good laugh about what he 's doing now ! " 
 = = = Academic analysis = = = 
 Shawn P. Wilbur , a left @-@ libertarian academic then associated with the Bowling Green State University , closely critiqued the concept of the supposed " cyberpunk movement " . In an attempt to understand why members of the movement were so negative in reaction to attempts by the mainstream to investigate the cyberpunk meme , he directly investigated the criticism of Billy Idol on <unk> His interpretation of the discussions led him to dub the reactions of alt.cyberpunk the " Panic of ' 93 " . It was Wilbur 's assertion that the lack of a cohesive understanding of what " cyberpunk " meant was the chief reason for a lack of critical thought displayed during discussions concerning its inspection or adoption by " outsiders " . 
 He concluded , " [ u ] <unk> 's alt.cyberpunk is both a warning and a promise . It suggests the power of ideas to draw people together , even when they aren 't quite sure what those ideas are . " 
 While examining Pat <unk> 's 1991 novel , <unk> , Wilbur also referenced the Cyberpunk single , " Shock to the System " , interpreting the song on multiple levels . These included the " shock " cyberpunk represented to established forms of science fiction , as well as the " future shock " society felt in reaction to new technology . Wilbur also asserted that the storyline told by the music video neatly fit into the cyberpunk tradition of glorifying social resistance . 
 The single , " Shock to the System " , and its accompanying music video were also heavily analysed for the overtones of racial , sexual , and physical trauma presented within them by Thomas Foster , associate professor at Indiana University , in his 2005 book , The Souls of <unk> . 
 = = = Re @-@ release = = = 
 Despite the overwhelmingly negative reviews from professional critics , the album was reissued on 22 August 2006 by <unk> Records as part of its Priceless Collection series . The reissued album did not include the special edition multimedia of the original , but did include new cover art . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Billy Idol 's career = = = 
 Following the failure of the Cyberpunk album , Billy Idol did not produce another original album until 2005 , 13 years later . However , this was not due to the failure of the album , but rather his dissatisfaction with his producers at Chrysalis Records . With the founding of Sanctuary Records , an independent record label Idol felt positive about , and the formation of a new band with Steve Stevens , Idol decided to produce Devil 's Playground . Idol 's later album featured a more power pop and classic rock sound similar to Idol 's 80s style , and received middling reviews . 
 During the intermittent years between albums , Idol created music for the Speed and Heavy Metal 2000 film soundtracks and regularly wrote and performed new songs for several tours , but never attempted to experiment with the style he explored in Cyberpunk . In 2001 , Idol released a compilation album , Greatest Hits . Only one song from Cyberpunk , " Shock to the System " , was included in the collection . In 2008 , another compilation album , The Very Best of Billy Idol : <unk> Yourself , was released . Once again , the only song from Cyberpunk to be included was a digital remaster of " Shock to the System " . Idol achieved widespread commercial success with his greatest hits material , Greatest Hits went platinum . 
 In the years following the album 's release , musicians who had worked with Idol in the past were asked to comment on the failure of Cyberpunk . Tony James of Sigue Sigue Sputnik , a pop @-@ cyberpunk band , and former bassist for Generation X , weighed in . Though sympathetic to his former band mate , he felt the stylistic change didn 't fit Idol . " Billy is always cool but he does Billy Idol rebel <unk> the best , i felt cyberpunk was a wrong turning for him .. he has his sound .. stay great as u are Bill ... [ sic ] " In 2001 Steve Stevens was asked if Idol 's declining popularity and the failure of Cyberpunk was related to their split . Stevens rejected the idea , saying of the failed album , " I think the Cyberpunk record people didn 't get . I think I would be doing Billy and his fans a great disservice if I said that he needed me for his popularity . " 
 Idol briefly responded once more to the negative reception the album received on two occasions . In 1996 , Idol gave an interview for his website in which he was asked if he 'd pursue the style of Cyberpunk for a future album . Idol addressed the question by first explaining his interpretation of the failure of the album . " You see the thing about Cyberpunk is that it was supposed to be like a home [ - ] made record , much like these rap bands are doing , all made really on home equipment . But it was very hard to make people understand that I was sort of making an alternative record . They don 't allow you to make an alternative record ... " He then stated that he would not be pursuing the same style with any future album . In a 2005 interview , Idol simply stated " ... the idea that I was trying to do an overground @-@ underground record just wasn 't understood at the time . " Tony Dimitriades , a prominent music industry producer and manager , interpreted Idol 's response at the time . " He realized at that point , ' Well , if that 's what people think , maybe I lost touch with my public . ' " 
 While embarking upon a 2010 tour , Idol was asked if he intended to perform music from the Cyberpunk album . While not distancing himself from the production , Idol stated he had no intentions of doing so immediately . Pointing out that he did wish to perform a mixture of new and older works , and would perhaps perform the music in the future , he intended to base his tour on " more guitar music " and pointed out that Cyberpunk 's keyboard @-@ driven music was not going to be featured . 
 = = = Critical legacy = = = 
 In 1999 , The A.V. Club awarded Cyberpunk as the " Least Essential Concept Album " of the 1990s . An accompanying review stated , " The result [ of Idol 's casting as a " futuristic maverick " and the album itself ] is as laughably dated as it is difficult to endure in its entirety . " In 2006 , Q magazine listed Cyberpunk as No. 5 in their list of the 50 worst albums of all time . Said music critic Parke Puterbaugh , " To make that record in ' 93 , it may have been a number of years ahead of its time actually , because it didn 't do terribly well . " 
 = = = Music industry 's use of technology = = = 
 The album was prescient for its early advocacy of the use of the internet and software to market albums . The Boston Globe reported , " ... [ Cyberpunk ] demands recognition as a style setter , not for its musical content , but for the changes it may prompt in the ways recordings are made and marketed ... " Idol 's early adoption of the internet to communicate with fans was broadened in the years after Cyberpunk 's release . By the late ' 90s , many celebrities had made inroads on to the internet , using official websites and blogs to directly advertise albums and tours to fans , as well as organizing fansites for official fan clubs . Billy Idol 's own official fansite was established in 1997 . In 2010 , Idol continued to pursue his early vision for the integration of his tours with technology by utilising his website to document a world tour through a blog and streaming video feed . " These days , [ Idol ] sees his own website as his old vision of the future becoming reality . " 
 The inclusion of multimedia software as a special feature was a novelty when Chrysalis Records released the Billy Idol 's Cyberpunk diskette . This was also widely adopted by the music industry years later . CD @-@ ROMs were initially considered as a medium for Cyberpunk 's multimedia features , but were too expensive at the time of production , and so floppy disks were used instead . Peter Gabriel and Todd Rundgren had previously experimented with CD @-@ ROMs , but it was hoped that if Idol 's album had proved popular , it could have been reissued with CD @-@ ROMs , catapulting the format into the music industry 's mainstream . This never materialised due to the album 's general failures . However , during the late ' 90s it became increasingly common for some limited edition digipaks to include CD @-@ ROMs , evolving by the early 2000s into the inclusion of DVDs . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Billy Idol and Mark Younger @-@ Smith , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 " Core " personnel 
 Billy Idol – vocals ; keyboards ; programming ; arranger 
 Mark Younger @-@ Smith – guitars ; sitars ; keyboards ; programming ; arranger 
 Robin Hancock – arrangement ; mixing ; engineer ; producer ; programming ; keyboards 
 Additional personnel 
 Doug Wimbish – bass guitar 
 Larry Seymour – bass guitar 
 Tal Bergman – drums 
 Durga McBroom – vocals ( background ) 
 Carnie Wilson – vocals ( background ) 
 Wendy Wilson – vocals ( background ) 
 Jamie Muhoberac – organ ; keyboards 
 Stephen Marcussen – audio mastering 
 Ed <unk> – audio mixing ; mixing assistant 
 Mike Baumgartner – audio engineering assistant ; mixing ; mixing assistant 
 Ross Donaldson – audio engineering 
 Ron Donaldson – audio engineering 
 Robert Farago – voices ; speech / speaker / speaking part ; spoken word 
 London Jo Henwood – speech / speaker / speaking part 
 David Weiss – percussion , saw 
 Henry Marquez – art direction 
 Michael Diehl – design 
 Greg Gorman – photography 
 Elisabeth Sunday – photography 
 Brett Leonard – photography 
 Gwen Mullen – rendering 
 Scott Hampton – rendering 
 Uncredited 
 Gareth Branwyn – consultation 
 Mark Frauenfelder – consultation ; graphic design ( cover art & logo for album , singles , and VHS cassette ) 
 Timothy Leary – consultation ; spoken word ( album track No. 15 segue ) 
 Jaime Levy – Interactive Producer 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Homer Simpson = 
 Homer Jay Simpson is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the American animated television series The Simpsons as the patriarch of the eponymous family . He is voiced by Dan Castellaneta and first appeared on television , along with the rest of his family , in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " on April 19 , 1987 . Homer was created and designed by cartoonist Matt Groening while he was waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks ' office . Groening had been called to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic strip Life in Hell but instead decided to create a new set of characters . He named the character after his father , Homer Groening . After appearing for three seasons on The Tracey Ullman Show , the Simpson family got their own series on Fox that debuted December 17 , 1989 . 
 Homer and his wife Marge have three children : Bart , Lisa , and Maggie . As the family 's provider , he works at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . Homer embodies several American working class stereotypes : he is a crude , bald , overweight , incompetent , clumsy , lazy , heavy drinking , ignorant and idiotic person ; however , he is essentially a decent man and fiercely devoted to his family . Despite the suburban blue @-@ collar routine of his life , he has had a number of remarkable experiences . 
 In the shorts and earlier episodes , Castellaneta voiced Homer with a loose impression of Walter Matthau ; however , during the second and third seasons of the half @-@ hour show , Homer 's voice evolved to become more robust , to allow the expression of a fuller range of emotions . He has appeared in other media relating to The Simpsons – including video games , The Simpsons Movie , The Simpsons Ride , commercials and comic books – and inspired an entire line of merchandise . His signature catchphrase , the annoyed grunt " D 'oh ! " , has been included in The New Oxford Dictionary of English since 1998 and the Oxford English Dictionary since 2001 . 
 Homer is one of the most influential characters in the history of television . The British newspaper The Sunday Times described him as " the greatest comic creation of [ modern ] time " . He was named the greatest character " of the last 20 years " in 2010 by Entertainment Weekly , was ranked the second greatest cartoon character by TV Guide , behind Bugs Bunny , and was voted the greatest television character of all time by Channel 4 viewers . For voicing Homer , Castellaneta has won four Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance and a special @-@ achievement Annie Award . In 2000 , Homer and his family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 Homer is the bumbling husband of Marge and father of Bart , Lisa and Maggie Simpson . He is the son of Mona and Abraham " Grampa " Simpson . Homer held over 188 different jobs in the first 400 episodes of The Simpsons . In most episodes , he works as the Nuclear Safety Inspector at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , a position he has held since " Homer 's Odyssey " , the third episode of the series . At the plant , Homer is often ignored and completely forgotten by his boss Mr. Burns , and constantly falls asleep and neglects his duties . Matt Groening has stated that he decided to have Homer work at the power plant because of the potential for Homer to wreak havoc . Each of his other jobs has lasted only one episode . In the first half of the series , the writers developed an explanation about how he got fired from the plant and was then rehired in every episode . In later episodes , he often began a new job on impulse , without any mention of his regular employment . 
 The Simpsons uses a floating timeline in which the characters never physically age , and , as such , the show is generally assumed to be set in the current year . Nevertheless , in several episodes , events in Homer 's life have been linked to specific time periods . " Mother Simpson " ( season seven , 1995 ) depicts Homer 's mother , Mona , as a radical who went into hiding in 1969 following a run @-@ in with the law ; " The Way We Was " ( season two , 1991 ) shows Homer falling in love with Marge Bouvier as a senior at Springfield High School in 1974 ; and " I Married Marge " ( season three , 1991 ) implies that Marge became pregnant with Bart in 1980 . However , the episode " That ' 90s Show " ( season 19 , 2008 ) contradicted much of this backstory , portraying Homer and Marge as a childless couple in the early 1990s . 
 Homer 's age has changed as the series developed ; he was 36 in the early episodes , 38 and 39 in season eight , and 40 in the eighteenth season , although even in those seasons his age is inconsistent . During Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein 's period as showrunners , they found that as they aged , Homer seemed to become older too , so they increased his age to 38 . His height is 6 ' 0 " . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Naming the characters after members of his own family , Homer was named after Groening 's father Homer Groening , who himself had been named after ancient Greek poet Homer . Very little else of Homer 's character was based on him , and to prove that the meaning behind Homer 's name was not significant , Groening later named his own son Homer . According to Groening , " Homer originated with my goal to both amuse my real father , and just annoy him a little bit . My father was an athletic , creative , intelligent filmmaker and writer , and the only thing he had in common with Homer was a love of donuts . " Although Groening has stated in several interviews that Homer was named after his father , he also claimed in several 1990 interviews that a character in the 1939 Nathanael West novel The Day of the Locust was the inspiration for naming Homer . Homer 's middle initial " J " , which stands for " Jay " , is a " tribute " to animated characters such as Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel from The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show , who got their middle initial from Jay Ward . 
 Homer made his debut with the rest of the Simpson family on April 19 , 1987 , in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " . In 1989 , the shorts were adapted into The Simpsons , a half @-@ hour series airing on the Fox Broadcasting Company . Homer and the Simpson family remained the main characters on this new show . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette . The family was crudely drawn because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators , assuming they would clean them up ; instead , they just traced over his drawings . Homer 's physical features are generally not used in other characters ; for example , in the later seasons , no characters other than Homer , Lenny , and Krusty the Clown have a similar beard line . When Groening originally designed Homer , he put his initials into the character 's hairline and ear : the hairline resembled an ' M ' , and the right ear resembled a ' G ' . Groening decided that this would be too distracting and redesigned the ear to look normal . However , he still draws the ear as a ' G ' when he draws pictures of Homer for fans . The basic shape of Homer 's head is described by director Mark Kirkland as a tube @-@ shaped coffee can with a salad bowl on top . Bart 's head is also coffee @-@ can shaped , while spheres are used for Marge , Lisa , and Maggie . During the shorts , the animators experimented with the way Homer would move his mouth when talking . At one point , his mouth would stretch out back " beyond his beardline " ; but this was dropped when it got " out of control . " In some early episodes , Homer 's hair was rounded rather than sharply pointed because animation director Wes Archer felt it should look disheveled . Homer 's hair evolved to be consistently pointed . During the first three seasons , Homer 's design for some close @-@ up shots included small lines which were meant to be eyebrows . Matt Groening strongly disliked them and they were eventually dropped . 
 In the season seven ( 1995 ) episode " Treehouse of Horror VI " , Homer was computer animated into a three @-@ dimensional character for the first time for the " Homer3 " segment of the episode . The computer animation directors at Pacific Data Images worked hard not to " reinvent the character " . In the final minute of the segment , the 3D Homer ends up in a real world , live @-@ action Los Angeles . The scene was directed by David Mirkin and was the first time a Simpsons character had been in the real world in the series . Because " Lisa 's Wedding " ( season six , 1995 ) is set fifteen years in the future , Homer 's design was altered to make him older in the episode . He is heavier ; one of the hairs on top of his head was removed ; and an extra line was placed under the eye . A similar design has been used in subsequent flashforwards . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Homer 's voice is performed by Dan Castellaneta , who voices numerous other characters , including Grampa Simpson , Krusty the Clown , Barney Gumble , Groundskeeper Willie , Mayor Quimby and Hans Moleman . Castellaneta had been part of the regular cast of The Tracey Ullman Show and had previously done some voice @-@ over work in Chicago alongside his wife Deb Lacusta . Voices were needed for the Simpsons shorts , so the producers decided to ask Castellaneta and fellow cast member Julie Kavner to voice Homer and Marge rather than hire more actors . In the shorts and first few seasons of the half @-@ hour show , Homer 's voice is different from the majority of the series . The voice began as a loose impression of Walter Matthau , but Castellaneta could not " get enough power behind that voice " , or sustain his Matthau impression for the nine- to ten @-@ hour @-@ long recording sessions , and had to find something easier . During the second and third seasons of the half @-@ hour show , Castellaneta " dropped the voice down " and developed it as more versatile and humorous , allowing Homer a fuller range of emotions . 
 Castellaneta 's normal speaking voice has no similarity to Homer 's . To perform Homer 's voice , Castellaneta lowers his chin to his chest and is said to " let his I.Q. go " . While in this state , he has ad @-@ libbed several of Homer 's least intelligent comments , such as the line " I am so smart , s @-@ m @-@ r @-@ t " from " Homer Goes to College " ( season five , 1993 ) which was a genuine mistake made by Castellaneta during recording . Castellaneta likes to stay in character during recording sessions , and he tries to visualize a scene so that he can give the proper voice to it . Despite Homer 's fame , Castellaneta claims he is rarely recognized in public , " except , maybe , by a die @-@ hard fan " . 
 " Homer 's Barbershop Quartet " ( season five , 1993 ) is the only episode where Homer 's voice was provided by someone other than Castellaneta . The episode features Homer forming a barbershop quartet called The Be Sharps ; and , at some points , his singing voice is provided by a member of The Dapper Dans . The Dapper Dans had recorded the singing parts for all four members of The Be Sharps . Their singing was intermixed with the normal voice actor 's voices , often with a regular voice actor singing the melody and the Dapper Dans providing backup . 
 Until 1998 , Castellaneta was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing for casting of new voices . However , the dispute was soon resolved and he received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The issue was resolved a month later , and Castellaneta earned $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary re @-@ negotiations in 2008 , the voice actors receive approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Castellaneta and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 Executive producer Al Jean notes that in The Simpsons ' writing room , " everyone loves writing for Homer " , and many of his adventures are based on experiences of the writers . In the early seasons of the show , Bart was the main focus . But , around the fourth season , Homer became more of the focus . According to Matt Groening , this was because " With Homer , there 's just a wider range of jokes you can do . And there are far more drastic consequences to Homer 's stupidity . There 's only so far you can go with a juvenile delinquent . We wanted Bart to do anything up to the point of him being tried in court as an adult . But Homer is an adult , and his boneheaded @-@ ness is funnier . [ ... ] Homer is launching himself headfirst into every single impulsive thought that occurs to him . " 
 Homer 's behavior has changed a number of times through the run of the series . He was originally " very angry " and oppressive toward Bart , but these characteristics were toned down somewhat as his persona was further explored . In early seasons , Homer appeared concerned that his family was going to make him look bad ; however , in later episodes he was less anxious about how he was perceived by others . In the first several years , Homer was often portrayed as sweet and sincere , but during Mike Scully 's tenure as executive producer ( seasons nine , 1997 to twelve , 2001 ) , he became more of " a boorish , self @-@ aggrandizing oaf " . Chris Suellentrop of Slate wrote , " under Scully 's tenure , The Simpsons became , well , a cartoon . [ ... ] Episodes that once would have ended with Homer and Marge bicycling into the sunset [ ... ] now end with Homer blowing a tranquilizer dart into Marge 's neck . " Fans have dubbed this incarnation of the character " Jerkass Homer " . At voice recording sessions , Dan Castellaneta has rejected material written in the script that portrayed Homer as being too mean . He believes that Homer is " boorish and unthinking , but he 'd never be mean on purpose . " When editing The Simpsons Movie , several scenes were changed or otherwise toned down to make Homer more sympathetic . 
 The writers have made Homer 's intelligence appear to decline over the years ; they explain this was not done intentionally , but it was necessary to top previous jokes . For example , in " When You Dish Upon a Star " , ( season 10 , 1998 ) the writers included a scene where Homer admits that he cannot read . The writers debated including this plot twist because it would contradict previous scenes in which Homer does read , but eventually they decided to keep the joke because they found it humorous . The writers often debate how far to go in portraying Homer 's stupidity ; one suggested rule is that " he can never forget his own name " . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 The comic efficacy of Homer 's personality lies in his frequent bouts of bumbling stupidity and laziness , and his explosive anger . He has a low intelligence level and is described by director David Silverman as " creatively brilliant in his stupidity " . Homer also shows immense apathy towards work , is overweight , and " is devoted to his stomach " . His short attention span is evidenced by his impulsive decisions to engage in various hobbies and enterprises , only to " change ... his mind when things go badly " . Homer often spends his evenings drinking Duff Beer at Moe 's Tavern , and was shown in the episode " Duffless " ( season four , 1993 ) as a full @-@ blown alcoholic . He is very envious of his neighbors , Ned Flanders and his family , and is easily enraged by Bart. Homer will often strangle Bart on impulse in a cartoonish manner . The first instance of Homer strangling Bart was in the short " Family Portrait " . According to Matt Groening , the rule was that Homer could only strangle Bart impulsively , never with pre @-@ meditation , because doing so " seems sadistic . If we keep it that he 's ruled by his impulses , then he can easily switch impulses . So , even though he impulsively wants to strangle Bart , he also gives up fairly easily . " Another of the original ideas entertained by Groening was that Homer would " always get his comeuppance or Bart had to strangle him back " , but this was dropped . Homer shows no compunction about expressing his rage , and does not attempt to hide his actions from people outside the family . 
 Homer has complex relationships with all three of his children , and the rest of his family . He often berates Bart , but the two commonly share adventures and are sometimes allies ; some episodes , particularly in later seasons , show that the pair have a strange respect for each other 's cunning . Homer and Lisa have opposite personalities and he usually overlooks Lisa 's talents , but when made aware of his neglect , does everything he can to help her . While Homer 's thoughtless antics often upset his family , he has also revealed himself to be a caring father and husband : in " Lisa the Beauty Queen " , ( season four , 1992 ) he sold his cherished ride on the Duff blimp and used the money to enter Lisa in a beauty pageant so she could feel better about herself ; in " Rosebud " , ( season five , 1993 ) he gave up his chance at wealth to allow Maggie to keep a cherished teddy bear , despite the show also occasionally implying Homer forgets he has a third child , while the episode " And Maggie Makes Three " suggests she is the chief reason Homer took and remains at his regular job ( season six , 1995 ) ; in " Radio Bart " , ( season three , 1992 ) he spearheaded an attempt to dig Bart out after he had fallen down a well ; and in " A Milhouse Divided " , ( season eight , 1996 ) he arranged a surprise second wedding with Marge to make up for their unsatisfactory first ceremony . Homer , however , has a poor relationship with his father Abraham " Grampa " Simpson , whom he placed in a nursing home as soon as he could . The Simpson family will often do their best to avoid unnecessary contact with Grampa , but Homer has shown feelings of love for his father from time to time . 
 Homer is " a ( happy ) slave to his various appetites " , and would gladly sell his soul to the devil in exchange for a single doughnut . He has an apparently vacuous mind but at times exhibits a surprising depth of knowledge about various subjects , such as the composition of the Supreme Court of the United States , Incan mythology , bankruptcy law , and cell biology . Homer 's brief periods of intelligence are overshadowed , however , by much longer and consistent periods of ignorance , forgetfulness , and stupidity . Homer has a low IQ of 55 which has variously been attributed to the hereditary " Simpson Gene " ( which eventually causes every male member of the family to become incredibly stupid ) , his alcohol problem , exposure to radioactive waste , repetitive cranial trauma , and a crayon lodged in the frontal lobe of his brain . In the episode " HOMR " ( season 12 , 2001 ) Homer gets surgery to remove the ( newly discovered ) crayon from his brain , boosting his IQ to 105 , but although he bonds very well with Lisa , his newfound capacity for understanding and reason makes him less happy and he gets Moe to reinsert a crayon , causing his intelligence to return to its previous level . Homer often debates with his own mind , which is expressed in voiceover . His brain has a record of giving him dubious advice , sometimes helping him make the right decisions , but often failing spectacularly . It has even become completely frustrated and , through sound effects , walked out on him , Homer 's conversations with his brain were used several times during the fourth season , but were later phased out after the producers " used every possible permutation " . These exchanges were often introduced because they filled time and were easy for the animators to work on . 
 In the episode " Fear of Flying " it is revealed that his favorite song was " It 's Raining Men " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commendations = = = 
 Homer 's influence on comedy and culture has been significant . In 2010 , Entertainment Weekly named Homer " the greatest character of the last 20 years . " He was placed second on TV Guide 's 2002 Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters , behind Bugs Bunny ; fifth on Bravo 's 100 Greatest TV Characters , one of only four cartoon characters on that list ; and first in a Channel 4 poll of the greatest television characters of all time . In 2007 , Entertainment Weekly placed Homer ninth on their list of the " 50 Greatest TV icons " and first on their 2010 list of the " Top 100 Characters of the Past Twenty Years " . Homer was also the runaway winner in British polls that determined who viewers thought was the " greatest American " and which fictional character people would like to see become the President of the United States . His relationship with Marge was included in TV Guide 's list of " The Best TV Couples of All Time " . 
 Dan Castellaneta has won several awards for voicing Homer , including four Primetime Emmy Awards for " Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance " in 1992 for " Lisa 's Pony " , 1993 for " Mr. Plow " , in 2004 for " Today I Am a Clown " , and in 2009 for " Father Knows Worst " . Although in the case of " Today I Am a Clown " , it was for voicing " various characters " and not solely for Homer . In 2010 , Castellaneta received a fifth Emmy nomination for voicing Homer and Grampa in the episode " Thursdays with Abie " . In 1993 , Castellaneta was given a special Annie Award , " Outstanding Individual Achievement in the Field of Animation " , for his work as Homer on The Simpsons . In 2004 , Castellaneta and Julie Kavner ( the voice of Marge ) won a Young Artist Award for " Most Popular Mom & Dad in a TV Series " . In 2005 , Homer and Marge were nominated for a Teen Choice Award for " Choice TV Parental Units " . Various episodes in which Homer is strongly featured have won Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program , including " Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment " in 1991 , " Lisa 's Wedding " in 1995 , " Homer 's Phobia " in 1997 , " Trash of the Titans " in 1998 , " HOMR " in 2001 , " Three Gays of the Condo " in 2003 and " Eternal Moonshine of the Simpson Mind " in 2008 . In 2000 , Homer and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Homer is an " everyman " and embodies several American stereotypes of working class blue @-@ collar men : he is crude , overweight , incompetent , dim witted , clumsy and a borderline alcoholic . Matt Groening describes him as " completely ruled by his impulses " . Dan Castellaneta calls him " a dog trapped in a man 's body " , adding , " He 's incredibly loyal – not entirely clean – but you gotta love him . " In his book Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner describes Homer as " the most American of the Simpsons " and believes that while the other Simpson family members could be changed to other nationalities , Homer is " pure American " . In the book God in the Details : American Religion in Popular Culture , the authors comment that " Homer 's progress ( or lack thereof ) reveals a character who can do the right thing , if accidentally or begrudgingly . " The book The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer includes a chapter analyzing Homer 's character from the perspective of Aristotelian virtue ethics . Raja Halwani writes that Homer 's " love of life " is an admirable character trait , " for many people are tempted to see in Homer nothing but buffoonery and immorality . [ ... ] He is not politically correct , he is more than happy to judge others , and he certainly does not seem to be obsessed with his health . These qualities might not make Homer an admirable person , but they do make him admirable in some ways , and , more importantly , makes us crave him and the Homer Simpsons of this world . " In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly justified designating The Simpsons as a television classic by stating , " we all hail Simpson patriarch Homer because his joy is as palpable as his stupidity is stunning " . 
 In the season eight episode " Homer 's Enemy " the writers decided to examine " what it would be like to actually work alongside Homer Simpson " . The episode explores the possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic named Frank Grimes placed alongside Homer in a work environment . In the episode , Homer is portrayed as an everyman and the embodiment of the American spirit ; however , in some scenes his negative characteristics and silliness are prominently highlighted . By the end of the episode , Grimes , a hard working and persevering " real American hero " , has become the villain ; the viewer is intended to be pleased that Homer has emerged victorious . 
 In Gilligan Unbound , author Paul Arthur Cantor states that he believes Homer 's devotion to his family has added to the popularity of the character . He writes , " Homer is the distillation of pure fatherhood . [ ... ] This is why , for all his stupidity , bigotry and self @-@ centered quality , we cannot hate Homer . He continually fails at being a good father , but he never gives up trying , and in some basic and important sense that makes him a good father . " The Sunday Times remarked " Homer is good because , above all , he is capable of great love . When the chips are down , he always does the right thing by his children — he is never unfaithful in spite of several opportunities . " 
 = = Cultural influence = = 
 Homer Simpson is one of the most popular and influential television characters in a variety of standards . USA Today cited the character as being one of the " top 25 most influential people of the past 25 years " in 2007 , adding that Homer " epitomized the irony and irreverence at the core of American humor . " Robert Thompson , director of Syracuse University 's Center for the Study of Popular Television believes that " three centuries from now , English professors are going to be regarding Homer Simpson as one of the greatest creations in human storytelling . " Animation historian Jerry Beck described Homer as one of the best animated characters , saying , " you know someone like it , or you identify with ( it ) . That 's really the key to a classic character . " Homer has been described by The Sunday Times as " the greatest comic creation of [ modern ] time " . The article remarked , " every age needs its great , consoling failure , its lovable , pretension @-@ free mediocrity . And we have ours in Homer Simpson . " 
 Homer has been cited as a bad influence on children ; for example , in 2005 a survey conducted in the United Kingdom found that 59 % of parents felt that Homer promoted an unhealthy lifestyle . A five @-@ year study of more than 2 @,@ 000 middle @-@ aged people in France found a possible link between weight and brain function , the findings of which were dubbed the " Homer Simpson syndrome " . Results from a word memory test showed that people with a body mass index ( BMI ) of 20 ( considered to be a healthy level ) remembered an average of nine out of 16 words . Meanwhile , people with a BMI of 30 ( inside the obese range ) remembered an average of just seven out of 16 words . 
 Despite Homer 's embodiment of American culture , his influence has spread to other parts of the world . In 2003 , Matt Groening revealed that his father , after whom Homer was named , was Canadian , and said that this made Homer himself a Canadian . The character was later made an honorary citizen of Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada , because Homer Groening was believed to be from there , although sources say the senior Groening was actually born in the province of Saskatchewan . In 2007 , an image of Homer was painted next to the Cerne Abbas Giant in Dorset , England as part of a promotion for The Simpsons Movie . This caused outrage among local neopagans who performed " rain magic " to try to get it washed away . In 2008 , a defaced Spanish euro coin was found in Avilés , Spain with the face of Homer replacing the effigy of King Juan Carlos I. 
 On April 9 , 2009 , the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44 cent stamps featuring Homer and the four other members of the Simpson family . They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while the show is still in production . The stamps , designed by Matt Groening , were made available for purchase on May 7 , 2009 . 
 Homer has appeared , voiced by Castellaneta , in several other television shows , including the sixth season of American Idol where he opened the show ; The Tonight Show with Jay Leno where he performed a special animated opening monologue for the July 24 , 2007 , edition ; and the 2008 fundraising television special Stand Up to Cancer where he was shown having a colonoscopy . 
 = = = D 'oh ! = = = 
 Homer 's catchphrase , the annoyed grunt " D 'oh ! " , is typically uttered when he injures himself , realizes that he has done something stupid , or when something bad has happened or is about to happen to him . During the voice recording session for a Tracey Ullman Show short , Homer was required to utter what was written in the script as an " annoyed grunt " . Dan Castellaneta rendered it as a drawn out " d <unk> " . This was inspired by Jimmy Finlayson , the mustachioed Scottish actor who appeared in 33 Laurel and Hardy films . Finlayson had used the term as a minced oath to stand in for the word " Damn ! " Matt Groening felt that it would better suit the timing of animation if it were spoken faster . Castellaneta then shortened it to a quickly uttered " D 'oh ! " The first intentional use of D 'oh ! occurred in the Ullman short " The Krusty the Clown Show " ( 1989 ) , and its first usage in the series was in the series premiere , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . 
 " D 'oh ! " was first added to The New Oxford Dictionary of English in 1998 . It is defined as an interjection " used to comment on an action perceived as foolish or stupid " . In 2001 , " D 'oh ! " was added to the Oxford English Dictionary , without the apostrophe ( " Doh ! " ) . The definition of the word is " expressing frustration at the realization that things have turned out badly or not as planned , or that one has just said or done something foolish " . In 2006 , " D 'oh ! " was placed in sixth position on TV Land 's list of the 100 greatest television catchphrases . " D 'oh ! " is also included in The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations . The book includes several other quotations from Homer , including " Kids , you tried your best and you failed miserably . The lesson is never try " , from " Burns ' Heir " ( season five , 1994 ) as well as " Kids are the best , Apu . You can teach them to hate the things you hate . And they practically raise themselves , what with the Internet and all " , from " Eight <unk> ' " ( season 11 , 1999 ) . Both quotes entered the dictionary in August 2007 . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Homer 's inclusion in many Simpsons publications , toys , and other merchandise is evidence of his enduring popularity . The Homer Book , about Homer 's personality and attributes , was released in 2004 and is commercially available . It has been described as " an entertaining little book for occasional reading " and was listed as one of " the most interesting books of 2004 " by The <unk> . Other merchandise includes dolls , posters , figurines , bobblehead dolls , mugs , alarm clocks , jigsaw puzzles , Chia Pets , and clothing such as slippers , T @-@ shirts , baseball caps , and boxer shorts . Homer has appeared in commercials for Coke , 1 @-@ 800 @-@ COLLECT , Burger King , Butterfinger , C.C. Lemon , Church 's Chicken , Domino 's Pizza , Intel , Kentucky Fried Chicken , Ramada Inn , Subway and T.G.I. Friday 's . In 2004 , Homer starred in a MasterCard Priceless commercial that aired during Super Bowl XXXVIII . In 2001 , <unk> launched a brand of cereal called " Homer 's Cinnamon Donut Cereal " , which was available for a limited time . In June 2009 , Dutch automotive navigation systems manufacturer <unk> announced that Homer would be added to its downloadable GPS voice lineup . Homer 's voice , recorded by Dan Castellaneta , features several in @-@ character comments such as " Take the third right . We might find an ice cream truck ! Mmm ... ice cream . " 
 Homer has appeared in other media relating to The Simpsons . He has appeared in every one of The Simpsons video games , including the most recent , The Simpsons Game . Homer also appears as a playable character in the crossover game Lego Dimensions . Alongside the television series , Homer regularly appears in issues of Simpsons Comics , which were first published on November 29 , 1993 , and are still issued monthly . Homer also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride , launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood . 
 = Mother ( video game series ) = 
 The Mother series ( Japanese : マザー , Hepburn : Mazā ) consists of three role @-@ playing video games : the 1989 Mother for the Famicom , the 1994 Mother 2 , known as EarthBound outside of Japan , for the Super NES , and the 2006 Mother 3 for the Game Boy Advance . Written by Shigesato Itoi and published by Nintendo , and featuring game mechanics modeled on the Dragon Quest series , the Mother series is known for its sense of humor , originality , and parody . Set in a late 20th century United States , the player uses weapons and psychic powers to fight hostile , everyday objects . Signature elements of the series include the lighthearted plots , the battle sequences with psychedelic backgrounds , and the " rolling HP meter " : as player health ticks down like an odometer , players can outrun the meter to heal before dying . While the franchise is popular in Japan , in the United States , it is best associated with the cult following behind EarthBound . 
 While visiting Nintendo for other business , Itoi approached Shigeru Miyamoto about making Mother . When approved for a sequel , Itoi increased his involvement as a designer in the five @-@ year development of EarthBound . When the project began to flounder , producer and later Nintendo president Satoru Iwata rescued the game . EarthBound 's English localizers were given great liberties when translating the Japanese game 's cultural allusions . The American version sold poorly despite a multimillion @-@ dollar marketing budget . Mother 3 was originally slated for release on the Nintendo 64 and its 64DD disk drive accessory , but was cancelled in 2000 . Three years later , the project was reannounced for the Game Boy Advance alongside a rerelease of Mother and Mother 2 in a combined cartridge : Mother 1 + 2 , released in 2003 . The new Mother 3 abandoned the 3D graphics progress for a 2D style , and became a bestseller upon its release . EarthBound was rereleased for the Wii U Virtual Console in 2013 , and Mother received its English @-@ language debut in 2015 for the same platform , retitled EarthBound Beginnings . 
 EarthBound is widely regarded as a video game classic , and is included in multiple top ten lists . In absence of continued official support for the series , an EarthBound fan community organized online to advocate for further series releases through petitions and fan art . Their projects include a full fan translation of Mother 3 , a full @-@ length documentary , and a fangame sequel to Mother 3 . The protagonist of EarthBound , Ness , received exposure from his inclusion in all four entries of the Super Smash Bros. series . Other Mother series locations and characters have made appearances in the fighting games . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Mother = = = 
 While visiting Nintendo for other work , celebrity copywriter Shigesato Itoi pitched to the company 's lead designer Shigeru Miyamoto , his idea for a role @-@ playing game set in contemporary times . The modern setting worked against role @-@ playing genre norms , and while Miyamoto liked the idea , he was hesitant until Itoi could show full commitment to the project . Itoi reduced his workload , formed a team , and began development in Ichikawa , Chiba . Nintendo tried to accommodate Itoi 's ideal work environment to feel more like an extracurricular club of volunteers . Itoi wrote the game 's script . Mother was developed by Ape , published by Nintendo , and released in Japan on July 27 , 1989 for the Famicom ( known as the Nintendo Entertainment System outside Japan ) . The game was slated for an English @-@ language localization as Earth Bound , but was abandoned when the team chose to localize Mother 2 instead . Years later , the complete localization was recovered by the public and distributed on the Internet , where it became known as EarthBound Zero . Mother received its English language debut in June 2015 as EarthBound Beginnings for the Wii U Virtual Console . 
 Mother is a single @-@ player , role @-@ playing video game set in a " slightly offbeat " , late 20th century United States ( as interpreted by Itoi ) . Unlike its Japanese role @-@ playing game contemporaries , Mother is not set in a fantasy genre . The player fights in warehouses and laboratories instead of in standard dungeons , and with baseball bats and psychic abilities instead of swords and magic . Mother follows the young Ninten as he uses psychic powers to fight hostile , formerly inanimate objects and other enemies . The game uses random encounters to enter a menu @-@ based , first @-@ person perspective battle system . 
 = = = EarthBound = = = 
 Mother 2 was made with a development team different from that of the original game , and most of its members were unmarried and willing to work through nights on the project . Itoi again wrote the game 's script and served as a designer . The game 's five @-@ year development exceeded time estimates and came under repeated threat of cancellation . It was in dire straits until producer Satoru Iwata joined the team . Mother 2 was developed by Ape and HAL , published by Nintendo , and released in Japan 's Super Famicom on August 27 , 1994 . The game was localized into English in the United States for Western audiences whereupon it became the only Mother series game to be released in North America until the later localization of Mother as Earthbound Beginnings . The localizers were given liberties to translate the Japanese script 's cultural allusions as they pleased . Symbolism was also modified between the versions to adapt to Western sensitivities . To avoid confusion about the series ' numbering , its English title was changed to EarthBound , and was released on June 5 , 1995 for the North American Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Though Nintendo spent about $ 2 million on marketing , the American release was ultimately viewed as unsuccessful within Nintendo . EarthBound was released when RPGs were not popular in the United States , and visual taste in RPGs was closer to Chrono Trigger and Final Fantasy VI . The game 's atypical " this game stinks " marketing campaign was derived from the game 's unusual humor and included foul @-@ smelling scratch and sniff advertisements . 1UP.com called the campaign " infamously ill @-@ conceived " . Between the poor sales and the dwindling support for the Super NES , the game did not receive a European release . 
 The Mother series titles are built on what Itoi considered " reckless wildness " , where he would offer ideas that encouraged his staff to contribute new ways of portraying scenes in the video game medium . He saw the titles foremost as games and not " big scenario scripts " . Itoi has said that he wanted the player feel emotions such as " distraught " when playing the game . The game 's writing was intentionally " quirky and goofy " in character , and written in the Japanese kana script so as to give dialogue a conversational feel . Itoi thought of the default player @-@ character names when he did not like his team 's suggestions . Many of the characters were based on real life personalities . Itoi sought to make the game appeal to populations that played games less , such as girls . 
 Giygas ( / <unk> / , / <unk> / , GEE @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) reappears as the antagonist , and continues Mother 's story ( and thus did not die at the end of Mother ) . By default , the player starts as a young boy named Ness , who finds that the alien force Giygas has enveloped the world in hatred and consequently turned animals , humans , and objects into malicious creatures . A bee from the future instructs Ness to collect melodies in a Sound Stone to preemptively stop the force . While visiting these eight Sanctuaries , Ness meets three other kids named Paula , Jeff , and Poo — " a psychic girl , an eccentric inventor , and a <unk> martial artist " , respectively — who join his party . Along the way , Ness meets the cultists of Happy Happy Village , the zombie @-@ infested Threed , the Winters boarding school , and the kingdom of <unk> . When the Sound Stone is filled , Ness visits Magicant alone , a surreal location in his mind where he fights his dark side . Upon returning to <unk> , he prepares to travel back in time to fight a young Giygas , a battle known for its " feeling of isolation , ... incomprehensible attacks , ... buzzing static " and reliance on prayer . EarthBound plays as a Japanese role @-@ playing game modeled on Dragon Quest . The game is characterized by its contemporary , satirical Western world setting and its unconventional characters , enemies , and humor . Examples of the game 's humor include untraditional enemies such as " New Age Retro Hippie " and " Unassuming Local Guy " , snide dialogue , frequent puns , and fourth wall @-@ breaking . The game also plays self @-@ aware pranks on the player , such as the existence of the useless ruler and protractor items that players and enemies can unsuccessfully try to use nonetheless . 
 = = = Mother 3 = = = 
 In 1996 , a sequel for the Nintendo 64 , Mother 3 ( EarthBound 64 in North America ) , was announced . It was slated for release on the 64DD , a disk drive expansion peripheral for the Nintendo 64 . Itoi 's expansive ideas during development led the development team to question whether fans would still consider the game part of the series . The game entered development hell and struggled to find a firm release date and in 2000 , despite its level of completion , was later cancelled altogether with the commercial failure of the 64DD . 
 The project was reannounced three years later as Mother 3 for the Game Boy Advance alongside a combined Mother 1 + 2 cartridge for the same handheld console . Itoi had been working on porting Mother and Mother 2 to the Game Boy Advance , and based on encouragement what he predicted to be further pressure , decided to release Mother 3 . The new Mother 3 abandoned the Nintendo 64 version 's 3D graphics , but kept its plot . The game was developed by Brownie Brown and HAL Laboratory , published by Nintendo , and released in Japan on April 20 , 2006 , whereupon it became a bestseller . It did not receive a North American release on the basis that it would not sell . 
 Mother 1 + 2 was released in Japan on June 20 , 2003 . The combined cartridge contains both Mother and EarthBound . Mother uses the extended ending of the unreleased English language prototype , but is still only presented in Japanese . 
 Unlike earlier games in the series , Mother 3 is presented in chapters . When the Pig Mask Army starts a forest fire and imposes police state @-@ like conditions on a " pastoral forest village " , a father , Flint , ventures out to protect his family ( twin sons Lucas and Claus and wife Hinawa ) , but the rest of the world is eventually implicated in the plot . Lucas , the game 's hero , does not become prominent until the fourth chapter . Along with his dog , a neophyte thief , and a princess , Lucas fulfills a prophecy of a " chosen one " pulling Needles from the earth to wake a sleeping dragon and determine the fate of the world . The game features a lighthearted plot , with characters such as " partying ghosts " and " talking rope snakes " . Mother 3 is a single @-@ player , simple role @-@ playing video game played with two buttons : one for starting conversations and checking adjacent objects , and another for running . The game updates the turn @-@ based , Dragon Quest @-@ style battle system with a " rhythm @-@ action mechanic " , which lets the player take additional turns to attack the enemy by chaining together up to sixteen taps in time with the background music . Apart from this , the battle system and " rolling HP meter " ( where health ticks down like an odometer such that players can outrun the meter to heal before dying ) are similar to EarthBound . 
 = = = Future of the series = = = 
 Around Mother 3 's 2006 release , Itoi stated that he had no plans to make Mother 4 , which he has reaffirmed repeatedly . Itoi has said that , of the three , he had the strongest drive to create the first Mother video game , and that it was made for the players . He made the second game as an exploration of his personal interests , and wanted to run wild with the third . While reflecting on Mother 3 's 2000 cancellation , Itoi recounted the great efforts the team made to tell small parts of the story , and felt this was a core theme in the series ' development . 
 In the absence of continued support for the series , an EarthBound fan community coalesced at Starmen.net with the intent to have Nintendo of America acknowledge their interest in Mother series . They drafted petitions for English language releases and created a full @-@ color , 270 @-@ page anthology of fan art , Upon " little " response from Nintendo , they localized Mother 3 by themselves and printed a " professional quality strategy guide " through Fangamer , a video game merchandising site that spun off from Starmen.net. The Verge cited the effort as proof of the fan base 's dedication . Other fan efforts include EarthBound , USA , a full @-@ length documentary on Starmen.net and the fan community , and Mother 4 , a fan @-@ produced sequel to the Mother series that went into production when Itoi definitively " declared " that he was done with the series . 
 IGN described the series as neglected by Nintendo in North America , as Mother 1 , Mother 1 + 2 , and Mother 3 were not released outside Japan . Despite this , Ness 's recurrence in the Super Smash Bros. series signaled favorable odds for the future of the Mother series . IGN and Nintendo Power readers anticipated a rerelease of EarthBound on the Wii 's Virtual Console upon its launch in 2006 , but it did not materialize . A Japanese rerelease was announced in 2013 for the Wii U Virtual Console as part of a celebration of the anniversaries of the NES and Mother 2 . North American and European releases for the same platform followed , with Nintendo president Satoru Iwata crediting fan interest on the company 's Miiverse social platform . The game was a " top @-@ seller " on the Wii U Virtual Console , and Kotaku users and first @-@ time EarthBound players had an " overwhelmingly positive " response to the game . Simon Parkin wrote that the game 's rerelease was a " momentous occasion " as the return of " one of Nintendo 's few remaining lost classics " after 20 years . In an interview in late November 2015 , Shigesato Itoi has once again denied plans to create a Mother 4 , despite fan feedback . 
