 = = Recurring elements = = 
 The series is known for its emotionally evocative scripts . Itoi wanted to tell Mother 3 's through a technique that swapped the active player @-@ character , which he first attempted in EarthBound . The two games also share similar visual styles , both with psychedelic battle backgrounds and cartoonish art . While Mother 3 's music is both similar in tone to its predecessors and completely new , it features similar sound effects . EarthBound characters such as Mr. Saturn recur , and RPGamer wrote that Mother 3 's final chapter is " full of blatant links " between the games of the series . Mother also shares similarities with its sequel , such as the game save option through phoning Ninten 's father , an option to store items with Ninten 's sister at home , and an automated teller machine for banking money . Additionally , the members of the party follow behind the protagonist on the overworld screen in the first two games . Ninten 's party members in Mother are analogous to those of EarthBound in style and function . 
 While Mother 's battles were trigged through random encounters , EarthBound and early Mother 3 shared battle scene triggers , where physical contact with an enemy in the overworld began a turn @-@ based battle scene shown in the first @-@ person . Apart from Mother 3 's rhythm and combo battle mechanic , the two game 's battle systems are similar . Mother 3 also retains the " rolling HP meter " of EarthBound ( where health ticks down like an odometer such that players can outrun the meter to heal before dying ) but removes the feature where experience is automatically awarded before battles against much weaker foes . Recurring through the series is its signature " <unk> " text and sound , which show when the player registers a critical hit . 
 Some characters are present in multiple entries of the series , such as Giygas , Mr. Saturn , and Pokey / Porky . Giygas is the primary antagonist in both Mother and EarthBound . The alien creature 's emotional complexity deviates from genre norms . Giygas shows internal conflict in Mother and has no appearance but as an " indescribable " force in EarthBound 's final boss battle . In both final battles , Giygas is defeated through love and prayer instead of through a tour de force of weaponry , unlike the endings of other period games . Nadia Oxford wrote for IGN that nearly two decades later , EarthBound 's final fight against Giygas continues to be " one of the most epic video game standoffs of all time " with noted emotional impact . This battle 's dialogue was based on Itoi 's recollections of a traumatic scene from the <unk> film The Military Policeman and the <unk> Beauty that he had accidentally seen in his childhood . Oxford wrote for 1UP.com that Itoi intended to show the alien 's yearning for love in " a manner ... beyond human understanding " . Despite EarthBound and Mother 3 's dissimilar settings , the Mr. Saturn fictional species appear in similar Saturn Valleys in both games . The Mr. Saturn look like an old man 's head with feet , a large nose , and bald except for a single hair with a bow . Though they are a technologically advanced and peaceful species with a pureness of heart , they are under constant attacks from encroaching enemies . Nadia and David Oxford of 1UP.com considered the Mr. Saturn to be aliens despite their human @-@ like and fleshy appearance , as described a piece arguing the central theme of aliens in the Mother series . They compared the Mr. Saturn to Kurt Vonnegut 's <unk> alien species . Finally , Pokey begins as Ness 's child neighbor who " cowers " and " refuses to fight " in EarthBound , but grows into a " vicious control freak with no regard for human life " , Porky , by the end of the series ' Mother 3 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtracks for Mother and EarthBound were composed by Keiichi Suzuki and Hirokazu Tanaka . The Mother soundtrack was likened by RPGFan reviewer Patrick Gann to compositions by The Beatles and for children 's television shows . He found the lyrics " cheesy and trite " but appreciated the " simple statements " in " Eight Melodies " and the " quirky and wonderful " " Magicant " . The Mother soundtrack contains several tracks later used in subsequent series games . When Suzuki and Tanaka were unavailable to commit to Mother 3 's soundtrack , Itoi chose Shogo Sakai for his experience with and understanding of the series . Sakai worked to make the music feel similar to previous entries in the series . Kyle Miller of RPGFan wrote that the game retained the quirkiness of the previous soundtracks in the series despite the change in composers . He felt that the second half of the album , which included reinterpreted " classics " from the series , to be its strongest . RPGamer 's Jordan Jackson too found that the music was " just as catchy as previous games " despite being " almost completely new " . Luke Plunkett of Kotaku credited Suzuki 's background outside of games composition as a rock star and film scorer for making the music of Mother and EarthBound " so distinct and memorable " as " a synthesized tribute to 20th century pop music " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die , Christian Donlan wrote that the Mother series is a " massive RPG franchise " in Japan comparable to that of Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest , though it does not enjoy the same popularity in the West . IGN described the series as neglected by Nintendo in North America , which only received one of the three Mother releases . Donlan added that the series ' oddities did not lend towards Western popularity . RPGamer 's Jordan Jackson noted that the series is " known for its wacky sense of humor , originality , and its very young protagonists " , and Kotaku 's Luke Plunkett said that the games were distinct from all other video games in that they stirred " genuine emotion in players beyond ... ' excited ' and ' afraid ' " with a " charming " , " touching " , and " tragic " story , which he credited to its creators ' pedigrees from outside the video game industry . 
 Mother received a " Silver Hall of Fame " score of 31 / 40 from Japanese reviewer Weekly Famitsu . Critics noted the game 's similarities with the Dragon Quest series and its simultaneous " parody " of the genre 's tropes . They thought the game 's sequel , EarthBound , to be very similar and a better implementation of Mother 's gameplay ideas , overall . Reviewers also noted the game 's high difficulty level and balance issues . Mother sold 150 @,@ 000 copies . USgamer 's Jeremy Parish said that Mother 's script was " as sharp as EarthBound 's " , but felt that the original 's game mechanics were subpar , lacking the " rolling HP counter " and non @-@ random encounters for which later entries in the series were known . Parish wrote earlier for 1UP.com that in comparison to EarthBound , Mother is " worse in just about every way " , and important less for its actual game and more for the interest it generated in video game emulation and the preservation of unreleased games . 
 EarthBound originally received little critical praise from the American press , and sold poorly in the United States : around 140 @,@ 000 copies , as compared to twice as many in Japan . Kotaku described EarthBound 's 1995 American release as " a dud " and blamed the low sales on " a bizarre marketing campaign " and graphics " cartoonish " beyond the average taste of players . Multiple reviewers described the game as " original " or " unique " and praised its script 's range of emotions , humor , cheery and charming ambiance , and " real world " setting , which was seen as an uncommon choice . Since its release , the game 's English localization has found praise , and later reviewers reported that the game had aged well . 
 Prior to its release , Mother 3 was in the " top five most wanted games " of Famitsu and at the top of the Japanese preordered game charts . It sold around 200 @,@ 000 units in its first week of sales in Japan , and was one of Japan 's top 20 bestselling games for the first half of 2006 . In comparison , the 2003 Mother 1 + 2 rerelease sold around 278 @,@ 000 copies in Japan in its first year , and a reissue " value selection " of the cartridge sold 106 @,@ 000 copies in Japan in 2006 . Mother 3 received a " Platinum Hall of Fame " score of 35 / 40 from Famitsu . Reviewers praised its story ( even though the game was only available in Japanese ) and graphics , and lamented its 1990s role @-@ playing game mechanics . Critics also complimented its music . Jackson said that the game was somewhat easier than the rest of the series and somewhat shorter in length . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The series has a legacy as both " one of Japan 's most beloved " and the video game cognoscenti 's " sacred cow " , and is known for its long @-@ lasting , resilient fan community . At one point leading up to Mother 3 's release , the series ' " Love Theme " played as music on hold for the Japan Post . Similarly , the Eight Melodies theme used throughout the series has been incorporated into Japanese elementary school music classrooms . Donlan of 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die wrote that EarthBound is " name @-@ checked by the video gaming cognoscenti more often than it 's actually been played " . 
 Critics consider EarthBound a " classic " or " must @-@ play " among video games . The game was included in multiple top 50 games of all time lists , including that of Famitsu readers in 2006 and IGN readers in 2005 and 2006 . IGN ranks the game 13th in its top 100 SNES games and 26th among all games for its in @-@ game world , which was " distinct and unforgettable " for its take on Americanism , unconventional settings , and 1960s music . And Gamasutra named it one of its 20 " essential " Japanese role @-@ playing games . The rerelease was Justin Haywald of GameSpot 's game of the year , and Nintendo Life 's Virtual Console game of the year . GameZone said it " would be a great disservice " to merely call EarthBound " a gem " . In the United Kingdom , where EarthBound had been previously unreleased , GamesTM noted how it had been " anecdotally heralded as a retro classic " . IGN 's Scott Thompson said the game was " the true definition of a classic " . Kotaku wrote that the game was content to make the player " feel lonely " , and , overall , was special not for any individual aspect but for its method of using the video game medium to explore ideas impossible to explore in other media . 
 Multiple critics wrote that Mother 3 was one of the best role @-@ playing games for the Game Boy Advance . GamePro 's Jeremy Signor listed it among his " best unreleased Japanese role @-@ playing games " for its script and attention to detail . Video game journalist Tim Rogers posited that Mother 3 was " the closest games have yet come to literature " . There are no plans for an official Mother 4 . 
 The series , and specifically EarthBound , is known for having a cult following that developed over time well after its release . Colin Campbell of Polygon wrote that " few gaming communities are as passionate and active " as EarthBound 's , and 1UP.com 's Bob Mackey wrote that no game was as poised to have a cult following . Starmen.net hosted a Mother 25th Anniversary <unk> in 2014 with a livestream of the game and plans for a remixed soundtrack . Later that year , fans released a 25th Anniversary Edition ROM hack that updated the game 's graphics , script , and gameplay balance . The Verge cited the two @-@ year @-@ long Mother 3 fan translation as proof of the fan base 's dedication , and Jenni Lada of TechnologyTell called it " undoubtably one of the best known fan translations in existence " , with active <unk> into other languages . Frank Caron of Ars Technica said that the fan translation 's " massive undertaking ... stands as a massive success " , and that " one cannot even begin to fathom " why Nintendo would not release their own English localization . 
 = = = Super Smash Bros. = = = 
 EarthBound 's Ness became widely known due to his later appearance in the Super Smash Bros. series . He appeared in the original Super Smash Bros. and its sequels : Melee , Brawl , and 3DS / Wii U. In Europe , which did not see an original EarthBound release , Ness is better known for his role in the fighting game than for his original role in the role @-@ playing game . He returned in the 2001 Melee with EarthBound 's Mr. Saturn , which could be thrown at enemies and otherwise pushes items off the battlefield . Melee also had an unlockable Fourside level based on the EarthBound location . Ness was joined by Mother 3 's Lucas in Brawl , and both characters returned in 3DS / Wii U , its sequel . Players can fight in the 3DS 's Magicant stage , which features clips from the Mother series in its background . 
 = Delaware Route 62 = 
 Delaware Route 62 ( DE 62 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware in the United States . The route officially runs from Old Capitol Trail in Prices Corner east to a dead end near Newport ; however , DE 62 is signed from an intersection with DE 2 and the southern terminus of DE 41 in Prices Corner to the DE 4 intersection . The road runs through suburban areas along Newport Gap Pike and Boxwood Road , interchanging with DE 141 . The Newport Gap Pike portion of road was built as a state highway by 1925 and became part of DE 41 by 1936 . Boxwood Road was improved in 1946 . DE 62 was assigned to its current alignment by 1981 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 62 heads southeast from Old Capitol Trail on the Newport Gap Pike , a two @-@ lane undivided road . Newport Gap Pike continues northwest past this intersection to DE 2 ( Kirkwood Highway ) , where the road becomes DE 41 . Signage has DE 62 follow Newport Gap Pike northwest to the DE 2 / DE 41 intersection . DE 62 heads through suburban residential and commercial developments , crossing the Wilmington and Western Railroad and CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision . The road passes more development and reaches the community of Belvedere , where it comes to a ramp from southbound DE 141 . 
 At this point , the route turns east onto Boxwood Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway , with Newport Gap Pike continuing south to provide access to southbound DE 141 . DE 62 passes over the DE 141 freeway and intersects Centerville Road , which provides access to and from northbound DE 141 . Past this intersection , the road becomes two lanes and undivided , passing to the south of the former Wilmington Assembly plant used by General Motors and to the north of residential subdivisions . DE 62 continues through more residential neighborhoods , passing to the north of the Conrad Schools of Science , and reaches an intersection with DE 4 , where DE 62 signage ends . The route officially continues east on <unk> Road through more neighborhoods , intersecting Dupont Road before coming to a dead end . DE 62 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 13 @,@ 544 vehicles at the DE 141 interchange to a low of 262 vehicles at the eastern terminus . None of DE 62 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now the Newport Gap Pike portion of DE 62 was originally chartered as the Gap and Newport Turnpike in 1808 , an extension of the 1807 @-@ chartered turnpike in Pennsylvania that was to run from Gap , Pennsylvania , southeast to Newport , Delaware . By 1920 , what is now DE 62 existed as a county road . The Newport Gap Pike portion of the route became a state highway by 1925 . This state highway became a part of DE 41 by 1936 , when Delaware designated its state highways . In 1946 , Boxwood Road was improved to provide access to the new General Motors plant along the road . By 1981 , DE 62 was designated onto its current alignment , with the Newport Gap Pike section replacing a portion of DE 41 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Graveyard Mountain Home = 
 Graveyard Mountain Home is the third studio album released under the name Chroma Key by American keyboardist Kevin Moore . It was released on November 8 , 2004 by InsideOut Music . Moore originally started work on the album in 2003 , planning to release a less electronica @-@ influenced album than previous Chroma Key albums , but put it aside to work on the first OSI album . He then moved to Istanbul , Turkey , where he wrote Ghost Book , the soundtrack to the film Okul . Enjoying the experience of writing music to film , Moore scrapped his previous plans for the third Chroma Key album , instead writing an album as an alternate soundtrack to an already @-@ existing film . 
 Moore found the social guidance film Age 13 in the Prelinger Archives , which served as his main inspiration . He slowed the film down to half its original playback speed to allow a full album to be written around the twenty @-@ five @-@ minute film . With complete creative control over the album , Moore was free to experiment , sometimes writing music " not necessarily to always match the images on the screen , but to sometimes play against it . " The deluxe edition of the album contains the film in its full length , played at half speed , with the album as a soundtrack in place of the original audio . 
 Critical reception of Graveyard Mountain Home was generally positive . Critics noted that the album was a departure from Moore 's previous works , and that it was best experienced as an alternate soundtrack to Age 13 . Moore played songs from Graveyard Mountain Home live for the first time in a small club in Istanbul in 2007 , and planned to tour more extensively in the future . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview published in December 2003 , Kevin Moore revealed that he had started work on a third Chroma Key album , but had put it aside to work on the first OSI album , Office of Strategic Influence . When Moore stopped working on Chroma Key material , he had already recorded two songs . " The big difference with the new [ Chroma Key album ] is that there are more real instruments , " Moore said . " I 've hooked up with a bunch of friends that made hand drums and <unk> . And I did a lot of recording with that . This new Chroma Key is going to be more organic , and less digital . " 
 Theron Patterson , a friend of Moore 's and former classmate at California Institute of the Arts , was working in Istanbul , Turkey and invited Moore to visit . Moore , who had been living in Costa Rica , stayed with him for two weeks , then decided to settle in Istanbul and record the third Chroma Key album there . Moore signed to InsideOut Records . " They 've been really great supporting this ; they sent me out to Turkey when I told them I wanted to record out there , basically supporting the whole process , " he said . The first project Moore worked on after he moved to Istanbul was Ghost Book , the soundtrack to the Turkish film Okul . Moore enjoyed the experience and decided to write the third Chroma Key album as an alternate soundtrack to an already @-@ existing film . 
 Moore decided to use a film in the public domain to avoid any rights issues . He looked through the Prelinger Archives to find a film which matched the mood he wanted for the Chroma Key album . One of the first films he found was the social guidance film Age 13 . " It was kind of rich for musical accompaniment and the cinematography and everything is really beautiful , kind of surreal , " Moore said . The film served as Moore 's main inspiration and source of audio samples . 
 When deciding on musicians to perform on the album , Moore said that he " picked people who were around " . His girlfriend , Bige Akdeniz , performed vocals , Theron Patterson did programming and Patterson 's drum teacher , Utku <unk> , performed the drums . The only musician Moore actively sought out was guitarist Erdem <unk> , who performed on one track . Moore noted that none of the music was technically demanding , " it 's just more of a feel that we ’ re going for so it was just a matter of getting comfortable and getting in the mood and playing stuff together . " 
 Moore ranked Graveyard Mountain Home as the most enjoyable project he had worked on up to that point . " I never felt like ' Oh fuck I have to finish this record , I have to do one more song , I have to do something to this song to make it better , ' " Moore said . He described the process of making the album as feeling " more like I was playing with this film and I was playing against it so it felt easy somehow " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Moore wrote music to Age 13 slowed down to half its original playback speed . This allowed him to write an album 's worth of music around the twenty @-@ five minute film and " made [ the film ] flow better " . Moore primarily worked alone in his home studio , recording short song ideas . " I would place [ the ideas ] inside a theme in the film , just sort of audition things that might work , and something would click and I would develop the idea , " Moore said . In contrast to Moore 's original plan to record an " organic , and less digital " album , all of the sounds on Graveyard Mountain Home are digital . 
 Unlike in a traditional film soundtrack , Moore often wrote music " not necessarily to always match the images on the screen , but to sometimes play against it . " Moore explained that a traditional soundtrack needs to convey the mood of the scene and advance the film 's storyline , but that he did not have to do that with Graveyard Mountain Home " because the director 's not around " . " I thought , well what would it be like if I did a totally different kind of mood than this scene is trying to convey ? When you put that music with that scene what happens there ? Sometimes it 's kind of interesting what happens , " Moore explained . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Graveyard Mountain Home was released on November 8 , 2004 by InsideOut Music . A special edition of the album , including a DVD with the film Age 13 on it , was also released . Moore originally planned to tour in support of Graveyard Mountain Home , but nothing materialized . In a 2005 interview , Moore said he was still trying to organize a tour . He was optimistic that he would play " at least a couple shows " , but noted that getting the funding to tour made the process " a constant battle " . 
 Moore performed his first solo show at a small club in Istanbul on March 23 , 2007 . The hour @-@ long show consisted primarily of material from Graveyard Mountain Home , which was accompanied by projections of the corresponding scenes from Age 13 . " I thought that it would be good for the first show to be sort of small and comfortable ... so I thought we [ could ] just have a hundred people , " Moore said . " Everybody can see , everybody can be comfortable and sort of enjoy themselves . And if something goes horribly wrong , it only happens in front of a hundred people . " Moore hoped the show would form the basis of more elaborate , longer shows . He planned on playing more shows in Turkey , before touring Europe and the rest of the world . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Graveyard Mountain Home was generally well received . Rick Anderson of Allmusic regarded the album as " a surprisingly affecting and powerful work . " Writing for Sea of Tranquility , Michael Popke noted that " If you listen to Graveyard Mountain Home as a stand @-@ alone piece of music ... you probably won 't be overly impressed . If , however , you hear this sophisticated mix of dark , ambient post @-@ rock and psychedelic sounds while viewing the 1955 public @-@ domain film Age 13 , you may consider multi @-@ instrumentalist Kevin Moore a small @-@ time genius . " Popke speculated that if Moore created more albums based on obscure films , " he might just alter the face of the genre . " <unk> Koolen of <unk> described Graveyard Mountain Home as " a typical album for dark , wintry afternoons , " although conceded that " it is not [ his ] cup of tea . " 
 Koolen described the music as having " absolutely no connection or Dream Theater influences whatsoever ... Kevin Moore mixes dark ambient , post @-@ rock and psychedelic music to create Chroma Key ’ s music . " He compared the album 's sound to that of Tortoise , <unk> Nova , Sigur Rós and early Pink Floyd . Anderson said that the album " sounds more like a twisted collaboration between Gábor Csupó and <unk> than anything else you 're likely to hear on the InsideOut label . " 
 Rachel Jablonski of Stream of Consciousness described the overall feel of the album as " somewhat calm and bleak . Yet throughout , a distant brightness prevails whether via musical tone or mental imagery in a very subtle way . " Anderson said that the music " at times is funky in a glitchy , herky @-@ jerky sort of way ... and at others is dark and meditative " . He noted that there were some " traditional " songs on the album , singling out " Sad Sad Movie " , which he described as " gorgeous " . Koolen considered " Human Love " and " Andrew Was Drowning His Stepfather " to be the " weirdest songs ... which can hardly be described as music " . 
 Popke noted that although he saw little connection between the music and the film , Moore " expresses the mood of each scene brilliantly . " He found that watching Age 13 with Graveyard Mountain Home as the soundtrack enhanced the film : " Age 13 is not necessarily an enjoyable film to watch ... but viewing it with the Chroma Key soundtrack makes an odd experience even odder yet wholly compelling , with a mysterious filmstrip allure that freezes a bygone era . " Conversely , Jablonski considered Age 13 as an enhancement to the music . " Listening to the album stand alone for the first time you may not be much impressed , " she said . " The music is solemn and somewhat confusing as the tracks run from one to another without much build and in seemingly senseless patterns ... Having previously seen or simultaneously watching Age 13 most definitely would help the listener along . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kevin Moore , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Kevin Moore – vocals , guitars , keyboard , programming 
 Utku <unk> – drums 
 Theron Patterson – programming on tracks 2 , 8 , and 14 ; bass 
 Bige Akdeniz – additional vocals on tracks 9 and 13 
 Bob Nekrasov – monologue on track 8 
 Erdem <unk> – additional guitar on track 3 
 = William S. Taylor = 
 William Sylvester Taylor ( October 10 , 1853 – August 2 , 1928 ) was the 33rd Governor of Kentucky . He was initially declared the winner of the disputed gubernatorial election of 1899 , but the Kentucky General Assembly , dominated by the Democrats , reversed the election results , giving the victory to his Democratic Party ( United States ) opponent , William Goebel . Taylor served only 50 days as governor . 
 A poorly educated but politically astute lawyer , Taylor began climbing the political ladder by holding local offices in his native Butler County . Though he was a Republican in an overwhelmingly Democratic state , divisions in the majority party resulted in his election as Attorney General of Kentucky on a ticket with the Commonwealth 's first Republican governor , William O. Bradley . Four years later , Taylor was elected in 1899 to the governorship . 
 When the General Assembly reversed the election results after a dispute , incensed Republicans armed themselves and descended on Frankfort . Taylor 's Democratic opponent , William Goebel , was shot and died after being sworn in on his deathbed . Taylor exhausted his finances in a legal battle with Goebel 's running mate J. C. W. Beckham over the governorship . Taylor ultimately lost the battle , and was implicated in Goebel 's assassination . He fled to neighboring Indiana . Despite eventually being pardoned for any wrongdoing , he seldom returned to Kentucky . Taylor died in Indianapolis , Indiana in 1928 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Taylor was born October 10 , 1853 in a log cabin on the Green River , about five miles from Morgantown , Kentucky . He was the first child of Sylvester and Mary G. ( Moore ) Taylor . He spent his early years working on the family farm , and did not attend school until age fifteen ; thereafter , he attended the public schools of Butler County and studied at home . In 1874 , he began teaching , specializing in mathematics , history , and politics . He taught until 1882 , and later became a successful attorney , but continued to operate a farm . 
 On February 10 , 1878 , Taylor married Sara ( " Sallie " ) Belle Tanner . The couple had nine children , including six daughters and a son that survived infancy . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Taylor 's political career began in 1878 with an unsuccessful bid to become county clerk of Butler County . In 1880 , he was an assistant presidential elector for Greenback candidate James Weaver . Two years later , he was elected county clerk of Butler County . He was the first person in the history of the county to successfully challenge a Democrat for this position . 
 Taylor became a member of the Republican Party in 1884 . In 1886 , he was chosen to represent the third district on the Republican state central committee . That same year , the party nominated a full slate of candidates for county offices , including Taylor as the nominee for county judge . In the ensuing elections , the full Republican slate was elected . Taylor was a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1888 . He was re @-@ elected as county judge in 1890 . 
 In 1895 , Taylor was elected Attorney General of Kentucky , and served until 1899 . During his term , state senator William Goebel proposed an election law that created a state Board of Elections which was empowered to appoint all election officers in every county and certify all election results . The Board was to be appointed by the General Assembly , and there were no requirements that its composition be bi @-@ partisan . The law was widely seen as a power play by Goebel , designed to ensure Democratic victories in state elections , including Goebel 's own anticipated run for governor . The law passed the General Assembly , but was vetoed by Republican governor William O. Bradley . The General Assembly promptly overrode the veto . As attorney general , Taylor opined that the bill was unconstitutional . The measure was adjudicated by the Kentucky Court of Appeals and found to be constitutional . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election of 1899 = = = 
 Bradley 's election in 1895 had marked the first time in Kentucky 's history that the Commonwealth had elected a Republican governor . Angry Democrats , who had controlled the governorship since the fall of the Whig Party , sought to regain what they had lost . Bitter divisions in the party led to a contentious convention that nominated William Goebel as the party candidate . A faction of the Democratic Party held a second nominating convention and chose former governor John Y. Brown as their nominee . 
 The Republicans were initially no less divided than the Democrats . Senator William J. Deboe backed Taylor for governor . Governor Bradley backed Judge Clifton J. Pratt of Hopkins County , and the Republicans of Central Kentucky backed state auditor Sam H. Stone . Taylor organized a strong political machine and seemed in a solid position to obtain the nomination . Bradley was incensed that the party would not unite behind his candidate and boycotted the convention . Taylor unsuccessfully tried to woo him back with a promise to make his nephew , Edwin P. Morrow , secretary of state . Because Taylor represented the western part of the state , the so @-@ called " lily white " branch of the Republican Party , black leaders also threatened not to support him ; Taylor responded by hiring one of the black leaders his permanent secretary , and promised to appoint other black leaders to office if he won the election . Seeing that Taylor 's nomination was likely , all the other candidates withdrew , and Taylor won the nomination unanimously . 
 During the campaign , Taylor was attacked by Democratic opponents because of his party 's support from black voters and its ties to big business , including the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . They also charged that Governor Bradley had run a corrupt administration . Republicans answered with charges of factionalism and use of political machinery by Democrats . In particular , they derided the Goebel Election Law , which Taylor claimed subverted the will of the people . 
 Ex @-@ Confederates were usually a safe voting bloc for the Democrats , but many of them deserted Goebel because he had , in 1895 , killed former Confederate general John Sanford in a duel . On the other hand , blacks had historically been a safe bloc for the Republicans , but Taylor had alienated many of them by not strongly opposing the Separate Coach Bill , which would have racially segregated railroad facilities . Goebel also risked losing support to minor party candidates . Besides John Y. Brown , the dissenting Democrats ' nominee , the Populist Party nominated a candidate , drawing votes from Goebel 's populist base . To unite his traditional base , Goebel convinced William Jennings Bryan , a hero to most populists and Democrats , to campaign for him . As soon as Bryan finished his tour of the state , Governor Bradley reversed course and began speaking in favor of Taylor . While Bradley insisted that his motives were to defend his administration , journalist Henry Watterson believed Taylor had promised to support Bradley 's senatorial bid if elected . 
 = = = Governorship and later life = = = 
 In the general election , Taylor secured just 2 @,@ 383 more votes than Goebel . The Democrat @-@ controlled General Assembly challenged the election results . Under the Goebel Election Law , a three @-@ man Board of Elections ( dominated by Democrats ) were to review the results and certify the winner in the contest . Two of the members of the board had openly campaigned for Goebel , and all three owed their appointments to him , but in a surprising decision , the Board voted 2 — 1 to certify Taylor as the winner . 
 The Board claimed that the Goebel Election Law did not give them the power to hear proof of vote fraud or call witnesses , although the wording of their decision implied that they would have invalidated Taylor votes if they had been empowered to do so . Taylor was inaugurated on December 12 , 1899 . Days later , the Democratic @-@ dominated General Assembly convened in Frankfort . They claimed the power to decide disputed elections , and formed a partisan commission ( ten Democrats and one Republican ) to examine the election results . 
 Fearing Democrats in the Assembly would " steal " the election , armed men came to Frankfort from various areas of the state , primarily Eastern Kentucky , which was heavily Republican . On January 30 , Goebel was shot while entering the state capitol building . Taylor declared a state of emergency and called out the militia . He called a special session of the legislature , holding it in heavily Republican London , Kentucky rather than the capital . Democrats refused to heed the call , and met in Democratic @-@ dominated Louisville instead . They certified the election commission 's report that disqualified enough Taylor votes for Goebel to be declared the winner of the election . Shortly after being sworn in as governor , Goebel died from the gunshot wound he had received days earlier . 
 With Goebel dead , Democrats and Republicans met jointly and drafted a proposal to bring peace . Under terms of the proposal , Taylor and his lieutenant governor , John Marshall , would step down from their offices and be granted immunity from prosecution in the events surrounding the election and Goebel 's assassination . The Goebel Election Law would be repealed , and the militia would disperse from Frankfort . Prominent leaders on both sides signed the agreement , but on February 10 , 1900 , Taylor announced he would not . The legislature convened on February 19 , 1900 and agreed to put the election in the hands of the courts . 
 On March 10 , 1900 , the circuit court of Jefferson County upheld the General Assembly 's actions that certified Goebel as governor . The case was appealed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals , then the court of last resort in Kentucky . On April 6 , 1900 , the Court of Appeals ruled 6 — 1 that Taylor had been legally unseated . Taylor appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States , and on May 21 , 1900 , the Court refused to hear the case . Only Kentuckian John Marshall Harlan dissented from this refusal . With Taylor 's legal options exhausted , Goebel 's lieutenant governor , J. C. W. Beckham , ascended to the governorship . During his short term as governor , Taylor had done little beyond making a few appointments and issuing a few pardons . 
 Taylor was indicted as an accessory in the assassination of Goebel . He fled to Indianapolis , where the governor refused to extradite him . At least one attempt to abduct him by force failed in 1901 . Despite being pardoned in 1909 by Republican Governor Augustus E. Willson , Taylor seldom returned to Kentucky . 
 Financially strapped by the costs of challenging the election , Taylor became an insurance executive and practiced law . Shortly after arriving in Indiana , his wife died . In 1912 , he briefly returned to Kentucky to marry Nora A. Myers . The couple returned to Indianapolis and had a son together . Taylor died of heart disease on August 2 , 1928 , and was buried at the Crown Hill Cemetery in Indianapolis . 
 = Dave Arneson = 
 David Lance " Dave " Arneson ( October 1 , 1947 – April 7 , 2009 ) was an American game designer best known for co @-@ developing the first published role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) , Dungeons & Dragons , with Gary Gygax , in the early 1970s . Arneson 's early work was fundamental to the development of the genre , developing the concept of the RPG using devices now considered to be archetypical , such as adventuring in " dungeons " , using a neutral judge , and having conversations with imaginary characters to develop the storyline . 
 Arneson discovered wargaming as a teenager in the 1960s , and began combining these games with the concept of role @-@ playing . He was a University of Minnesota student when he met Gygax at the Gen Con gaming convention in the late 1960s . In 1970 Arneson created the game and fictional world that became Blackmoor , writing his own rules and basing the setting on medieval fantasy elements . Arneson showed the game to Gygax the following year , and the pair co @-@ developed a set of rules that became Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) . Gygax subsequently founded TSR , Inc. to publish the game in 1974 . Arneson worked briefly for the company . 
 Arneson left TSR in 1976 , and filed suit in 1979 to retain credits and royalties on the game . He continued to work as an independent game designer , briefly worked for TSR again in the 1980s , and continued to play games for his entire life . Arneson also did some work in computer programming , and taught computer game design and game rules design at Full Sail University from the 1990s until shortly before his death in 2009 . 
 = = Experience with miniature wargaming = = 
 Arneson 's role @-@ playing game design work grew from his interest in wargames . His parents bought him the board wargame Gettysburg by Avalon Hill in the early 1960s . After Arneson taught his friends how to play , the group began to design their own games and tried out new ways to play existing games . Arneson was especially fond of naval wargames . Exposure to role @-@ playing influenced his later game designs . In college history classes he role @-@ played historical events , and preferred to deviate from recorded history in a manner similar to " what if " scenarios recreated in wargames . 
 In the late 1960s Arneson joined the Midwest Military Simulation Association ( <unk> ) , a group of miniature wargamers and military figurine collectors in the Minneapolis @-@ St. Paul area that included among its ranks future game designer David Wesely . Wesely asserts that it was during the Braunstein games he created and refereed , and in which other <unk> members participated , that Arneson helped develop the foundations of modern role @-@ playing games on a 1 : 1 scale basis by focusing on non @-@ combat objectives — a step away from wargaming towards the more individual play and varied challenges of later RPGs . Arneson was a participant in Wesely 's wargame scenarios , and as Arneson continued to run his own scenarios he eventually expanded them to include ideas from The Lord of the Rings and Dark Shadows . Arneson took over the <unk> when Wesely was drafted into the Army , and often ran them in different eras with different settings . Arneson had also become a member of the International Federation of Wargamers by this time . 
 In 1969 Arneson was a history student at the University of Minnesota and working part @-@ time as a security guard . He attended the second Gen Con gaming convention in August 1969 ( at which time wargaming was still the primary focus ) and it was at this event that he met Gary Gygax , who had founded the Castle & Crusade Society within the International Federation of Wargamers in the 1960s at Lake Geneva , Wisconsin , not far from Arneson 's home in Minnesota . Arneson and Gygax also shared an interest in sailing ship games and they co @-@ authored the Don 't Give Up The Ship ! naval battle rules , serialized from June 1971 and later published as a single volume in 1972 by Guidon Games with a revised edition by TSR , Inc. in 1975 . 
 = = Blackmoor = = 
 Following the departure of David Wesely to armed service duty in October 1970 , Arneson began to imagine a medieval fantasy style Braunstein wherein the players explored the dungeons of a castle inhabited by fantastic monsters . Arneson adjusted his <unk> to allow players to play themselves in the Barony of Blackmoor , where they would escort caravans , fight against the forces of evil , and delve into the sewers beneath Castle Blackmoor - which originated in a plastic kit that Arneson had of a Sicilian castle . Originally Arneson played his own mix of rules and used rock , paper , scissors to resolve combat , but later adapted elements from his naval wargame rules which had an armor class system like that later used in D & D. " I had spent the previous two days watching about five monster movies on channel 5 ’ s ' Creature Feature ' weekend , reading several Conan books ( I cannot recall which ones , but I always thought they were all pretty much the same ) , and stuffing myself with popcorn , doodling on a piece of graph paper . At the time , I was quite tired of my Nappy ( Napoleonic ) campaign with all its rigid rules and was rebelling against it . " The Fantasy combat system appearing in the Chainmail rules , written by Gygax and Jeff Perren and published in the spring of 1971 , were also applied for a short time . Finding those lacking , Arneson wrote modified rules to apply to his role @-@ playing game scenarios . The game that evolved from those modifications to Chainmail was the game Blackmoor , which modern players of D & D would describe as a campaign setting rather than a " complete game . " The gameplay would be recognizable to modern D & D players , featuring the use of fixed hit points , armor class , character development , and dungeon crawls . This setting was fleshed out over time and continues to be played to the present day . Arneson described Blackmoor as " roleplaying in a non @-@ traditional medieval setting . I have such things as steam power , gunpowder , and submarines in limited numbers . There was even a tank running around for a while . The emphasis is on the story and the roleplaying . " Details of Blackmoor and the original campaign , which was by then established on the map of the Castle & Crusade Society 's " Great Kingdom " , were first brought to print briefly in issue # 13 of the Domesday Book , the newsletter of the Castle & Crusade Society in July 1972 , and later in much @-@ expanded form as The First Fantasy Campaign , published by Judges Guild in 1977 . 
 Although much of what was later deemed to be " Tolkien @-@ influenced " in D & D and the concept of adventuring in " dungeons " originated with Blackmoor , as a setting it was not purely fantasy @-@ oriented , as it incorporated recent history and science fiction elements . These are visible much later in the DA module series published by TSR ( particularly City of the Gods ) , but were also present from the early to mid @-@ 1970s in the original campaign and parallel and intertwined games run by John Snider , whose ruleset developed from these adventures and was intended for publication by TSR from 1974 as the first science fiction RPG . 
 = = Dungeons & Dragons = = 
 In November 1972 , Arneson and David Megarry traveled to Lake Geneva to meet with Gary Gygax . Arneson thought that Gygax would be interested in Megarry 's Dungeon ! boardgame , which Megarry had developed as a player in Blackmoor , and Gygax had expressed a desire to play a game of Blackmoor itself . After playing in the Blackmoor game Arneson refereed , Gygax almost immediately began a similar campaign of his own which he called Greyhawk and asked Arneson for a draft of his playing rules . The two then collaborated by phone and mail , and playtesting carried out by their various groups and other contacts . Gygax and Arneson wanted to publish the game , but Guidon Games and Avalon Hill rejected it . Arneson could not afford to invest in the venture . 
 Gygax felt that there was a need to publish the game as soon as possible , since similar projects were being planned elsewhere , so rules were hastily put together and Arneson 's own final draft was never used . Despite all this , Brian Blume eventually provided the funding required to publish the original Dungeons & Dragons set in 1974 , with the initial print run of 1 @,@ 000 selling out within a year and sales increasing rapidly in subsequent years . Further rules and a sample dungeon from Arneson 's original campaign ( the first published RPG scenario in a professional publication ) were released in 1975 in the Blackmoor supplement for D & D , named after the campaign setting . The supplement offered little in the way of details from Arneson 's actual campaign , however . Blackmoor showed D & D as Arneson imagined it ; as he had not been able to work with the final proofs of the original game , this was his first opportunity to present his take on the game . He included new classes for monks and assassins , more monsters , and " The Temple of the Frog " , the first published RPG adventure for other people to run . Although the book bore the setting 's name , it focused more on Arneson 's house rules rather than background material . 
 Arneson formally joined TSR as their Director of Research at the beginning of 1976 but left at the end of the year to pursue a career as an independent game designer . 
 = = After TSR = = 
 In 1977 , despite the fact that he was no longer at TSR , Arneson published <unk> 's Index , a 38 @-@ page booklet that indexed all of TSR 's D & D properties to that point in time , including Chainmail , the original 3 @-@ book set of D & D , the five D & D supplements ( Greyhawk ; Blackmoor ; Eldritch Wizardry ; Gods , Demi @-@ gods & Heroes ; and Swords & Spells ) , and all seven issues of The Strategic Review . 
 TSR had agreed to pay Arneson royalties on all D & D products , but when the company came out with Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) in 1977 , it claimed that this was a significantly different product and did not pay him royalties . In response , Arneson filed the first of five lawsuits against Gygax and TSR in 1979 . In March 1981 , as part of a confidential agreement , Arneson and Gygax resolved the suits out of court by agreeing that they would both be credited as " co @-@ creators " on the packaging of D & D products from that point on , but the court ruled that Arneson was not due monies for the AD & D game . This did not end the lingering tensions between them . ( Twenty years later , Wizards of the Coast ( WotC ) bought TSR and wanted to drop the word " Advanced " from its planned third edition of D & D. WotC CEO Peter Adkison approached Arneson to resolve the two @-@ decade @-@ old issue and Arneson released all claims to D & D for an undisclosed sum of money . ) 
 Arneson wrote up the Blackmoor setting for Judges Guild in The First Fantasy Campaign ( 1977 ) . In 1979 Arneson and Richard L. Snider , an original Blackmoor player , co @-@ authored Adventures in Fantasy , a role @-@ playing game that attempted to recapture the " original spirit of the Role Playing Fantasy Game " that Arneson had envisioned in the early 1970s , instead of what D & D had become . In the early 1980s he established his own game company , Adventure Games - staffed largely by Arneson 's friends , most of whom were also members of a Civil War reenactment group - that produced the miniatures games Harpoon ( 1981 ) and Johnny Reb ( 1983 ) , as well as a new edition of his own Adventures in Fantasy role @-@ playing game ( 1981 ) . The company also put out about a half @-@ dozen <unk> related books , due to Arneson 's friendship with M. A. R. Barker . Adventure Games was profitable , but Arneson found the workload to be excessive and finally sold the company to Flying Buffalo . Flying Buffalo picked up the rights to Adventure Games in 1985 ; because Arneson owned a portion of Flying Buffalo , he let them take care of the rest of the company 's stock and IP when he shut the company down . 
 While Gary Gygax was president of TSR in the mid @-@ 1980s , he and Arneson reconnected , and Arneson briefly <unk> Blackmoor to D & D with the " DA " ( Dave Arneson ) series of modules set in Blackmoor ( 1986 – 1987 ) . The four modules , three of which were written by Arneson , detailed Arneson 's campaign setting for the first time . When Gygax was forced out of TSR , Arneson was removed from the company before a planned fifth module could be published . Gygax and Arneson again went their separate ways . In 1986 Arneson wrote a new D & D module set in Blackmoor called " The Garbage Pits of Despair " , which was published in two parts in Different Worlds magazine issues # 42 and # 43 . 
 In 1988 Arneson stated his belief that RPGs , whether paper or computer , were still " hack and slash " and did not teach novices how to play , and that games like Ultima IV " have stood pretty much alone as quirks instead of trend setters " as others did not follow their innovations . He hoped that computer RPGs would teach newcomers how to role play while offering interesting campaigns , and said that SSI 's Gold Box games did not innovate on the genre as much as he had hoped . Arneson stepped into the computer industry and founded 4D Interactive Systems , a computer company in Minnesota that is still in business today . He also did some computer programming and worked on several games . He eventually found himself consulting with computer companies . 
 Living in California in the late 1980s , Arneson had a chance to work with special education children . Upon returning to Minnesota , he pursued teaching and began speaking at schools about educational uses of role @-@ playing and using multi @-@ sided dice to teach math . In the 1990s he began working at Full Sail , a private university that teaches multimedia subjects , and continued there as a professor of computer game design until 2008 . 
 In 1997 , after Wizards of the Coast purchased TSR , Peter Adkison wrote a check to Arneson to free up D & D from royalties owed to Arneson ; this allowed Wizards to retitle Advanced Dungeons & Dragons to simply Dungeons & Dragons . Around 2000 , Arneson was working with videographer John <unk> on Dragons in the Basement , a video documentary on the early history of role @-@ playing games . Arneson describes the documentary : " Basically it is a series of interviews with original players ( ' How did D & D affect your life ? ' ) and original RPG designers like Marc Miller ( Traveller ) and <unk> Barker ( Empire of the Petal Throne ) . " He also made a cameo appearance in the Dungeons & Dragons movie as one of many mages throwing fireballs at a dragon , although the scene was deleted from the completed movie . Arneson and Dustin Clingman founded Zeitgeist Games to produce an updated d20 System version of the Blackmoor setting . Goodman Games published and distributed Dave Arneson 's Blackmoor in 2004 , and Goodman produced a few more Blackmoor products in the next year . Code Monkey Publishing released Dave Arneson 's Blackmoor : The First Campaign ( 2009 ) for 4th edition D & D. 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Arneson married Frankie Ann Morneau in 1984 ; they had one daughter , Malia , and two grandchildren . 
 Arneson continued to play games his entire life , including D & D and military miniature games , and regularly attended an annual meeting to play the original Blackmoor in Minnesota . At Full Sail University he taught the class " Rules of the Game " , a class in which students learned how to accurately document and create rule sets for games that were balanced between mental challenges for the players and " physical " ones for the characters . He retired from the position on June 19 , 2008 . 
 Arneson died on April 7 , 2009 , after battling cancer for two years . According to his daughter , Malia <unk> , " The biggest thing about my dad 's world is he wanted people to have fun in life ... I think we get distracted by the everyday things you have to do in life and we forget to enjoy life and have fun . " 
 = = Honors and tributes = = 
 Arneson received numerous industry awards for his part in creating Dungeons & Dragons and other role @-@ playing games . In 1984 he was inducted into the Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts and Design 's Hall of Fame and in 1999 was named by Pyramid magazine as one of The Millennium 's Most Influential Persons , " at least in the realm of adventure gaming " . He was honored as a " famous game designer " by being featured on the king of hearts in Flying Buffalo 's 2008 Famous Game Designers Playing Card Deck . 
 Three days after his death , Wizards of the Coast temporarily replaced the front page of the Dungeons & Dragons section of their web site with a tribute to Arneson . Other tributes in the gaming world included Order of the Stick # 644 , and Dork Tower for April 8 , 2009 . 
 Video game publisher Activision Blizzard posted a tribute to Arneson on their website and on April 14 , 2009 , released patch 3 @.@ 1 of the online role @-@ playing game World of Warcraft , The Secrets of <unk> , dedicated to Arneson . 
 Turbine 's Dungeons and Dragons Online added an in @-@ game memorial altar to Arneson in the Ruins of <unk> location in the game . They also created an in @-@ game item named the " Mantle of the <unk> " that is a reward for finishing the <unk> quest chain that is narrated by Arneson himself . The Mantle 's description reads : " A comforting and inspiring presence surrounds you as you hold this cloak . Arcane runes run along the edges of the fine cape , and masterfully drawn on the silken lining is an incredibly detailed map of a place named ' Blackmoor ' . " 
 On October 30 , 2010 , Full Sail University dedicated the student game development studio space as " Dave Arneson 's Blackmoor Studios " in Arneson 's honor . 
 = = Partial bibliography = = 
 Dungeons & Dragons ( 1974 ) ( with Gary Gygax ) 
 Blackmoor ( 1975 ) 
 <unk> 's Index ( 1977 ) 
 The First Fantasy Campaign ( 1977 ) 
 Adventures in Fantasy ( 1979 ) ( with Richard L. Snider ) 
 Robert <unk> 's Thieves ' World ( 1981 ) ( co @-@ author ) 
 <unk> II – Port o ' Call ( 1984 ) ( co @-@ author ) 
 Adventures in Blackmoor ( D & D Module : <unk> ) ( 1986 ) ( with David J. Ritchie ) 
 Temple of the Frog ( D & D Module : <unk> ) ( 1986 ) ( with David J. Ritchie ) 
 City of the Gods ( D & D Module : <unk> ) ( 1987 ) ( with David J. Ritchie ) 
 DNA / DOA ( 1989 ) 
 The Case of the Pacific Clipper ( 1991 ) 
 The Haunted Lighthouse ( Dungeon Crawl Classics Module # 3 @.@ 5 ) ( 2003 ) 
 Dave Arneson 's Blackmoor ( 2004 ) ( lead designer ) 
 Player 's Guide to Blackmoor ( 2006 ) 
 = HMS Ocean ( 1862 ) = 
 HMS Ocean was the last of the Royal Navy 's four Prince Consort @-@ class ironclads to be completed in the mid @-@ 1860s . She was originally laid down as a 91 @-@ gun second @-@ rate ship of the line , and was converted during construction to an armoured frigate . The ship spent the bulk of her career on the China Station and served as flagship there for a time . Upon her return to Great Britain in 1872 her hull was found to be partly rotten and she was placed in reserve until she was sold for scrap in 1882 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Ocean was 273 feet 1 inch ( 83 @.@ 2 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 58 feet 5 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) . The ship had a draught of 24 feet 5 inches ( 7 @.@ 4 m ) forward and 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) aft . She displaced 6 @,@ 832 long tons ( 6 @,@ 942 t ) . 
 Ocean had a metacentric height of 6 @.@ 01 feet ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) which meant that she rolled a lot and was an unsteady gun platform . Her hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . Her crew consisted of 605 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Ocean had a simple horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller shaft using steam was provided by eight rectangular boilers . The engine produced 4 @,@ 244 indicated horsepower ( 3 @,@ 165 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials in June 1864 which gave the ship a maximum speed of 12 @.@ 9 knots ( 23 @.@ 9 km / h ; 14 @.@ 8 mph ) . Ocean carried a maximum of 570 long tons ( 580 t ) of coal , enough to steam 2 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 700 km ; 2 @,@ 300 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged with three masts and had a sail area of 25 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) . Her best speed with the propeller disconnected and under sail alone was 11 @.@ 5 knots ( 21 @.@ 3 km / h ; 13 @.@ 2 mph ) . Yards were added to the ship 's mizzenmast by 1866 and Ocean was given a full ship rig which she retained for the rest of her career . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Ocean was initially armed with twenty @-@ four seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . Four of these guns were mounted on the upper deck as chase guns , two each fore and aft . The 16 @-@ calibre seven @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 inches ( 196 mm ) of armour . In 1867 four of these guns were replaced by eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loaders . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre eight @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed nine long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The entire side of the Prince Consort @-@ class ships , from the upper @-@ deck level downwards , was protected by wrought iron armour that tapered from 3 inches ( 76 mm ) at the ends to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) amidships . The armour extended 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) below the waterline . One small conning tower was fitted on each side of the upper deck amidships , but these proved to be untenable when the ship 's guns were fired . The armour was backed by the sides of the ship which were 29 @.@ 5 inches ( 749 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 HMS Ocean was laid down on 23 August 1860 as a wooden two @-@ deck , 90 @-@ gun ship of the line by Devonport Dockyard . The Admiralty ordered on 5 June 1861 that she be lengthened 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) , cut down one deck , and converted to an armoured frigate for the price of £ 298 @,@ 851 . The ship was launched on 19 March 1863 and commissioned in July 1866 , but was not completed until 6 September 1866 . Ocean initially served with the Channel Fleet , but she was almost immediately transferred to the Mediterranean , and from there to the Far East ; she arrived in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) on 15 October 1867 . She was the only armoured ship ever to double the Cape of Good Hope under canvas alone . During this voyage Ocean set a record in having sailed 243 nautical miles ( 450 km ; 280 mi ) on 26 August 1867 with cold boilers , the greatest distance ever covered under sail power by a British ironclad . 
 Ocean served on the China Station for five years , 1867 – 1872 , without docking once . The ship relieved the old two @-@ decker HMS Rodney as station flagship in 1869 when Vice @-@ Admiral Henry Kellett took command ; a new crew was carried out by HMS Donegal and Captain William Hewett , VC assumed command of the ship . Ocean was relieved in turn by HMS Iron Duke in 1872 , but drew too much water to pass through the Suez Canal . The Admiralty therefore ordered that she return home via the Cape of Good Hope using steam . The ship 's bottom was very foul and she averaged only 4 @.@ 5 knots ( 8 @.@ 3 km / h ) during the voyage . Ocean had lost a lot of sheathing during her time in the Far East and much of her planking was in a bad state . The ship was therefore relegated to dockyard reserve until sold in 1882 . 
 = Máscara Dorada = 
 Máscara Dorada ( born November 3 , 1988 ) is a Mexican luchador enmascarado , currently signed to WWE and best known for his decade long stint in Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre . Máscara Dorada 's real name has not been officially documented , a tradition in Mexican Lucha Libre where masked wrestler 's real names often are not a matter of public record . The wrestler currently known as Máscara Dorada made his debut in 2005 and has worked under other names , but achieved most success as Máscara Dorada . His ring name is Spanish for " Golden Mask " . 
 At one time , Máscara Dorada was a quadruple CMLL champion , holding the Mexican National Trios Championship , the CMLL World Trios Championship , the CMLL World Super Lightweight Championship and the CMLL World Welterweight Championship at the same time . He is also the wrestler who has held the CMLL World Welterweight Championship , having held it four times in total . After a decade of working for CMLL in his native Mexico , Dorada signed with the Japanese promotion New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) in January 2015 . After a year with NJPW , Dorada returned to CMLL in January 2016 . 
 He made his in ring debut in 2005 , originally using the masked persona Plata II and later on would use the ring name " <unk> " where he held the local Occidente Welterweight Championship , but abandoned it when he was given the Máscara Dorada character . The " Máscara Dorada " was the first instance of a regular luchador being given a character based on a Mini @-@ Estrella as he was introduced after CMLL introduced Mascarita Dorada in 2007 . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( 2005 – 2016 ) = = = 
 The luchador who would later be known as Máscara Dorada made his debut on July 14 , 2005 , after training with Gran <unk> and El Satánico . His initial ring persona was that of Plata II , a copy of the original Plata that wrestled in the early to mid 1990s . His run at Plata II was short lived as he was quickly repackage as Metalik , a variation of the " Metal based " look that he also used as " Plata II " . As Metalik he worked mainly for Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 's ( CMLL ) Guadalajara branch , getting experience while working on a local level . On April 13 , 2008 Metalik defeated wrestler <unk> for the Occidente Welterweight Championship , the local Welterweight title . About a month later Metalik won his first ever Luchas de Apuestas match , winning the hair of <unk> . The title win and hair win indicated that CMLL had plans for Metalik 's future . Metalik was entered in the 2008 Torneo Gran Alternativa , where a newcomer teams up with a veteran , Metalik teamed up with Dos Caras , Jr. and made it all the way to the finals before losing to Último Guerrero and Dragón Rojo , Jr . 
 In 2007 CMLL signed Mascarita Sagrada 2000 , but were not allowed to call him that as a rival promotion owned the copyright to the name . Instead CMLL chose to repackage the Mini luchador as Mascarita Dorada . The gimmick and the wrestler proved so successful , that in the fall of 2008 , CMLL announced that they were creating a " Large " version of Mascarita Dorada . Traditionally the minis were often patterned after existing <unk> , but this time the mini was created before the " Regular " . On November 7 , 2008 Metalik was repackaged and made his debut as Máscara Dorada , helping his team defeat the trio of Averno , Mephisto and Ephesto . Máscara Dorada kept working mid @-@ card tag team matches throughout the spring of 2008 with general success . On April 4 , 2009 CMLL announced that they had stripped Rocky Romero of the CMLL World Super Lightweight Championship and announced that a tournament to crown the new champion would take place on April 7 , 2009 , one of the announced participants was Máscara Dorada . On the night Máscara Dorada won a <unk> Cibernetico outlasting nine other wrestlers to become the CMLL Super Lightweight Champion 
 Since he held a CMLL title Dorada was entered into CMLL 's <unk> " Universal Championship " tournament , but was eliminated in the first round by Black Warrior . On December 19 , 2009 it was announced by the Comisión de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F. that Poder Mexica had been stripped of the Mexican National Trios Championship title because Black Warrior had left CMLL , breaking up the team . At the same time they announced an eight team tournament to crown a new trios champion . The top half of the bracket took place on December 22 , 2009 and the bottom half of the bracket took place on December 29 . In the top bracket Máscara Dorada teamed with Stuka , Jr. and Metro for the first time ever and defeated Los Guerreros Tuareg ( Arkangel de la Muerte , Loco Max and <unk> ) in the first round and Los <unk> del Infierno ( Virus , Euforia and Pólvora ) in the second round to qualify for the finals . The bottom bracket took place on December 29 , 2009 and saw the team of Poder Mexica ( Sangre Azteca , Dragón Rojo , Jr. and Misterioso , Jr . ) qualify for the final . On January 6 , 2010 Máscara Dorada , Stuka , Jr. and Metro defeated Poder Mexica to become the new Mexican National Trios Champions , making Máscara Dorada a double champion . 
 On January 22 , 2010 Máscara Dorada teamed up with Atlantis to participate in CMLL 's Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles ( " National Amazing Pairs tournament " ) , a tournament where CMLL teams up a Tecnico ( Dorada ) and a Rudo ( Atlantis ) for a tournament . The two defeated Dragón Rojo , and La Sombra in the opening round , Mr. Niebla and Máximo in the second round and Místico and Averno in the semi @-@ final to earn a spot in the final of the tournament . During the tournament Atlantis wore his old Tecnico white mask , acting and wrestling a tecnico style . On February 5 , 2010 Dorada and Atlantis defeated Negro Casas and La Máscara in the finals to win the tournament . 
 On May 14 , 2010 Máscara Dorada teamed up with La Sombra and La Máscara to defeat the then CMLL World Trios Champions La Ola Amarilla ( Hiroshi Tanahashi , Okumura and Taichi ) in a non @-@ title match to earn a shot at the titles the following week . One week later the trio defeated Ola Amarilla again , ending the Japanese trios title reign after just two weeks . By virtue of holding three CMLL championships Máscara Dorada participated in the 2010 Universal Championship tournament . Stuka , Jr. was part of " Block A " that competed on the July 30 , 2010 Super Viernes show . He was the first wrestler eliminated in the seeding battle royal and then defeated his Mexican National Trios Championship partner Stuka , Jr. in the first round of the actual tournament . Máscara Dorada was eliminated in the second round , losing to Último Guerrero . On September 7 , 2010 Máscara Dorada defeated Negro Casas to win the CMLL World Welterweight Championship , making him a quadruple CMLL champion , the first ever in the history of the promotion . On November 18 , 2010 , Dorada announced that he was relinquishing his hold of the Mexican National Trios Championship , which Metro and Stuka , Jr. will continue to hold with a new partner . 
 On January 22 , 2011 , Dorada lost the CMLL World Welterweight Championship to Ryusuke Taguchi at Fantastica Mania 2011 , a CMLL and New Japan Pro Wrestling co – promoted event in Tokyo , Japan . On February 25 , 2011 , Máscara Dorada and Atlantis defeated Blue Panther and Dragón Rojo , Jr. in the finals to win the Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles for the second year in a row . On April 7 Dorada vacated the CMLL World Super Lightweight Championship , stating that he was moving up to the middleweight division . After Dorada returned from Japan with the CMLL World Welterweight Championship , La Generación Dorada lost the CMLL World Trios Championship to Los Hijos del Averno ( Averno , Ephesto and Mephisto ) on July 15 , 2011 . On November 11 , 2012 , Dorada lost the CMLL World Welterweight Championship to Pólvora during CMLL 's Sunday night event in Arena Mexico . 
 On June 2 , 2013 , Dorada defeated Negro Casas to win the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship for the first time . On June 16 , Dorada and his new Los <unk> del Aire ( " Air <unk> " ) stable , formed with Místico and Valiente , won the CMLL World Trios Championship . On November 19 , Dorada lost the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship to Volador Jr . On March 28 , 2014 , Los <unk> del Aire also lost the CMLL World Trios Championship . 
 On January 2 , 2015 , Dorada defeated Negro Casas in the finals of a tournament to win the CMLL World Welterweight Championship for the third time . Later in the month , through CMLL 's relationship with NJPW , Dorada signed a one @-@ year contract with NJPW , leaving his Mexican home promotion . He returned to CMLL and hand his first match in Mexico for over a year on February 1 , 2016 . On May 3 , 2016 his fourth reign as the CMLL World Welterweight Champion was ended as Mephisto defeated him for the championship . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2010 – 2016 ) = = = 
 In April 2010 it was announced that Máscara Dorada and Valiente would travel to Japan in early May to participate in New Japan Pro Wrestling 's first ever Super J Tag Team tournament . In the first round of the tournament they lost to former IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Champions Ryusuke Taguchi and Prince Devitt in just under eight minutes . In November 2010 Máscara Dorada and La Sombra took part in New Japan 's five @-@ day @-@ long Super J Tag League . After winning two out of their four matches in the group stage , Sombra and Dorada finished third in their block , missing the finals of the tournament . Dorada and Sombra returned to New Japan on January 4 , 2011 , at Wrestle Kingdom V in Tokyo Dome , where they defeated Jushin Thunder Liger and Héctor Garza in a tag team match . 
 Dorada returned to New Japan on April 16 , teaming with Tama Tonga to defeat Liger and King Fale in a tag team match . Dorada worked a majority of the tour as a rudo , teaming with members of the Chaos stable . On May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2011 , Dorada unsuccessfully challenged Liger for the CMLL World Middleweight Championship . Dorada 's extended tour of New Japan also included participation in the 2011 Best of the Super Juniors tournament in late May @-@ early June . Dorada managed to win four out of his eight matches in the round robin stage of the tournament , which included wins over Liger and CMLL World Welterweight Champion Ryusuke Taguchi , and finished sixth out of the nine wrestlers in his block . On June 18 at New Japan 's Dominion 6 @.@ 18 show , Dorada defeated Taguchi to regain the CMLL World Welterweight Championship . Three days later Dorada entered the J Sports Crown Openweight 6 Man Tag Tournament , teaming with IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi and KUSHIDA , with the team defeating Brian Kendrick , Gedo and Jado in their first round match . The following day the trio was eliminated from the tournament in the second round by Giant Bernard , Jushin Thunder Liger and Karl Anderson . Dorada 's tour of New Japan ended the following day , when he , Tanahashi , Hiroyoshi <unk> , Tiger Mask and Wataru Inoue were defeated in a ten man tag team match by Chaos ( Dick Togo , Gedo , Jado , Masato Tanaka and Yujiro Takahashi ) . 
 On January 4 , 2012 , Dorada returned to New Japan at Wrestle Kingdom VI in Tokyo Dome , where he teamed with Jushin Thunder Liger , KUSHIDA and Tiger Mask to defeat Atlantis , Taichi , Taka Michinoku and Valiente in an eight man tag team match . Dorada returned to Japan on January 21 to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2012 events , teaming with Rush losing to the team of Hirooki Goto and KUSHIDA on the first night . The second night , Dorada successfully defended the CMLL World Welterweight Championship against KUSHIDA . On September 7 , 2012 , Dorada returned to Japan for another two @-@ week tour with New Japan Pro Wrestling . In January 2013 , Dorada returned to Japan to take part in the three @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2013 event . During the first night on January 18 , he teamed with La Máscara and Máximo in a six man tag team match , where they were defeated by Taichi , Taka Michinoku and Volador Jr . The following night , Dorada and Diamante were defeated in a tag team match by Mephisto and Okumura . During the third and final night , Dorada took part in a twelve @-@ man torneo cibernetico , from which he was the eighth man eliminated by Yoshi @-@ Hashi and which was eventually won by Tomohiro Ishii . Dorada returned to New Japan on September 23 , 2013 , working the entire tour opposite the Bullet Club stable , which also included his fellow CMLL worker Rey Bucanero . Dorada 's tour concluded on September 29 at the Destruction pay @-@ per @-@ view , where he pinned Bucanero in an eight @-@ man tag team match , where he teamed with Captain New Japan , Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma against Bucanero , Bad Luck Fale , Karl Anderson and Tama Tonga . Dorada returned to Japan in January 2014 , when he took part in the five @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2014 tour . The tour concluded on January 19 with a main event , where Dorada unsuccessfully challenged Volador Jr. for the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship . From April to July 2014 , Dorada worked an extended tour with New Japan , which included a two @-@ day tour of Taiwan , the Wrestling Dontaku 2014 tour , the 2014 Best of the Super Juniors , where he finished with a record of three wins and four losses and thus missed the semifinals of the tournament , and the Kizuna Road 2014 tour . On October 25 , 2014 , Dorada returned to NJPW , teaming up with Bushi for the 2014 Super Junior Tag Tournament . The team lost to reDRagon ( Bobby Fish and Kyle O 'Reilly ) in the first round . Dorada remained with NJPW until November 8 . 
 In January 2015 , Dorada returned to Japan to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2015 tour , during which he and Atlantis won the Fantastica Mania 2015 Tag Tournament . Dorada 's participation in the tour was built around a rivalry with La Sombra , which culminated in a singles match between the two on January 19 , where La Sombra was victorious . During the final event , Dorada announced he had signed a one @-@ year contract with NJPW . After doing interviews suggesting the unification of his CMLL World Welterweight Championship and the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship , Dorada entered the IWGP title picture by challenging reigning champion Kenny Omega on February 11 at The New Beginning in Osaka . He received his title shot on April 5 at Invasion Attack 2015 , but was defeated by Omega . The following month , Dorada entered the 2015 Best of the Super Juniors . He finished third in his block with a record of five wins and two losses , failing to advance to the finals of the tournament . On December 19 , Dorada lost the CMLL World Welterweight Championship to Bushi following outside interference from Bushi 's Los Ingobernables de Japón stablemate Evil . He regained the title from Bushi on January 22 , 2016 , at Fantastica Mania 2016 . Dorada 's final match under his NJPW contract took place two days later . 
 = = = WWE ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On June 13 , 2016 , WWE announced Dorada , under the ring name " Gran Metalik " , as a participant in the upcoming Cruiserweight Classic tournament . In a subsequent interview he revealed that he was only working the Cruiserweight Classic matches with WWE and was still full time with CMLL beyond that . He credited Finn Bálor , who worked as Prince Devitt in NJPW as being the reason he was invited to the tournament . He wanted to use " Metalik " as his ring name but WWE decided to go with " Gran Metalik " instead . The tournament kicked off on June 23 with Metalik defeating Alejandro <unk> in his first round match . On July 14 , Metalik defeated Tajiri in his second round match . The following day , it was reported that Metalik had signed with WWE . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During a 2016 interview with Lucha World , Máscara Dorada revealed that he was the father of two young girls . His immediate family still resides in Guadalajara , Jalisco . He has relatives living in Los Angeles , California while Dorada himself lives in Mexico City . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Corkscrew somersault senton bomb 
 Dorada Screwdriver ( Modified sitout scoop slam driver ) 
 Springboard <unk> 
 Signature moves 
 Brillo Dorada ( Topé con Giro , after springboarding off the <unk> rope ) 
 Double jump springboard victory roll 
 Multiple hurricanrana variations 
 Dorada runs down the ramp , jumps over the ropes and executes a hurricanrana 
 Double jump springboard 
 Slingshot 
 Topé con Giro 
 Sunset flip powerbomb 
 Nicknames 
 " El <unk> Maravilla " ( Spanish for " The Boy Wonder " ) 
 Entrance themes 
 " El Son de la Negra " by Mariachi Vargas de <unk> 
 " Tornado " by May 's 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL World Super Lightweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 CMLL World Trios Championship ( 2 times ) – with La Sombra and La Máscara ( 1 ) and Místico and Valiente ( 1 ) 
 CMLL World Welterweight Championship ( 4 times ) 
 Mexican National Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with Metro and Stuka , Jr . 
 NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 CMLL Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles ( 2010 , 2011 ) – with Atlantis 
 Torneo Corona - with La Sombra 
 CMLL Trio of the Year ( 2010 ) – with La Sombra and La Máscara 
 CMLL Guadalajara 
 Occidente Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 New Japan Pro Wrestling 
 Fantastica Mania Tag Tournament ( 2015 ) – with Atlantis 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 152 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2013 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = The Falcon and the D 'ohman = 
 " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " is the season premiere of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 25 , 2011 . In the episode , the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant hires a new security guard named Wayne and Homer soon becomes friends with him . " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " also reveals the fate of the relationship between the characters Ned Flanders and Edna Krabappel that was initiated in the previous episode of the series , " The Ned @-@ <unk> Catch " , that aired in May 2011 . 
 Actor Kiefer Sutherland guest starred in the episode as the voice of Wayne . This was the third time he appeared on The Simpsons . The episode also features a guest appearance by American chef and Top Chef judge Tom Colicchio as himself in a segment in which Marge dreams about being a contestant in a show similar to Top Chef . " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " has received mixed reviews from television critics , with criticism directed at the plot and the cultural references featured . However , a reference in the episode to the computer animated re @-@ enactments of news stories done by the Taiwan @-@ based Next Media Animation has been particularly praised . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " features a reference to the previous episode of the series , the twenty @-@ second season finale " The Ned @-@ <unk> Catch " that aired on May 22 , 2011 . In that episode , the characters Ned Flanders and Edna Krabappel start dating . The episode ends with Homer and Marge Simpson giving viewers a link to the official The Simpsons website , <unk> , and encouraging them to go on the website and vote over the 2011 summer on whether Ned and Edna should stay together . The result of the poll was revealed in " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " — a majority had voted for the couple to remain in a relationship . According to executive producer Al Jean , the poll was " very strong in one direction " . In an interview before the result was presented , Jean guaranteed that the poll was authentic and that the writers would not undo the viewers ' decision , adding " What our fans have joined together , let no writer tear asunder . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Comic Book Guy opens the season premiere by telling the viewers that there will be hints in the episode as to the conclusion of the romance between Ned and Edna . After the revised introduction , where Homer sneaks late into work , sings to the tune of The Police 's " Walking on the Moon " , and marks up his time card to make it seem like he was on time and had put in some overtime hours , Homer is surprised to find that a new security guard named Wayne has been hired at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . He repeatedly tries to befriend Wayne , only to be coldly shunned at every attempt . Meanwhile , while making crackers for Bart and Lisa , Marge daydreams that she has become a contestant on a cooking show called Master Chef . The show is judged by Tom Colicchio and he praises her crackers , awarding her the prize of a new kitchen . However , when Marge stops daydreaming and gives the crackers to her children , they tell her they do not like them because they do not like change . 
 One day while Wayne is walking home in the rain and hail , Homer sees Wayne and he reluctantly agrees to let Homer drive him to Moe 's Tavern for a drink . While Wayne is in the bathroom , Snake Jailbird dramatically crashes through the door on his motorcycle to rob everyone . As soon as Wayne comes out , he soundly beats up Snake . The story spreads quickly and a news segment that features an interview with Wayne by Kent Brockman and a computer animated Taiwanese dramatization of the incident soon airs on television . It is discovered that Wayne is a highly trained former CIA black ops agent , who decided to go into hiding in Springfield . He is plagued by recurring flashbacks from his previous missions , which cause him to act or shout them out , as evidenced when he unintentionally attacks Mr. Burns , the boss of the power plant , which results in Wayne being fired . 
 Homer allows Wayne to stay in Bart 's treehouse because Wayne can no longer afford his apartment . One night , Wayne speaks loudly about a past mission in his sleep , causing the couples in the nearby houses to lose sleep . Ned and Edna are one of these couples , and they are shown holding each other in bed . News of what happened to Mr. Burns is leaked onto YouTube and is seen by one of Wayne 's gangster enemies , Viktor , in Kiev , Ukraine . Apparently , Wayne accidentally killed Viktor 's wife with a stray bullet on a previous mission . Thus , the Ukrainian gangster and his henchmen kidnap and torture Homer as bait to lure Wayne . Wayne tracks Homer down through tracking devices he unknowingly ate , frees him and kills all of the Ukrainian gangsters . Afterwards , Wayne decides to leave Springfield , but not before giving Homer the fist pound Homer wanted when they first met . However , Marge suggests that Wayne get a job at the Springfield Department of Motor Vehicles ( DMV ) , and he does . At the DMV , he has a flashback to the time he was a prisoner in North Korea and was forced to write a ridiculous musical play paying tribute to Kim Jong @-@ il . During the closing credits of the episode , Ned and Edna thank the fans for voting for their relationship to continue . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " was written by Justin Hurwitz and directed by Matthew Nastuk . The storyline of the episode resembles David Cronenberg 's film A History of Violence . " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " features several references to popular culture . For example , in a sequence at the beginning of the episode , Homer sings about working at the power plant to the melody of The Police 's song " Walking on the Moon " . According to Chris Ledesma , music editor on The Simpsons , the staff was " very fortunate to have obtained the original master tracks from The Police without vocals . This is a rare instance . When we need to do our own lyrics to an established hit song , [ composer Alf Clausen ] usually arranges and records a ' sound @-@ alike ' that tries to capture all the spirit and nuance of the original so that the audience immediately identifies the track , but allows us to add our own vocals . " The episode also made frequent use of the sequence " Dance of the Knights " from the ballet Romeo and Juliet by Sergei Prokofiev . The sequence had to be licensed , as it was under copyright in most parts of the world . 
 Another cultural reference appears in one of Wayne 's flashbacks , in which he is seen receiving special training against enemies such as Chucky of the Child 's Play film series and basketball player Kobe Bryant . The Taiwanese dramatization of Wayne 's fight with Snake at Moe 's Tavern parodies the humorous computer animated re @-@ enactments of news stories done by the Taiwan @-@ based Next Media Animation . One YouTube clip that Viktor sees is a reference to The Gregory Brothers , the creators of the popular online Auto @-@ Tune the News series , in that a news segment featuring a lady who has lost her cat has been autotuned into a song . Marge 's dream of becoming a contestant in a cooking competition parodies the American reality competition series Top Chef . American chef Tom Colicchio , who is a judge on that show , guest starred in " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " as himself . 
 Canadian actor Kiefer Sutherland guest starred in " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " as the security guard Wayne . This was the third episode of The Simpsons that he appeared in , the first being the 2006 episode " G.I. ( Annoyed Grunt ) " ( playing a colonel ) and the second being the 2007 episode " 24 Minutes " ( playing his character Jack Bauer from the television series 24 ) . As noted by Rick Porter of the website Zap2it , Sutherland 's appearance in " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " makes him " one of the relatively few Simpsons guest stars who 've appeared more than once and voiced different characters rather than recurring residents of Springfield . " Other guest stars to have done this are Albert Brooks , Jon Lovitz , and Phil Hartman , all of whom have played one @-@ time characters and recurring parts . The character Wayne is partly based on Sutherland 's 24 character Jack Bauer , who , according to Christopher Hooton of Metro , is also a " po @-@ faced anti @-@ terrorism agent constantly finding his loved ones kidnapped by megalomaniacs . " After the episode had aired in the United States , the Ukrainian press reported that the mafioso Viktor bears a resemblance to the Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 25 , 2011 , as the premiere of the twenty @-@ third season of The Simpsons . It was watched by approximately 8 @.@ 08 million people during this broadcast . It received a 3 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 ( up three percent from the last season 's premiere ) , and a ten percent share . The Simpsons became the second highest @-@ rated program in the 18 – 49 demographic in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night , finishing with a higher rating than The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! but a lower rating than Family Guy . The Simpsons was , however , the most @-@ watched show in the lineup in terms of total viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Since airing , " The Falcon and the D 'ohman " has received mixed reviews from critics . The plot of the episode has been criticized by some reviewers . Kyle Lemmon of Under the Radar gave the episode a three out of ten rating , concluding that " this new episode is rarely grounded in any kind of reality . The best examples of The Simpsons center the situational humor in somewhat plausible scenarios within the town . I guess after so many years , they 've completely run out of ideas . " Similarly , Television Blend 's Jesse Carp wrote that the plot shows " essentially what is wrong with the show and why I stopped watching . Because of the endless amount of material needed to keep a series running for twenty three years , they have to resort to outlandish plots and endless cameos to stay interesting . The best episodes , ... definitely have some absurd elements but they 're all firmly grounded in a fairly real world of Springfield , USA and its colorful cast of characters . I 'd like to see more of that . I miss them . " 
 The cultural references featured in the episode have attracted both criticism and praise . The parody of Next Media Animation has been commended by several reviewers . Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club commented that the episode " features a couple of quite funny sight gags , like the fresco on Moe 's ceiling and the delightful Taiwanese dramatization of certain events " , but further wrote that the " rest of the jokes and references clang away without being too funny or too insulting , and that is probably the best that any viewers can ask of The Simpsons in its advanced age . " Television Blend 's Steve West commented that the episode was the worst of the Animation Domination lineup that week and further elaborated that the cultural references " are always a year behind , and the smart writers who used classic American culture to bring wit to the series have been replaced by those who want to mimic South Park and Family Guy . They fail miserably , and it 's gotten so bad that I now no longer care about the relationship between Marge and Homer . " 
 Matt Roush of TV Guide wrote more positively about the episode , noting that " Fox 's eternal The Simpsons kicks off a night of all @-@ new animation , welcoming Kiefer Sutherland in a very clever guest role as a security guard trying without much success to escape his violent past . A nod to Taiwanese animation is just one of the highlights in this homage to 24 @-@ style mayhem . " Similarly , <unk> <unk> of CNN 's The Marquee Blog commented that " there were a lot of light laughs in this episode , like when Wayne walks through the Ukrainian part of Springfield ( <unk> , anyone ? ) . Pop culture references like the Taiwanese animation of the robbery were hilarious . I was disappointed , though , to see that Marge 's daydream about being on Top Chef didn 't become a side story . " Mike Hughes of the Lansing State Journal commented that the episode was " inconsistent , but [ had ] great moments " , and that it was " much better than Fox 's other season @-@ openers " that premiered on the same day . 
 = Sieges of Taunton = 
 The sieges of Taunton were a series of three blockades during the First English Civil War . The town of Taunton , in Somerset , was considered to be of strategic importance because it controlled the main road from Bristol to Devon and Cornwall . Robert Blake commanded the town 's Parliamentarian defences during all three sieges , from September 1644 to July 1645 . 
 The first siege was laid by Edmund Wyndham on 23 September , and was primarily composed of Royalist troops from local Somerset garrisons . After initial assaults drove Blake and his troops back into Taunton Castle , the blockade was conducted from 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) away , and concentrated more on starving the garrison than continued attacks . The town was relieved by a force under James Holborne on 14 December . 
 Over the next three months , Blake was able to establish a network of earthen defences in Taunton , including a basic perimeter and a number of forts . The Royalists began the second , and bloodiest , siege in late March 1645 , initially under Sir Richard Grenville . A series of disputes between the Royalist commanders allowed Taunton some respite at the start of the siege , but in May the attacks were fierce under the command of Sir Ralph Hopton . After five days of intense fighting , which had once again driven the defending army back to a small central perimeter including the castle , the Royalists retreated in the face of a Parliamentarian relief army commanded by Ralph Weldon . 
 Lord Goring , who had proposed the second siege , renewed the blockade for a third time in mid @-@ May , after engaging Weldon 's departing army and forcing it back into Taunton . Goring 's siege was lax and allowed provisions into the town , diminishing its effectiveness . The Parliamentarian defence tied up Goring and his 10 – 15 @,@ 000 troops , who would have otherwise been available to fight for the King at Naseby , where historians believe they could have tipped the battle in favour of the Royalists . Instead , after securing a Parliamentarian victory at Naseby , Thomas Fairfax marched his army to relieve Taunton on 9 July 1645 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Loyalties in Somerset were divided at the start of the First English Civil War ; many of the prominent landowners and those living in the countryside favoured King Charles I , but most of the towns , including Taunton , were Parliamentarian , predominantly due to their Puritan beliefs . By August 1642 , the town was held by a small Parliamentarian force . In June the following year , Sir Ralph Hopton led his Royalist army , consisting of eighteen regiments equally split between foot and cavalry , out of Cornwall and into Somerset . He forced the surrender of Taunton to the King without engaging in battle , and established a garrison in Taunton Castle . 
 In mid @-@ 1644 , Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex , the Chief Commander of the Parliamentary army , decided to reclaim the West Country . He moved through Dorset , retaking Dorchester and Weymouth , and then left the coast and headed towards Chard . At the time , Taunton was held by a garrison of 800 men commanded by Colonel John Stawell , but the proximity of the Earl of Essex 's army led the town to be abandoned , leaving only 80 men to defend the castle . The historian Robert Morris , in The Sieges of Taunton 1644 – 1645 , suggests that Stawell and his men retreated to Bridgwater , but in The History of the Rebellion , the 17th @-@ century historian Edward Hyde claims that the troops were requisitioned by Prince Maurice during his retreat from Lyme Regis to Plymouth . 
 On 8 July 1644 , the Earl of Essex sent a Parliamentarian force , led by Colonel Sir Robert Pye with Lieutenant Colonel Robert Blake as his second in command , to reclaim Taunton . They took the town without a fight , and surrounded the castle . The Royalist forces under Major William Reeve that were garrisoned at Taunton Castle surrendered and retreated to Bridgwater . Pye left Taunton shortly after the capture , leaving Blake to hold the town . Blake had an army of about 1 @,@ 000 men , and was charged with trying to blockade the roads to support the Earl of Essex 's campaign in Devon and Cornwall . 
 = = Sieges = = 
 = = = First siege = = = 
 The Earl of Essex 's campaign failed , suffering a total defeat at the Battle of Lostwithiel in early September 1644 . His remaining forces retreated back to Dorset , leaving only Plymouth , Lyme Regis and Taunton under Parliamentarian control in the South West . Blake was aware of the vulnerability of Taunton , which , unlike many towns and cities of the time , did not have any town walls . On the eastern side of the town , which was the most vulnerable , he dug trenches outside the Eastern gate and erected a barricade across the street within it . At least three earthen forts were also built in that end of town . King Charles I held council in Chard , and shortly after ordered a Royalist force numbering 3 @,@ 000 troops to set up the first siege of Taunton . Initially , Sir Francis Dodington was going to command the attack , but the only available men were those in Bridgwater under the command of Colonel Edmund Wyndham . 
 The siege began on 23 September 1644 . Wyndham was assisted in the attack by his brother , Francis Wyndham , who brought his garrison from Dunster Castle , and Edward Rodney , who commanded an infantry regiment . The Royalist forces initially set themselves up around the town , where they were able to use their artillery to bombard the castle from the west and the town from the east . In his record of the siege , Morris claims that the besieging forces were unable to establish a presence in the town , and set up a wide perimeter roughly 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) away . However , almost all other sources agree that after initial skirmishes , the Royalists broke through the eastern defences and forced Blake 's troops back into the castle itself . 
 During the siege , Edmund Wyndham and Blake exchanged letters ; Wyndham initially wrote to explain that he felt the siege was a gentle method of attack , rather than using " fire and sword " . He offered generous terms for surrender , and signed the letter " Your well @-@ wishing Neighbour and Country @-@ man " ; the pair had served as members of parliament together for Bridgwater in 1640 . Blake was unmoved , and wrote back to unequivocally reject the offer . Blake sent skirmishing parties out against the attackers with some success , though food and ammunition began to run out for the defending troops . To further this , Wyndham heavily rationed the town 's population to prevent them smuggling food to the garrison . A petition to Parliament for help was answered when Sir William Waller , who commanded the Parliamentarian army in Wiltshire , sent a force of 3 @,@ 000 men under the command of his deputy , Major General James Holborne , in support of the town . 
 Wyndham had initially planned to attack Holborne 's forces at Chard , but instead retreated back to his garrison at Bridgwater on 14 December . He recorded that during his retreat , " the enemy sallied upon me but they were so hungry that they could not follow me . " The day after the arrival of Holborne , a supply caravan containing food , 2 @,@ 000 muskets and 40 barrels of gunpowder restocked the town . Fearing further Royalist assaults , Holborne provided 1 @,@ 000 of his own men as reinforcements for the town 's defence . 
 = = = Second siege = = = 
 In early 1645 , Blake sent raiding parties out from Taunton that , according to Hyde , controlled a large area and disrupted activities throughout Somerset . Around that time , Lord Goring , the lieutenant @-@ general of the south @-@ eastern counties in the Royalist army , requested troops from the King so that he could mount a " large @-@ scale southeastern campaign " . His request was rejected , and he was despatched to the South West instead . He duly changed his focus , electing to target first Weymouth , and then Taunton , both Parliamentarian strongholds in the area . He took Weymouth , but was unable to hold it in the face of Parliamentarian reinforcements . In a letter he received from the King shortly after that loss , he was ordered to gather the Royalist forces of the area together in order to " [ clear ] those parts of the rebels ' forces . " 
 The King sent orders for Sir Richard Grenville and John Berkeley to support Goring in the attack on Taunton . Goring arrived outside Taunton on 11 March , and a sizeable part of Berkeley 's garrison from Exeter arrived soon after . Grenville did not leave his siege of Plymouth and , coupled with the threat from a Parliamentarian force formed by Waller and Oliver Cromwell combining their armies in Hampshire , the attack on Taunton was postponed . After further urging from the King and the Prince of Wales , Grenville did eventually travel up towards Taunton and was ordered to follow Goring to support the King in the north , as Grenville 's force of 3 @,@ 000 men was considered too small to assault Taunton . He refused , claiming that " he had promised the commissioners of Devon and Cornwall , that he would not advance beyond Taunton " , while also boasting that he could claim the town in ten days . He was delegated command of the siege , and arrived outside Taunton on 2 April . Only a day after his arrival , Grenville was injured while attacking Wellington House , and as the wound was serious , he was carried to Exeter . 
 The blockade set by Grenville was initially some distance from the town , and did not prevent Blake from sending and receiving messages . The besieging army was reinforced soon after with Goring 's infantry and artillery units , and so , with a large force , the attackers closed in on the town , establishing entrenchments within musket @-@ shot of Taunton 's defences . Command of the siege passed to Berkeley , though Grenville 's troops often failed to follow the new commander 's orders , and some of them deserted . Despite Grenville 's retirement from the battle due to injury , he and Berkeley clashed ; Grenville complained to the Prince of Wales that Berkeley was conducting the siege badly , while Berkeley claimed that Grenville had given his men orders to desert . These disagreements led Hopton , by now the commander of the Royalist forces in the West Country , to be given command of the siege . 
 As the siege continued , supplies once again began to run out for the defending army , and Parliament identified the relief of Taunton as being a priority . On 28 April , they ordered Thomas Fairfax , the Commander in Chief of the recently established New Model Army , to relieve the town . Fairfax marched with the whole of his army towards Taunton ; the Royalists considered sending their own army to meet him before he could reach London , but Prince Rupert convinced them instead to focus on conquering the north of England . In response to the Royalist movement north , Fairfax split his own army in two , sending a force of between 6 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 on to Taunton under Colonel Ralph Weldon , while Fairfax led the rest north . 
 Aware that the Parliamentarians under Fairfax were on their way , Hopton increased the attacks on the town on 6 May . Further attacks the following day focused on the east side of the town , first bombarding it with cannon shot , and then storming the earthen redoubt that Blake had established . After some early success in which they captured one of the earthen forts , the attackers were forced back by a combination of musket shot , stones and boiling water . The next day , after yet more attacks made little impact , Hopton staged a battle on the south side of the town between two parties of his own army in an attempt to make Blake believe the Parliamentarian army had arrived . Hopton hoped that Blake would send out some of his own men to support the relieving force , but the feint failed . That evening , at around 7 pm , the Royalist force , which consisted of around 4 @,@ 200 infantry and 2 @,@ 000 cavalry , launched an all @-@ out assault against the town . In heavy fighting , the attackers captured two of the earthen forts on the eastern side of town , and broke through the defences . Once inside Blake 's outer perimeter , the besieging army discovered that there were Parliamentarian musketeers within every house , which prevented them advancing any further , though they did set fire to a number of buildings , hoping to force the defenders to retreat . The tactic failed when the wind blew the flames back towards the Royalists , halting their attack . 
 The attack was renewed around 11 am on 9 May , and over the next seven hours , Hopton 's army advanced slowly through the town . His forces pushed the Parliamentarian troops back one building at a time , until they were left with only a small area of land in the middle of the town . Within the perimeter was the castle , an entrenchment in the market square , St Mary Magdalene Church and an earthen defence known as " Maiden 's fort " . By this time , a combination of artillery and arson attacks had set most of the east side of town on fire . An attempt by three people — two men and a woman — to set fires inside the remaining defences was quashed , and the culprits lynched . 
 Further assaults were made on 10 May , along with a demand for Blake and his men to surrender , to which Blake responded that he " had four pairs of boots left and would eat three of them before he yielded . " Weldon 's relieving force had met with small parties of the Royalist army around Chard and <unk> , and they sent an advance party ahead of them , which reached Orchard Portman , roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Taunton , on 10 May . Fearing that they were facing the entirety of Fairfax 's army , Hopton ordered his forces to abandon their attacks and retreat to Bridgwater . As they left , they felled trees across roads to slow the Parliamentarian advance . Weldon 's army arrived in Taunton on 11 May , relieving and restocking the town . Accounts of Taunton 's losses vary between 50 and 200 killed , with 200 or more casualties on top of that , while two thirds of the houses in the town had been razed . Having relieved Taunton , Weldon and his army left the following day and marched eastwards . 
 = = = Third siege = = = 
 Over the course of the siege , Lord Goring had been with the King in Oxford , and on 10 May he returned to Bristol with a royal warrant pronouncing him the Commander of the Royalist Army in the West Country , replacing Hopton . Goring began his operations by harrying Weldon 's army , and forcing them to retreat back to Taunton . Goring , commanding about 10 @,@ 000 men , established a third siege of the town in under a year . He ignored orders from the King for him to support the Royalist efforts in the Midlands , claiming that " Taunton would be taken in a few days . " Despite his promises , he soon discovered that his army was too small to enact a rapid takeover of the town , and he established a loose blockade . Hyde , who is frequently scathing of Goring in his description of the Civil War , recalls that " Goring was so far from making any advance upon Taunton , that he grew much more negligent in it than he had been ; suffered provisions , in great quantities , to be carried into the town . " As well as being lax in his siege , Goring was often drunk and — reminiscent of the earlier siege — was deserted by many of his troops . 
 The regional commander of the Parliamentarian forces , Colonel Edward Massey , was ordered to relieve Taunton in June , but he could only raise 3 @,@ 000 men ; far less than was needed to dispel Goring 's army . The New Model Army , with Fairfax at their head , were busy in the Midlands defeating the bulk of the Royalist army at the Battle of Naseby , described by modern sources as " the decisive clash of the English Civil War " . Goring had been ordered by the King to abandon his siege and join the Royalist forces at Naseby , and it has been suggested by modern historians that with his forces , and his leadership , the Royalists might have won the battle . Immediately after securing that victory , Fairfax led his army down towards Taunton once again . Aware of the approaching army , Lord Goring mounted a final assault on the town , hoping to catch Blake unaware by sending his cavalry towards the town on 9 July . The attack was neutralised by a section of Fairfax 's army in Ilminster , and Goring withdrew from Taunton to meet Fairfax at the Battle of Langport , relieving the third and final siege of Taunton during the English Civil War . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In his history of Taunton , H. J. Wickenden suggests that over half of the town was burned or destroyed during the three sieges , while Diane Purkiss claims that it was as high as two thirds of the town . Several compensation payouts were made to the town and some of its residents , funded by fines against those who had fought for the Royalists , such as Sir William Portman , who had been the Member of Parliament for Taunton at the outbreak of the war and was fined £ 7 @,@ 000 . Although the Parliamentarians destroyed many of the castles that had featured in the Civil War , Taunton Castle was considered a Parliamentarian stronghold , and remained intact . In 1647 , only two years after the end of the sieges , the castle was sold as part of the estate of Taunton Manor . In 1660 , shortly after taking the throne , Charles II stripped Taunton of its town charter for its part in the Civil War , and had the castle 's outer walls removed . 
 After commanding the defence of Taunton , Blake was ordered to capture Dunster Castle , which he achieved after a nine @-@ month siege . After the war , he was honoured by Parliament for his efforts and rewarded with £ 500 , while a further £ 2 @,@ 000 was split amongst his men . He took no side during the Second Civil War and , three years later , under the Commonwealth of England , he became a general at sea , as one of the three commissioners of the navy , and spent the rest of his life as a naval commander , for which he remains best known . 
 = Zooropa = 
 Zooropa / <unk> / is the eighth studio album by Irish rock band U2 . Produced by Flood , Brian Eno , and The Edge , it was released on 5 July 1993 on Island Records . Inspired by the band 's experiences on the Zoo TV Tour , Zooropa expanded on many of the tour 's themes of technology and media oversaturation . The record was a continuation of the group 's experimentation with alternative rock , electronic dance music , and electronic sound effects that began with their previous album , Achtung Baby , in 1991 . 
 U2 began writing and recording Zooropa in Dublin in February 1993 , during a six @-@ month break between legs of the Zoo TV Tour . The record was originally intended as an EP to promote the " Zooropa " leg of the tour that was to begin in May 1993 , but during the sessions , the group decided to extend the record to a full @-@ length LP . Pressed for time , U2 wrote and recorded at a rapid pace , with songs originating from many sources , including leftover material from the Achtung Baby sessions . The album was not completed in time for the tour 's resumption , forcing the band to travel between Dublin and their tour destinations in May to complete mixing and recording . 
 Zooropa received generally favourable reviews from critics . Despite none of its three singles — " Numb " , " Lemon " , and " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " — being hits consistently across regions , the record sold well upon release and peaked at number one in multiple countries . The album 's charting duration and lifetime sales of 7 million copies , however , were less than those of Achtung Baby . In 1994 , Zooropa won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . Although the record was a success and music journalists view the album as one of the group 's most creative works , the band regard it with mixed feelings . 
 = = Background = = 
 U2 regained critical favour with their commercially successful 1991 album Achtung Baby and the supporting Zoo TV Tour in 1992 . The record was a musical reinvention for the group , incorporating influences from alternative rock , industrial music , and electronic dance music into their sound . The tour was an elaborately staged multimedia event that satirised television and the viewing public 's over @-@ stimulation by attempting to instill " sensory overload " in its audience . The band finished 1992 with one of their most successful years , selling 2 @.@ 9 million concert tickets and reaching 10 million copies sold for Achtung Baby . Their 73 North American concerts from the year grossed US $ 67 million , easily the highest amount for any touring artist in 1992 . 
 The group concluded the North American " Outside Broadcast " leg of the tour on 25 November 1992 , leaving them with a six @-@ month break before the tour resumed in Europe in May 1993 with the " Zooropa " leg . Rather than use the time to rest , lead vocalist Bono and guitarist The Edge were keen to record new material . Following a hectic year of touring , the two did not want to settle back into domestic life . Bono said , " We thought we could live a normal life and then go back on the road [ in May 1993 ] . But it turns out that your whole way of thinking , your whole body has been geared toward the madness of Zoo TV ... So we decided to put the madness on a record . Everybody 's head was spinning , so we thought , why not keep that momentum going ... ? " The Edge also wished to distract himself from the emotions he was feeling after separating from his wife during the Achtung Baby sessions in 1991 . The other members , bassist Adam Clayton and drummer Larry Mullen , Jr . , ultimately agreed to join them for recording . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After handling audio engineering for the recording of Achtung Baby , Robbie Adams was invited by U2 to manage sound mixing on the Zoo TV Tour . Adams also recorded the group 's tour soundchecks . In January 1993 , the band asked him to compile these recordings and create loops of interesting parts that they could play to in the studio . After Adams spent a few weeks assembling loops , the group entered The Factory in Dublin that February to begin composing rough demos . Bono and The Edge were most involved during this initial demoing process , which lasted six weeks . 
 The group employed Brian Eno and his assisting partner Mark " Flood " Ellis — both of whom worked on Achtung Baby — to produce the sessions ; long @-@ time Eno collaborator Daniel Lanois was busy promoting his solo album and was unavailable . Similar to the Achtung Baby sessions , Eno worked two @-@ week shifts . The group often gave him in @-@ progress songs to adjust and to which he could add his own personality . Initially , the band did not have a clear plan for how they would release the material being written . At the time , Clayton said , " I don 't know if what we 're doing here is the next U2 album or a bunch of rough sketches that in two years will turn into the demos for the next U2 album . " The Edge was a proponent of making an EP of new material to promote the upcoming leg of the tour , describing his mentality as thus : " We 've got a bit of time off . We 've got some ideas hanging around from the last record , let 's do an EP , maybe four new songs to spice the next phase of the tour up a bit . It 'll be a fan thing . It 'll be cool . " 
 Soon after the sessions commenced , Bono pushed for the band to work towards a full @-@ length LP . The Edge was initially hesitant , but saw the opportunity as a challenge to quickly record an album before returning to tour and prove the band had not become spoiled by the luxury of ample recording time . Additionally , Bono and band manager Paul McGuinness had discussed the possibility of releasing a " one @-@ two punch " of records since the beginning of the Achtung Baby sessions . In early March , U2 reached a consensus to work towards an LP . Much like they had for the Achtung Baby sessions , the band split work between two studios at once ; Adams operated a <unk> mixing console at The Factory , while Flood used an SSL console at the newly relocated Windmill Lane Studios . 
 Due to the time limit , U2 were forced to write and record songs at a more rapid pace . They continued their long @-@ time practice of jamming in the studio . Eno and Flood edited together song sections they liked and then discussed the arrangements with the group . U2 suggested alterations and added lyrics and melodies , before performing to the edited arrangements . Eno used an <unk> whiteboard to give instructions and cues to the band while they jammed ; he pointed at chords and various commands , such as " hold " , " stop " , " change " , and " change back " , to direct their performances . To record all of the band 's material and test different arrangements , the engineers utilised a technique they called " <unk> " , which allowed them to achieve more than 48 tracks of audio by using a 24 @-@ track analogue recording , a DAT machine , and a synchroniser . The production crew faced issues with audio spill at The Factory , as all group members recorded in the same room as the mixing desk and Bono frequently sang in @-@ progress lyrics that would need to be replaced . <unk> and wood booths were built to separate the performers ' sounds as much as possible . 
 Songs originated from and were inspired by a variety of sources . " Zooropa " was the result of combining two separate pieces of music together , one of which the band discovered while reviewing recordings of tour soundchecks . The verse melody to " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " and an instrumental backing track that became " Numb " were originally from the Achtung Baby sessions . " Babyface " , " Dirty Day " , " Lemon " , and " The Wanderer " were written during the Zooropa sessions . Country singer Johnny Cash recorded vocals for " The Wanderer " during a visit to Dublin , and although Bono recorded his own vocals for the song , he preferred Cash 's version . The production crew and the band debated which version to include on the record . Throughout the sessions , U2 were undecided on a unifying musical style for the release , and as a result , they maintained three potential track listings — one for the best songs , one for " vibes " , and one for a soundtrack album . Bono suggested editing the best segments of songs together to create a montage . 
 As May 's " Zooropa " tour leg approached , U2 continued to record while simultaneously rehearsing for the tour . Their time limit prevented them from working on live arrangements for any of the new songs . Despite the sessions ' rapid pace , the album was not completed by the time they had to resume touring . Moreover , Flood and Eno had to begin work on other projects . The Edge remembers everyone was telling the group , " Well , it 's an EP . You did good but there 's a lot more work needed to finish some of these songs . " However , the band did not want to shelve the project , as they believed they were on a " creative roll " and that they would be in a completely different frame of mind if they revisited the material six months later . 
 The group 's solution was to fly back and forth between Dublin and their concert destinations for about ten days to finish recording and mixing at night and during their off @-@ days . Clayton called the process " about the craziest thing you could do to yourself " , while Mullen said of it , " It was mad , but it was mad good , as opposed to mad bad . " McGuinness later said the band had nearly wrecked themselves in the process . The group simultaneously used three separate rooms at Windmill Lane to mix , overdub , and edit . Adams said the hectic approach meant " there was never anybody sitting around waiting or doing nothing " . Flood called the period one of " absolute lunacy " . Eschewing console automation , the engineers adopted a " live performance " attitude to mixing , based on past experiences with Lanois . The band and production crew sat in on the mixing and offered encouragement , creating , as Adams put it , " a kind of cheerleader thing . It all induces a nervous energy in you and creates a lot of pressure , and gives the whole thing a performance feel . " Recording concluded on 14 May 1993 . 
 In the final weeks , the band decided to exclude the traditional rock songs and guitar @-@ driven tracks they had written in favour of an " album of disjointed , experimental pop " . The Edge received a production credit — his first on a U2 record — for the extra level of responsibility he assumed for the album . Twenty songs were recorded during the sessions , but ultimately 10 were chosen for the final track listing . One piece that was left off the record was " In Cold Blood " , which featured somber lyrics written by Bono in response to the Bosnian War and was previewed prior to the album 's release . Other tracks that were left off the album included " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " , " If God Will Send His Angels " , " If You Wear That Velvet Dress " , and " Wake Up Dead Man " . The first was later released as a single from the Batman Forever soundtrack in 1995 , and the latter three were included on the band 's following studio album , Pop , in 1997 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 With an even more " European " musical aesthetic than Achtung Baby , Zooropa is a further departure from the group 's " rootsy " sound of the late 1980s . Much like how the group embraced technology for the Zoo TV Tour , they utilized technology as a musical resource to a greater extent on Zooropa . The record exhibits additional influences from alternative rock , electronic dance music , and industrial music — it is more synthesised than U2 's past work , featuring various sound effects , audio loops , and use of synthesisers . In addition to The Edge playing synthesiser , Brian Eno received credit for the instrument on six tracks . 
 The Edge 's guitar playing on Zooropa marks a further shift away from his trademark style , highlighted by a heavier reliance on guitar effects and the songs ' reduced emphasis on his guitar parts . The danceable " Lemon " , called a " space @-@ age German disco " by Stephen Thomas Erlewine , features a guitar part played with rhythmic gated reverb effect . The distorted " Daddy 's Gonna Pay For Your Crashed Car " was described by Bono as " industrial blues " . The instrumentation of the closing song , " The Wanderer " , consists primarily of a synthesised bassline and was described by the group as resembling the " ultimate Holiday Inn band from hell " . The song was sequenced as the final track because U2 wanted to end the album on a " musical joke " . 
 Similar to how the Zoo TV Tour display screens sampled video footage from television programming , a number of songs from Zooropa sample audio . The introduction to the title track , " Zooropa " , contains a noisy collage of indecipherable human voices from radio signals — credited to the " advertising world " — played over sustained synthesiser chords . The industrial @-@ influenced " Numb " features a noisy backdrop of sampled , rhythmic noises , including " arcade sounds " , a Walkman rewinding , and a Hitler Youth boy banging a bass drum in the 1935 propaganda film Triumph of the Will . " Daddy 's Gonna Pay For Your Crashed Car " begins with a snippet of fanfare from Lenin 's Favourite Songs and samples MC 900 Ft . Jesus ' song " The City Sleeps " . 
 The vocals on Zooropa are a further departure from U2 's previous style . As Jon Pareles described , Bono " underplays his lung power " throughout the record , in contrast to his impassioned , belting vocals from past work . Additionally , in songs such as " Lemon " and " Numb " , Bono sings in an operatic falsetto he calls the " Fat Lady " voice . Two tracks feature other people on lead vocals : for " Numb " , The Edge provides lead vocals in the form of a droning , monotonous list of " don 't " commands ; for " The Wanderer " , country musician Johnny Cash sings lead vocals , juxtaposing the electronic nature of the song with his haggard voice . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Bono is credited as the sole lyricist for eight of the ten songs , while The Edge received sole credit for " Numb " . The duo share credits for the lyrics to " Dirty Day " . Technology is a common theme on Zooropa , inspired by the group 's experiences on the Zoo TV Tour . Jon Pareles wrote that the songs are about how " media messages infect characters ' souls " , while music journalist David Browne said the songs are concerned with " emotional fracturing in the techno @-@ <unk> age " . Critic Robert Hilburn interpreted the album as U2 probing into what they saw as the " disillusionment of the modern age " . 
 " Zooropa " is set amongst neon signs of a brightly lit futuristic city . In the song 's introduction , background voices ask , " What do you want ? " In response to the question , the lyrics in the first three verses consist of various advertising slogans , including , " Better by design " , " Be all that you can be " , and " Vorsprung durch <unk> " . Critic Parry Gettelman interpreted these lines as meaning to " signify the emptiness of modern , godless life " . In the song 's second half , the theme of moral confusion and uncertainty is introduced , particularly in the lines " I have no compass / And I have no map " . " Babyface " is about a man practicing his obsessive love for a celebrity by manipulating her image on a TV recording . " Lemon " , inspired by an old video of Bono 's late mother in a lemon @-@ coloured dress , describes man 's attempts to preserve time through technology . This is reflected in lines such as , " A man makes a picture / A moving picture / Through the light projected he can see himself up close " . The lyrics to " Numb " are a series of " don 't " commands , amidst a noisy backdrop of sounds . The Edge notes that the song was inspired by one of the themes of Zoo TV , " that sense that you were getting bombarded with so much that you actually were finding yourself shutting down and unable to respond because there was so much imagery and information being thrown at you " . 
 In contrast to the technology @-@ inspired lyrics of many songs , others had more domestic themes . " The First Time " was Bono 's interpretation of the story of the Prodigal son , but in his version , the son decides not to return home . Similarly , " Dirty Day " was written about a character who abandons his family and returns years later to meet his son . Many of the track 's lyrics are taken from phrases that Bono 's father commonly used , such as " No blood is thicker than ink " and " It won 't last kissing time " . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " is a love song written for an abused woman . Bono based his lyrics to " The Wanderer " on the Old Testament 's Book of Ecclesiastes , and he modeled the song 's character after the book 's narrator , " The Preacher " . In the song , the narrator wanders through a post @-@ apocalyptic world " in search of experience " , sampling all facets of human culture and hoping to find meaning in life . Bono described the song as an " antidote to the Zooropa manifesto of uncertainty " , and he believes it presents a possible solution to the uncertainty expressed earlier on the album . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The sleeve was designed by Works Associates of Dublin under the direction of Steve Averill , who had created the majority of U2 's album covers . Brian Williams was the graphic designer and created the digital images and layout . Inspired by the Zoo TV Tour 's " highly charged electronic TV images in all of their saturated colours and fizz " , Works Associates conceived a " kind of electronic flag " for Zooropa . The cover features a sketch of the circle of stars from the Flag of Europe with an " <unk> " drawing in the center . The illustration , created by Shaughn McGrath , was an alteration of the " graffiti babyface " by Charlie Whisker that was originally on the face of the Achtung Baby compact disc / vinyl record . The cover 's drawing was meant to represent an urban legend of a Soviet cosmonaut supposedly left floating in orbit for weeks after the collapse of the Soviet Union . In the background is a montage of blurred images , similar to the arrangement of images on Achtung Baby 's sleeve . The images include shots of a woman 's face and mouth , as well as photographs of European leaders , including Vladimir Lenin , Benito Mussolini , and Nicolae Ceauşescu . These images are obscured by distorted purple text comprising the names of songs planned for the record that were provided to Works Associates during the sleeve design process . However , the album 's track listing was eventually changed and the titles of several songs withheld from the album were accidentally left in the cover image ; the songs include " Wake Up Dead Man " , " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " , and " If You Wear That Velvet Dress " . Author <unk> Cogan described this text as giving the impression of a " torn veil " . 
 Zooropa was named for the " Zooropa " leg of the Zoo TV Tour , which began in May 1993 while the band completed the record . The name is a portmanteau of " zoo " ( from Zoo TV Tour and " Zoo Station " ) and " Europa " . During the album 's production , one of the proposed titles was Squeaky . The Album cover won multiple awards for the artwork including Best Cover voted by Music Maker magazine . 
 = = Release = = 
 Zooropa completed U2 's contractual obligation to Island Records , and to PolyGram , the multinational that purchased Island in 1989 . Although the group were free to sign a new contract elsewhere , their strong relationship with the label and its founder Chris Blackwell prompted the band to remain with Island / Polygram by signing a long @-@ term , six @-@ album deal . The Los Angeles Times estimated that the deal was worth US $ 60 million to U2 , making them the highest @-@ paid rock group ever . At the time , the group were cognizant of several emerging technologies that would potentially impact the delivery and transmission of music to consumers in the following years . Author Bill Flanagan speculated , " Record stores could become obsolete as music is delivered over cable , telephone wires , or satellite transmissions directly into consumers ' homes . " With uncertainty over the future of these technologies and the implications of entertainment and telecommunications companies merging , the band negotiated with Island that the division of their earnings from future transmission systems would be flexible and decided upon at a relevant time . U2 toyed with the idea of releasing Zooropa as an interactive audio @-@ video presentation in lieu of conventional physical formats , but the deadline imposed by the Zoo TV Tour prevented the band from realising this idea . 
 U2 's delivery of Zooropa in late May caught PolyGram somewhat off @-@ guard , because they were not expecting a new album by the group for several years . With Achtung Baby , PolyGram had approximately six months to market the record and plan its release strategy , but the sudden completion of Zooropa necessitated a more hurried promotional plan . PolyGram president / CEO Rick <unk> explained : " For the last one , we prepared for six months . It was like a marathon . But this is like a sprint , and that is the spirit it was made in . The band was so excited about it , they sprinted to complete the album before the ... tour . We want to bring it to the street with that same spirit . " Island / PolyGram 's and U2 's marketing for Zooropa was intended to focus less on singles and more on the record as a whole , and ultimately , only three singles were released , compared to Achtung Baby 's five singles . The first single " Numb " was released in June 1993 exclusively on VHS as a " video single " . The music video was directed by Kevin Godley . The song peaked at number seven in Australia and number nine in Canada , while reaching number two on the US Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . However , it failed to chart on the singles charts in the UK or US . 
 Zooropa was released on 5 July 1993 , during the Zooropa leg of the Zoo TV Tour . An initial shipment of 1 @.@ 6 million copies was made available in stores at the time of release . The album performed very well commercially , debuting at number one in the United States , United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , France , Germany , Austria , Sweden , and Switzerland . It also reached number one in the Netherlands , Italy , Japan , Norway , Denmark , Ireland , and Iceland . In the US , the album spent its first two weeks on the Billboard 200 at the top spot , staying in the top 10 for seven weeks . In its first week on sale , Zooropa sold 377 @,@ 000 copies in the US , the group 's best debut in the country to that point . The album reached the top 10 in 26 countries . Despite reaching impressive peak positions , it had a shorter stay on the music charts than Achtung Baby did . In total , Zooropa spent 40 weeks on the Billboard 200 , 60 fewer weeks than Achtung Baby . Similarly , the album 's stay of 31 weeks on the UK Albums Chart was a decrease of 56 weeks from its predecessor . 
 Two additional commercial singles were released from the album . " Lemon " received a limited commercial release in North America , Australia , and Japan in September 1993 . The single peaked at number six in Australia and number three on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . The final commercial single was " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " , released worldwide on 22 November 1993 . It was the album 's most successful single , topping the Irish Singles Chart and peaking at number five in Australia , number six in New Zealand , number four in the UK , and number 61 in the US — making it the record 's only single to chart on the UK Singles Chart and Hot 100 . " Zooropa " was released as a promotional single in Mexico and the United States . By the end of 1993 , Zooropa had sold 1 @.@ 8 million copies in the US . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Zooropa received generally favourable reviews from critics . Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone wrote in his four @-@ star review that the album was " a daring , imaginative coda to Achtung Baby " and that " it is varied and vigorously experimental , but its charged mood of giddy anarchy suffused with barely suppressed dread provides a compelling , unifying thread " . Spin wrote a positive review , commenting that the record " sounds mostly like a band shedding its skin , trying on different selves for size " . The review said the album " has the feel of real collectivity " , praising the cohesiveness of the individual band members ' playing . The review concluded by saying Zooropa " indicates U2 might be worthy of whatever absurd mutations the ' 90s throw our way " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised the group for transforming themselves and becoming " raucous , playful and ready to kick its old habits " . Pareles enjoyed the sonics and electronic effects that made the " sound of a straightforward four @-@ man band ... hard to find " , and he commented that " The new songs seem destined not for stadiums ... but for late @-@ night radio shows and private listenings through earphones . " The Orlando Sentinel gave the record a rating of three @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five stars , commenting , " Although U2 leans heavily on the electronic sound of contemporary dance music , the rhythm tracks on Zooropa are less than propulsive . " The review said that Brian Eno 's production and the electronic flourishes made the album interesting , but that ultimately , " there 's nothing especially hummable " and " the songs are not very memorable " . 
 David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave Zooropa an " A " , calling it " harried , spontaneous @-@ sounding , and ultimately exhilarating album " . Browne noted that it sounds " messy " and " disconnected " , but clarified " that sense of incoherence is the point " in the context of the record 's technology themes . He concluded , " For an album that wasn 't meant to be an album , it 's quite an album . " Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times gave the record a maximum score of four stars . In two separate articles , he said that it " captured the anxious , even paranoid tone of the Zoo TV Tour " so much so that " it stands as the first tour album that doesn 't include any of the songs from the tour " and yet sounds like a " souvenir " of Zoo TV . In a positive review , Jim Sullivan of The Boston Globe called the album a " creative stretch " , noting that the band experiments more yet retains their recognizable sound . He commented that the group 's " yearning anthemic reach " and " obvious , slinky pop charm " are replaced with " darker corners , more disruptive interjections , more moodiness " . Paul Du Noyer of Q gave Zooropa a score of four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five stars , finding a " freewheeling feel of going with the flow " throughout the album and calling it " rootless and loose , restless and unsettled " . For Du Noyer , U2 sounded " monstrously tight as a performing unit and fluidly inventive as composers , so the results transcend the merely experimental " . 
 A review from The New Zealand Herald was more critical , noting that the album started as an EP and " just got longer but not necessarily better " . The publication called it " more perplexing than challenging " and commented that it " sounds like the biggest band in the world having one of the biggest , strangest mid @-@ life crises " . Jim DeRogatis of the Chicago Sun Times gave the record a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star review , calling it " inconsistent " , but admitting " it 's satisfying and surprising to hear a band of U2 's status being so playful , experimental , and downright weird " . Robert Christgau gave the album a B − , calling it " half an Eno album " in the same manner that David Bowie 's Eno @-@ produced albums Low and " Heroes " were , but saying , " The difference is that Bowie and Eno were fresher in 1977 than Bono and Eno are today . " The Irish media was most consistently negative in their reviews of the album ; George Byrne of the Irish Independent said , " The songs sound like they were knocked up in double @-@ quick time and with about as much thought put into the lyrics as goes into a DJ 's <unk> " . Byrne remarked that the record resembles " a lot of mickey @-@ taking over a variety of drum patterns " . In a retrospective , four @-@ star review , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that " most of the record is far more daring than its predecessor " . For him , although there were moments that the album was " unfocused and meandering ... the best moments of Zooropa rank among U2 's most inspired and rewarding music " . 
 Zooropa finished in 9th place on the " Best Albums " list from The Village Voice 's 1993 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . At the 36th Annual Grammy Awards , it won the award for Best Alternative Music Album . In his acceptance speech , Bono sarcastically mocked the " alternative " characterisation the album received and used a profanity on live television : " I think I 'd like to give a message to the young people of America . And that is : We shall continue to abuse our position and fuck up the mainstream . " 
 = = Zoo TV Tour = = 
 The band began the Zoo TV Tour in February 1992 in support of Achtung Baby . In contrast to the austere stage setups of previous U2 tours , Zoo TV was an elaborate multimedia event . It satirised television and the viewing public 's over @-@ stimulation by attempting to instill " sensory overload " in its audience . The stage featured large video screens that showed visual effects , random video clips from pop culture , and flashing text phrases . Live satellite link @-@ ups , channel surfing , crank calls , and video confessionals were incorporated into the shows . 
 The Zooropa album was released in July 1993 , halfway through the Zooropa leg of the tour . Of the 157 shows the band played during the Zoo TV Tour , approximately 30 of them were after the release of Zooropa . Many of the album 's songs found permanent places in the shows ' setlists . " Lemon " and " Daddy 's Gonna Pay for Your Crashed Car " were performed with Bono in his MacPhisto persona , during encores of the Zoomerang Leg of the tour . " Dirty Day " was also played on this leg after the acoustic set . " Numb " was performed with The Edge playing guitar and on lead vocals , with Mullen performing backing vocals while drumming . " Zooropa " was played only three times and " Babyface " twice more at the same shows on the Zooropa leg , but they were cut out of the setlist after the band were displeased with how they sounded live . " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " was performed acoustically for the Zooropa and Zoomerang legs . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Zooropa is certified 2 × Platinum in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America , 3 × Platinum in Australia , Platinum in the UK , and 4 × Platinum in both New Zealand and Canada . To date , it has sold more than 7 million copies . 
 After the release of the record , David Bowie praised the band , writing , " [ U2 ] might be all shamrocks and deutsche marks to some , but I feel that they are one of the few rock bands even attempting to hint at a world which will continue past the next great wall — the year 2000 . " Although the record was a success , in the years following its release , the group have regarded it with mixed feelings and rarely play its material in live performances . Bono said , " I thought of Zooropa at the time as a work of genius . I really thought our pop discipline was matching our experimentation and this was our Sgt. Pepper . I was a little wrong about that . The truth is our pop disciplines were letting us down . We didn 't create hits . We didn 't quite deliver the songs . And what would Sgt. Pepper be without the pop songs ? " The Edge said that he did not think the songs were " potent " , further stating , " I never thought of Zooropa as anything more than an interlude ... but a great one , as interludes go . By far our most interesting . " Clayton said , " It 's an odd record and a favourite of mine . " 
 Neil McCormick wrote about Zooropa , " It feels like a minor work , and generally U2 don 't do minor . But if you 're not going to make the Big Statement , you 're maybe going to come up with something that has the oxygen of pop music . " In 1997 , Spin wrote , " Zooropa took U2 as far from the monastic mysticism of The Joshua Tree as they could go . It freed U2 from itself . " Edna Gundersen of USA Today said in 2002 , " the alien territory of Achtung Baby and Zooropa cemented U2 's relevance and enhanced its cachet as intrepid explorers " . In 2011 , Rolling Stone ranked the record at number 61 on its list of " 100 Best Albums of the Nineties " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by U2 . 
 After " The Wanderer " fades out , a " hidden track " , consisting of a ringing alarm used to alert disc jockeys of " dead air " , plays for 30 seconds . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 U2 
 Bono – vocals , guitar 
 The Edge – guitar , piano , synthesisers , vocals 
 Adam Clayton – bass guitar 
 Larry Mullen , Jr . – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 Additional performers 
 Brian Eno – synthesisers , piano , arcade sounds , backing vocals , loops , strings , harmonium 
 Des <unk> – loops ( tracks 2 , 6 , 7 ) 
 Flood – loops ( tracks 6 , 10 ) 
 Johnny Cash – lead vocals ( track 10 ) 
 Technical 
 Production – Flood , Brian Eno , The Edge 
 Mixing – Flood , Robbie Adams 
 Engineering – Flood , Robbie Adams 
 Engineering and mixing assistance – Willie Mannion , Rob Kirwan , Mary McShane 
 Digital editing – Stewart Whitmore 
 Mastering – Arnie Acosta 
 = = Charting and certifications = = 
 = Born This Way ( Glee ) = 
 " Born This Way " is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the American television series Glee , and the fortieth episode overall . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on April 26 , 2011 . The episode was written by Brad Falchuk and directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon , and is a tribute to Lady Gaga , the second such tribute to the artist in the show 's history ; the first one was " Theatricality " . Most of the major plots of the episode center on the topic of homosexuality , as Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) lays the groundwork for his longtime bully Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) to come to terms with his sexuality , and Santana ( Naya Rivera ) plots to run for school prom queen in the hopes of winning her love interest Brittany ( Heather Morris ) from Artie ( Kevin McHale ) . 
 " Born This Way " attracted mostly positive reception from most critics of the show , as many felt that it was one of the better episodes of the season . However , the episode came under scrutiny by several conservative media critics who criticized the show 's depiction of homosexuality . This episode featured cover versions of seven songs , notably a cover of " Born This Way " by Lady Gaga . Other musical works featured in the episode include cover versions of the Keane song " Somewhere Only We Know " and " I 've Gotta Be Me " from the 1968 Broadway production Golden Rainbow . The musical covers and performances were met with generally positive reception from critics , with several noting that it contained the best musical selection in a while . With the exception of " Barbra Streisand " , all cover versions were released as singles available for digital download . 
 Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 62 million American viewers , and garnered a 3 @.@ 4 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , the lowest ratings and total viewership of the season . The episode 's ratings and total viewership significantly declined from the previous episode , " Night of Neglect " , which had previously been the low point in viewership . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During dance rehearsals for the upcoming Nationals competition , New Directions glee club co @-@ captain Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) accidentally breaks Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) nose . Her doctor ( George <unk> ) recommends <unk> and elective rhinoplasty ; Rachel considers modelling her nose after Finn 's current girlfriend Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) , and the two girls duet on the mash @-@ up " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " . Both Finn and Puck ( Mark Salling ) oppose her planned transformation . Puck tries to help her accept her nose as part of her Jewish heritage , and recruits Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , who convinces her to look to her idol Barbra Streisand , who refused to succumb to pressure to alter her nose . Ultimately , Rachel decides against having surgery . 
 Club member Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) uses Rachel 's broken nose as a launching point to highlight the other group members ' physical flaws . Aiming to help them achieve self @-@ acceptance , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) urges them to embrace their perceived flaws by printing them on T @-@ shirts to be worn during a group performance of Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " . He also encourages school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) to confront her OCD ; she begins treatment with a psychiatrist , Dr. Shane ( Kathleen Quinlan ) . 
 Santana , who is a closeted lesbian , decides to run for school prom queen in the hope that she can win the love of her best friend Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) , who is dating Artie ( Kevin McHale ) . She realizes that popular jock Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) is also in the closet , after noticing him checking out Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) , and hatches an elaborate scheme to attain her goals : she threatens to out Karofsky unless he agrees to stop the bullying that drove Kurt from McKinley and the glee club . The pair form an anti @-@ bullying club to make the school safer in order to entice Kurt back and bolster the glee club 's chance at Nationals , though mostly to boost Santana 's popularity before the prom . They also become one another 's " beard " to bolster their heterosexual facades . 
 Karofsky issues an apology to Kurt at a group meeting involving Will , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , and their fathers . Though Kurt wants to transfer back to McKinley from Dalton Academy , he is hesitant until Karofsky admits privately that Santana 's prom queen scheme is behind his change of heart and the anti @-@ bullying movement ; Kurt agrees to return , but only if Karofsky will start a school PFLAG club with him . As Kurt arrives back at McKinley , the Dalton Academy Warblers glee club that he had joined while he was away — fronted by his boyfriend Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) — serenades him in farewell with a rendition of Keane 's " Somewhere Only We Know " . Kurt marks his re @-@ entry to New Directions with a solo performance of " As If We Never Said Goodbye " from Sunset Boulevard . 
 As the race for prom queen intensifies , Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) begins campaigning against Quinn . She discovers that Quinn 's first name is Lucy , and that she used to be an overweight outcast who had rhinoplasty before re @-@ inventing herself and transferring to McKinley . Lauren attempts to sabotage Quinn 's campaign by revealing her former image to the other students , but it backfires when Quinn 's popularity actually increases amongst the girls like Lauren . Lauren apologizes to Quinn , but Quinn commends her for her confidence and pride . Brittany shows off her shirt to Santana , and gives Santana a shirt reading " Lebanese " , believing that it reads " Lesbian " . Santana balks at wearing it , and the two argue ; Brittany finally storms off saying that if Santana loved herself as much as Brittany loved her , she would put on the shirt and dance with her . The episode closes with the club , minus Santana , embracing their identities and performing " Born This Way " . During the song , Emma arrives wearing a T @-@ shirt that acknowledges her own problems — it reads " OCD " — and she and Will join the performance . Karofsky and Santana watch from the audience , with Santana wearing her " Lebanese " shirt . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was extended and ran for 90 minutes , as opposed to the usual 60 minutes . Michael Ausiello of TVLine reported that the producers included two extra musical performances to fill the extended time slot . Series creator Ian Brennan stated that he believed the extension was granted as there were two songs which would otherwise have been cut for length . He welcomed the additional 24 minutes of screen time , and commented : " We 're always desperately cutting down our episodes . Even when we write them , and then in the editing room we 're always throwing away stuff that I really love to get it down to time . [ ... ] It will be just really interesting content @-@ wise for us [ to have an extension ] . " 
 The focus of the episode is Lady Gaga 's song " Born This Way " , which she approved for use in Glee before the song premiered . This will be the second episode to highlight Gaga 's music , the first one being season one 's " Theatricality " . According to Monteith , the focus of " Born This Way " is the characters " embracing the things about [ them ] selves that [ they ] don 't like and tailoring [ their ] performances around that . " It features homophobic Dave Karofsky starting to come to terms with his homosexuality . The plot arc , which began in the season 's sixth episode , " Never Been Kissed " , is intended by series creator Ryan Murphy to have a happy ending . He explained that , while someone like Karofsky could turn to drugs or alcohol or commit suicide , Glee is " by nature optimistic " , so he plans to conclude the storyline positively . For fellow closeted character Santana , " Born This Way " set up the final three episodes of the season , which will increase focus on her love for her best friend Brittany . The episode additionally marked the first appearance of guest star Dr. Shane , " a very smart , cool and kind psychiatrist " who may become a recurring character . Other characters seen in " Born This Way " include glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans and Lauren Zizes , Kurt 's boyfriend Blaine Anderson , school bully Azimio ( James Earl ) , Principal Figgins , and Karofsky 's father , Paul ( Daniel Roebuck ) . 
 In addition to " Born This Way " , the other songs covered in the episode were Keane 's " Somewhere Only We Know " , " As If We Never Said Goodbye " from the musical Sunset Boulevard , a mash @-@ up of " I Feel Pretty " from West Side Story and " Unpretty " by TLC , " I 've Gotta Be Me " from the musical Golden Rainbow , and Duck Sauce 's " Barbra Streisand " . All but " Barbra Streisand " were released as digital singles for the episode . " Somewhere Only We Know " was included on the series ' seventh soundtrack , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers , and " As If We Never Said Goodbye " , " Born This Way " and " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " were included on the series ' eighth soundtrack , Glee : The Music , Volume 6 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Born This Way " was first broadcast on April 26 , 2011 , in the United States . It averaged a 3 @.@ 4 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and also averaged nearly 8 @.@ 62 million American viewers during its initial airing . The first hour of the show garnered 8 @.@ 3 million American viewers and a 3 @.@ 3 / 9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , despite airing simultaneously with a rerun of NCIS on CBS , The Biggest Loser on NBC , No Ordinary Family on ABC , and One Tree Hill on The CW . The last half @-@ hour of the episode had 8 @.@ 5 million American viewers , as well as a 3 @.@ 4 / 9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , despite airing alongside a rerun of NCIS : Los Angeles on CBS , Dancing with the Stars on ABC , The Voice on NBC , and Hellcats on The CW . The total viewership and ratings were the lowest of the second season of Glee , and was down from those of the previous episode , " Night of Neglect " , which was watched by 9 @.@ 80 million American viewers and acquired a 3 @.@ 8 / 11 rating / share upon first airing . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 52 million viewers ( 2 @.@ 087 million on E4 , and 433 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Born This Way " was given a positive reception by many critics of the show . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone and Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly both considered it to be an improvement from the previous episode . Futterman wrote that it " gave us the charm , wit and just @-@ zany @-@ enough @-@ to @-@ be @-@ plausible plot lines we were sorely missing after last week 's predictable " episode , and added , " Even better : the episode didn 't feel as long as the 90 minutes it clocked in at . " IGN 's Robert Canning gave the episode a " great " rating of 8 out of 10 . While he said the episode was entertaining , he felt that it did not need to be an hour and a half . Emily Yahr of The Washington Post agreed about the extended length , and did not like what she called " lame attempts to fill time " , which she said " detracted from what started as a decent episode " . She did , however , cite several " promising storylines " , including Rachel 's , and noted , " Usually , New Directions leader Rachel Berry is a caricature of all things annoying — but this episode , we see her genuinely struggling with wanting to love herself the way she is " . The Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson summed it up as follows : " Not an epic episode , just sort of … meh . " Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times reacted more positively and wrote , " The 90 @-@ minute episode had a lot of laughs , a lot of heart , some good lessons , character development , a few good numbers and more than a few surprises . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff gave it a " B " , and wrote that he " finally got a sense that , yes , this second season has been building toward something and has been trying to tell an emotional story , as well as a humorous one . ' Born This Way ' , for the first time in a long time , made me feel like I could say I was a fan of Glee without a million qualifiers . " Gary Mills of the Florida Times @-@ Union felt that the episode didn 't live up to its hype , but also said that he wasn 't disappointed . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair reacted positively , and noted that by " focusing on what makes these lovable dorks , well , lovable dorks — and not pop , or high @-@ school , superstars — tonight 's episode , if a bit tidily , reminded us that these are supposed to be kids " . Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon thought that " Born This Way " was " the show 's best episode to date " , and " an epic about a hero returning from a long journey , walking serenely through halls that once scared him , and performing with such skill and sincerity that his friends stared at him with love and awe . " Aly Semigran of MTV had mixed emotions . She criticized the abrupt changes of the storylines in the episode , and thought that the episode " was a noble effort " but " it didn 't quite work the way it was supposed to . " Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal stated that the episode " sounded just the perfect notes " and called it " the best episode yet " . He continued : " The night held wonderful gems : A clear message . Witty repartee ( … ) . Great character build up . And tailored songs that carried emotional heft . " 
 Several critics praised the development of Santana . Hankinson wrote , " My goodness , Santana . It 's as if all the writers sat around a room , identified the best lines of tonight 's episode and then decided to give them all to Santana . Fantastic . " VanDerWerff called Santana the highlight of the episode : " The best thing about this episode is Naya Rivera 's work as Santana and the story the three writers have cooked up for her . Rivera 's really come into her own this season , going from just a generic bitchy cheerleader to an actual character who has motivations and might be a better villain for the show than Sue . " He added , " the storyline of Santana realizing she was in love with Brittany and , thus , is probably a lesbian has been nicely plotted and surprisingly deep . The reveal about Santana hasn 't washed away her less savory qualities ; indeed , it 's heightened them , to a degree , as she struggles to be true to herself and still maintain her status as the hottest girl in school . " Jenna Mullins of E ! Online wrote of Santana , " This episode just cemented my love for her . The insult spew in the beginning of the episode was awesomely mean . " She also said that Santana 's " inner monologue is often more entertaining than other characters ' outer monologues " . CNN 's Lisa Respers France considered Santana the episode 's highlight , and went on to write , " She embraced her inner lesbian ( sort of ) and rattled off the best [ lines ] like ' the only straight I am is straight @-@ up [ bitch ] . ' You gotta love that . " 
 Some critics reacted negatively to the episode . Scott Pierce of The Salt Lake Tribune felt that the show has jumped the shark starting from this episode . He felt that the Kurt storyline had some major flaws , and that the messages being sent have been mixed . The episode garnered criticism from a number of conservatives , who found the depiction of homosexuality abrasive . In an interview with ABC News , conservative media critic Dan Gainor felt that it was Ryan Murphy 's " latest depraved initiative to promote his gay agenda . " He added : " This is clearly Ryan Murphy 's vision of what growing up should be , not most of America 's . It 's a high school most parents would not want to send their kids to . " 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances and cover versions in the episode received generally positive commentary . Gonzalez stated that she loved the song choices , and Meghan Brown of The Atlantic felt that this episode carried the best selection of music of a Glee episode in a long time . Flandez commended that they are " tailored songs that carried emotional heft " . 
 Critics mostly reacted with acclaim for the mash @-@ up of " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " . Gonzalez gave the performance an " A " and commented : " While part of me would have said that pairing Rachel and Quinn for a duet would vocally be like putting a pit bull in a cage match with a <unk> , it actually worked ! There was a surprisingly balanced and incredibly lovely tone . " All three writers of The Atlantic 's review praised the mash @-@ up : Patrick Burns said it was beautiful , and noted that " the arrangement was clever , the ladies sounded great , and the song was placed perfectly into the plot of two characters who were restored a bit of their depth in this episode " , Brown stated that the song was lovely , and Kevin Fallon felt that it was " unexpectedly gorgeous and haunting " , and noted that it was " yet another example of how skilled the music directors are at these mash @-@ ups . " Semigran felt that it was the best performance of the night , and TV Line 's Michael Slezak gave the piece an " A " , and said that it was a " vocally and visually stunning set piece for the unlikeliest of duet partners . " Flandez commented that the song " floated like gossamer between Rachel and Quinn as they beautifully poured the sentiments of ugly ducklings " , and Futterman wrote , " It 's a poignant moment , and the inclusion of West Side Story 's ' I Feel Pretty ' makes for a great pop / theater mash @-@ up that reminds us of what Glee is at its heart . " 
 Kurt 's performance of " As If We Never Said Goodbye " was also met with critical acclaim . Brown stated that the song was " absolutely stunning in every conceivable way . " She thought that he had the emotional connection , the musicality , and the storytelling ability " down pat " . Gonzalez gave the song an " A − " and wrote , " Kurt apparently picked up a few helpful notes ... from his Warbler brothers and emerged an even better solo singer than I recall . ... Most enjoyable , however , was a tenderness Kurt added to the song that I don 't think could have been duplicated by any other member of this ensemble . " Slezak commended Kurt 's voice , gave the song an " A " , and said , " I feel like we haven 't had too many strong musical moments from Kurt this season , but this number , which pushed Chris Colfer 's falsetto to impressive heights , went a long way to erase the deficit . " Futterman thought that it was " a sweeter moment than last season 's ' Rose 's Turn ' , but the high notes and big vocals are still there . " Berk gave it three out of five stars and called it " lovely , and properly sentimental " . Zoller Seitz called the performance " spellbinding " and concluded , " Chris Colfer turns ' As if We Never Said Goodbye ' into a valentine to self @-@ knowledge and self @-@ improvement — and a young , gay singer 's dream of treating the world as a stage and commanding it like a star . " 
 The New Directions ' rendition of " Born This Way " was strongly approved by Lady Gaga . On her Twitter account , she wrote , " I really loved Glee 's Born This Way episode . I admire the show for being brave + fighting for such modern social messaging . Never back down . " Gonzalez gave the performance a " B + " , and commented that it wasn 't her favorite group number , mostly because she felt the song " wasn 't [ Lady Gaga 's ] best effort " . Berk was less kind about the song , and called it a " crappy but thematically admirable Gaga tune " , though he gave it three stars out of five . Slezak gave it an " A − " and approved of the rendition : " it was nice to see and hear Tina , Mercedes and Kurt on lead vocals — instead of , say , Blaine , Rachel , and Mr. Schue . " 
 The duet of " I Gotta Be Me " by Finn and Mike was considered to be " shockingly adorable " by Berk , who gave it four stars out of five . Slezak was less impressed : " The jazz band arrangement and the Mike @-@ teaches @-@ Finn @-@ some @-@ moves choreography was cute , I guess , but it 's not a good sign that I spent half the number focusing on Mike 's matching green t @-@ shirt and shoe laces . " He went on to question the song 's inclusion — " In an episode about confronting one 's greatest teenage insecurities , I wonder if there might have been a better choice for a solo than the popular football player with the cheerleader girlfriend lamenting his inability to dance " — and ultimately gave the performance a " B − " . Futterman also commented on the song 's selection , though from a slightly different angle : " In theory it 's charming — and there are definitely moments of the ' I can dance / You can 't dance ' exchange that were enjoyable — but we couldn 't ever imagine this song as something Finn would have voluntarily picked . " 
 " Somewhere Only We Know " , as performed by Blaine and the Warblers , received an " A + " from Gonzalez , who loved the song and commented that she was " going to miss the Warblers " . Slezak gave the performance a " B " , and said that he " can 't be too mad at another pretty song sung well by Darren Criss . " The performance was acclaimed by Futterman , who wrote , " While the rest of the Warblers maintain their stoic facade , Blaine shows enough emotion to make this bittersweet Keane tune a simple , yet powerful , performance . " 
 The flash @-@ mob mall performance of " Barbra Streisand " was deemed to be pointless by Gonzalez , and she gave it a " C " , her lowest grade of the episode . Futterman enjoyed the performance , thinking that it was " the episode 's most fun moment and beats out last year 's ' Safety Dance ' for Glee numbers done in a mall . " Slezak also reacted positively to the performance , giving it a " B + " . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Several of the cover versions featured debuted on numerous musical charts . The show 's rendition of " Born This Way " debuted at number forty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 , on an issue dated for May 4 , 2011 . It sold 73 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week of release as a digitally downloadable single . The mash @-@ up of " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " was the highest charted single featured in the episode , debuting at number twenty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also peaked at number thirteen on the Digital 100 charts and sold 112 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States in its first week of release . It was the highest charting Glee single on the Billboard charts since " Loser Like Me " , which debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and sold over 210 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . " Somewhere Only We Know " peaked at number forty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 charts , and it sold over 75 @,@ 000 copies within its first week . The fourth single , " As If We Never Said Goodbye " , charted at number eighty . 
 In Ireland , two of the songs debuted on the Irish Singles Charts on an issue dated May 5 , 2011 . The mash @-@ up peaked at number thirty @-@ seven , while the cover version of " Somewhere Only We Know " trailed behind at number forty @-@ seven . On May 6 , three of the singles appeared on the Canadian Hot 100 . The " I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " mash @-@ up peaked the highest out of all the singles , debuting at twenty @-@ eight . It was followed by " Born This Way " and " Somewhere Only We Know " , which debuted at number thirty @-@ one and fifty @-@ two on the charts , respectively . 
 = Antoni Gaudí = 
 Antoni Gaudí i Cornet ( Catalan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 25 June 1852 – 10 June 1926 ) was a Spanish Catalan architect from Reus and the best known practitioner of Catalan Modernism . Gaudí 's works reflect an individualized and distinctive style . Most are located in Barcelona , including his magnum opus , the Sagrada Família . 
 Gaudí 's work was influenced by his passions in life : architecture , nature , and religion . Gaudí considered every detail of his creations and integrated into his architecture such crafts as ceramics , stained glass , wrought ironwork forging and carpentry . He also introduced new techniques in the treatment of materials , such as trencadís which used waste ceramic pieces . 
 Under the influence of neo @-@ Gothic art and Oriental techniques , Gaudí became part of the <unk> movement which was reaching its peak in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . His work transcended mainstream Modernisme , culminating in an organic style inspired by natural forms . Gaudí rarely drew detailed plans of his works , instead preferring to create them as three @-@ dimensional scale models and molding the details as he conceived them . 
 Gaudí 's work enjoys global popularity and continuing admiration and study by architects . His masterpiece , the still @-@ incomplete Sagrada Família , is the most @-@ visited monument in Spain . Between 1984 and 2005 , seven of his works were declared World Heritage Sites by UNESCO . Gaudí 's Roman Catholic faith intensified during his life and religious images appear in many of his works . This earned him the nickname " God 's Architect " and led to calls for his beatification . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth , childhood and studies = = = 
 Antoni Gaudi was born in 1852 in Riudoms or Reus , to the <unk> Francesc Gaudí i Serra ( 1813 – 1906 ) and <unk> Cornet i Bertran ( 1819 – 1876 ) . He was the youngest of five children , of whom three survived to adulthood : Rosa ( 1844 – 1879 ) , Francesc ( 1851 – 1876 ) and Antoni . Gaudí 's family originated in the Auvergne region in southern France . One of his ancestors , Joan Gaudí , a hawker , moved to Catalonia in the 17th century ; possible origins of Gaudí 's family name include Gaudy or Gaudin . 
 Gaudí 's exact birthplace is unknown because no supporting documents have been found , leading to a controversy about whether he was born in Reus or Riudoms , two neighbouring municipalities of the <unk> Camp district . Most of Gaudí 's identification documents from both his student and professional years gave Reus as his birthplace . Gaudí stated on various occasions that he was born in Riudoms , his paternal family 's village . Gaudí was baptised in the church of Sant Pere <unk> in Reus the day after his birth under the name " Antoni <unk> Guillem Gaudí i Cornet " . 
 Gaudí had a deep appreciation for his native land and great pride in his Mediterranean heritage . He believed Mediterranean people to be endowed with creativity , originality and an innate sense for art and design . Gaudí reportedly described this distinction by stating , " We own the image . Fantasy comes from the ghosts . Fantasy is what people in the North own . We are concrete . The image comes from the Mediterranean . Orestes knows his way , where Hamlet is torn apart by his doubts . " Time spent outdoors , particularly during summer stays in the Gaudí family home Mas de la <unk> , afforded Gaudí the opportunity to study nature . Gaudí 's enjoyment of the natural world led him to join the Centre <unk> de Catalunya in 1879 at the age of 27 . The organisation arranged expeditions to explore Catalonia and southern France , often riding on horseback or walking ten kilometres a day . 
 Young Gaudí suffered from poor health , including rheumatism , which may have contributed to his reticent and reserved character . These health concerns and the hygienist theories of Dr. <unk> contributed to Gaudí 's decision to adopt vegetarianism early in his life . His religious faith and strict vegetarianism led him to undertake several lengthy and severe fasts . These fasts were often unhealthy and occasionally , as in 1894 , led to life @-@ threatening illness . 
 Gaudí attended a nursery school run by Francesc Berenguer , whose son , also called Francesc , later became one of Gaudí 's main assistants . He enrolled in the Piarists school in Reus where he displayed his artistic talents via drawings for a seminar called El <unk> ( the Harlequin ) . During this time he worked as an apprentice in the " Vapor Nou " textile mill in Reus . In 1868 he moved to Barcelona to study teaching in the Convent del Carme . In his adolescent years Gaudí became interested in utopian socialism and , together with his fellow students Eduard Toda i Güell and Josep Ribera i Sans , planned a restoration of the Poblet Monastery that would have transformed it into a Utopian <unk> . 
 Between 1875 and 1878 , Gaudí completed his compulsory military service in the infantry regiment in Barcelona as a Military Administrator . Most of his service was spent on sick leave , enabling him to continue his studies . His poor health kept him from having to fight in the Third Carlist War , which lasted from 1872 to 1876 . In 1876 Gaudí 's mother died at the age of 57 , as did his 25 @-@ year @-@ old brother Francesc , who had just graduated as a physician . During this time Gaudí studied architecture at the <unk> School and the Barcelona Higher School of Architecture , graduating in 1878 . To finance his studies , Gaudí worked as a draughtsman for various architects and constructors such as Leandre Serrallach , Joan Martorell , Emili Sala Cortés , Francisco de Paula del Villar y Lozano and Josep Fontserè . In addition to his architecture classes , he studied French , history , economics , philosophy and aesthetics . His grades were average and he occasionally failed courses . When handing him his degree , <unk> <unk> , director of Barcelona Architecture School , said : " We have given this academic title either to a fool or a genius . Time will show . " Gaudí , when receiving his degree , reportedly told his friend , the sculptor Llorenç Matamala , with his ironical sense of humour , " Llorenç , they 're saying I 'm an architect now . " 
 = = = Adulthood and professional work = = = 
 Gaudí 's first projects were the lampposts he designed for the Plaça Reial in Barcelona , the unfinished Girossi newsstands , and the Cooperativa Obrera <unk> ( Workers ' Cooperative of Mataró ) building . He gained wider recognition for his first important commission , the Casa Vicens , and subsequently received more significant proposals . At the Paris World 's Fair of 1878 Gaudí displayed a showcase he had produced for the glove manufacturer Comella . Its functional and aesthetic modernista design impressed Catalan industrialist Eusebi Güell , who then commissioned some of Gaudí 's most outstanding work : the Güell wine cellars , the Güell pavilions , the Palau Güell ( Güell palace ) , the Park Güell ( Güell park ) and the crypt of the church of the Colònia Güell . Gaudí also became a friend of the marquis of Comillas , the father @-@ in @-@ law of Count Güell , for whom he designed " El Capricho " in Comillas . 
 In 1883 Gaudí was put in charge of the recently initiated project to build a Barcelona cathedral called Basílica i Temple <unk> de la Sagrada Família ( Basilica and <unk> Church of the Holy Family , or Sagrada Família ) . Gaudí completely changed the initial design and imbued it with his own distinctive style . From 1915 until his death he devoted himself entirely to this project . Given the number of commissions he began receiving , he had to rely on his team to work on multiple projects simultaneously . His team consisted of professionals from all fields of construction . Several of the architects who worked under him became prominent in the field later on , such as Josep Maria Jujol , Joan Rubió , Cèsar Martinell , Francesc Folguera and Josep Francesc Ràfols . In 1885 , Gaudí moved to rural Sant Feliu de <unk> to escape the cholera epidemic that was ravaging Barcelona . He lived in Francesc <unk> 's house , for whom he designed a dinner table as a sign of his gratitude . 
 The 1888 World Fair was one of the era 's major events in Barcelona and represented a key point in the history of the Modernisme movement . Leading architects displayed their best works , including Gaudí , who showcased the building he had designed for the Compañía <unk> ( Transatlantic Company ) . Consequently he received a commission to restructure the Saló de Cent of the Barcelona City Council , but this project was ultimately not carried out . In the early 1890s Gaudí received two commissions from outside of Catalonia , namely the Episcopal Palace , Astorga , and the Casa Botines in León . These works contributed to Gaudí 's growing renown across Spain . In 1891 , he travelled to Málaga and Tangiers to examine the site for a project for the Franciscan Catholic Missions that the 2nd marquis of Comillas had requested him to design . 
 In 1899 Gaudí joined the Cercle <unk> de Sant <unk> ( Saint Luke artistic circle ) , a Catholic artistic society founded in 1893 by the bishop Josep Torras i Bages and the brothers Josep and Joan Llimona . He also joined the <unk> Espiritual de la Mare de <unk> de Montserrat ( spiritual league of Our lady of Montserrat ) , another Catholic Catalan organisation . The conservative and religious character of his political thought was closely linked to his defence of the cultural identity of the Catalan people . 
 At the beginning of the century , Gaudí was working on numerous projects simultaneously . They reflected his shift to a more personal style inspired by nature . In 1900 , he received an award for the best building of the year from the Barcelona City Council for his Casa Calvet . During the first decade of the century Gaudí dedicated himself to projects like the Casa Figueras ( Figueras house , better known as Bellesguard ) , the Park Güell , an unsuccessful urbanisation project , and the restoration of the Cathedral of Palma de Mallorca , for which he visited Majorca several times . Between 1904 and 1910 he constructed the Casa Batlló ( Batlló house ) and the Casa Milà ( <unk> house ) , two of his most emblematic works . 
 As a result of Gaudí 's increasing fame , in 1902 the painter Joan Llimona chose Gaudí 's features to represent Saint Philip Neri in the paintings for the aisle of the Sant Felip Neri church in Barcelona . Together with Joan Santaló , son of his friend the physician Pere Santaló , he unsuccessfully founded a wrought iron manufacturing company the same year . 
 After moving to Barcelona , Gaudí frequently changed his address : as a student he lived in residences , generally in the area of the Gothic Quarter ; when he started his career he moved around several rented flats in the <unk> area . Finally , in 1906 , he settled in a house in the Güell Park that he owned and which had been constructed by his assistant Francesc Berenguer as a showcase property for the estate . It has since been transformed into the Gaudí Museum . There he lived with his father ( who died in 1906 at the age of 93 ) and his niece Rosa <unk> Gaudí ( who died in 1912 at the age of 36 ) . He lived in the house until 1925 , several months before his death , when he began residing inside the workshop of the Sagrada Família . 
 An event that had a profound impact on Gaudí 's personality was Tragic Week in 1909 . Gaudí remained in his house in Güell Park during this turbulent period . The anticlerical atmosphere and attacks on churches and convents caused Gaudí to worry for the safety of the Sagrada Família , but the building escaped damage . 
 In 1910 , an exhibition in the Grand Palais of Paris was devoted to his work , during the annual salon of the Société des Beaux @-@ Arts ( Fine Arts Society ) of France . Gaudí participated on the invitation of count Güell , displaying a series of pictures , plans and plaster scale models of several of his works . Although he participated hors <unk> , he received good reviews from the French press . A large part of this exposition could be seen the following year at the I Salón Nacional de <unk> that took place in the municipal exhibition hall of El Buen Retiro in Madrid . 
 During the Paris exposition in May 1910 , Gaudí spent a holiday in Vic , where he designed two basalt lampposts and wrought iron for the Plaça Major of Vic in honor of Jaume Balmes 's centenary . The following year he resided as a convalescent in <unk> while suffering from tuberculosis . During this time he conceived the idea for the facade of the Passion of the Sagrada Família . Due to ill health he prepared a will at the office of the notary Ramon Cantó i Figueres on 9 June , but later completely recovered . 
 The decade from 1910 was a hard one for Gaudí . During this decade , the architect experienced the deaths of his niece Rosa in 1912 and his main collaborator Francesc Berenguer in 1914 ; a severe economic crisis which paralysed work on the Sagrada Família in 1915 ; the 1916 death of his friend Josep Torras i Bages , bishop of Vic ; the 1917 disruption of work at the Colonia Güell ; and the 1918 death of his friend and patron Eusebi Güell . Perhaps because of these tragedies he devoted himself entirely to the Sagrada Família from 1915 , taking refuge in his work . Gaudí confessed to his collaborators : 
 My good friends are dead ; I have no family and no clients , no fortune nor anything . Now I can dedicate myself entirely to the Church . 
 Gaudí dedicated the last years of his life entirely to the " Cathedral of the Poor " , as it was commonly known , for which he took alms in order to continue . Apart from his dedication to this cause , he participated in few other activities , the majority of which were related to his Catholic faith : in 1916 he participated in a course about Gregorian chant at the Palau de la Música Catalana taught by the Benedictine monk Gregori M. Sunyol . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Gaudí devoted his life entirely to his profession , remaining single . He is known to have been attracted to only one woman — Josefa <unk> , teacher at the Mataró Cooperative , in 1884 — but this was not reciprocated . Thereafter Gaudí took refuge in the profound spiritual peace his Catholic faith offered him . Gaudí is often depicted as unsociable and unpleasant , a man of gruff reactions and arrogant gestures . However , those who were close to him described him as friendly and polite , pleasant to talk to and faithful to friends . Among these , his patrons Eusebi Güell and the bishop of Vic , Josep Torras i Bages , stand out , as well as the writers Joan <unk> and Jacint Verdaguer , the physician Pere Santaló and some of his most faithful collaborators , such as Francesc Berenguer and Llorenç Matamala . 
 Gaudí 's personal appearance — Nordic features , blond hair and blue eyes — changed radically over the course of time . As a young man , he dressed like a dandy in costly suits , sporting well @-@ groomed hair and beard , indulging gourmet taste , making frequent visits to the theatre and the opera and visiting his project sites in a horse carriage . The older Gaudí ate frugally , dressed in old , worn @-@ out suits , and neglected his appearance to the extent that sometimes he was taken for a beggar , such as after the accident that caused his death . 
 Gaudí left hardly any written documents , apart from technical reports of his works required by official authorities , some letters to friends ( particularly to Joan <unk> ) and a few journal articles . Some quotes collected by his assistants and disciples have been preserved , above all by Josep Francesc Ràfols , Joan Bergós , Cèsar Martinell and Isidre Puig i Boada . The only written document Gaudí left is known as the <unk> de Reus ( Reus Manuscript ) ( 1873 – 1878 ) , a kind of student diary in which he collected diverse impressions of architecture and decorating , putting forward his ideas on the subject . Included are an analysis of the Christian church and of his ancestral home , as well as a text about ornamentation and comments on the design of a desk . 
 Gaudí was always in favour of Catalonian culture but was reluctant to become politically active to campaign for its autonomy . Politicians , such as Francesc <unk> and Enric Prat de la Riba , suggested that he run for deputy but he refused . In 1920 he was beaten by police in a riot during the Floral Games celebrations . On 11 September 1924 , National Day of Catalonia , he was beaten at a demonstration against the banning of the Catalan language by the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera . Gaudí was arrested by the Civil Guard , resulting in a short stay in prison , from which he was freed after paying 50 pesetas bail . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 7 June 1926 , Gaudí was taking his daily walk to the Sant Felip Neri church for his habitual prayer and confession . While walking along the Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes between Girona and Bailén streets , he was struck by a passing tram and lost consciousness . Assumed to be a beggar because of his lack of identity documents and shabby clothing , the unconscious Gaudí did not receive immediate aid . Eventually a police officer transported him in a taxi to the Santa <unk> Hospital , where he received rudimentary care . By the time that the chaplain of the Sagrada Família , <unk> Gil <unk> , recognised him on the following day , Gaudí 's condition had deteriorated too severely to benefit from additional treatment . Gaudí died on 10 June 1926 at the age of 73 and was buried two days later . A large crowd gathered to bid farewell to him in the chapel of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in the crypt of the Sagrada Família . His gravestone bears this inscription : 
 Antonius Gaudí Cornet . <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> , vitae <unk> vir , <unk> <unk> , mirabilis <unk> hujus , <unk> auctor , pie <unk> <unk> die X Junii <unk> , hinc <unk> <unk> <unk> , resurrectionem mortuorum expectant . R.I.P. 
 ( Antoni Gaudí Cornet . From Reus . At the age of 74 , a man of exemplary life , and an extraordinary craftsman , the author of this marvelous work , the church , died piously in Barcelona on the tenth day of June 1926 ; henceforward the ashes of so great a man await the resurrection of the dead . May he rest in peace . ) 
 = = Style = = 
 = = = Gaudí and Modernisme = = = 
 Gaudí 's professional life was distinctive in that he never ceased to investigate mechanical building structures . Early on , Gaudí was inspired by oriental arts ( India , Persia , Japan ) through the study of the historicist architectural theoreticians , such as Walter Pater , John Ruskin and William Morris . The influence of the Oriental movement can be seen in works like the Capricho , the Güell Palace , the Güell Pavilions and the Casa Vicens . Later on , he adhered to the neo @-@ Gothic movement that was in fashion at the time , following the ideas of the French architect Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc . This influence is reflected in the Teresian College , the Episcopal Palace in Astorga , the Casa Botines and the Bellesguard house as well as in the crypt and the apse of the Sagrada Família . Eventually , Gaudí embarked on a more personal phase , with the organic style inspired by nature in which he would build his major works . 
 During his time as a student , Gaudí was able to study a collection of photographs of Egyptian , Indian , Persian , Mayan , Chinese and Japanese art owned by the School of Architecture . The collection also included Moorish monuments in Spain , which left a deep mark on him and served as an inspiration in many of his works . He also studied the book Plans , elevations , sections and details of the Alhambra by Owen Jones , which he borrowed from the School 's library . He took various structural and ornamental solutions from <unk> and mudéjar art , which he used with variations and stylistic freedom in his works . Notably , Gaudí observed of Islamic art its spatial uncertainty , its concept of structures with limitless space ; its feeling of sequence , fragmented with holes and partitions , which create a divide without disrupting the feeling of open space by enclosing it with barriers . 
 Undoubtedly the style that most influenced him was the Gothic Revival , promoted in the latter half of the 19th century by the theoretical works of Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc . The French architect called for studying the styles of the past and adapting them in a rational manner , taking into account both structure and design . Nonetheless , for Gaudí the Gothic style was " imperfect " , because despite the effectiveness of some of its structural solutions it was an art that had yet to be " perfected " . In his own words : 
 Gothic art is imperfect , only half resolved ; it is a style created by the compasses , a formulaic industrial repetition . Its stability depends on constant propping up by the buttresses : it is a defective body held up on crutches . ( ... ) The proof that Gothic works are of deficient plasticity is that they produce their greatest emotional effect when they are mutilated , covered in ivy and lit by the moon . 
 After these initial influences , Gaudí moved towards Modernisme , then in its heyday . Modernisme in its earlier stages was inspired by historic architecture . Its practitioners saw its return to the past as a response to the industrial forms imposed by the Industrial Revolution 's technological advances . The use of these older styles represented a moral regeneration that allowed the bourgeoisie to identify with values they regarded as their cultural roots . The <unk> ( rebirth ) , the revival of Catalan culture that began in the second half of the 19th century , brought more Gothic forms into the Catalan " national " style that aimed to combine nationalism and cosmopolitanism while at the same time integrating into the European modernizing movement . 
 Some essential features of Modernisme were : an <unk> language inherited from Romanticism with a tendency to lyricism and subjectivity ; the determined connection of architecture with the applied arts and artistic work that produced an overtly ornamental style ; the use of new materials from which emerged a mixed constructional language , rich in contrasts , that sought a plastic effect for the whole ; a strong sense of optimism and faith in progress that produced an emphatic art that reflected the atmosphere of prosperity of the time , above all of the esthetic of the bourgeoisie . 
 = = = Quest for a new architectural language = = = 
 Gaudí is usually considered the great master of Catalan Modernism , but his works go beyond any one style or classification . They are imaginative works that find their main inspiration in nature . Gaudí studied organic and anarchic geometric forms of nature thoroughly , searching for a way to give expression to these forms in architecture . Some of his greatest inspirations came from visits to the mountain of Montserrat , the caves of Mallorca , the saltpetre caves in <unk> , the crag of Fra <unk> in the <unk> Mountains behind Reus , the <unk> mountain in the north of Mallorca and Sant Miquel del Fai in <unk> i <unk> . 
 = = = = Geometrical forms = = = = 
 This study of nature translated into his use of ruled geometrical forms such as the hyperbolic paraboloid , the hyperboloid , the <unk> and the cone , which reflect the forms Gaudí found in nature . Ruled surfaces are forms generated by a straight line known as the <unk> , as it moves over one or several lines known as directrices . Gaudí found abundant examples of them in nature , for instance in rushes , reeds and bones ; he used to say that there is no better structure than the trunk of a tree or a human skeleton . These forms are at the same time functional and aesthetic , and Gaudí discovered how to adapt the language of nature to the structural forms of architecture . He used to equate the <unk> form to movement and the hyperboloid to light . Concerning ruled surfaces , he said : 
 <unk> , <unk> and helicoids , constantly varying the incidence of the light , are rich in matrices themselves , which make ornamentation and even modelling unnecessary . 
 Another element widely used by Gaudí was the catenary arch . He had studied geometry thoroughly when he was young , studying numerous articles about engineering , a field that praised the virtues of the catenary curve as a mechanical element , one which at that time , however , was used only in the construction of suspension bridges . Gaudí was the first to use this element in common architecture . <unk> arches in works like the Casa Milà , the Teresian College , the crypt of the Colònia Güell and the Sagrada Família allowed Gaudí to add an element of great strength to his structures , given that the catenary distributes the weight it regularly carries evenly , being affected only by self @-@ canceling tangential forces . 
 Gaudí evolved from plane to spatial geometry , to ruled geometry . These constructional forms are highly suited to the use of cheap materials such as brick . Gaudí frequently used brick laid with mortar in successive layers , as in the traditional Catalan vault , using the brick laid flat instead of on its side . This quest for new structural solutions culminated between 1910 and 1920 , when he exploited his research and experience in his masterpiece , the Sagrada Família . Gaudí conceived the interior of the church as if it were a forest , with a set of tree @-@ like columns divided into various branches to support a structure of intertwined hyperboloid vaults . He inclined the columns so they could better resist the perpendicular pressure on their section . He also gave them a double @-@ turn helicoidal shape ( right turn and left turn ) , as in the branches and trunks of trees . This created a structure that is now known as fractal . Together with a modulation of the space that divides it into small , independent and self @-@ supporting modules , it creates a structure that perfectly supports the mechanical traction forces without need for buttresses , as required by the neo @-@ Gothic style . Gaudí thus achieved a rational , structured and perfectly logical solution , creating at the same time a new architectural style that was original , simple , practical and aesthetic . 
 = = = = <unk> the Gothic = = = = 
 This new constructional technique allowed Gaudí to achieve his greatest architectural goal ; to perfect and go beyond Gothic style . The hyperboloid vaults have their centre where Gothic vaults had their keystone , and the hyperboloid allows for a hole in this space to let natural light in . In the intersection between vaults , where Gothic vaults have ribs , the hyperboloid allows for holes as well , which Gaudí employed to give the impression of a starry sky . 
 Gaudí complemented this organic vision of architecture with a unique spatial vision that allowed him to conceive his designs in three dimensions , unlike the flat design of traditional architecture . He used to say that he had acquired this spatial sense as a boy by looking at the drawings his father made of the boilers and stills he produced . Because of this spatial conception , Gaudí always preferred to work with casts and scale models or even improvise on site as a work progressed . Reluctant to draw plans , only on rare occasions did he sketch his works , in fact only when required by authorities . 
 Another of Gaudí 's innovations in the technical realm was the use of a scale model to calculate structures : for the church of the Colònia Güell , he built a 1 : 10 scale model with a height of 4 metres ( 13 ft ) in a shed next to the building . There , he set up a model that had strings with small bags full of birdshot hanging from them . On a drawing board that was attached to the ceiling he drew the floor of the church , and he hung the strings ( for the <unk> ) with the birdshot ( for the weight ) from the supporting points of the building — columns , intersection of walls . These weights produced a catenary curve in both the arches and vaults . At that point , he took a picture that , when inverted , showed the structure for columns and arches that Gaudí was looking for . Gaudí then painted over these photographs with gouache or pastel . The outline of the church defined , he recorded every single detail of the building : architectural , stylistic and decorative . 
 Gaudí 's position in the history of architecture is that of a creative genius who , inspired by nature , developed a style of his own that attained technical perfection as well as aesthetic value , and bore the mark of his character . Gaudí 's structural innovations were to an extent the result of his journey through various styles , from Doric to Baroque via Gothic , his main inspiration . It could be said that these styles culminated in his work , which reinterpreted and perfected them . Gaudí passed through the historicism and eclecticism of his generation without connecting with other architectural movements of the 20th century that , with their rationalist postulates , derived from the Bauhaus school , and represented an antithetical evolution to that initiated by Gaudí , given that it later reflected the disdain and the initial lack of comprehension of the work of the modernista architect . 
 Among other factors that led to the initial neglect of the Catalan architect 's work was that despite having numerous assistants and helpers , Gaudí created no school of his own and never taught , nor did he leave written documents . Some of his subordinates adopted his innovations , above all Francesc Berenguer and Josep Maria Jujol ; others , like Cèsar Martinell , Francesc Folguera and Josep Francesc Ràfols graduated towards <unk> , leaving the master 's trail . Despite this , a degree of influence can be discerned in some architects that either formed part of the <unk> movement or departed from it and who had had no direct contact with him , such as Josep Maria <unk> ( Casa <unk> , Ripoll ) , <unk> Martorell ( <unk> cemetery ) and Lluís <unk> ( Masia <unk> , Terrassa ) . Nonetheless , Gaudí left a deep mark on 20th @-@ century architecture : masters like Le Corbusier declared themselves admirers , and the works of other architects like Pier Luigi Nervi , <unk> Hundertwasser , Oscar Niemeyer , Félix <unk> , Eduardo <unk> and Santiago Calatrava were inspired by Gaudí . Frei Otto used Gaudí 's forms in the construction of the Munich Olympic Stadium . In Japan , the work of Kenji Imai bears evidence of Gaudí 's influence , as can be seen in the Memorial for the Twenty @-@ six Martyrs of Japan in Nagasaki ( Japanese National Architecture Award in 1962 ) , where the use of Gaudí 's famous " trencadís " stands out . 
 = = = Design and craftsmanship = = = 
 During his student days , Gaudí attended craft workshops , such as those taught by Eudald Puntí , Llorenç Matamala and Joan Oñós , where he learned the basic aspects of techniques relating to architecture , including sculpture , carpentry , wrought ironwork , stained glass , ceramics , plaster modelling , etc . He also absorbed new technological developments , integrating into his technique the use of iron and reinforced concrete in construction . Gaudí took a broad view of architecture as a multifunctional design , in which every single detail in an arrangement has to be harmoniously made and well @-@ proportioned . This knowledge allowed him to design architectural projects , including all the elements of his works , from furnishings to illumination to wrought ironwork . 
 Gaudí was also an innovator in the realm of craftsmanship , conceiving new technical and decorative solutions with his materials , for example his way of designing ceramic mosaics made of waste pieces ( " trencadís " ) in original and imaginative combinations . For the restoration of Mallorca Cathedral he invented a new technique to produce stained glass , which consisted of juxtaposing three glass panes of primary colours , and sometimes a neutral one , varying the thickness of the glass in order to graduate the light 's intensity . 
 This was how he personally designed many of the Sagrada Família 's sculptures . He would thoroughly study the anatomy of the figure , concentrating on gestures . For this purpose , he studied the human skeleton and sometimes used dummies made of wire to test the appropriate posture of the figure he was about to sculpt . In a second step , he photographed his models , using a mirror system that provided multiple perspectives . He then made plaster casts of the figures , both of people and animals ( on one occasion he made a donkey stand up so it would not move ) . He modified the proportions of these casts to obtain the figure 's desired appearance , depending on its place in the church ( the higher up , the bigger it would be ) . Eventually , he sculpted the figures in stone . 
 = = = = Urban spaces and landscaping = = = = 
 Gaudí also practiced landscaping , often in urban settings . He aimed to place his works in the most appropriate natural and architectural surroundings by studying the location of his constructions thoroughly and trying to naturally integrate them into those surroundings . For this purpose , he often used the material that was most common in the nearby environment , such as the slate of Bellesguard and the grey <unk> granite in the Episcopal Palace , Astorga . Many of his projects were gardens , such as the Güell Park and the Can Artigas Gardens , or incorporated gardens , as in the Casa Vicens or the Güell Pavilions . Gaudí 's harmonious approach to landscaping is exemplified at the First Mystery of the Glory of the Rosary at Montserrat , where the architectural framework is nature itself — here the Montserrat rock — nature encircles the group of sculptures that adorned the path to the Holy Cave . 
 = = = = Interiors = = = = 
 Equally , Gaudí stood out as interior decorator , decorating most of his buildings personally , from the furnishings to the smallest details . In each case he knew how to apply stylistic particularities , personalising the decoration according to the owner 's taste , the predominant style of the arrangement or its place in the surroundings — whether urban or natural , secular or religious . Many of his works were related to liturgical furnishing . From the design of a desk for his office at the beginning of his career to the furnishings designed for the Sobrellano Palace of Comillas , he designed all furnishing of the Vicens , Calvet , Batlló and Milà houses , of the Güell Palace and the Bellesguard Tower , and the liturgical furnishing of the Sagrada Família . It is noteworthy that Gaudí studied some <unk> in order to adapt his furnishings to human anatomy . Many of his furnishings are exhibited at Gaudí Museum . 
 Another aspect is the intelligent distribution of space , always with the aim of creating a comfortable , intimate , interior atmosphere . For this purpose , Gaudí would divide the space into sections , adapted to their specific use , by means of low walls , dropped ceilings , sliding doors and wall closets . Apart from taking care of every detail of all structural and ornamental elements , he made sure his constructions had good lighting and ventilation . For this purpose , he studied each project 's orientation with respect to the cardinal points , as well as the local climate and its place in its surroundings . At that time , there was an increasing demand for more domestic comfort , with piped water and gas and the use of electric light , all of which Gaudí expertly incorporated . For the Sagrada Família , for example , he carried out thorough studies on acoustics and illumination , in order to optimise them . With regard to light , he stated : 
 Light achieves maximum harmony at an inclination of 45 ° , since it resides on objects in a way that is neither horizontal nor vertical . This can be considered medium light , and it offers the most perfect vision of objects and their most exquisite nuances . It is the Mediterranean light . 
 Lighting also served Gaudí for the organisation of space , which required a careful study of the gradient of light intensity to adequately adapt to each specific environment . He achieved this with different elements such as skylights , windows , shutters and blinds ; a notable case is the gradation of colour used in the atrium of the Casa Batlló to achieve uniform distribution of light throughout the interior . He also tended to build south @-@ facing houses to maximise sunlight . 
 = = Works = = 
 Gaudí 's work is normally classed as modernista , and it belongs to this movement because of its eagerness to renovate without breaking with tradition , its quest for modernity , the ornamental sense applied to works , and the multidisciplinary character of its undertakings , where craftsmanship plays a central role . To this , Gaudí adds a dose of the baroque , adopts technical advances and continues to use traditional architectural language . Together with his inspiration from nature and the original touch of his works , this amalgam gives his works their personal and unique character in the history of architecture . 
 Chronologically , it is difficult to establish guidelines that illustrate the evolution of Gaudí 's style faithfully . Although he moved on from his initially historicist approach to immerse himself completely in the modernista movement which arose so vigorously in the last third of the 19th century in Catalonia , before finally attaining his personal , organic style , this process did not consist of clearly defined stages with obvious boundaries : rather , at every stage there are reflections of all the earlier ones , as he gradually assimilated and surpassed them . One of the best descriptions of Gaudí 's work was made by his disciple and biographer Joan Bergós , according to plastic and structural criteria . Bergós establishes five periods in Gaudí 's productions : preliminary period , mudéjar @-@ <unk> ( Moorish / mudéjar art ) , emulated Gothic , naturalist and expressionist , and organic synthesis . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 <unk> first works both from his student days and the time just after his graduation stand out for the precision of their details , the use of geometry and the prevalence of mechanical considerations in the structural calculations . 
 = = = = University years = = = = 
 During his studies , Gaudí designed various projects , among which the following stand out : a cemetery gate ( 1875 ) , a Spanish pavilion for the Philadelphia World Fair of 1876 , a quay @-@ side building ( 1876 ) , a courtyard for the <unk> de Barcelona ( 1876 ) , a monumental fountain for the Plaça Catalunya in Barcelona ( 1877 ) and a university assembly hall ( 1877 ) . 
 Antoni Gaudí started his professional career while still at university . To pay for his studies , he worked as a draughtsman for some of the most outstanding Barcelona architects of the time , such as Joan Martorell , Josep Fontserè , Francisco de Paula del Villar y Lozano , Leandre Serrallach and Emili Sala Cortés . Gaudí had a long @-@ standing relationship with Josep Fontserè , since his family was also from Riudoms and they had known each other for some time . Despite not having an architecture degree , Fontserè received the commission from the city council for the Parc de la <unk> development , carried out between 1873 and 1882 . For this project , Gaudí was in charge of the design of the Park 's entrance gate , the bandstand 's balustrade and the water project for the monumental fountain , where he designed an artificial cave that showed his liking for nature and the organic touch he would give his architecture . 
 Gaudí worked for Francisco de Paula del Villar on the apse of the Montserrat monastery , designing the niche for the image of the Black Virgin of Montserrat in 1876 . He would later substitute Villar in the works of the Sagrada Família . With Leandre Serrallach , he worked on a tram line project to Villa Arcadia in Montjuïc . Eventually , he collaborated with Joan Martorell on the Jesuit church on Carrer <unk> and the Salesian convent in Passeig de Sant Joan , as well as the <unk> church ( Almería ) . He also carried out a project for Martorell for the competition for a new facade for Barcelona cathedral , which was never accepted . His relationship with Martorell , whom he always considered one of his main and most influential masters , brought him unexpected luck ; he later recommended Gaudí for the Sagrada Família . 
 = = = = Early post @-@ graduation projects = = = = 
 After his graduation as an architect in 1878 , Gaudí 's first work was a set of lampposts for the Plaça Reial , the project for the Girossi newsstands and the Mataró cooperative , which was his first important work . He received the request from the city council of Barcelona in February 1878 , when he had graduated but not yet received his degree , which was sent from Madrid on 15 March of the same year . For this commission he designed two types of lampposts : one with six arms , of which two were installed in the Plaça Reial , and another with three , of which two were installed in the Pla del Palau , opposite the Civil Government . The lampposts were inaugurated during the <unk> festivities in 1879 . Made of cast iron with a marble base , they have a decoration in which the caduceus of Mercury is prominent , symbol of commerce and emblem of Barcelona . 
 The Girossi newsstands project , which was never carried out , was a commission from the tradesman Enrique Girossi de Sanctis . It would have consisted of 20 newsstands , spread throughout Barcelona . Each would have included a public lavatory , a flower stand and glass panels for advertisements as well as a clock , a calendar , a barometer and a thermometer . Gaudí conceived a structure with iron pillars and marble and glass slabs , crowned by a large iron and glass roof , with a gas illumination system . 
 The Cooperativa Obrera <unk> ( Mataró Workers ' Cooperative ) was Gaudí 's first big project , on which he worked from 1878 to 1882 , for Salvador Pagès i Anglada . The project , for the cooperative 's head office in Mataró , comprised a factory , a worker 's housing estate , a social centre and a services building , though only the factory and the services building were completed . In the factory roof Gaudí used the catenary arch for the first time , with a bolt assembly system devised by Philibert de l 'Orme . He also used ceramic tile decoration for the first time in the services building . Gaudí laid out the site taking account of solar orientation , another signature of his works , and included landscaped areas . He even designed the Cooperative 's banner , with the figure of a bee , symbol of industriousness . 
 In May 1878 Gaudí designed a display cabinet for the Esteban Comella glove factory , which was exhibited in the Spanish pavilion at the Paris World Exhibition that year . It was this work that attracted the attention of the entrepreneur Eusebi Güell , visiting the French capital ; he was so impressed that he wanted to meet Gaudí on his return , beginning a long friendship and professional collaboration . Güell became Gaudí 's main patron and sponsor of many of his large projects . 
 = = = = First Güell projects = = = = 
 Güell 's first task for Gaudí , that same year , was the design of the furniture for the pantheon chapel of the Palacio de Sobrellano in Comillas , which was then being constructed by Joan Martorell , Gaudí 's teacher , at the request of the Marquis of Comillas , Güell 's father in law . Gaudí designed a chair , a bench and a prayer stool : the chair was upholstered with velvet , finished with two eagles and the Marquis 's coat of arms ; the bench stands out with the motif of a dragon , designed by Llorenç Matamala ; the prayer stool is decorated with plants . 
 Also in 1878 he drew up the plans for a theatre in the former town of Sant Gervasi de <unk> ( now a district of Barcelona ) ; Gaudí did not take part in the construction of the theatre , which no longer exists . The following year he designed the furniture and counter for the Gibert Pharmacy , with marquetry of Arab influence . The same year he made five drawings for a procession in honour of the poet Francesc <unk> Garcia i Torres in <unk> de <unk> , where this celebrated 17th @-@ century writer and friend of Lope de Vega was the parish priest . Gaudí 's project was centred on the poet and on several aspects of agricultural work , such as reaping and harvesting grapes and olives ; however , as a result of organisational problems Gaudí 's ideas were not carried out . 
 Between 1879 and 1881 he drew up a proposal for the decoration of the church of Sant <unk> , belonging to the Colegio de Jesús @-@ María in Sant Andreu del Palomar : he created the altar in a Gothic style , the monstrance with Byzantine influence , the mosaics and the lighting , as well as the school 's furniture . The church caught fire during the Tragic Week of 1909 , and now only the mosaics remain , of " opus <unk> " , probably the work of the Italian mosaicist Luigi Pellerin . He was given the task of decorating the church of the Colegio de Jesús @-@ María in Tarragona ( 1880 – 1882 ) : he created the altar in white Italian marble , and its front part , or <unk> , with four columns bearing medallions of polychrome alabaster , with figures of angels ; the <unk> with gilt wood , the work of Eudald Puntí , decorated with rosaries , angels , <unk> symbols and the dove of the Holy Ghost ; and the choir stalls , which were destroyed in 1936 . 
 In 1880 he designed an electric lighting project for Barcelona 's Muralla de Mar , or seawall , which was not carried out . It consisted of eight large iron <unk> , profusely decorated with plant motifs , friezes , shields and names of battles and Catalan admirals . The same year he participated in the competition for the construction of the San Sebastián social centre ( now town hall ) , won by Luis <unk> <unk> and Adolfo Morales de los Ríos ; Gaudí submitted a project that synthesised several of his earlier studies , such as the fountain for the Plaça Catalunya and the courtyard of the Provincial Council . 
 = = = = Collaboration with Martorell = = = = 
 A new task of the Güell @-@ López 's for Comillas was the gazebo for Alfonso XII 's visit to the Cantabrian town in 1881 . Gaudí designed a small pavilion in the shape of a Hindu turban , covered in mosaics and decorated with an abundance of small bells which <unk> constantly . It was subsequently moved into the Güell Pavilions . 
 In 1882 he designed a Benedictine monastery and a church dedicated to the Holy Spirit in <unk> ( Cuevas de Vera , Almeria ) for his former teacher , Joan Martorell . It was of neo @-@ Gothic design , similar to the Convent of the Salesians that Gaudí also planned with Martorell . Ultimately it was not carried out , and the project plans were destroyed in the looting of the Sagrada Família in 1936 . The same year he was tasked with constructing a hunting lodge and wine cellars at a country residence known as La <unk> , in <unk> ( Sitges ) , property of baron Eusebi Güell . Ultimately the wine cellars , but not the lodge , were built some years later . With Martorell he also collaborated on three other projects : the church of the Jesuit School in Carrer Caspe ; the Convent of the Salesians in Passeig de Sant Joan , a neo @-@ Gothic project with an altar in the centre of the crossing ; and the facade project for Barcelona cathedral , for the competition convened by the cathedral chapter in 1882 , ultimately won by Josep Oriol <unk> and August Font i Carreras . 
 Gaudí 's collaboration with Martorell was a determining factor in Gaudí 's recommendation for the Sagrada Família . The church was the idea of Josep Maria Bocabella , founder of the Devotees of Saint Joseph Association , which acquired a complete block of Barcelona 's <unk> district . The project was originally entrusted to Francisco de Paula del Villar y Lozano , who planned the construction of a neo @-@ Gothic church , on which work began in 1882 . However , the following year Villar resigned due to disagreements with the construction board , and the task went to Gaudí , who completely redesigned the project , apart from the part of the crypt that had already been built . Gaudí devoted the rest of his life to the construction of the church , which was to be the synthesis of all of his architectural discoveries . 
 = = = Orientalist period = = = 
 During these years Gaudí completed a series of works with a distinctly oriental flavour , inspired by the art of the Middle and Far East ( India , Persia , Japan ) , as well as Islamic @-@ Hispanic art , mainly Mudejar and Nazari . Gaudí used ceramic tile decoration abundantly , as well as Moorish arches , columns of exposed brick and pinnacles in the shape of pavilions or domes . 
 Between 1883 and 1888 he constructed the Casa Vicens , commissioned by stockbroker Manuel Vicens i Montaner . It was constructed with four floors , with facades on three sides and an extensive garden , including a monumental brick fountain . The house was surrounded by a wall with iron gates , decorated with palmetto leaves , work of Llorenç Matamala . The walls of the house are of stone alternated with lines of tile , which imitate yellow flowers typical of this area ; the house is topped with chimneys and turrets . In the interior the polychrome wooden roof beams stand out , adorned with floral themes of papier <unk> ; the walls are decorated with vegetable motifs , as well as paintings by Josep <unk> ; finally , the floor consists of Roman @-@ style mosaics of " opus <unk> " . One of the most original rooms is the smoking room , notable the ceiling , decorated with Moorish honeycomb @-@ work , reminiscent of the <unk> in the Alhambra in Granada . 
 In the same year , 1883 , Gaudí designed the Santísimo Sacramento chapel for the parish church of San Félix de <unk> , as well as some topographical plans for the Can Rosell de la <unk> country residence in <unk> . He also received a commission to build a small annex to the Palacio de Sobrellano , for the Baron of Comillas , in the Cantabrian town of the same name . Known as El Capricho , it was commissioned by Máximo Díaz de Quijano and constructed between 1883 and 1885 . <unk> <unk> i Colom , Gaudí 's fellow student , directed the construction . In an oriental style , it has an elongated shape , on three levels and a cylindrical tower in the shape of a Persian minaret , faced completely in ceramics . The entrance is set behind four columns supporting depressed arches , with capitals decorated with birds and leaves , similar to those that can be seen at the Casa Vicens . Notable are the main lounge , with its large sash window , and the smoking room with a ceiling consisting of a false Arab @-@ style stucco vault . 
 Gaudí carried out a second commission from Eusebi Güell between 1884 and 1887 , the Güell Pavilions in <unk> , now on the outskirts of Barcelona . Güell had a country residence in Les Corts de Sarrià , consisting of two adjacent properties known as Can Feliu and Can <unk> de la <unk> . The architect Joan Martorell had built a Caribbean @-@ style mansion , which was demolished in 1919 to make way for the Royal Palace of <unk> . Gaudí undertook to refurbish the house and construct a wall and porter 's lodge . He completed the stone wall with several entrances , the main entrance with an iron gate in the shape of a dragon , with symbology allusive to the myths of Hercules and the Garden of the Hesperides . The buildings consist of a stable , covered <unk> ring and porter 's lodge : the stable has a rectangular base and catenary arches ; the <unk> ring has a square base with a hyperboloid dome ; the porter 's lodge consists of three small buildings , the central one being polygonal with a hyperbolic dome , and the other two smaller and cubic . All three are topped by ventilators in the shape of chimneys faced with ceramics . The walls are of exposed brick in various shades of reds and yellows ; in certain sections prefabricated cement blocks are also used . The Pavilions are now the headquarters of the Real <unk> Gaudí , of the Polytechnic University of Catalonia . 
 In 1885 Gaudí accepted a commission from Josep Maria Bocabella , <unk> of the Sagrada Família , for an altar in the oratory of the Bocabella family , who had obtained permission from the Pope to have an altar in their home . The altar is made of varnished mahogany , with a slab of white marble in the centre for relics . It is decorated with plants and religious motifs , such as the Greek letters alpha and omega , symbol of the beginning and end , gospel phrases and images of Saint Francis of Paola , Saint Teresa of Avila and the Holy Family and closed with a curtain of crimson embroidery . It was made by the cabinet maker Frederic <unk> , who also collaborated with Gaudí on the Sagrada Família . 
 Shortly after , Gaudí received an important new commission from Güell : the construction of his family house , in the Carrer Nou de la Rambla in Barcelona . The Palau Güell ( 1886 – 1888 ) continues the tradition of large Catalan urban mansions such as those in Carrer <unk> . Gaudí designed a monumental entrance with a magnificent parabolic arch above iron gates , decorated with the Catalan coat of arms and a helmet with a winged dragon , the work of Joan Oñós . A notable feature is the triple @-@ height entrance hall ; it is the core of the building , surrounded by the main rooms of the palace , and it is remarkable for its double dome , parabolic within and conical on the outside , a solution typical of Byzantine art . For the gallery on the street facade Gaudí used an original system of catenary arches and columns with hyperbolic capitals , a style he used only here . He designed the interior of the palace with a sumptuous Mudejar @-@ style decoration , where the wood and iron coffered ceilings stand out . The chimneys on the roof are a remarkable feature , faced in vividly coloured ceramic tiles , as is the tall spire in the form of a lantern tower , which is the external termination of the dome within , and is also faced with ceramic tiles and topped with an iron weather vane . 
 On the occasion of the World Expo held in Barcelona in 1888 , Gaudí constructed the pavilion for the Compañía <unk> , property of the Marquis of Comillas , in the Maritime Section of the event . He created it in a <unk> Nazari style , with horseshoe arches and stucco decoration ; the building survived until the Passeig <unk> was opened up in 1960 . In the wake of the event he received a commission from Barcelona Council to restore the Saló de Cent and the grand stairs in Barcelona City Hall , as well as a chair for the queen Maria Cristina ; only the chair was made , and Mayor Francesc <unk> i <unk> presented it to the Queen . 
 = = = Neo @-@ Gothic period = = = 
 During this period Gaudí was inspired above all by mediaeval Gothic art , but wanted to improve on its structural solutions . Neo @-@ gothic was one of the most successful historicist styles at that time , above all as a result of the theoretical studies of Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc . Gaudí studied examples in Catalonia , the Balearic Islands and Roussillon in depth , as well as Leonese and <unk> buildings during his stays in León and Burgos , and became convinced that it was an imperfect style , leaving major structural issues only partly resolved . In his works he eliminated the need of buttresses through the use of ruled surfaces , and abolished crenellations and excessive openwork . 
 The first example was the Teresian College ( Col · <unk> de les <unk> ) ( 1888 – 1889 ) , in Barcelona 's Carrer <unk> , commissioned by San Enrique de <unk> . Gaudí fulfilled the wish of the order that the building should be austere , in keeping with their vows of poverty . He designed a simple building , using bricks for the exterior and some brick elements for the interior . Wrought ironwork , one of Gaudí 's favourite materials , appeared on the facades . The building is crowned by a row of merlons which suggest a castle , a possible reference to Saint Teresa 's Interior Castle . The corners have brick pinnacles topped by helicoidal columns and culminate in a four @-@ armed cross , typical of Gaudí 's works , and with ceramic shields bearing various symbols of the order . The interior includes a corridor which is famous for the series of catenary arches that it contains . These elegant arches are decorative and support the ceiling and the floor above . For Gaudí , the catenary arch was an ideal constructional element , capable of supporting great loads with slender masonry . 
 Gaudí received his next commission from a clergyman who had been a boyhood friend in his native Reus . When he was appointed bishop of Astorga , Joan Baptista Grau i <unk> asked Gaudí to design a new episcopal palace for the city , as the previous building had caught fire . Constructed between 1889 and 1915 , in a neo @-@ Gothic style with four cylindrical towers , it was surrounded by a moat . The stone with which it was built ( grey granite from the El <unk> area ) is in harmony with its surroundings , particularly with the cathedral in its immediate vicinity , as well as with the natural landscape , which in late 19th @-@ century Astorga was more visible than today . The porch has three large flared arches , built of ashlar and separated by sloping buttresses . The structure is supported by columns with decorated capitals and by ribbed vaults on pointed arches , and topped with Mudejar @-@ style merlons . Gaudí resigned from the project in 1893 , at the death of Bishop Grau , due to disagreements with the Chapter , and it was finished in 1915 by Ricardo García <unk> . It currently houses a museum about the Way of Saint James , which passes through Astorga 
 Another of Gaudí 's projects outside of Catalonia was the Casa de los Botines , in León ( 1891 – 1894 ) , commissioned by Simón Fernández Fernández and Mariano Andrés Luna , textile merchants from Leon , who were recommended Gaudí by Eusebi Güell , with whom they did business . Gaudí 's project was an impressive neo @-@ Gothic style building , which bears his unmistakable modernista imprint . The building was used to accommodate offices and textile shops on the lower floors , as well as apartments on the upper floors . It was constructed with walls of solid limestone . The building is flanked by four cylindrical turrets surmounted by slate spires , and surrounded by an area with an iron grille . The Gothic facade style , with its cusped arches , has a clock and a sculpture of Saint George and the Dragon , the work of Llorenç Matamala . As of 2010 it was the headquarters of the Caja España . 
 In 1892 Gaudí was commissioned by Claudio López Bru , second Marquis of Comillas , with the Franciscana Catholic Missions for the city of Tangier , in Morocco ( at the time a Spanish colony ) . The project included a church , hospital and school , and Gaudí conceived a <unk> ground @-@ plan floor structure , with catenary arches , parabolic towers , and hyperboloid windows . Gaudí deeply regretted the project 's eventual demise , always keeping his design with him . In spite of this , the project influenced the works of the Sagrada Família , in particular the design of the towers , with their paraboloid shape like those of the Missions . 
 In 1895 he designed a funerary chapel for the Güell family at the abbey of Montserrat , but little is known about this work , which was never built . That year , construction finally began on the Bodegas Güell , the 1882 project for a hunting lodge and some wineries at La <unk> de <unk> ( Sitges ) , property of Eusebi Güell . Constructed between 1895 and 1897 under the direction of Francesc Berenguer , Gaudí 's aide , the wineries have a triangular end facade , a very steep stone roof , a group of chimneys and two bridges that join them to an older building . It has three floors : the bottom one for a garage , an apartment and a chapel with catenary arches , with the altar in the centre . It was completed with a porter 's lodge , notable for the iron gate in the shape of a fishing net . 
 In the township of Sant Gervasi de <unk> ( now a district of Barcelona ) , the widow of Jaume Figueras commissioned Gaudí to renovate the Torre Bellesguard ( 1900 – 1909 ) , former summer palace of King Martin I the Humane . Gaudí designed it in a neo @-@ Gothic style , respecting the former building as much as possible , and tried as always to integrate the architecture into the natural surroundings . This influenced his choice of local slate for the construction . The building 's ground @-@ plan measures 15 x 15 meters , with the corners oriented to the four cardinal points . Constructed in stone and brick , it is taller than it is wide , with a spire topped with the four @-@ armed cross , the Catalan flag and the royal crown . The house has a basement , ground floor , first floor and an attic , with a gable roof . 
 = = = Naturalist period = = = 
 During this period Gaudí perfected his personal style , inspired by the organic shapes of nature , putting into practise a whole series of new structural solutions originating from his deep analysis of ruled geometry . To this he added a great creative freedom and an imaginative ornamental style . His works acquired a great structural richness , with shapes and volumes devoid of rational rigidity or any classic premise . 
 = = = = 1898 – 1900 = = = = 
 Commissioned by the company Hijos de Pedro Mártir Calvet , Gaudí built the Casa Calvet ( 1898 – 1899 ) , in Barcelona 's Carrer <unk> . The facade is built of Montjuïc stone , adorned with wrought iron balconies and topped with two pediments with wrought iron crosses . Another notable feature of the facade is the gallery on the main floor , decorated with plant and mythological motifs . For this project , Gaudí used a Baroque style , visible in the use of Solomonic columns , decoration with floral themes and the design of the terraced roof . In 1900 , he won the award for the best building of the year from Barcelona City Council . 
 A virtually unknown work by Gaudí is the Casa Clapés ( 1899 – 1900 ) , at 125 Carrer Escorial , commissioned by the painter Aleix Clapés , who collaborated on occasion with Gaudí , such as in decorating the Palau Güell and the Casa Milà . It has a ground floor and three apartments , with stuccoed walls and cast @-@ iron balconies . Due to its lack of decoration or original structural solutions its authorship was unknown until 1976 , when the architect 's signed plans by Gaudí were discovered . In 1900 , he renovated the house of Dr. Pere Santaló , at 32 Carrer Nou de la Rambla , a work of equally low importance . Santaló was a friend of Gaudí 's , whom he accompanied during his stay in <unk> in <unk> was he who recommended him to do manual work for his rheumatism . 
 Also in 1900 , he designed two banners : for the Orfeó <unk> ( of Sant Feliu de <unk> ) , made of brass , leather , cork and silk , with ornamental motifs based on the martyrdom of San Félix ( a millstone ) , music ( a staff and clef ) and the inscription " Orfeó <unk> " ; and Our Lady of Mercy of Reus , for the pilgrimage of the Reus residents of Barcelona , with an image of Isabel <unk> , the shepherdess to whom the Virgin appeared in 1592 , work of Aleix Clapés and , on the back , a rose and the Catalan flag . In the same year , for the shrine of Our Lady of Mercy in Reus , Gaudí outlined a project for the renovation of the church 's main facade , which ultimately was not undertaken , as the board considered it too expensive . Gaudí took this rejection quite badly , leaving some bitterness towards Reus , possibly the source of his subsequent claim that Riudoms was his place of birth . Between 1900 and 1902 Gaudí worked on the Casa Miralles , commissioned by the industrialist <unk> Miralles i <unk> ; Gaudí designed only the wall near the gateway , of undulating masonry , with an iron gate topped with the four @-@ armed cross . Subsequently , the house for Señor Miralles was designed by Domènec Sugrañes , associate architect of Gaudí . 
 Gaudí 's main new project at the beginning of the 20th century was the Park Güell ( 1900 – 1914 ) , commissioned by Eusebi Güell . It was intended to be a residential estate in the style of an English garden city . The project was unsuccessful : of the 60 plots into which the site was divided only one was sold . Despite this , the park entrances and service areas were built , displaying Gaudí 's genius and putting into practice many of his innovative structural solutions . The Park Güell is situated in Barcelona 's <unk> district , a rugged area , with steep slopes that Gaudí negotiated with a system of viaducts integrated into the terrain . The main entrance to the park has a building on each side , intended as a porter 's lodge and an office , and the site is surrounded by a stone and glazed @-@ ceramic wall . These entrance buildings are an example of Gaudí at the height of his powers , with Catalan vaults that form a parabolic hyperboloid . After passing through the gate , steps lead to higher levels , decorated with sculpted fountains , notably the dragon fountain , which has become a symbol of the park and one of Gaudí 's most recognised emblems . These steps lead to the Hypostyle Hall , which was to have been the residents ' market , constructed with large Doric columns . Above this chamber is a large plaza in the form of a Greek theatre , with the famous undulating bench covered in broken ceramics ( " trencadís " ) , the work of Josep Maria Jujol . The park 's show home , the work of Francesc Berenguer , was Gaudí 's residence from 1906 to 1926 , and currently houses the Casa @-@ Museu Gaudí . 
 During this period Gaudí contributed to a group project , the Rosary of Montserrat ( 1900 – 1916 ) . Located on the way to the Holy Cave of Montserrat , it was a series of groups of sculptures that evoked the mysteries of the Virgin , who tells the rosary . This project involved the best architects and sculptors of the era , and is a curious example of Catalan Modernism . Gaudí designed the First Mystery of Glory , which represents the Holy Sepulcher . The series include a statue of Christ Risen , the work of Josep Llimona , and the Three Marys sculpted by <unk> Renart . Another monumental project designed by Gaudí for Montserrat was never carried out : it would have included crowning the summit of El <unk> Bernat ( one of the mountain peaks ) with a viewpoint in the shape of a royal crown , incorporating a 20 metres ( 66 ft ) high Catalan coat of arms into the wall . 
 = = = = 1901 – 03 = = = = 
 In 1901 Gaudí decorated the house of Isabel Güell López , Marchioness of <unk> , and daughter of Eusebi Güell . Situated at 19 Carrer Junta de <unk> , the house had been built in 1885 and renovated between 1901 and 1904 ; it was destroyed by a bomb during the Civil War . The following year Gaudí took part in the decoration of the Bar Torino , property of Flaminio <unk> , located at 18 Passeig de <unk> ; Gaudí designed the ornamentation of el Salón <unk> of that establishment , made with varnished Arabian @-@ style cardboard tiles ( which no longer exist ) . 
 A project of great interest to Gaudí was the restoration of the Cathedral of Santa Maria in Palma de Mallorca ( 1903 – 1914 ) , commissioned by the city 's bishop , Pere <unk> i Barceló . Gaudí planned a series of works including removing the baroque altarpiece , revealing the bishop 's throne , moving the choir @-@ stalls from the centre of the nave and placing them in the presbytery , clearing the way through chapel of the Holy Trinity , placing new pulpits , fitting the cathedral with electrical lighting , uncovering the Gothic windows of the Royal Chapel and filling them with stained glass , placing a large canopy above the main altar and completing the decoration with paintings . This was coordinated by Joan Rubió i Bellver , Gaudí 's assistant . Josep Maria Jujol and the painters Joaquín Torres García , Iu Pascual and Jaume <unk> were also involved . Gaudí abandoned the project in 1914 due to disagreements with the Cathedral chapter . 
 = = = = 1904 = = = = 
 One of Gaudí 's largest and most striking works is the Casa Batlló ( 1904 – 1906 ) . Commissioned by Josep Batlló i <unk> to renovate an existing building erected in 1875 by Emili Sala Cortés , Gaudí focused on the facade , the main floor , the patio and the roof , and built a fifth floor for the staff . For this project he was assisted by his aides Domènec Sugrañes , Joan Rubió and Josep <unk> . The facade is of Montjuïc sandstone cut to create warped ruled surfaces ; the columns are bone @-@ shaped with vegetable decoration . Gaudí kept the rectangular shape of the old building 's balconies — with iron railings in the shape of masks — giving the rest of the facade an ascending undulating form . He also faced the facade with ceramic fragments of various colours ( " trencadís " ) , which Gaudí obtained from the waste material of the <unk> glass works . The interior courtyard is roofed by a skylight supported by an iron structure in the shape of a double T , which rests on a series of catenary aches . The helicoidal chimneys are a notable feature of the roof , topped with conical caps , covered in clear glass in the centre and ceramics at the top , and surmounted by clear glass balls filled with sand of different colours . The facade culminates in catenary vaults covered with two layers of brick and faced with glazed ceramic tiles in the form of scales ( in shades of yellow , green and blue ) , which resemble a dragon 's back ; on the left side is a cylindrical turret with anagrams of Jesus , Mary and Joseph , and with Gaudí 's four @-@ armed cross . 
 In 1904 , commissioned by the painter Lluís Graner , he designed the decoration of the Sala <unk> , in the Rambla dels <unk> , one of the first cinemas in Barcelona ; the theatre imitated a cave , inspired by the Coves del <unk> ( Dragon 's Caves ) in Mallorca . Also for Graner he designed a detached house in the <unk> district of Barcelona , of which only the foundations and the main gate were built , with three openings : for people , vehicles and birds ; the building would have had a structure similar to the Casa Batlló or the porter 's lodge of the Park Güell . 
 The same year he built a workshop , the Taller Badia , for Josep and Lluís Badia <unk> , blacksmiths who worked for Gaudí on several of his works , such as the Batlló and Milà houses , the Park Güell and the Sagrada Família . Located at 278 Carrer <unk> , it was a simple stone building . Around that time he also designed hexagonal hydraulic floor tiles for the Casa Batlló , they were eventually used instead for the Casa Milà ; they were a green colour and were decorated with seaweed , shells and starfish . These tiles were subsequently chosen to pave Barcelona 's Passeig de <unk> . 
 Also in 1904 he built the Chalet de <unk> , in La <unk> de Lillet , for the <unk> cement factory , owned by Eusebi Güell . It has a simple structure though very original , in the shape of a pointed arch , with two semi @-@ circular flights of stairs leading to the top two floors . This building fell into ruin when the cement works closed , and when it was eventually restored its appearance was radically altered , the ingenious original staircase being replaced with a simpler metal one . In the same area he created the Can Artigas Gardens between 1905 and 1907 , in an area called Font de la Magnesia , commissioned by the textile merchant Joan Artigas i <unk> ; men who had worked the Park Güell were also involved on this project , similar to the famous park in Barcelona . 
 = = = = 1906 = = = = 
 In 1906 he designed a bridge over the Torrent de <unk> , between Sarrià and Sant Gervasi . This river flowed directly between two of Gaudí 's works , Bellesguard and the Chalet Graner , and so he was asked to bridge the divide . Gaudí designed an interesting structure composed of juxtaposed triangles that would support the bridge 's framework , following the style of the viaducts that he made for the Park Güell . It would have been built with cement , and would have had a length of 154 metres ( 505 ft ) and a height of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) ; the balustrade would have been covered with glazed tiles , with an inscription dedicated to Santa <unk> . The project was not approved by the Town Council of Sarrià . 
 The same year Gaudí apparently took part in the construction of the Torre <unk> Mateu , in <unk> del <unk> , in collaboration with his disciple Francesc Berenguer , though the project 's authorship is not clear or to what extent they each contributed to it . The style of the building evokes Gaudí 's early work , such as the Casa Vicens or the Güell Pavilions ; it had an entrance gate in the shape of a fishing net , currently installed in the Park Güell . The building was demolished in 1939 . Also in 1906 he designed a new banner , this time for the Guild of metalworkers and blacksmiths for the Corpus Christi procession of 1910 , in Barcelona Cathedral . It was dark green in colour , with Barcelona 's coat of arms in the upper left corner , and an image of Saint Eligius , patron of the guild , with typical tools of the trade . The banner was burned in July 1936 . 
 Another of Gaudí 's major projects and one of his most admired works is the Casa Milà , better known as La Pedrera ( 1906 – 1910 ) , commissioned by Pere Milà i Camps . Gaudí designed the house around two large , curved courtyards , with a structure of stone , brick and cast @-@ iron columns and steel beams . The facade is built of limestone from <unk> del <unk> , apart from the upper level , which is covered in white tiles , evoking a snowy mountain . It has a total of five floors , plus a loft made entirely of catenary arches , as well as two large interior courtyards , one circular and one oval . Notable features are the staircases to the roof , topped with the four @-@ armed cross , and the chimneys , covered in ceramics and with shapes that suggest mediaeval helmets . The interior decoration was carried out by Josep Maria Jujol and the painters Iu Pascual , Xavier Nogués and Aleix Clapés . The facade was to have been completed with a stone , metal and glass sculpture with Our lady of the Rosary accompanied by the archangels Michael and Gabriel , 4m in height . A sketch was made by the sculptor Carles Mani , but due to the events of the Tragic Week in 1909 the project was abandoned . 
 = = = = 1907 – 08 = = = = 
 In 1907 , to mark the seventh centenary of the birth of King James I , Gaudí designed a monument in his memory . It would have been situated in the Plaça del Rei , and would have also meant the renovation of the adjacent buildings : new roof for the cathedral , as well as the completion of its towers and cupola ; placement of three vases above the buttresses of the Chapel of Santa <unk> , dedicated to the Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary , as well as the figure of an angel on top of the chapel 's tower ; finally , the opening of a large square next to the walls ( now the Plaça Ramon Berenguer el Grand ) . The project was not executed because the city council disliked it . 
 In 1908 Gaudí devised a project for a skyscraper hotel in New York , the Hotel Attraction , commissioned by two American entrepreneurs whose names are unknown . It would have been 360 metres ( 1 @,@ 180 ft ) high ( taller than the Empire State Building ) , with a taller parabolic central section , topped with a star , and flanked by four volumes containing museums , art galleries and concert halls , with shapes similar to the Casa Milà . Inside it would have had five large rooms , one dedicated to every continent . 
 The final project for his great patron Eusebi Güell was the church for the Colònia Güell , an industrial village in Santa Coloma de Cervelló ( 1890 – 1918 ) . The project began in 1890 , and the factory , service buildings and housing for the workers were constructed . What would have been the colony 's church was designed by Gaudí in 1898 , though the first stone was not laid until 4 October 1908 . Unfortunately only the crypt ( known today as Crypt of the Colònia Güell ) was built , as Güell 's sons abandoned the project after his death in 1918 . Gaudí designed an oval church with five aisles , one central aisle and two at either side . He conceived it as fully integrated into nature . A porch of hyperbolic paraboloid vaults precedes the crypt , the first time that Gaudí used this structure and notably the first use of paraboloid vaults in the history of architecture . In the crypt the large hyperboloid stained glass windows stand out , with the shapes of flower petals and butterfly wings . Inside , circular brick pillars alternate with slanted basalt columns from Castellfollit de la Roca . 
 = = = Final period = = = 
 During the last years of his career , dedicated almost exclusively to the Sagrada Família , Gaudí reached the culmination of this naturalistic style , creating a synthesis of all of the solutions and styles he had tried until then . Gaudí achieved perfect harmony between structural and ornamental elements , between plastic and aesthetic , between function and form , between container and content , achieving the integration of all arts in one structured , logical work . 
 The first example of his final stage can be seen in a simple but very ingenious building , the Sagrada Família schools , a small school for the workers ' children . Built in 1909 , it has a rectangular ground plan of 10 by 20 metres ( 33 ft × 66 ft ) , and contained three classrooms , a vestibule and a chapel . It was built of exposed brick , in three overlapping layers , following the traditional Catalan method . The walls and roof have an undulating shape , giving the structure a sense of lightness but also strength . The Sagrada Família schools have set an example of constructive genius and have served as a source of inspiration for many architects , such is their simplicity , strength , originality , functionality and geometric excellence . 
 In May 1910 Gaudí paid a short visit to Vic , where he was tasked to design the lampposts for the city 's Plaça Major , in commemoration of the first centenary of the birth of Jaume Balmes . They were obelisk @-@ shaped lamps , with basalt rock bases from Castellfollit de la Roca and wrought iron arms , topped with the four @-@ armed cross ; they were decorated with vegetable themes and included the birth and death dates of Balmes . They were demolished in 1924 due to poor maintenance . 
 The same year , on the occasion of Eusebi Güell 's obtaining the title of count , Gaudí designed a coat of arms for his patron . He devised a shield with the lower part in a catenary shape typical of Gaudí . He divided it into two parts : the lantern of Palau Güell features a dove and a gear @-@ wheel on the right in allusion to the Colònia Güell in Santa Coloma de Cervelló ( <unk> is Catalan for dove ) , with the phrase <unk> pastor ( yesterday Shepherd ) . On the left is an owl perched on a half @-@ moon — symbol of prudence and wisdom — with the words <unk> <unk> ( today Lord ) . The shield is surmounted by a helmet with the count 's coronet and the dove symbol of the Holy Spirit . 
 In 1912 he built two pulpits for the church of Santa Maria in Blanes : the pulpit on the Gospel side had a hexagonal base , decorated with the dove of the Holy Spirit and the names in Latin of the four evangelists and the seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit ; the pulpit of the Epistle side had the names of the apostles who wrote epistles ( Saint Peter , Saint Paul , Saint John the Evangelist , Saint Judas <unk> and Saint James the Great ) , with the three theological virtues and the flames of Pentecost . These pulpits were burned in July 1936 . 
 = = = = Sagrada Família = = = = 
 From 1915 Gaudí devoted himself almost exclusively to his magnum opus , the Sagrada Família , a synthesis of his architectural evolution . After completion of the crypt and the apse , still in Gothic style , the rest of the church is conceived in an organic style , imitating natural shapes with their abundance of ruled surfaces . He intended the interior to resemble a forest , with inclined columns like branching trees , helicoidal in form , creating a simple but sturdy structure . Gaudí applied all of his previous experimental findings in this project , from works such as the Park Güell and the crypt of the Colònia Güell , creating a church that is at once structurally perfect , harmonious and aesthetically satisfying . 
 The Sagrada Família has a cruciform plan , with a five @-@ aisled nave , a transept of three aisles , and an apse with seven chapels . It has three facades dedicated to the birth , passion and glory of Jesus , and when completed it will have eighteen towers : four at each side making a total of twelve for the apostles , four on the transept invoking the evangelists and one on the apse dedicated to the Virgin , plus the central tower in honour of Jesus , which will reach 170 metres ( 560 ft ) in height . The church will have two sacristies adjacent to the apse , and three large chapels : one for the Assumption in the apse , and the Baptism and Penitence chapels at the west end ; also , it will be surrounded by a cloister designed for processions and to isolate the building from the exterior . Gaudí used highly symbolic content in the Sagrada Família , both in architecture and sculpture , dedicating each part of the church to a religious theme . 
 During Gaudí 's life only the crypt , apse and part of the Nativity facade were completed . Upon his death his assistant Domènec Sugrañes took over the construction ; thereafter it was directed by various architects . Jordi Bonet i <unk> assumed responsibility in 1987 and continued as of 2011 . Artists such as Llorenç and Joan Matamala , Carles Mani , Jaume Busquets , Joaquim Ros i <unk> , <unk> <unk> and Josep Maria <unk> ( creator of the Passion facade ) have worked on the sculptural decoration . Completion is not expected until at least 2027 . 
 = = = = Minor , late projects = = = = 
 During the last years of his life , apart from his devotion to the Sagrada Família , Gaudí participated only in minor projects which were not completed : in 1916 , on the death of his friend bishop Josep Torras i Bages , he designed a monument in his honour , which he wanted to place in front of the Passion facade of the Sagrada Família . He made a sketch of the project , which ultimately was not carried out , and made a plaster bust of the bishop , the work of Joan Matamala under the instruction of Gaudí . It was put in the Sagrada Família , where it would have formed part of the church , but it was destroyed in 1936 . Another commemorative monument project , also not carried out , was dedicated to Enric Prat de la Riba , which would have been situated in <unk> , birthplace of this Catalan politician . The project dates from 1918 , and would have consisted of a tall tower with two porticos and a spire topped with an iron structure flying the Catalan flag . The sketch of the project was done by Lluís Bonet i <unk> , Gaudí 's assistant . 
 In 1922 Gaudí was commissioned , by the Franciscan Padre <unk> Aranda , to construct a church dedicated to the Assumption in the Chilean city of Rancagua . Gaudí apologised and said that he was occupied exclusively with the Sagrada Família , but sent some sketches of the Assumption chapel which he had designed for the apse of the Sagrada Família , which more or less coincided with what Padre Aranda had asked for . Unfortunately this project was not carried out , though there are currently plans by the Chilean architect Christian <unk> to take up the project . The President of Chile , Michelle Bachelet , has announced that building will begin in 2015 , with an expected completion in 2017 and at a cost of $ 7 million . Once completed it will become the first of Gaudí 's works to be constructed in the Americas . 
 The same year Gaudí was consulted about the construction of a monumental train station for Barcelona ( the future Estació de França ) . Gaudí suggested an iron structure in the form of a large suspended awning , a solution quite ahead of its time ; perhaps for this reason , it put the head engineers off , and they declined Gaudí 's offer . The last known projects by the architect are the chapel for the <unk> Calvet in <unk> , of 1923 , and a pulpit for Valencia ( the exact location is unknown ) , of 1924 . From then on , Gaudí worked exclusively on the Sagrada Família until his death . 
 = = Collaborators = = 
 The enormous task which Gaudí faced , not in terms of the number of works , but in terms of their complexity , required the collaboration of a large number of assistants , artists , architects and craftsmen . Gaudí always led the way , but allowed expression of the individual abilities of all of his collaborators . A test of his expertise both in his field and in interpersonal communication was demonstrated in bringing together a large number of diverse professionals and creating an integrated team . Among his collaborators were : 
 Architects : Francesc Berenguer , Josep Maria Jujol , <unk> <unk> i Colom , Josep Francesc Ràfols , Cèsar Martinell , Joan Bergós , Francesc Folguera , Josep <unk> , Joan Rubió , Domènec Sugrañes , Francesc Quintana , Isidre Puig i Boada , Lluís Bonet i <unk> . 
 Sculptors : Carles Mani , Joan <unk> , Llorenç Matamala , Joan Matamala , Josep Llimona . 
 Painters : Ricard <unk> , Aleix Clapés , Iu Pascual , Xavier Nogués , Jaume <unk> , Joaquín Torres García . 
 Builders and foremen : Agustí <unk> , Josep <unk> i Font , <unk> Alsina i <unk> , Josep Pardo i Casanova and his nephew <unk> <unk> i Pardo . 
 Craftsmen : Eudald Puntí ( carpenter and forger ) , Joan Oñós ( forger ) , Lluís y Josep Badia i <unk> ( forger ) , Joan Bertran ( plasterer ) , Joan <unk> ( cabinet maker ) , Frederic <unk> ( cabinet maker ) , Antoni <unk> i Blanch ( glazier ) , Josep <unk> ( glazier ) , Mario <unk> ( mosaic artist ) , Jaume Pujol i <unk> and his son Pau Pujol i <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After his death , Gaudí 's works suffered a period of neglect and were largely unpopular among international critics , who regarded them as baroque and excessively imaginative . In his homeland he was equally disdained by <unk> , the new movement which took the place of Modernisme . In 1936 , during the Spanish Civil War , Gaudí 's workshop in the Sagrada Família was ransacked and a great number of his documents , plans and scale models were destroyed . 
 Gaudí 's reputation was beginning to recover by the 1950s , when his work was championed not only by Salvador Dalí but also by architect Josep Lluís <unk> . In 1952 , the centenary year of the architect 's birth , the Asociación de Amigos de Gaudí ( Friends of Gaudí Association ) was founded with the aim of disseminating and conserving his legacy . Four years later , a retrospective was organised at the Saló del <unk> in Barcelona , and the Gaudí Chair at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia was created with the purpose of deepening the study of the Gaudí 's works and participating in their conservation . These events were followed in 1957 by Gaudí 's first international exhibition , held at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City . In 1976 , on the 50th anniversary of his death , the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs organised an exhibition about Gaudí and his works that toured the globe . 
 Between 1950 and 1960 , research and writings by international critics like George R. Collins , Nikolaus Pevsner and Roberto Pane spread a renewed awareness of Gaudí 's work , while in his homeland it was admired and promoted by Alexandre <unk> , Juan Eduardo <unk> and Oriol <unk> . Gaudí 's work has since gained widespread international appreciation , such as in Japan where notable studies have been published by Kenji Imai and <unk> Torii . International recognition of Gaudí 's contributions to the field of architecture and design culminated in the 1984 listing of Gaudí 's key works as UNESCO World Heritage Sites . Gaudí 's style have subsequently influenced contemporary architects such as Santiago Calatrava and Norman Foster . 
 Due to Gaudí 's profoundly religious and ascetic lifestyle , the archbishop of Barcelona , Ricard Maria Carles proposed Gaudí 's beatification in 1998 . His beatification was approved by the Vatican in 2000 . In 1999 , American composer Christopher Rouse wrote the guitar concerto Concert de Gaudí , which was inspired by Gaudí 's work ; it went on to win the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Classical Contemporary Composition . On the occasion of the 150th anniversary of Gaudí 's birth , a number of official ceremonies , concerts , shows and conferences were held , and several books were published . On 24 September of the same year , the musical Gaudí had its premiere in the Palau dels Esports de Barcelona . The authors of the piece were Jordi <unk> , Esteve Miralles and Albert <unk> . In 2008 the Gaudí Awards were launched in his honour , organised by the Catalan Film Academy to award the best Catalan films of the year . An Iberia Airbus A340 @-@ 642 , EC @-@ INO is named after Gaudí . 
 = = = World Heritage = = = 
 Several of Gaudí 's works have been granted World Heritage status by UNESCO : in 1984 the Park Güell , the Palau Güell and the Casa Milà ; and in 2005 the Nativity facade , the crypt and the apse of the Sagrada Família , the Casa Vicens and the Casa Batlló in Barcelona , together with the crypt of the Colònia Güell in Santa Coloma de Cervelló . 
 The declaration of Gaudí 's works as World Heritage aims to recognise his outstanding universal value . According to the citation : 
 * The work of Antoni Gaudí represents an exceptional and outstanding creative contribution to the development of architecture and building technology in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 Gaudí 's work exhibits an important interchange of values closely associated with the cultural and artistic currents of his time , as represented in el Modernisme [ sic ] of Catalonia . It anticipated and influenced many of the forms and techniques that were relevant to the development of modern construction in the 20th century . 
 Gaudí 's work represents a series of outstanding examples of the building typology in the architecture of the early 20th century , residential as well as public , to the development of which he made a significant and creative contribution . 
 = Mistle thrush = 
 The mistle thrush ( Turdus viscivorus ) is a bird common to much of Europe , Asia and North Africa . It is a year @-@ round resident in much of its range , but northern and eastern populations migrate south for the winter , often in small flocks . It is a large thrush with pale grey @-@ brown upperparts , a greyish @-@ white chin and throat , and black spots on its pale yellow and off @-@ white underparts . The sexes are similar in plumage , and its three subspecies show only minimal differences . The male has a loud , far @-@ carrying song which is delivered even in wet and windy weather , earning the bird the old name of " stormcock " . 
 Found in open woods , parks , hedges and cultivated land , the mistle thrush feeds on a wide variety of invertebrates , seeds and berries . Its preferred fruits including those of the mistletoe , holly and yew . Mistletoe is favoured where it is available , and this is reflected in the thrush 's English and scientific names ; the plant , a parasitic species , benefits from its seeds being excreted by the thrush onto branches where they can germinate . In winter , a mistle thrush will vigorously defend mistletoe clumps or a holly tree as a food reserve for when times are hard . 
 The open cup nest is built against a trunk or in a forked branch , and is fearlessly defended against potential predators , sometimes including humans or cats . The clutch , typically of three to five eggs , is incubated for 12 – 15 days , mainly by the female . The chicks fledge about 14 – 16 days after hatching . There are normally two broods . There was a large range expansion in the 18th and early 19th centuries , although there has been a small decline in recent decades , perhaps due to changes in agricultural practices . Given its high numbers and very large range , this thrush is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of least concern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mistle thrush was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name . The bird 's liking for mistletoe berries is indicated by both its English and scientific names . Turdus is the Latin for " thrush " , and viscivorus , " mistletoe eater " , comes from <unk> " mistletoe " and <unk> , " to devour " . 
 There are more than 60 species of medium to large thrushes in the genus Turdus , characterised by rounded heads , longish pointed wings , and usually melodious songs . A mitochondrial DNA study identified the mistle thrush 's closest relatives as the similarly plumaged song and Chinese thrushes , all three species being early offshoots from the main Turdus radiation , and hence more distantly related to other European thrushes such as the common blackbird . 
 At least eight subspecies have been proposed , but the differences are mainly clinal , with birds of the nominate subspecies becoming paler and less densely spotted in the east of the range . The currently accepted subspecies are : 
 Turdus viscivorus viscivorus , Linnaeus , 1758 . The nominate subspecies . 
 T. v. bonapartei , Cabanis , 1860 . 
 T. v. deichleri , Erlanger , 1897 . 
 An isolated population in Crimea has sometimes been separated as T. v. tauricus , but this is not considered to be a valid form . Mistle thrush fossils have been found in Pleistocene deposits from Poland and Sicily . 
 = = Description = = 
 The mistle thrush is the largest thrush native to Europe . The nominate subspecies measures 27 – 28 cm ( 11 – 11 in ) in length , with a 45 cm ( 18 in ) wingspan . It weighs 93 to 167 g ( 3 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 9 oz ) , with an average of around 130 g ( 4 @.@ 6 oz ) . It has a stocky upright posture when on the ground . It has pale grey @-@ brown upperparts , the chin and throat are greyish @-@ white , and the yellowish @-@ buff breast and off @-@ white belly are marked with round black spots . The spotting becomes denser on the lower chest , giving the appearance of a breast @-@ band . The long tail has white tips on the outer feathers , and the underwing coverts are white . The eyes are dark brown and the bill is blackish with a yellowish base to the lower mandible . The legs and feet are yellowish @-@ brown . There are no plumage differences between the sexes . Juveniles are similar to adults , but they have paler upperparts with creamy centres to many of the feathers and smaller spots on the yellowish underparts . By their first winter they are very similar to adults , but the underparts are usually more buff @-@ toned . 
 The eastern subspecies T. v. bonapartei is 30 cm ( 12 in ) in length , and therefore slightly larger than the nominate form . It is paler grey above and whiter below , with fewer black spots . Birds of intermediate appearance are seen west of the Ob River where the range overlaps with viscivorus . The southern race T. v. deichleri resembles bonapartei in appearance , but is closer in size to the nominate viscivorus , although it has a more slender bill . 
 Adults have a full moult after breeding , beginning between late May and the end of June , and completed by early October . Juvenile birds have a partial moult , replacing their head , body , and covert feathers ; this is completed by October , although the start of the moult depends on when the chicks hatched . 
 The mistle thrush is much larger , paler and longer @-@ tailed than the sympatric song thrush . In the western Himalayas it could be confused with both the plain @-@ backed and the long @-@ tailed thrushes . These are similar to the mistle thrush , but the plain – backed thrush lacks obvious wing bars , is more rufous above than its relative , and is barred rather than spotted below . The long @-@ tailed thrush has olive @-@ toned upperparts , bars on its breast and two wing bars . Juvenile mistle thrushes are superficially similar to White 's thrush , but that species has golden @-@ yellow plumage , scalloped underparts and a distinctive underwing pattern . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The male mistle thrush has a loud melodious song with fluted whistles , sounding like <unk> @-@ <unk> ... <unk> or similar , repeated three to six times , and used to advertise his territory , attract a mate and maintain the pair bond . The tone resembles that of the song thrush or blackbird , but compared to its relatives the mistle thrush 's repertoire is less varied and the delivery is slower . The song is , however , much louder , often audible up to 2 km ( 2 @,@ 000 yd ) away . The song is given from a treetop or other elevated position mainly from November to early June . The male is most vocal in the early morning , and its tendency to sing after , and sometimes during , wet and windy weather led to the old name " stormcock " . The song may be heard in any month , although it is uncommon from July to August while the thrush is moulting . The main call , given by both sexes , is a dry chattering <unk> , louder when it is alarmed or excited . It is often likened to the sound of a football rattle , a form of musical ratchet . There is also a squeaky tuk contact call . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The mistle thrush breeds in much of Europe and temperate Asia , although it is absent from the treeless far north , and its range becomes discontinuous in southeast Europe , Turkey and the Middle East . In these warmer southern areas , it tends to be found in the milder uplands and coastal regions . Nominate T. v. viscivorus breeds in Europe and in Asia east to the Ob , beyond which it is replaced by T. v. bonapartei . The southern form T. v. deichleri is resident in North Africa , Corsica and Sardinia . 
 The mistle thrush is a partial migrant : birds from the north and east of the range wintering in the milder areas of Europe and North Africa . Scandinavian and Russian birds start moving south from mid @-@ September onwards , most birds wintering in Europe , western Turkey and the Middle East . Between mid @-@ October and November , large numbers cross the Strait of Gibraltar and others pass through Cyprus , but there is hardly any migration across the North Sea . Breeding birds in the British Isles and north @-@ west Europe are resident or move only short distances . In the Himalayas , the breeding population moves to nearby lower @-@ altitude sites in winter . Return migration starts mainly from late March , although it can be a month earlier in the Middle East , and northern breeders may not arrive back on their territories until late April or early May . Migration may be by day or night , and typically involves individuals or small groups . Vagrant birds have occurred in the Azores , China , Crete , Faroe Islands , Iceland , Japan , Oman , Saudi Arabia , Sikkim and the United Arab Emirates . 
 The mistle thrush is found in a wide range of habitats containing trees , including forests , plantations , hedges and town parks . In the south and east of its range , it inhabits upland coniferous woodland and the range extends above the main tree line where dwarf juniper is present . Breeding occurs at up to 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) in the mountains of North Africa , and occasionally much higher , to 1 @,@ 700 m ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) . In the highlands of Europe , its preferred altitude is from 800 – 1 @,@ 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 – 5 @,@ 900 ft ) . More open habitats , such as agricultural land , moors and grassy hills , are extensively used in winter or on migration . 
 There is evidence that this species has changed its natural habitat in at least parts of its range . In Germany and elsewhere in central Europe , it was found only in coniferous forest until the mid @-@ 1920s when its range rapidly expanded , first into farmland , and then to suburbs and urban parks . The reasons for this expansion are unclear . In areas of intensive farming , such as eastern England , arable land has in turn largely been abandoned in favour of built @-@ up areas with their greater variety of green habitats . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Mistle thrushes are found as individuals or pairs for much of the year , although families forage together in late summer , and groups may merge to form flocks of several tens of birds ; it is not uncommon for up to 50 thrushes to feed together at that time of year . They roost at night in trees or bushes , again typically as individuals or pairs , but with families roosting together in autumn . 
 The mistle thrush is quite terrestrial , hopping with its head held up and body erect ; when excited , it will flick its wings and tail . The flight consists of undulating bounds interspersed with glides . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Mistle thrushes breed in the year subsequent to their hatching ; they are monogamous and stay as a pair throughout the year in areas where they are not migratory . Their territories are much larger than those of blackbirds or song thrushes ; although the nest territory is only about 0 @.@ 6 hectares ( 1 @.@ 5 acres ) , around 15 – 17 ha ( 37 – 42 acres ) is used for feeding . Territories are normally reoccupied in subsequent years . Territories are larger in woods than in farmland . The male will attack intruders into its breeding area , including birds of prey and corvids , and sometimes cats or humans . Courtship feeding of the female by her partner has sometimes been observed . Breeding typically commences in mid @-@ March in the south and west of Europe ( late February in Britain ) , but not till early May in Finland . The nest is usually built in a tree in the fork of a branch or against the trunk , although hedges , ledges on buildings and cliff faces may also be used . The nest site may be up to 20 m ( 66 ft ) above the ground , although 2 – 9 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 29 @.@ 5 ft ) is more typical . The common chaffinch often nests close to a mistle thrush , the vigilance of the finch and the aggressive behaviour of the thrush benefiting both species . The thrush 's nest is a large cup of sticks , dry grass , roots and moss , coated on the inside with a layer of mud and lined with fine grass and leaves . The nest is built by the female , although the male may help . Nests built early in the breeding season may be destroyed by bad weather . 
 The clutch is typically three to five eggs ( range two to six ) , which are usually whitish @-@ buff or greenish @-@ blue and are spotted with red , purple or brown . The average size of the egg is 30 mm × 22 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in × 0 @.@ 87 in ) , and weighs 7 @.@ 8 g ( 0 @.@ 28 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . The eggs are incubated for 12 – 15 days , mainly by the female . The chicks are altricial and downy , and are fed by both parents . They fledge about 14 – 16 days after hatching . There are normally two broods , except in Siberia , where there is only one , the male feeding the fledglings from the first brood while the female sits on the second clutch . Sometimes the same nest is reused for both broods . The young are dependent on their parents for 15 – 20 days after fledging . 
 In a study carried out in Britain , the survival rate for juveniles in their first year is 57 per cent , and the adult annual survival rate is 62 per cent . Life expectancy is typically three years , but the maximum age recorded from bird ringing recoveries is 21 years and 3 months for a bird shot in Switzerland . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Mistle thrushes feed mainly on invertebrates , fruit and berries . Animal prey include earthworms , insects and other arthropods , slugs and snails . Snails are sometimes smashed on a stone " anvil " , a technique also used by the song thrush . The mistle thrush has been known to kill slow worms and the young of the song thrush , blackbird and <unk> . 
 Plant food includes the fruits and seeds of bushes and trees , mainly holly , yew , ivy and mistletoe , but also , for example , blackberry , cherry , elder , hawthorn , olive and rose . It may eat the flowers and shoots of grasses and other plants , and will take fallen apples and plums . It forages within its breeding habitat and in open fields , sometimes sharing these feeding areas with redwings or fieldfares . 
 Young birds are initially mainly fed on invertebrates , often collected from low foliage or under bushes rather than in the grassland preferred by the adults . Adults will roam up to 1 km ( 1000 yd ) from the nest on pasture or ploughed land . After fledging the young may accompany their parents until the onset of winter . Individuals or pairs will defend one or more fruit @-@ bearing trees throughout the winter , mistletoe being preferred where available , with holly as the first choice elsewhere . Although the thrush normally feeds on the ground or other trees , the defence of this resource conserves the fruit for later in the season when other food items are becoming scarce . The trees are defended against conspecifics , other thrushes and species such as the bullfinch and great spotted woodpecker . In years when there is an abundance of winter fruit , this strategy may be abandoned , with the mistle thrushes foraging in flocks . Conversely , in hard winters , the defender may be overwhelmed by large flocks of fieldfares , redwings or Bohemian waxwings . 
 As its name implies , the mistle thrush is important in propagating the mistletoe , an aerial parasite , which needs its seeds to be deposited on the branches of suitable trees . The highly nutritious fruits are favoured by the thrush , which digests the flesh leaving the sticky seeds to be excreted , possibly in a suitable location for germination . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 The mistle thrush is hunted by birds of prey including the boreal owl , short @-@ eared owl , tawny owl , Ural owl , Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , golden eagle , kestrel , common buzzard , red kite , northern goshawk , peregrine falcon , and sparrowhawk . The eggs and chicks may be targeted by cats and corvids , although the adults are fearless in defence of their nests , occasionally even attacking humans . The mistle thrush is not normally a host of the common cuckoo , a brood parasite . 
 External parasites of the mistle thrush include the hen flea , the moorhen flea , the castor bean tick and the brightly coloured harvest mite . Internally , the thrush may be hosting tapeworms , nematodes , and Syngamus <unk> a relative of the <unk> . Blood parasites include Trypanosoma and Plasmodium species . 
 = = Status = = 
 The mistle thrush has an extensive distribution in Europe and western Asia , and its European breeding population is estimated at 9 – 22 @.@ 2 million birds . When Asian breeders are added , this gives a global total of 12 @.@ 2 – 44 @.@ 4 million . The species was formerly more restricted in range , and rarely bred even in northern England in the 1700s . It expanded rapidly into lowland and coastal areas of Europe during the 18th century and the first half of the 19th century , colonising areas where it was formerly rare or absent , such as Ireland ( where it first bred in 1807 ) , Scotland and the Netherlands . The range also increased in Denmark , Norway , Hungary and Austria . 
 Although the population now appears to be declining , the decrease is not rapid or large enough to trigger conservation vulnerability criteria . Given its high numbers and very large range , this thrush is therefore classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of least concern . The perceived decline may be due to the loss of invertebrate @-@ rich pastures and mixed farms through conversion to arable agriculture or more intensively managed grassland . Adult survival , clutch size and fledging success are all lower in arable landscapes than in areas with extensive pasture . In Finland , the loss of ancient forests is thought to have led to a local decline . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Desiderius Erasmus 's early sixteenth @-@ century collection of Latin proverbs included Turdus <unk> sibi ipse <unk> , ( the thrush himself excretes his own trouble ) , which refers to the use of the sticky berries favoured by this species to make birdlime for trapping birds . The thrush is literally spreading the seeds of his own destruction . 
 Giovanni da Udine painted in Raphael 's workshop in the 16th century . His Mistle Thrush and Alpine Chough was a sketch for his Bird with Garland and Fruit , and this in turn was the basis for a Raphael fresco in the Apostolic Palace . 
 The early Renaissance poem " The Harmony of Birds " had the <unk> ( mistle thrush ) sing " sanctus , sanctus " , and distinguished it from the song thrush , the <unk> or throstle . The song is also described in Thomas Hardy 's " Darkling Thrush " and Edward Thomas 's " The Thrush " . The loud call of this common and conspicuous bird also led to many old or local names , including " screech " , " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Other names , including " stormcock " referred to its willingness to sing in wind and rain . " Holm thrush " , " <unk> cock " and " holm cock " are based on obsolete names for the holly tree , which may be defended by the thrush in winter for its berries . 
 = Science and technology of the Han dynasty = 
 The Han dynasty ( 206 BC – 220 AD ) of ancient China , divided between the eras of Western Han ( 206 BC – 9 AD , when the capital was at Chang 'an ) , Xin dynasty of Wang Mang ( r . 9 – 23 AD ) , and Eastern Han ( 25 – 220 AD , when the capital was at Luoyang , and after 196 AD at Xuchang ) , witnessed some of the most significant advancements in premodern Chinese science and technology . 
 There were great innovations in metallurgy . In addition to Zhou @-@ dynasty China 's ( c . 1050 BCE – 256 BC ) previous inventions of the blast furnace and cupola furnace to make pig iron and cast iron , respectively , the Han period saw the development of steel and wrought iron by use of the finery forge and puddling process . With the drilling of deep boreholes into the earth , the Chinese used not only derricks to lift brine up to the surface to be boiled into salt , but also set up bamboo @-@ crafted pipeline transport systems which brought natural gas as fuel to the furnaces . Smelting techniques were enhanced with inventions such as the waterwheel @-@ powered bellows ; the resulting widespread distribution of iron tools facilitated the growth of agriculture . For tilling the soil and planting straight rows of crops , the improved heavy @-@ moldboard plough with three iron plowshares and sturdy multiple @-@ tube iron seed drill were invented in the Han , which greatly enhanced production yields and thus sustained population growth . The method of supplying irrigation ditches with water was improved with the invention of the mechanical chain pump powered by the rotation of a waterwheel or draft animals , which could transport irrigation water up elevated terrains . The waterwheel was also used for operating trip hammers in pounding grain and in rotating the metal rings of the mechanical @-@ driven astronomical armillary sphere representing the celestial sphere around the Earth . 
 The quality of life was improved with many Han inventions . The Han Chinese had hempen @-@ bound bamboo scrolls to write on , yet by the 2nd century AD had invented the papermaking process which created a writing medium that was both cheap and easy to produce . The invention of the wheelbarrow aided in the hauling of heavy loads . The maritime junk ship and stern @-@ mounted steering rudder enabled the Chinese to venture out of calmer waters of interior lakes and rivers and into the open sea . The invention of the grid reference for maps and raised @-@ relief map allowed the Chinese to better navigate their terrain . In medicine , they used new herbal remedies to cure illnesses , calisthenics to keep physically fit , and regulated diets to avoid diseases . Authorities in the capital were warned ahead of time of the direction of sudden earthquakes with the invention of the seismometer that was tripped by a vibration @-@ sensitive pendulum device . To mark the passing of the seasons and special occasions , the Han Chinese used two variations of the lunisolar calendar , which were established due to efforts in astronomy and mathematics . Han @-@ era Chinese advancements in mathematics include the discovery of square roots , cube roots , the Pythagorean theorem , Gaussian elimination , the Horner scheme , improved calculations of pi , and negative numbers . Hundreds of new roads and canals were built to facilitate transport , commerce , tax collection , communication , and movement of military troops . The Han @-@ era Chinese also employed several types of bridges to cross waterways and deep gorges , such as beam bridges , arch bridges , simple suspension bridges , and pontoon bridges . Han ruins of defensive city walls made of brick or rammed earth still stand today . 
 = = Modern perspectives on science and technology during Han = = 
 Jin <unk> , a professor of the Institute of Chinese Studies at the Chinese University of Hong Kong , Fan Hongye , a research fellow with the Chinese Academy of Sciences ' Institute of Science Policy and Managerial Science , and Liu <unk> , a professor of the Institute of Chinese Culture at the Chinese University of Hong Kong , assert that the latter part of the Han dynasty was a unique period in the history of premodern Chinese science and technology . They compare it to the incredible pace of scientific and technological growth during the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 AD ) . However , they also argue that without the influence of proto @-@ scientific precepts in the ancient philosophy of Mohism , Chinese science continued to lack a definitive structure : 
 From the middle and late Eastern Han to the early Wei and Jin dynasties , the net growth of ancient Chinese science and technology experienced a peak ( second only to that of the Northern Song dynasty ) ... Han studies of the Confucian classics , which for a long time had hindered the socialization of science , were declining . If Mohism , rich in scientific thought , had rapidly grown and strengthened , the situation might have been very favorable to the development of a scientific structure . However , this did not happen because the seeds of the primitive structure of science were never formed . During the late Eastern Han , disastrous upheavals again occurred in the process of social transformation , leading to the greatest social disorder in Chinese history . One can imagine the effect of this calamity on science . 
 Joseph Needham ( 1900 – 1995 ) , a late Professor from the University of Cambridge and author of the groundbreaking Science and Civilisation in China series , stated that the " Han time ( especially the Later Han ) was one of the relatively important periods as regards the history of science in China . " He noted the advancements during Han of astronomy and calendrical sciences , the " beginnings of systematic botany and zoology " , as well as the philosophical skepticism and rationalist thought embodied in Han works such as the Lunheng by the philosopher Wang Chong ( 27 – 100 CE ) . 
 = = Writing materials = = 
 The most common writing mediums found in archaeological digs from ancient sites predating the Han period are shells and bones as well as bronzewares . In the beginning of the Han period , the chief writing mediums were bamboo ( Chinese : <unk> ) and clay tablets , silk cloth , and rolled scrolls made of strips of bamboo sewn together with hempen string passed through drilled holes ( <unk> ) and secured with clay stamps . The written characters on these narrow flat strips of bamboo were arranged into vertical columns . 
 While maps drawn in ink on flat silk cloths have been found in the tomb of the Marquess of Dai ( interred in 168 BCE at Mawangdui , Hunan province ) , the earliest known paper map found in China , dated 179 – 41 BC and located at <unk> ( near Tianshui , Gansu province ) , is incidentally the oldest known piece of paper . Yet Chinese hempen paper of the Western Han and early Eastern Han eras was of a coarse quality and used primarily as wrapping paper . The papermaking process was not formally introduced until the Eastern Han court eunuch Cai Lun ( 50 – 121 AD ) created a process in 105 AD where mulberry tree bark , hemp , old linens , and fish nets were boiled together to make a pulp that was pounded , stirred in water , and then dunked with a wooden sieve containing a reed mat that was shaken , dried , and bleached into sheets of paper . The oldest known piece of paper with writing on it comes from the ruins of a Chinese watchtower at <unk> , <unk> League , Inner Mongolia , dated precisely 110 AD when the Han garrison abandoned the area following a nomadic Xiongnu attack . By the 3rd century , paper became one of China 's chief writing mediums . 
 = = Ceramics = = 
 The Han ceramics industry was upheld by private businesses as well as local government agencies . Ceramics were used in domestic wares and utensils as well as construction materials for roof tiles and bricks . 
 Han dynasty grey pottery — its color derived from the clay that was used — was superior to earlier Chinese grey pottery due to the Han people 's use of larger kiln chambers , longer firing tunnels , and improved chimney designs . <unk> of the Han dynasty making grey pottery were able to reach firing temperatures above 1 @,@ 000 ° C ( 1 @,@ 830 ° F ) . However , hard southern Chinese pottery made from a dense adhesive clay native only in the south ( i.e. Guangdong , Guangxi , Hunan , Jiangxi , Fujian , Zhejiang , and southern Jiangsu ) was fired at even higher temperatures than grey pottery during the Han . Glazed pottery of the Shang ( c . 1600 – c . 1050 BC ) and Zhou ( c . 1050 – 256 BCE ) dynasties were fired at high temperatures , but by the mid Western Han ( 206 BC – 9 AD ) , a brown @-@ glazed ceramic was made which was fired at the low temperature of 800 ° C ( 1 @,@ 470 ° F ) , followed by a green @-@ glazed ceramic which became popular in the Eastern Han ( 25 – 220 CE ) . 
 Wang Zhongshu states that the light @-@ green stoneware known as celadon was thought to exist only since the Three Kingdoms ( 220 – 265 AD ) period onwards , but argues that ceramic shards found at Eastern Han ( 25 – 220 AD ) sites of Zhejiang province can be classified as celadon . However , Richard Dewar argues that true celadon was not created in China until the early Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) when Chinese kilns were able to reach a minimum furnace temperature of 1 @,@ 260 ° C ( 2 @,@ 300 ° F ) , with a preferred range of 1 @,@ 285 to 1 @,@ 305 ° C ( 2 @,@ 345 to 2 @,@ 381 ° F ) for celadon . 
 = = Metallurgy = = 
 = = = <unk> and smelting techniques = = = 
 A blast furnace converts raw iron ore into pig iron , which can be remelted in a cupola furnace to produce cast iron . The earliest specimens of cast iron found in China date to the 5th century BC during the late Spring and Autumn period , yet the oldest discovered blast furnaces date to the 3rd century BC and the majority date to the period after Emperor Wu of Han ( r . 141 – 87 BC ) established a government monopoly over the iron industry in 117 BCE ( most of the discovered iron works sites built before this date were merely foundries which recast iron that had been smelt elsewhere ) . Iron ore smelted in blast furnaces during the Han was rarely if ever cast directly into permanent molds ; instead , the pig iron scraps were remelted in the cupola furnace to make cast iron . Cupola furnaces utilized a cold blast traveling through tuyere pipes from the bottom and over the top where the charge of charcoal and pig iron was introduced . The air traveling through the tuyere pipes thus became a hot blast once it reached the bottom of the furnace . 
 Although Chinese civilization lacked the bloomery , the Han Chinese were able to make wrought iron when they injected too much oxygen into the cupola furnace , causing decarburization . The Han @-@ era Chinese were also able to convert cast iron and pig iron into wrought iron and steel by using the finery forge and puddling process , the earliest specimens of such dating to the 2nd century BCE and found at <unk> near Mount Song of Henan province . The <unk> walls of these furnaces were lined with refractory bricks and had bottoms made of refractory clay . Besides charcoal made of wood , Wang Zhongshu states that another furnace fuel used during the Han were " coal cakes " , a mixture of coal powder , clay , and quartz . 
 = = = Use of steel , iron , and bronze = = = 
 Donald B. Wagner writes that most domestic iron tools and implements produced during the Han were made of cheaper and more brittle cast iron , whereas the military preferred to use wrought iron and steel weaponry due to their more durable qualities . During the Han dynasty , the typical 0 @.@ 5 m ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) bronze sword found in the Warring States period was gradually replaced with an iron sword measuring roughly 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in length . The ancient dagger @-@ axe ( ge ) made of bronze was still used by Han soldiers , although it was gradually phased out by iron spears and iron ji halberds . Even arrowheads , which were traditionally made of bronze , gradually only had a bronze tip and iron shaft , until the end of the Han when the entire arrowhead was made solely of iron . Farmers , carpenters , bamboo craftsmen , stonemasons , and rammed earth builders had at their disposal iron tools such as the plowshare , pickaxe , spade , shovel , hoe , sickle , axe , adze , hammer , chisel , knife , saw , scratch awl , and nails . Common iron commodities found in Han dynasty homes included tripods , stoves , cooking pots , belt buckles , tweezers , fire tongs , scissors , kitchen knives , fish hooks , and needles . Mirrors and oil lamps were often made of either bronze or iron . Coin money minted during the Han was made of either copper or copper and tin smelted together to make the bronze alloy . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 = = = Tools and methods = = = 
 Modern archaeologists have unearthed Han iron farming tools throughout China , from Inner Mongolia in the north to Yunnan in the south . The spade , shovel , pick , and plow were used for tillage , the hoe for weeding , the rake for loosening the soil , and the sickle for harvesting crops . Depending on their size , Han plows were driven by either one ox or two oxen . Oxen were also used to pull the three @-@ legged iron seed drill ( invented in Han China by the 2nd century BCE ) , which enabled farmers to plant seeds in precise rows instead of casting them out by hand . While artwork of the Wei ( 220 – 265 CE ) and Jin ( 265 – 420 CE ) periods show use of the harrow for breaking up chunks of soil after plowing , it perhaps first appeared in China during the Eastern Han ( 25 – 220 CE ) . Irrigation works for agriculture included the use of water wells , artificial ponds and embankments , dams , canals , and sluice gates . 
 = = = Alternating fields = = = 
 During Emperor Wu 's ( r . 141 – 87 BCE ) reign , the Grain Intendant Zhao Guo ( <unk> ) invented the alternating fields system ( <unk> <unk> ) . For every mou of land — i.e. a thin but elongated strip of land measuring 1 @.@ 38 m ( 4 @.@ 5 ft ) wide and 331 m ( 1 @,@ 086 ft ) long , or an area of roughly 457 m2 ( 0 @.@ 113 acres ) — three low @-@ lying furrows ( <unk> <unk> ) that were each 0 @.@ 23 m ( 0 @.@ 75 ft ) wide were sowed in straight lines with crop seed . While weeding in the summer , the loose soil of the ridges ( long <unk> ) on either side of the furrows would gradually fall into the furrows , covering the sprouting crops and protecting them from wind and drought . Since the position of the furrows and ridges were reversed by the next year , this process was called the alternating fields system . 
 This system allowed crops to grow in straight lines from sowing to harvest , conserved moisture in the soil , and provided a stable annual yield for harvested crops . Zhao Guo first experimented with this system right outside the capital Chang 'an , and once it proved successful , he sent out instructions for it to every commandery administrator , who were then responsible for disseminating these to the heads of every county , district , and hamlet in their commanderies . Sadao Nishijima speculates that the Imperial Counselor Sang Hongyang ( d . 80 BCE ) perhaps had a role in promoting this new system . 
 Rich families who owned oxen and large heavy moldboard iron plows greatly benefited from this new system . However , poorer farmers who did not own oxen resorted to using teams of men to move a single plow , which was exhausting work . The author Cui Shi ( 催寔 ) ( d . 170 CE ) wrote in his Simin yueling ( 四民月令 ) that by the Eastern Han Era ( 25 – 220 AD ) an improved plow was invented which needed only one man to control it , two oxen to pull it , had three plowshares , a seed box for the drills , a tool which turned down the soil , and could sow roughly 45 @,@ 730 m2 ( 11 @.@ 30 acres ) of land in a single day . 
 = = = Pit fields = = = 
 During the reign of Emperor Cheng of Han ( r . 33 – 7 BCE ) , Fan Shengzhi wrote a manual ( i.e. the Fan Shengzhi shu 氾勝之書 ) which described the pit field system ( <unk> <unk> ) . In this system , every mou of farmland was divided into 3 @,@ 840 grids which each had a small pit that was dug 13 @.@ 8 cm ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) deep and 13 @.@ 8 cm ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) wide and had good quality manure mixed into the soil . Twenty seeds were sowed into each pit , which allegedly produced 0 @.@ 6 L ( 20 oz ) of harvested grain per pit , or roughly 2 @,@ 000 L ( 67 @,@ 630 oz ) per mou . This system did not require oxen @-@ driven plows or the most fertile land , since it could be employed even on sloping terrains where supplying water was difficult for other methods of farming . Although this farming method was favored by the poor , it did require intensive labor , thus only large families could maintain such a system . 
 = = = Rice paddies = = = 
 Han farmers in the Yangzi River region of southern China often maintained paddy fields for growing rice . Every year , they would burn the weeds in the paddy field , drench it in water , sow rice by hand , and around harvest time cut the surviving weeds and drown them a second time . In this system , the field lays fallow for much of the year and thus did not remain very fertile . However , Han rice farmers to the north around the Huai River practiced the more advanced system of transplantation . In this system , individual plants were given intensive care ( perhaps in the same location as the paddy field ) , their offshoots separated so that more water could be conserved , and the field could be heavily fertilized since winter crops were grown while the rice seedlings were situated nearby in a plant nursery . 
 = = Mechanical and hydraulic engineering = = 
 = = = Literary sources and archaeological evidence = = = 
 Evidence of Han @-@ era mechanical engineering comes largely from the choice observational writings of sometimes disinterested Confucian scholars . Professional artisan @-@ engineers ( jiang <unk> ) did not leave behind detailed records of their work . Han scholars , who often had little or no expertise in mechanical engineering , sometimes provided insufficient information on the various technologies they described . 
 Nevertheless , some Han literary sources provide crucial information . As written by Yang Xiong in 15 BCE , the belt drive was first used for a quilling device which wound silk fibers onto the bobbins of weaver shuttles . The invention of the belt drive was a crucial first step in the development of later technologies during the Song dynasty , such as the chain drive and spinning wheel . 
 The inventions of the artisan @-@ engineer Ding Huan ( <unk> ) are mentioned in the Miscellaneous Notes on the Western Capital . The official and poet Sima Xiangru ( 179 – 117 BC ) once hinted in his writings that the Chinese used a censer in the form of a gimbal , a pivot support made of concentric rings which allow the central gimbal to rotate on an axis while remaining vertically positioned . However , the first explicit mention of the gimbal used as an incense burner occurred around 180 CE when the artisan Ding Huan created his ' Perfume Burner for use among <unk> ' which allowed burning incense placed within the central gimbal to remain constantly level even when moved . Ding had other inventions as well . For the purpose of indoor air conditioning , he set up a large manually operated rotary fan which had rotating wheels that were 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in diameter . He also invented a lamp which he called the ' nine @-@ storied hill @-@ censer ' , since it was shaped as a hillside . When the cylindrical lamp was lit , the convection of rising hot air currents caused vanes placed on the top to spin , which in turn rotated painted paper figures of birds and other animals around the lamp . 
 When Emperor Gaozu of Han ( r . 202 – 195 BC ) came upon the treasury of Qin Shi Huang ( r . 221 – 210 BC ) at Xianyang following the downfall of the Qin dynasty ( 221 – 206 BC ) , he found an entire miniature musical orchestra of puppets 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) tall who played mouth organs if one pulled on ropes and blew into tubes to control them . Zhang Heng wrote in the 2nd century AD that people could be entertained by theatrical plays of artificial fish and dragons . Later , the inventor Ma Jun ( fl . 220 – 265 AD ) invented a theater of moving mechanical puppets powered by the rotation of a hidden waterwheel . 
 From literary sources it is known that the collapsible umbrella was invented during Wang Mang 's reign , although the simple parasol existed beforehand . This employed sliding levers and bendable joints that could be protracted and retracted . 
 Modern archaeology has led to the discovery of Han artwork portraying inventions which were otherwise absent in Han literary sources . This includes the crank handle . Han pottery tomb models of farmyards and gristmills possess the first known depictions of crank handles , which were used to operate the fans of winnowing machines . The machine was used to separate chaff from grain , but the Chinese of later dynasties also employed the crank handle for silk @-@ reeling , hemp @-@ spinning , flour @-@ sifting , and drawing water from a well using the windlass . To measure distance traveled , the Han @-@ era Chinese also created the odometer cart . This invention is depicted in Han artwork by the 2nd century CE , yet detailed written descriptions were not offered until the 3rd century CE . The wheels of this device rotated a set of gears which in turn forced mechanical figures to bang gongs and drums that alerted the travelers of the distance traveled ( measured in li ) . From existing specimens found at archaeological sites , it is known that Han @-@ era craftsmen made use of the sliding metal caliper to make minute measurements . Although Han @-@ era calipers bear incised inscriptions of the exact day of the year they were manufactured , they are not mentioned in any Han literary sources . 
 = = = Uses of the waterwheel and water clock = = = 
 By the Han dynasty , the Chinese developed various uses for the waterwheel . An improvement of the simple lever @-@ and @-@ fulcrum tilt hammer device operated by one 's foot , the hydraulic @-@ powered trip hammer used for pounding , <unk> , and polishing grain was first mentioned in the Han dictionary <unk> of 40 BC . It was also mentioned in the Regional Speech ( Fangyan ) dictionary written by Yang Xiong ( 53 BC – 18 AD ) in 15 BC , the philosophical <unk> <unk> written by Huan Tan ( 43 BC – 28 AD ) in 20 AD , the poetry of Ma Rong ( 79 – 166 CE ) , and the writings of Kong Rong ( 153 – 208 CE ) . 
 In his Balanced Discourse ( Lunheng ) , the philosopher Wang Chong ( 27 – 100 AD ) was the first in China to describe the square @-@ pallet chain pump used to lift water ( and other substances ) . Although some models were operated manually by foot pedals , some chain pumps were powered by a horizontal waterwheel which rotated large toothed gears and a horizontal axis beam . Their primary use was for lifting water into irrigation ditches , but chain pumps were also used in public works programs , such as when Zhang Rang ( d . 189 CE ) had an engineer build several of them to lift water into pipes that provided the capital Luoyang and its palaces with clean water . 
 While acting as administrator of Nanyang in 31 CE , Du Shi ( d . 38 CE ) invented a water @-@ powered <unk> which worked the bellows of the blast furnace and cupola furnace in smelting iron ; before this invention , intensive manual labor was required to work the bellows . 
 Although the astronomical armillary sphere ( representing the celestial sphere ) existed in China since the 1st century BCE , the mathematician and court astronomer Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 CE ) provided it with motive power by using the constant pressure head of an inflow water clock to rotate a waterwheel that acted on a set of gears . Zhang Heng was also the first to address the problem of the falling pressure head in the inflow water clock ( which gradually slowed the timekeeping ) by setting up an additional tank between the reservoir and inflow vessel . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Han court was responsible for the major efforts of disaster relief when natural disasters such as earthquakes devastated the lives of commoners . To better prepare for calamities , Zhang Heng invented a seismometer in 132 CE which provided instant alert to authorities in the capital Luoyang that an earthquake had occurred in a location indicated by a specific cardinal or ordinal direction . Although no tremors could be felt in the capital when Zhang told the court that an earthquake had just occurred in the northwest , a message came soon afterwards that an earthquake had indeed struck 400 to 500 km ( 250 to 310 mi ) northwest of Luoyang ( in what is now modern Gansu ) . Zhang called his device the ' instrument for measuring the seasonal winds and the movements of the Earth ' ( <unk> <unk> yi <unk> ) , so @-@ named because he and others thought that earthquakes were most likely caused by the enormous compression of trapped air . 
 As described in the Book of the Later Han , the frame of the seismometer was a domed bronze vessel in the shape of a wine jar , although it was 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in diameter and decorated with scenes of mountains and animals . The trigger mechanism was an inverted pendulum ( which the Book of the Later Han calls the " central column " ) that , if disturbed by the ground tremors of earthquakes located near or far away , would swing and strike one of eight mobile arms ( representing the eight directions ) , each with a crank and catch mechanism . The crank and a right angle lever would raise one of eight metal dragon heads located on the exterior , dislodging a metal ball from its mouth that dropped into the mouth of one of eight metal toads below arranged like the points on a compass rose , thus indicating the direction of the earthquake . The Book of the Later Han states that when the ball fell into any one of eight toad mouths , it produced a loud noise which gained the attention of those observing the device . While Wang Zhenduo ( <unk> ) accepted the idea that Zhang 's seismometer had cranks and levers which were disturbed by the inverted pendulum , his contemporary <unk> Imamura ( 1870 – 1948 ) argued that the inverted pendulum could have had a pin at the top which , upon moving by force of the ground vibrations , would enter one of eight slots and expel the ball by pushing a slider . Since the Book of the Later Han states that the other seven dragon heads would not subsequently release the balls lodged up into their jaws after the first one had dropped , Imamura asserted that the pin of the pendulum would have been locked into the slot it had entered and thus immobilized the instrument until it was reset . 
 = = Mathematics and astronomy = = 
 = = = Mathematical treatises = = = 
 One of the earliest surviving mathematical treatises of ancient China is the Book on Numbers and Computation ( Suan shu shu ) , part of the Zhangjiashan Han bamboo texts dated 202 to 186 BCE and found in Jiangling County , Hubei . Another mathematical text compiled during the Han was The Arithmetical Classic of the Gnomon and the Circular Paths of Heaven ( Zhoubi suanjing ) , dated no earlier than the 1st century BCE ( from perhaps multiple authors ) and contained materials similar to those described by Yang Xiong in 15 BCE , yet the <unk> school of mathematics was not explicitly mentioned until Cai Yong 's ( 132 – 192 CE ) commentary of 180 CE . A preface was added to the text by Zhao Shuang <unk> in the 3rd century CE . There was also the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art ( Jiuzhang <unk> ) ; its full title was found on two bronze standard <unk> dated 179 CE ( with speculation that its material existed in earlier books under different titles ) and was provided with detailed commentary by Liu Hui ( fl . 3rd century CE ) in 263 CE . It is worth noting in this context that many of the documents excavated from Qin and Han sites contain evidence of the practical mathematics used by administrators for inventories and taxes , as well as for calculating labor needed for public works projects , just as described in the mathematical treatises . 
 = = = Innovations in the treatises = = = 
 The Suan shu shu presents basic mathematics problems and solutions . It was most likely a handbook for day @-@ to @-@ day business transactions or affairs of government administration . It contains problems and solutions for field measurements of area , proportional exchange rates for agricultural millet and rice , distribution by proportion , short width division , and excess and deficiency . Some of the problems found in the Suan shu shu appear in the later text Jiuzhang suanshu ; in five cases , the titles are exact matches . However , unlike the Jiuzhang suanshu , the Suan shu shu does not deal with problems involving right @-@ angle triangles , square roots , cube roots , and matrix methods , which demonstrates the significant advancements made in Chinese mathematics between the writings of these two texts . 
 The Zhoubi suanjing , written in dialogue form and with regularly presented problems , is concerned with the application of mathematics to astronomy . In one problem which sought to determine the height of the Sun from the Earth and the diameter of the Sun , Chen Zi ( <unk> ) instructs Rong Fang ( <unk> ) to wait until the shadow cast by the 8 chi tall gnomon is 6 chi ( one chi during the Han was 33 cm ) , so that a 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 5 right @-@ angle triangle can be constructed where the base is 60 @,@ 000 li ( one li during the Han was the equivalent of 415 m or 1362 ft ) , the hypotenuse leading towards the sun is 100 @,@ 000 li , and the height of the sun is 80 @,@ 000 li . Like the Jiuzhang suanshu , the Zhoubi suanjing also gives mathematical proof for the " <unk> Theorem " ( <unk> ; i.e. where c is the length of the hypotenuse and a and b are the lengths of the other two sides , respectively , a2 + b2 = c2 ) , which is known as the Pythagorean theorem in the West after the Greek mathematician Pythagoras ( fl . 6th century BCE ) . 
 The Jiuzhang suanshu was perhaps the most groundbreaking of the three surviving Han treatises . It is the first known book to feature negative numbers , along with the <unk> manuscript ( 200 CE ? – 600 CE ? ) of India and the book of the Greek mathematician Diophantus ( fl . 3rd century ) written in about 275 CE . Negative numbers appeared as black counting rods , while positive numbers appeared as red counting rods . Although the decimal system existed in China since the Shang dynasty ( c . 1600 – c . 1050 BCE ) , the earliest evidence of a decimal fraction ( i.e. the denominator is a power of ten ) is an inscription on a standard volume @-@ measuring vessel dated 5 CE and used by the mathematician and astronomer Liu Xin ( 46 BCE – 23 CE ) . Yet the first book to feature decimal fractions was the Jiuzhang suanshu , as a means to solve equations and represent measurements . Gaussian elimination , an algorithm used to solve linear equations , was known as the Array Rule in the Jiuzhang suanshu . While the book used continued fractions to find the roots of equations , Liu Hui built on this idea in the 3rd century when he increased the decimals to find the cube root of 1 @,@ 860 @,@ 867 ( yielding the answer 123 ) , the same method used in the Horner scheme named after William George Horner ( 1786 – 1837 ) . 
 = = = Approximations of pi = = = 
 For centuries , the Chinese had simply approximated the value of pi as 3 , until Liu Xin approximated it at 3 @.@ 154 sometime between 1 – 5 CE , although the method he used to reach this value is unknown to historians . Standard measuring vessels dating to the reign of Wang Mang ( 9 – 23 CE ) also showed approximations for pi at 3 @.@ 1590 , 3 @.@ 1497 , and 3 @.@ 167 . Zhang Heng is the next known Han mathematician to have made an approximation for pi . Han mathematicians understood that the area of a square versus the area of its inscribed circle had an approximate ratio of 4 : 3 , and also understood that the volume of a cube and the volume of its inscribed sphere would be 42 : 32 . With D as diameter and V as volume , D3 : V = 16 : 9 or V = 9 ⁄ 16D3 , a formula Zhang found fault with since he realized the value for diameter was inaccurate , the discrepancy being the value taken for the ratio . To fix this , Zhang added 1 ⁄ 16D3 to the formula , thus V 
 = 9 ⁄ 16D3 + 1 ⁄ 16D3 = 
 5 ⁄ <unk> . Since he found the ratio of the volume of the cube to the inscribed sphere at 8 : 5 , the ratio of the area of a square to the inscribed circle is √ 8 : √ 5 . With this formula , Zhang was able to approximate pi as the square root of 10 , or 3 @.@ 162 . After the Han , Liu Hui approximated pi as 3 @.@ 14159 , while the mathematician Zu Chongzhi ( 429 – 500 CE ) approximated pi at 3 @.@ <unk> ( or 355 ⁄ 113 ) , the most accurate approximation the ancient Chinese would achieve . 
 = = = Musical tuning and theory = = = 
 Mathematics were also used in musical tuning and music theory . The 2nd @-@ century @-@ BCE Huainanzi , compiled by eight scholars under the patronage of King Liu An ( 179 – 122 BCE ) , outlined the use of twelve tones on a musical scale . Jing Fang ( 78 – 37 BCE ) , a mathematician and music theorist , expanded these to create a scale of 60 tones . While doing so , Jing Fang realized that 53 just fifths is approximate to 31 octaves . By calculating the difference at <unk> ⁄ <unk> , Jing reached the same value of 53 equal temperament duly discovered by the German mathematician Nicholas Mercator ( 1620 – 1687 ) ( i.e. 353 / 284 , known as Mercator 's comma ) . Later , the prince Zhu Zaiyu ( 1536 – 1611 CE ) in Ming China and Simon Stevin ( 1548 – 1620 CE ) of the Flemish Region in Europe would simultaneously ( but separately ) discover the mathematical formula for equal temperament . 
 = = = Astronomical observations = = = 
 The ancient Chinese made careful observations of heavenly bodies and phenomena since observations of the cosmos were used for astrology and prognostication . The astronomer Gan De ( fl . 4th century BCE ) from the State of Qi was the first in history to acknowledge sunspots as genuine solar phenomena ( and not obstructing natural satellites as thought in the West after Einhard 's observation in 807 CE ) , while the first precisely dated sunspot observation in China occurred on May 10 , 28 BCE during the reign of Emperor Cheng of Han ( r . 33 – 7 BCE ) . Among the Mawangdui Silk Texts dated no later than 168 BCE ( when they were sealed in a tomb at Mawangdui , Changsha , Hunan province ) , the Miscellaneous Readings of Cosmic Patterns and Pneuma Images ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) manuscript illustrates in writings and ink drawings roughly three @-@ hundred different climatic and astronomical features including clouds , <unk> , rainbows , stars , constellations , and comets . Another silk text from the same site reports the times and locations of the rising and setting of planets in the night sky from the years 246 – 177 BCE . 
 The Han @-@ era Chinese noted the passage of the same comet seen in Persia for the birth of Mithridates II of Parthia in 135 BCE , the same comet the Romans observed close to the assassination of Julius Caesar in 44 BCE , Halley 's comet in 12 BCE , the same comet noted by Roman historian Cassius Dio ( c . 155 – c . 229 CE ) for 13 CE , and ( what is now known to have been ) a supernova in 185 CE . For various comets discussed in the Han @-@ era history books Records of the Grand Historian and Book of Han , details are given for their position in the sky and direction they were moving , the length of time they were visible , their color , and their size . 
 The Han @-@ era Chinese also made star catalogues , such as historian Sima Qian 's ( 145 – 86 BCE ) A Monograph on Celestial Officials ( <unk> <unk> ) and Zhang Heng 's 2nd @-@ century @-@ CE star catalogue which featured roughly 2 @,@ 500 stars and 124 constellations . To create a three @-@ dimensional representation of such observations , Astronomer Geng <unk> ( <unk> ) provided his armillary sphere with an equatorial ring in 52 BCE . By 84 CE the elliptical ring was added to the armillary sphere , while Zhang Heng 's model of 125 CE added the celestial horizon ring and meridian ring . 
 = = = Han calendars = = = 
 The Han Chinese used astronomical studies mainly to construct and revise their calendar . In contrast to the Julian calendar ( 46 BCE ) and Gregorian calendar ( 1582 CE ) of the West ( but like the Hellenic calendars of Classical Greece ) , the Chinese calendar is a lunisolar calendar , meaning that it uses the precise movements of the Sun and Moon as time @-@ markers throughout the year . In the 5th century BCE during the Spring and Autumn period , the Chinese established the Sifen calendar ( <unk> ) , which measured the tropical year at 3651 ⁄ 4 days ( like the Julian calendar of Rome ) . Emperor Wu replaced this with the new Taichu calendar ( <unk> ) in 104 BCE which measured the tropical year at 365385 ⁄ 1539 days and the lunar month at 2943 ⁄ 81 days . Since the Taichu calendar had become inaccurate over two centuries , Emperor Zhang of Han ( r . 75 – 88 CE ) halted its use and revived use of the Sifen calendar . Later , astronomer Guo Shoujing ( 1233 – 1316 CE ) would set the tropical year at 365 @.@ 2425 days for his <unk> calendar ( <unk> ) , the same value used in the Gregorian calendar . Besides the use of the calendar for regulating agricultural practices throughout the seasons , it was also used to mark important dates in the <unk> cycle — constructed by celestial stems ( gan <unk> ) and Earthly Branches ( zhi <unk> ) , each of the latter associated with an animal of the Chinese zodiac . 
 = = = Astronomical theory = = = 
 Zhao <unk> 's 3rd @-@ century commentary in the Zhoubi suanjing describes two astronomical theories : in one , the heavens are shaped as a hemi @-@ spherical dome extending over the earth , while the other compares the earth to the central yolk of an egg , where the heavens are shaped as a celestial sphere around the earth . The latter astronomical theory was mentioned by Yang Xiong in his Model Sayings ( <unk> <unk> ) and expounded on by Zhang Heng in his Spiritual Constitution of the Universe ( <unk> 靈憲 ) of 120 CE . Thus , the Han @-@ era Chinese believed in a geocentric model for the immediate solar system and greater universe , as opposed to a heliocentric model . 
 The Han @-@ era Chinese discussed the illumination and shapes of heavenly bodies : were they flat and circular , or were they rounded and spherical ? Jing Fang wrote in the 1st century BCE that Han astronomers believed the Sun , Moon , and planets were spherical like balls or crossbow bullets . He also wrote that the Moon and planets produce no light of their own , are viewable to people on Earth only because they are illuminated by the Sun , and those parts not illuminated by the Sun would be dark on the other side . For this , Jing compared the Moon to a mirror illuminating light . In the 2nd century CE , Zhang Heng drew a similar comparison to Jing 's by stating that the Sun is like fire and the Moon and planets are like water , since fire produces light and water reflects it . He also repeated Jing 's comment that the side of the moon not illuminated by the Sun was left in darkness . However , Zhang noted that sunlight did not always reach the Moon since the Earth obstructs the rays during a lunar eclipse . He also noted that a solar eclipse occurred when the Moon and Sun crossed paths to block sunlight from reaching earth . 
 In his Balanced Discourse ( Lunheng ) , Wang Chong ( 27 – 100 CE ) wrote that some Han thinkers believed that rain fell from the Heavens ( i.e. where the stars were located ) . Wang argued that , although rain fell from above , this common theory was false . He agreed with another theory that stated clouds were formed by the evaporation of water on earth , and that since clouds disperse rain , clouds and rain are in fact one and the same ; in essence , he accurately described the water cycle . 
 = = Structural engineering and public works = = 
 = = = Materials and construction = = = 
 Timber was the chief building material in Han architecture . It was used for grand palace halls , multi @-@ story towers , multi @-@ story residential halls , and humble abodes . However , due to wood 's rapid decay over time and susceptibility to fire , the oldest wooden buildings found in China ( i.e. several temple halls of Mount Wutai ) date no earlier than the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 CE ) . Architectural historian Robert L. Thorp describes the scarcity of Han @-@ era archaeological remains , as well as the often unreliable Han @-@ era literary and artistic sources used by historians for clues about non @-@ existent Han architecture . What remains of Han @-@ dynasty architecture are ruins of brick and rammed earth walls ( including aboveground city walls and underground tomb walls ) , rammed earth platforms for terraced altars and halls , funerary stone or brick pillar @-@ gates , and scattered ceramic roof tiles that once adorned timber halls . Sections of the Han @-@ era rammed earth Great Wall still exist in Gansu province , along with the Han frontier ruins of thirty beacon towers and two fortified castles with crenellations . Han walls of frontier towns and forts in Inner Mongolia were typically constructed with stamped clay bricks instead of rammed earth . 
 Thatched or tiled roofs were supported by wooden pillars , since the addition of brick , rammed earth , or mud walls of these halls did not actually support the roof . Stone and plaster were also used for domestic architecture . <unk> eaves projecting outward were built to distance falling rainwater from the walls ; they were supported by dougong brackets that were sometimes elaborately decorated . Molded designs usually decorated the ends of roof tiles , as seen in artistic models of buildings and in surviving tile pieces . 
 = = = Courtyard homes = = = 
 Valuable clues about Han architecture can be found in Han artwork of ceramic models , paintings , and carved or stamped bricks discovered in tombs and other sites . The layout of Han tombs were also built like underground houses , comparable to the scenes of courtyard houses found on tomb bricks and in three @-@ dimensional models . Han homes had a courtyard area ( and some had multiple courtyards ) with halls that were slightly elevated above it and connected by stairways . Multi @-@ story buildings included the main colonnaded residence halls built around the courtyards as well as watchtowers . The halls were built with intersecting crossbeams and rafters that were usually carved with decorations ; stairways and walls were usually plastered over to produce a smooth surface and then painted . 
 = = = Chang 'an and Luoyang , the Han capitals = = = 
 The ruins of the walls of Han 's first capital Chang 'an still stand today at 12 m ( 39 ft ) in height with a base width of 12 to 16 m ( 39 to 52 ft ) . Modern archaeological surveys have proven that the eastern wall was 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) long , the southern wall was 7 @,@ 600 m ( 24 @,@ 900 ft ) long , the western wall was 4 @,@ 900 m ( 16 @,@ 100 ft ) long , and the northern wall was 7 @,@ 200 ( 23 @,@ 622 ft ) long . Overall the total length of walls equalled 25 @,@ 700 m ( 84 @,@ 300 ft ) , and formed a roughly square layout ( although the southern and northern walls had sections which <unk> due to topographical concerns : rough terrain existed along the southern wall and the course of the Wei River obstructed the straight path of the northern wall ) . The city 's moat was 8 m ( 26 ft ) wide and 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep ; the remains of what were wooden bridges have been discovered along the moat . Chang 'an had twelve gatehouses leading into the city , three for each side of the wall , and acted as terminus points for the main avenues . Every gatehouse had three gateway entrances that were each 6 m ( 20 ft ) wide ; Han @-@ era writers claimed that each gateway could accommodate the traffic of four horse @-@ drawn carriages at once . The drainage system included many <unk> that were dug under these gates and lined with bricks that form arches , where ceramic water pipes have been found that once connected to the ditches built alongside the major streets . Only some wall sections and platform foundations of the city 's once lavish imperial palaces remain . Likewise , the stone foundations of the armory were also discovered , but its wooden architecture had long since disappeared . 
 Some sections of the wall ruins of Han 's second capital Luoyang still stand at 10 m ( 33 ft ) in height and 25 m ( 82 ft ) in width at the base . The eastern wall was 3 @,@ 900 m ( 12 @,@ 800 ft ) long , the western wall was 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 200 ft ) long , and the northern wall was 2 @,@ 700 m ( 8 @,@ 900 ft ) long , yet the southern wall was washed away when the Luo River changed its course centuries ago ; by using the terminus points of the eastern and western walls , historians estimate that the southern wall was 2 @,@ 460 m ( 8 @,@ 070 ft ) long . The overall walled enclosure formed a rectangular shape , yet with some disruptive curves due to topographical obstructions . Like Chang 'an , Luoyang had twelve gatehouses , three for each side of the wall , while each gatehouse had three gateway entrances which led to major avenues within the city . The rammed earth foundational platforms of religious altars and terraces still stand today outside of the walled perimeter of Luoyang , dedicated to the worship of deities and where state sacrifices were conducted . They were approached by long ramps and once had timber halls built on top with verandas on the lower levels . 
 = = = Underground tombs = = = 
 By the 1980s , over ten thousand brick @-@ and @-@ stone underground Han tombs had been discovered throughout China . Earlier Chinese tombs dating to the Warring States were often vertically dug pits lined with wooden walls . In digging the tomb sites , Han workers would first build vertical pits and then dig laterally , hence the name " horizontal pits " for Han tombs ; this method was also used for tomb sites dug into the sides of mountains . The walls of most Western Han tombs were built of large hollow bricks while the smaller , non @-@ hollow brick type that dominated Eastern Han tomb architecture ( with some made out of stone ) appeared in the late Western Han . The smaller brick type was better @-@ suited for Han tomb archways at entrances , vaulted chambers , and domed roofs . Underground vaults and domes did not require buttress supports since they were held in place by earthen pits . The use of brick vaults and domes in aboveground Han structures is unknown . 
 The layout of tombs dug into the sides of mountains typically had a front chamber , side chambers , and a rear chambers designed to imitate a complex of aboveground halls . The tomb of King Liu Sheng ( d . 113 BCE ) in Hebei province not only had a front hall with window drapes and grave goods , carriages and horses in the southern separate side chamber , and storage goods in the northern side chamber , but also the remains of real timber houses with tiled roofs erected within ( along with a house made of stone slabs and two stone doors in the rear chamber ) . Doors made completely out of stone were found in many Han tombs as well as tombs in later dynasties . 
 A total of twenty @-@ nine monumental brick or stone @-@ carved pillar @-@ gates ( que ) from the Han dynasty have survived and can be found in the aboveground areas around Han tomb and shrine sites . They often formed part of outer walls , usually flanking an entry but sometimes at the corners of walled enclosures . Although they lack wooden and ceramic components , they feature imitation roof tiles , eaves , porches , and balustrades . 
 = = = Boreholes and mining shafts = = = 
 On Han tomb brick reliefs of Sichuan province , scenes of borehole drilling for mining projects are shown . They show towering derricks lifting liquid brine through bamboo pipes to the surface so that the brine could be distilled in evaporation pans over the heat of furnaces and produce salt . The furnaces were heated by natural gas brought by bamboo pipes , yet gas brought up from 610 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) below the surface could cause an explosion if it was not properly mixed with oxygen first , so the Han @-@ era Chinese built underground carburetor chambers and siphoned some of the gas off with exhaust pipes . The drill bit for digging boreholes was operated by a team of men jumping on and off a beam while the boring tool was rotated by a draft animal , usually oxen or water buffaloes . Han boreholes dug for collecting brine could reach hundreds of meters ( feet ) beneath the Earth 's surface . Mining shafts dating to the Han dynasty have been found which reach depths of hundreds of meters ( feet ) beneath the earth , complete with spacious underground rooms structured by timber frames along with ladders and iron tools left behind . 
 = = = Ceramic model buildings = = = 
 There are Han @-@ era literary references to tall towers found in the capital cities ; they often served as watchtowers , astronomical observatories , and religious establishments meant to attract the favor of immortals . The court eunuchs Zhao Zhong and Zhang Rang discouraged the aloof Emperor Ling of Han ( r . 168 – 189 CE ) from ascending to the top floors of tall towers ( claiming it would cause bad luck ) , in order to conceal from him the enormous palatial mansions the eunuchs built for themselves in Luoyang . It is not known for certain whether or not miniature ceramic models of residential towers and watchtowers found in Han @-@ dynasty tombs are completely faithful representations of such timber towers , yet they reveal vital clues about lost timber architecture . 
 There are only a handful of existing ceramic models of multi @-@ story towers from pre @-@ Han and Western Han eras ; the bulk of the hundreds of towers found so far were made during the Eastern Han period . Model towers could be fired as one piece in the kiln or assembled from several different ceramic pieces to create the whole . No one tower is a duplicate of the other , yet they share common features . They often had a walled courtyard at the bottom , a balcony with balustrades and windows for every floor , roof tiles capping and concealing the ceiling rafters , human figures peering out the windows or standing on the balconies , door knockers , and pets such as dogs in the bottom courtyard . Perhaps the most direct pieces of evidence to suggest that miniature ceramic tower models are faithful representations of real @-@ life Han timber towers are tile patterns . Artistic patterns found on the circular tiles that cap the eave @-@ ends on the miniature models are exact matches of patterns found on real @-@ life Han roof tiles excavated at sites such as the royal palaces in Chang 'an and Luoyang , and even the tiles of the original White Horse Temple . The ceramic model towers featured below come from tombs of the Han dynasty : 
 Besides towers , other ceramic models from the Han reveal a variety of building types . This includes multi @-@ story storehouses such as granaries , courtyard houses with multi @-@ story halls , kiosks , walled gate towers , mills , manufactories and workshops , animal pens , outhouses , and water wells . Even models of single @-@ story farmhouses show a great amount of detail , including tiled roofs , courtyards , steps leading to walkways , farmyards with troughs and basins , parapets , and privies . Models of granaries and storehouses had tiled rooftops , dougong brackets , windows , and stilt supports raising them above ground level . Han models of water wells sometimes feature tiny tiled roofs supported by beams that house the rope pulley used for lifting the bucket . The ceramic models featured below come from tombs of the Han dynasty : 
 = = = Roads , bridges , and canals = = = 
 In order to facilitate commerce and communication as well as speed the process of tax collection and movement of military troops , the Han government sponsored the building of new roads , bridges , and canal waterways . These include repairs and renovation work on the Dujiangyan Irrigation System of Sichuan and Zhengguo Canal of Shaanxi , both of which were built by the previous State of Qin . Accepting the proposal of Ni Kuan ( zh : <unk> ) , in 111 BCE Emperor Wu commissioned Er to lead the project of creating extensions to the Zhengguo Canal that could irrigate nearby terrain elevated above the main canal . Since a large amount of silt had built up over time at the bottom of the Zhengguo Canal ( causing flooding ) , in 95 BCE another project was initiated to tap irrigation waters from further up the Jing River , requiring the dredging of a new 100 km ( 62 mi ) long canal following a contour line above the Zhengguo . The Han state also maintained a system of dikes to protect farmland from seasonal floods . 
 Roadways , wooden bridges , postal stations , and relay stations were occasionally repaired , while many new facilities such as these were established . As written by Han authors , roads built during the Han were tamped down with metal rammers , yet there is uncertainty over the materials used ; Joseph Needham speculates that they were rubble and gravel . The widths of roads ranged from narrow footpaths where only a single horse or oxen could pass at once to large highways that could accommodate the simultaneous passage of nine horse @-@ drawn chariots abreast . Fortified Han roadways were built as far west as Shanshan ( Loulan ) near the Lop Desert , while Han forces utilized routes that traversed north of the Taklamakan Desert towards Kashgar . A vast network of roads , fortified passes , and wooden bridges built over rushing torrents in steep gorges of the Qin Mountains was consolidated during the Han , known as the gallery roads . During the reign of Emperor Wu , roads were built to connect newly conquered territories in what is now Yunnan in the far southwest as well as the Korean Peninsula in the far northeast . 
 One of the most common bridge @-@ types built during the Han was the wooden @-@ trestle beam bridge , described by literary sources and seen in reliefs carved on tomb bricks . Evidence for arch bridges is elusive : one outside of Chengdu 's south gate is claimed to date to the Han period , while that built by Ma Xian ( <unk> ) ( fl . 135 CE ) was certainly a beam bridge . In artwork , a relief sculpture from a Han tomb in Sichuan province shows an arch bridge with a gradual curve , suggesting that it is segmental , although the use of such bridges are not entirely confirmed . Although there are rare references to simple suspension bridges in Han sources , these are only mentioned in connection with travels to foreign countries in the Himalaya , <unk> and Afghanistan , demonstrating the antiquity of the invention there . Floating pontoon bridges made of boats secured by iron chains were built during the Han ( some even spanning the Yellow River and Yangzi River ) and were most often employed for military purposes since they could be easily assembled and then disassembled . 
 = = Medicine = = 
 Much of the beliefs held by Han @-@ era physicians are known to modern historians through such texts as the Yellow Emperor 's Inner Canon ( Huangdi neijing ) medical corpus , which was compiled from the 3rd to 2nd century BCE and was mentioned in the Book of Later Han . It is clear from this text and others that their metaphysical beliefs in the five phases and yin and yang dictated their medical decisions and assumptions . The Han @-@ era Chinese believed that each organ in the body was associated with one of the five phases ( metal 金 , wood 木 , water 水 , fire 火 , earth 土 ) and had two circulatory qi channels ( <unk> ) . If these channels were disrupted , Han medical texts suggest that one should consume an edible material associated with one of these phases that would counteract the organ 's prescribed phase and thus restore one 's health . For example , the Chinese believed that when the heart — associated with the fire phase — caused one to become sluggish , then one should eat sour food because it was associated with the wood phase ( which promoted fire ) . The Han Chinese also believed that by using pulse diagnosis , a physician could determine which organ of the body emitted " vital energy " ( qi ) and what qualities the latter had , in order to figure out the exact disorder the patient was suffering . Despite the influence of metaphysical theory on medicine , Han texts also give practical advice , such as the proper way to perform clinical lancing to remove an abscess . The Huangdi neijing noted the symptoms and reactions of people with various diseases of the liver , heart , spleen , lung , or kidneys in a 24 @-@ hour period , which was a recognition of circadian rhythm , although explained in terms of the five phases . 
 In his Essential Medical Treasures of the Golden Chamber ( <unk> <unk> ) , Zhang Zhongjing ( c . 150 – c . 219 CE ) was the first to suggest a regulated diet rich in certain vitamins could prevent different types of disease , an idea which led Hu <unk> ( fl . 1314 – 1330 CE ) to prescribe a diet rich in Vitamin B1 as a treatment for beriberi . Zhang 's major work was the Treatise on Cold Injury and Miscellaneous Disorders ( <unk> <unk> lun ) . His contemporary and alleged associate Hua Tuo ( d . 208 CE ) was a physician who had studied the Huangdi neijing and became knowledgeable in Chinese herbology . Hua Tuo used anesthesia on patients during surgery and created an ointment that was meant to fully heal surgery wounds within a month . In one diagnosis of an ill woman , he deciphered that she bore a dead fetus within her womb which he then removed , curing her of her ailments . 
 Historical sources say that Hua Tuo rarely practiced moxibustion and acupuncture . The first mentioning of acupuncture in Chinese literature appeared in the Huangdi neijing . Acupuncture needles made of gold were found in the tomb of the Han King Liu Sheng ( d . 113 BCE ) . Some stone @-@ carved depictions of acupuncture date to the Eastern Han Era ( 25 – 220 CE ) . Hua Tuo also wrote about the allegedly life @-@ prolonging exercises of calisthenics . In the 2nd @-@ century @-@ BCE medical texts excavated from the tombs of Mawangdui , illustrated diagrams of calisthenic positions are accompanied by descriptive titles and captions . Vivienne Lo writes that the modern physical exercises of <unk> and qigong are derived from Han @-@ era calisthenics . 
 = = Cartography = = 
 Map @-@ making in China preceded the Han dynasty . Since two 4th @-@ century @-@ BCE silk maps from the State of Qin ( found in Gansu , displaying the region about the <unk> River ) show the measured distance between timber @-@ gathering sites , Mei @-@ ling Hsu argues that these are to be considered the first known economic maps ( as they predate the maps of the Roman geographer Strabo , c . 64 BCE – 24 CE ) . Maps from the Han period have also been uncovered by modern archaeologists , such as those found with 2nd @-@ century @-@ BCE silk texts at Mawangdui . In contrast to the Qin maps , the Han maps found at Mawangdui employ a more diverse use of map symbols , cover a larger terrain , and display information on local populations and even pinpoint locations of military camps . One of the maps discovered at Mawangdui shows positions of Han military garrisons which were to attack Nanyue in 181 BCE . 
 In Chinese literature , the oldest reference to a map comes from the year 227 BCE , when the assassin Jing Ke was to present a map to Ying Zheng <unk> , King of Qin ( ruling later as Qin Shi Huang , r . 221 – 210 BCE ) on behalf of Crown Prince Dan of Yan . Instead of presenting the map , he pulled out a dagger from his scroll , yet was unable to kill Ying Zheng . The Rites of Zhou ( <unk> ) , compiled during the Han and commented by Liu Xin in the 1st century CE , mentioned the use of maps for governmental provinces and districts , principalities , frontier boundaries , and locations of ores and minerals for mining facilities . The first Chinese gazetteer was written in 52 CE and included information on territorial divisions , the founding of cities , and local products and customs . Pei Xiu ( 224 – 271 CE ) was the first to describe in detail the use of a graduated scale and geometrically plotted reference grid . However , historians Howard Nelson , Robert Temple , and Rafe de Crespigny argue that there is enough literary evidence that Zhang Heng 's now lost work of 116 CE established the geometric reference grid in Chinese cartography ( including a line from the Book of Later Han : " [ Zhang Heng ] cast a network of coordinates about heaven and earth , and reckoned on the basis of it " ) . Although there is speculation fueled by the report in Sima 's Records of the Grand Historian that a gigantic raised @-@ relief map representing the Qin Empire is located within the tomb of Qin Shi Huang , it is known that small raised @-@ relief maps were created during the Han dynasty , such as one made out of rice by the military officer Ma Yuan ( 14 BCE – 49 CE ) . 
 = = <unk> and vehicles = = 
 In 1975 , an ancient shipyard discovered in Guangzhou is now dated to the late 3rd century BCE , made during either the Qin dynasty ( 221 – 206 BCE ) or early Western Han dynasty . It had three large platforms capable of building wooden ships that were 30 m ( 98 ft ) long , 8 m ( 26 ft ) wide , and had a weight capacity of 60 metric tons . Another Han shipyard in what is now Anhui province had a government @-@ operated maritime workshop where battle ships were assembled . The widespread use of iron tools during the Han dynasty was essential for crafting such vessels . 
 The southward expansion of the Han dynasty led to new trade routes and diplomatic contact with foreign kingdoms . In 111 BCE , Emperor Wu conquered the Kingdom of Nanyue in what is now modern northern Vietnam and Guangdong , Guangxi , Yunnan ; thereafter he opened up maritime trade to both Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean , as foreign merchants brought lapis lazuli , pearls , jade , and glasswares to the Han Empire from this southern sea route . When a group of travelers from the Roman Empire ( allegedly diplomats of Marcus Aurelius but most likely Roman merchants ) came to the Han court in 166 CE , they allegedly came from this southern trade route . By at least the 1st century CE — as proven by Eastern Han ceramic miniature models of ships found in various tombs — the Chinese would have been able to brave distant waters with the new steering invention of the stern @-@ mounted rudder . This came to replace the less efficient steering oar . While ancient China was home to various ship designs , including the layered and fortified tower ship meant for calm waters of lakes and river , the junk design ( jun <unk> ) created by the 1st century CE was China 's first seaworthy sailing ship . The typical junk has a square @-@ ended bow and stern , a flat @-@ bottomed hull or carvel @-@ shaped hull with no keel or sternpost , and solid transverse bulkheads in the place of structural ribs found in Western <unk> . Since the Chinese junk lacked a sternpost , the rudder was attached to the back of the ship by use of either socket @-@ and @-@ jaw or block and tackle ( which differed from the later European pintle and gudgeon design of the 12th century ) . As written by a 3rd @-@ century author , junks had for @-@ and @-@ aft rigs and lug sails . 
 Although horse and ox @-@ drawn carts and spoke @-@ wheeled chariots had existed in China long before the Han dynasty , it was not until the 1st century BCE that literary evidence pointed to the invention of the wheelbarrow , while painted murals on Han tomb walls of the 2nd century CE show the wheelbarrow in use for hauling goods . While the ' throat @-@ and @-@ girth ' harness was still in use throughout much of the ancient world ( placing an excessive amount of pressure on horses ' necks ) , the Chinese were placing a wooden yoke across their horses ' chests with traces to the chariot shaft by the 4th century BCE in the State of Chu ( as seen on a Chu lacquerware ) . By Han times , the Chinese replaced this heavy yoke with a softer breast strap , as seen in Han stamped bricks and carved tomb reliefs . In the final stage of evolution , the modern horse collar was invented in China by the 5th century CE , during the Northern Wei period . 
 = = Weaponry and war machines = = 
