 In 997 , at a royal meeting near Clonfert , Brian Boru , King of Munster , met with his long @-@ time rival Máel Sechnaill mac Domnaill , who was at the time High King of Ireland . Although the idea of the high @-@ kingship is considered mainly an anachronistic invention , it came into vogue in the 10th century to denote a king who had enforced his power over external territories . Máel Sechnaill assumed the Irish high @-@ kingship after the Battle of Tara in 980 . 
 The two kings made a truce , by which Brian was granted rule over the southern half of Ireland , while Máel Sechnaill retained the northern half and high kingship . In honour of this arrangement , Máel Sechnaill handed over to Brian the hostages he had taken from Dublin and Leinster ; and in 998 , Brian handed over to Máel Sechnaill the hostages of Connacht . In the same year , Brian and Máel Sechnaill began co @-@ operating against the Norse of Dublin for the first time . 
 Late in 999 , however , the Leinstermen , historically hostile to domination by either the Uí Néill overkings or the King of Munster , allied themselves with the Norse of Dublin and revolted against Brian . According to the 17th century Annals of the Four Masters , the following prophecy had predicted the Battle of Glenmama : 
 They shall come to Gleann @-@ Mama , 
 It will not be water over hands , 
 Persons shall drink a deadly draught 
 Around the stone at <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 From the victorious overthrow they shall retreat , 
 Till they reach past the wood northwards , 
 And Ath @-@ <unk> the fair shall be burned , 
 After the ravaging the Leinster plain . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The Annals of the Four Masters records that Brian and Máel Sechnaill united their forces , and according to the Annals of Ulster , they met the Leinster @-@ Dublin army at Glenmama on Thursday , 30 December 999 . Glenmama , near Lyons Hill in County Kildare , was the ancient stronghold of the Kings of Leinster . 
 The Munster @-@ Meath army defeated the Leinster @-@ Dublin army . Later historians have also seen the battle as decisive . The sources point to high mortality on both sides . According to the Annals of Innisfallen , which represents a Munster perspective , <unk> Gall <unk> ( ‘ the best part of the foreigners of Ireland ’ ) fell therein . The more partisan <unk> <unk> re <unk> indulges in hyperbole , claiming that ‘ since the Battle of Mag Roth to that time there had not taken place a greater slaughter . ” The fallen included Harald son of <unk> ( a brother of Sitriuc Silkbeard ) and ‘ other nobles of the foreigners ’ , amongst whom was one <unk> son of <unk> , who apparently belonged to the <unk> ; he may have been a brother of <unk> son of <unk> , king of <unk> <unk> , who died in 953 . 
 On Brian ’ s side , even the Cogadh acknowledges that ‘ there fell many multitudes of the Dál Cais , ’ but no details are <unk> the It says the battle was ' bloody , furious , red , valiant , heroic , manly ; rough , cruel and heartless ; ' and that there had been no greater slaughter since the seventh century Battle of Magh Rath . 
 Ó Corráin refers to it as a " crushing defeat " of Leinster and Dublin , while The dictionary of English history says the battle effectively " quelled " the " desperate revolt " of Leinster and Dublin . Tradition records that " the son of the King of the Danes " , Harold Olafsson , was killed in the retreat , and was interned at the now obscure cemetery of <unk> . Brian took Máel Mórda of Leinster prisoner and held him until he received hostages from the Leinstermen . It was alleged that 7000 Norse fell in the battle . This was at a time when warfare was fought on a very limited scale , and raiding armies generally had between a hundred and two hundred men . Most importantly , the defeat left the road to Dublin " free and unimpeded for the victorious legions of Brian and <unk> " . 
 = = Sack of Dublin = = 
 The victory was followed up with an attack on the city of Dublin . Brian ’ s forces marched quickly to Dublin ( again confirming a <unk> @-@ Ardclough location for the battle ) reaching the town on New Year ’ s Eve 999 . They entered its defences without any great resistance and the Annals of Innisfallen say that , on New Year ’ s Day ( the <unk> of January ) 1000 , they burned both the settlement itself and the nearby wood known as <unk> <unk> which apparently stood on the north side of the Liffey . The plunder of the town , for the second time in ten years , is described in considerable detail in the <unk> . The 12th century Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh gives two accounts of the occupation : that Brian remained in Dublin from Christmas Day until Epiphany ( 6 January ) , or from Christmas Day until St. Brigid 's Day ( 1 February ) . The later Annals of Ulster gives a date of 30 December for the Battle of Glenmama , while Annals of Inisfallen dates Brian 's capture of the city two days later , to 1 January 1000 . According to the much more reliable Annals of the Four Masters and the Chronicon Scotorum , Dublin was only occupied for a week by Munster forces . In any case , in 1000 Brian plundered the city , burned the Norse fortress and expelled its ruler , King Sigtrygg Silkbeard . Ailbhe Mac Shamhráin wrote : 
 Allowance must be made here for poetic license but , event itself , some picture can be obtained of the wealth of the trading centre that was Dublin According to the account Brian , having plundered the dún ( fortress ) , entered the <unk> ( market area ) and here seized the greatest wealth . Meanwhile , on the approach of the Munster forces , King Sitriuc had fled northward hoping to obtain asylum among the Ulstermen . His ally , Máel @-@ <unk> of Uí <unk> , was captured , in ignominious circumstances according to <unk> <unk> re <unk> . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The kingship of Leinster was bestowed upon the Uí <unk> candidate , <unk> son of <unk> , who retained this status until he was deposed in 1003 . Sigtrygg Silkbeard returned having found no asylum in the north . The annal accounts concur that he , too , yielded hostages to Brian while the Annals of Innisfallen add that Brian in a suitable magnanimous gesture , ‘ gave the fort ( dún ) to the Foreigners . Ailbhe Mac Shamhráin wrote : 
 The implications here is that , from this time onwards , the Hiberno @-@ Scandinavian ruler would hold his kingship from his Munster overlord . Brian , at this stage , aspired to an even tighter dominance of Dublin that than secured by his rival , Máel Sechnaill mac Domnaill , ten years earlier . There seems to be little doubt that the longer term beneficiary of Glenn Máma was Brian alone . With renewed confidence , he again moved against Máel Sechnaill | Máel Sechnaill mac Domnaill , even if his initiatives of 1000 @-@ 1001 resulted in setbacks , one expedition into Brega resulted in his advance cavalry being slaughtered by the Uí Néill , another foray was reversed in <unk> ( Co Westmeath ) , and the Dál Cais river @-@ fleet was impeded by the King of Tara and his Connachta allies having constructed a barrier across the Shannon . Brian , however , found a way of circumventing hit and , early in 1002 , brought a large army through to Athlone and took the hostages of Connacht . 
 According to the Cogadh Gaedhil re Gallaibh , Sigtrygg 's flight from the city brought him north , first to the Ulaid and then to Áed of Cenél nEógain . Since Sigtrygg could find no refuge in Ireland , he eventually returned , submitted to Brian , gave hostages and was restored to Dublin . This was three months after Brian ended his occupation in February . In the meantime , Sigtrygg may have temporarily " turned pirate " and been responsible for a raid on St David 's in Wales . 
 Brian gave his own daughter by his first wife in marriage to Sigtrygg . Brian in turn took as his second wife Sigtrygg 's mother , the now thrice @-@ married Gormflaith . The cessation of revolt was followed by over a decade of peace in Dublin while Sigtrygg 's men served in the armies of Brian . However , Sigtrygg never forgot the insult of the Ulaid , and in 1002 he had his revenge when his soldiers served in Brian 's campaign against the Ulaid and ravaged their lands . 
 Máel Sechnaill found the support of the northern kings slipping away felt obliged to submit and a new political order was created . The capitulation of the king of Tara left Brian as the most powerful king in Ireland – the first non Uí Néill king to achieve such prominence . Ailbhe Mac Shamhráin wrote : 
 Glenn Máma gave Brian a psychological advantage over the king of Tara and increased his readiness to break the Agreement of Clonfert . As a result of the battle , he had achieved domination , in a meaningful sense , of Leinster and Dublin . Through achieving effective dominance of Dublin , Brian acquired a military ( aside from a psychological ) advantage over Máel Sechnaill , which helped him in his endeavours to reach beyond the lordship of Leth Moga . His success in this regard was probably instrumental in tying Dublin into the sphere of Leth Moga for at least a century to follow . 
 = Iori Yagami = 
 Iori Yagami ( <unk> <unk> , Yagami Iori ) is a character from SNK 's The King of Fighters video game series who first appeared in The King of Fighters ' 95 as the leader of the Rivals Team . He is an iconic character in the series , and appears regularly on publicity material and merchandise . Iori is a central character to the series ' plot , and the initial enemy and eventual rival of Kyo Kusanagi . He was created specifically to become Kyo 's rival and his name and abilities were designed to relate him with the Yamata no Orochi legend . The designers ended up liking him so much that they are careful how his character is developed as the series expands . 
 Iori is the heir of the Yagami clan , who wield pyrokinetic powers and sealed the Orochi demon along with the Kusanagi and Yata clans . However , after betraying the Kusanagi clan , the Yagami are cursed by Orochi giving them powers that cause all their members to die young . The character harbors hatred against the other clans , but later becomes obsessed with killing their heir Kyo . As a result , Iori sometimes helps him in order to have the opportunity to have a final fight against him . Aside from the main series , Iori appears in several other media series such as spin @-@ offs and crossover video games , and comic adaptations of the series . 
 Video games journalists have praised the character as one of the most powerful characters in the series . Reviewers have also cited Iori as one of the best characters from the games , labeling him as a veteran character and praising his appearance as one of the best creations by SNK . A variety of collectibles based on Iori 's likeness have been created , including key chains and figurines . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 Iori is a violent and sadistic person who suffers from trauma because of his clan 's past . In ancient times , the Yagami clan was known as the Yasakani . With the help of the Yata and Kusanagi clans , they sealed the demon Orochi . As time passed , the Yasakani , tired of living in the shadow of the Kusanagi , made a blood pact with Orochi . This gave them greater powers , but in return , they and their descendants were forever cursed . They renamed their clan the Yagami and set out to destroy the Kusanagi with their new powers . In response , the Kusanagi declared war on the Yagami , which led to many clan members on both sides being killed . 
 As a side @-@ effect of the Orochi 's curse , the flames of the Yagami have a bluish tint . The curse also causes each heir to die young and each mother to die in childbirth . Iori suffers from an additional curse - " The Riot of the Blood " ( <unk> , Chi no <unk> ) - when he becomes faster , more powerful , wilder , and tends to attack anybody near him indiscriminately . In this state Iori is commonly named " Wild Iori " or " Orochi Iori " ( <unk> , Tsuki no Yoru Orochi no Chi ni <unk> Iori , lit . Insane Iori with Blood of Orochi Under the Night of the Moon ) . Iori hates the Kusanagi clan because of this curse , but later becomes obsessed with killing its heir Kyo , disregarding their clans ' past . This sometimes results in Iori helping him to defeat his enemies to finish their battle . In order to find him , he sometimes enters the The King of Fighters tournaments and uses his teammates as tools in order to get to him . Iori appears in most of the series ' games , and is voiced by Kunihiko Yasui . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 First appearing in The King of Fighters ' 95 , Iori enters the annual tournament as the leader of the Rival Team along with Billy Kane and Eiji Kisaragi ) as he learns that the heir of the Kusanagi clan , Kyo , is expected to be there . However , the team fails to defeat Kyo 's team and Iori betrays his teammates . In the next video game , Iori teams up with two women , Vice and Mature , servants of the Orochi demon . The same team would be repeated in KOF ' 98 , KOF 2002 , and Neowave , games which do not feature a storyline . During the ' 96 competition , Iori meets Chizuru Kagura , heir of the Yata clan , who wants to gather Kyo and Iori on her team to seal Orochi . Together they defeat the Orochi follower Goenitz but neither Iori nor Kyo agree with the idea . When Iori leaves with his teammates , he is unable to control this surge of Orochi power , resulting in their deaths . Iori continued to suffer from multiple outbreaks and during The King of Fighters ' 97 , attacks other team members . As such , Iori appears as a sub @-@ boss character in the game depending on the characters that the player uses . He later joins Chizuru and Kyo to confront and seal Orochi . 
 In The King of Fighters ' 99 Iori is a secret character in most versions of the game . Iori can be faced as a bonus fight in the end of the game if the player manages to get a high score . In the story , Iori discovers the creation of Kyo clones and enters the annual tournament where he finds those responsible , an organization named NEST . Iori follows the battles in secret and fights against the Nests ' agents to continue his fight against Kyo . An assistant version of his character , named Striker , also appears for Iori in The King of Fighters 2000 but with an outfit based on his illustrations from artbooks . In The King of Fighters 2001 , an agent named Seth invites Iori to join his team for the next King of Fighters tournament , presuming that he would get his shot against Kyo . While his regular form appears in KOF 2002 , his Orochi form is also featured in the PlayStation 2 port from the game as well as the remake of KOF ' 98 . In The King of Fighters 2003 , Chizuru appears to both Kyo and Iori , requesting that they form a team and investigate suspicious activities concerning the Orochi seal . During the investigation , the team is ambushed by the fighter Ash Crimson , who plans to get the power from the descendants of the clans who sealed Orochi and steals the ones from Chizuru . In the following video game , Iori and Kyo form a team once again with Kyo 's student Shingo Yabuki to fill Chizuru 's spot to stop Ash . At the end of the tournament , the strengthening presence of Orochi causes Iori to enter the Riot of Blood state , in which he attacks his comrades . Ash appears afterward and defeats Iori , stealing his powers . Iori is a playable character in The King of Fighters XII . Iori is featured with a different outfit , and with a new moveset , that does not use purple flames . Like each character , he does not have a team . Iori 's appearance in The King of Fighters XIII sees him teamed with his former team members from the 1996 tournament , Mature and Vice , who return as spirits . He recovers his flames in his ending and appears as downloadable content in this form . He is set to return in the upcoming The King of Fighters XIV . 
 In The King of Fighters : Kyo , a role @-@ playing video game situated before KOF ' 97 , Iori appears as Kyo 's antagonist in his journey around the world . Iori appears in the spin @-@ off video games Maximum Impact series . In the North American editions of Maximum Impact , Iori is voiced by Eric Summerer . Iori also appears as a sub @-@ boss during The King of Fighters Ex : Neo Blood , which is situated after his fight against Orochi . Although Iori enters the tournament to fight Kyo , Geese Howard , the organizer of the tournament , tries to make him awake his Riot of the Blood to absorb his powers , but fails . In The King of Fighters EX2 : Howling Blood , Iori enters another tournament , and is joined by two women who want to find a man controlled by the Orochi power . The shooter game KOF : Sky Stage also features him as a boss . 
 Iori also appears in SNK 's hand @-@ held game , SNK Gals ' Fighters , as a comical interpretation called Miss X ( <unk> X , Misu <unk> ) . The character insists he is a female in order to participate in the game 's Queen of Fighters tournament , though several female fighters easily see through his disguise . In the crossover video games <unk> Battle Coliseum and SNK vs. Capcom series , Iori appears as a playable character ; the latter includes his Riot of the Blood state . His character is also a boss character ( along with Geese ) in the Game Boy version from Real Bout Fatal Fury Special . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Aside from the King of Fighters series , the character is featured on his own drama CD and character image album . In the anime The King of Fighters : Another Day , Iori is seen searching for Ash to regain his powers . Iori appears in the spin @-@ off manga story based on his adventure prior to The King of Fighters ' 96 entitled , The King of Fighters : Kyo . The character appears in the manhua adaptation of The King of Fighters : Zillion created by Andy Seto . The manhua retells Iori 's story from his fight against Orochi until he attacks NESTS to destroy Kyo 's clones . He also stars in further manhua for the games , starting with The King of Fighters 2001 through 2003 along with the Maximum Impact series . In the The King of Fighters movie , Iori is played by Will Yun Lee . 
 = = Conception and creation = = 
 A main objective planned for The King of Fighters ' 95 was to introduce Iori properly as Kyo 's rival . Creators have stated Iori 's personality , and other aspects of his character such as his phrases and unique moves , " broke the mold for characters in fighting games at that time " Like Kyo , several aspects of Iori , including his surname and abilities , were designed to relate him to the Yamata no Orochi legend , which was the inspiration for the plot . After observing fan reactions at initial location testing for King of Fighters ' 95 , several staff members predicted that Iori would be popular on his release . One of them was happy that at an event for The King of Fighters XIII on March 25 , 2010 , several fans reminded him that it was Iori 's birthday according to his official profile . Iori is a berserker due to the Orochi demon blood within him . This version of him , officially named " Orochi Iori " , is hinted to have existed before his debut in The King of Fighters ' 97 as one of the game 's mid bosses . This form of Iori was designed specifically to overpower other characters easily . Series ' flagship director , Toyohisa Tanabe , states that the staff was initially reluctant to add this version of Iori to the series ' roster — worried about fans ' reactions — but did so to add more impact to the Orochi saga 's climax . He was particularly pleased to see surprised reactions from female fans to this form during KOF ' 97 's location testing . Another minor development of his character was his change of " most valued possession / valued treasure " information . A girlfriend was also listed more than once , specifically in The King of Fighters ' 95 , The King of Fighters ' 99 , and The King of Fighters 2000 . However , starting with The King of Fighters 2001 and every entry after , the space is listed as " None " . The SNK staff commented that it is curious that he does not have a girlfriend anymore . 
 During the early development stages of The King of Fighters ' 99 , SNK planned to exclude Iori and Kyo from the game , as the story 's focus was meant to center on the new protagonist , K ' . However , they reversed this decision because of the characters ' popularity . Iori 's , Kyo 's , and other SNK regulars repeated appearances in the series is at the insistence of the marketers and main planners , making it a challenge to decide the story for each title . Because of his popularity among fans , some of the series ' main designers have stated that he is " difficult to draw for " . Illustrator Shinkiro thought Iori was one of the series ' wildest characters because of his hairstyle ; similar sentiments were expressed by Last Blade illustrator , <unk> . In addition , KOF : Maximum Impact producer Falcoon stated that attempting to change an " untouchable " design such as Iori 's put him under severe pressure . He stated that creating Iori 's alternate design that appears in the Maximum Impact series almost felt " unforgivable " , as he felt unsure of fans ' reaction to the change . 
 In The King of Fighters XIII , Iori 's gameplay mechanics were modified to be a close range fighter . Despite losing his flaming techniques , he was given brutal moves using his nails to emphasize his character 's ferociousness . His strongest technique in the game , " Forbidden 1218 Shiki : Yatagarasu " ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) , is a new move that focuses on violent combos and serves as a reference to the character 's ending from The King of Fighters ' 96 in which he brutally murders his teammates . Iori 's 10th color scheme in the game matches his classic outfit 's scheme , and during development of the game , details were added to increase the similarities . The ending of the character at the end of the game was also pointed by developers as something to look forward to . His version , featuring his classic techniques , was designed with the intention of not surpassing the current Iori so that players would choose the fighting style they prefer in the game . This was further emphasized in the console version of The King of Fighters XIII where Iori had his moveset adjusted for better balancing by not using flaming techniques . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Iori 's character was mostly well received by several video game publications and other media . IGN 's A. E. Sparrow considered him one of the most useful of the games ' characters and one of the best ones for the " veteran players " . In another review from the same site , writer Jeremy Dunham praised Iori 's appearance in KOF : Maximum Impact as one of the best designs from the game . However , Dunham complained about his lack of bloody scenes considering his actions in previous 2D games . The character 's ending in The King of Fighters ' 97 has been considered by 1UP.com as one of the strangest parts of the story . However , they considered his winning quotations and appearance as one of the best creations of SNK , commenting that the company had been unable to make such an appealing character until K ′ ' s introduction . <unk> M. <unk> from Eurogamer praised Iori , along with Kyo , as having one of the most unpredictable appearances in the series , and considered him a veteran character . In the top ten fighting games from GameTrailers , Iori has been called one of the main innovative figures from the series , from his introduction in The King of Fighters ' 95 through his development in the following games . Some commentators found his recurring interactions with Kyo Kusanagi during fights d to be appealing , adding depth to the games , despite the fact English gamers are not able to understand them , and some lack a storyline . The character 's new design from The King of Fighters XII has been well received by GameSpot writer Andrew Park who found such moves interesting . On the other hand , 1UP.com writer Richard Li ; Li complained about the lack of Iori 's signature moves such as his fireballs , and while some of them remained , Li noted that they now require a different input from the ones they normally require . 
 In an interview with Iori 's Japanese voice actor , Kunihiko Yasui comments that he feels responsible as a voice actor for his performances as Iori , taking care to sound different in each installment as a means of developing and " protecting " his character 's humanity . Iori has been highly popular with video gamers . In Gamest 's 1996 Heroes Collection , Iori was no . 2 in the poll Best Character from 1996 . In an issue from 1997 , Iori was voted as the staff 's favorite character , claiming first place over fifty other characters . He also received the same rank on Neo Geo Freak 's website with a total of 3 @,@ 792 votes . In a 2005 poll made by SNK @-@ Playmore USA , he was voted the eighth fan favorite character with 145 votes . Merchandising based on Iori has also been released including figurines , key @-@ chains and puzzles . 
 = Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals = 
 Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals is the second extended play ( EP ) by the cast of musical television series Glee . Containing six songs from the season one finale " Journey to Regionals " , it was released on June 8 , 2010 , the same day the episode aired . Half of the tracks are cover versions of songs by American rock band Journey . The EP debuted at the top of the US Billboard 200 and Soundtrack charts , with first @-@ week sales of 154 @,@ 000 copies . Unlike previous Glee releases , no singles were released from this album , but all of its tracks managed to appear on multiple national charts . Songs were generally received favorably , with many enjoying the Journey covers . The setlist of Glee Live ! In Concert ! , the cast 's first concert tour , included three songs from the Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The season one finale of Glee first aired on Fox on June 8 , 2010 in the US . The episode sees the fictional William McKinley High School glee club New Directions compete at the 2010 Midwest Regional Show Choir Championships . Director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) decides to have New Directions pay tribute to American rock band Journey . This was not only as homage to the cast 's cover of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " in the season one premiere that led to his decision to remain at the school , but as a representation of the path undertaken to arrive at the Regionals level of competition . They perform a medley of Journey songs : the love ballad " Faithfully " , with Lea Michele and Cory Monteith on lead vocals as Rachel Berry and Finn Hudson , respectively , transitions into a mashup of " Any Way You Want It " and " Lovin ' , Touchin ' , Squeezin ' " . This ends with a reprise of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , where each cast member sings a portion of the song . Rival choir Vocal Adrenaline performs a cover of Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " thereafter , with Jesse ( Jonathan Groff ) on lead vocals . At the end of the episode , New Directions decides to show appreciation for Schuester with a rendition of Lulu 's " To Sir With Love " , the theme of the 1967 film of the same name . He returns the honor , performing Israel Kamakawiwoʻole 's reinvention of " Over the Rainbow " along with glee club member Puck ( Mark Salling ) . 
 The EP , along with its track listing , was announced in an official press release on May 26 , 2010 . It was released on June 8 , 2010 in the US , and on June 14 , 2010 in the UK . " Lovin ' , Touchin ' , Squeezin ' " was previously covered in the series ' pilot episode . The 1981 single " Don 't Stop Believin ' " was also previously performed in the pilot , as well as in the season one episode " The Rhodes Not Taken " . The songs in the EP all fall under the genres of pop and rock . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Denver Post 's Ricardo Baca enjoyed the familiar nature of the songs on the EP , and liked " Faithfully " best of the Journey covers . He felt , however , that the music of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " outshone the vocals of the cast . Andrew Leahey of allmusic gave the album a rating of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . A writer for Reuters called the Journey medley " heartfelt and uplifting " and Jessica Derschowitz of CBS News found it " fantastic " . Gerrick Kennedy also enjoyed it , highlighting its emotional nature and complimenting the entire cast 's vocals . IGN 's Eric Goldman thought the reprise of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " worked well , and liked not only the connection to the pilot , but also its musical <unk> . Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle enjoyed " Don 't Stop Believin ' " best of the performances but Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk deemed it unnecessary in the medley , and felt the cast would have done better to showcase more of " Lovin ' , Touchin ' , Squeezin ' " . Berk enjoyed " Bohemian Rhapsody " best , giving it a rating of four stars out of a possible five , though he thought it was too predictable a song choice . Time 's James Poniewozik opined the song was one of Glee 's best , but was contemplative of which choir 's performance was the better . Berk felt the lyrical context of " To Sir With Love " was trite and Hankinson was impressed by the song , calling it " sweet " . " Over the Rainbow " was called " lovely " by the former and Derschowitz decided it was a " perfect " closing song . 
 Former Journey frontman Steve Perry gave an interview to American magazine <unk> , as co @-@ writer of several Journey tracks , and praised the use of his songs on the show : " Glee has opened up a international [ sic ] catalog of songwriting and introduced those songs to a whole new generation that would have otherwise never heard them . " The Regionals version of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " earned a Grammy nomination for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for the ceremonies in 2011 . Following this nomination , the song was included on the compilation album 2011 Grammy Nominees . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The EP debuted at number one on both the US Billboard 200 and Soundtracks charts , selling 154 @,@ 000 copies there . The album became the cast 's third number @-@ one album on the Billboard 200 . Reaching the top of the chart on June 26 , 2010 , it did so three weeks after Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . This beat the cast 's own record for the shortest span between number @-@ one debuts with different releases , previously held with Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna and Volume 3 Showstoppers . It entered at number two in Canada and the United Kingdom , selling 14 @,@ 000 copies in the former . On the Irish Albums Chart , Journey to Regionals entered the week of June 10 , 2010 at number 14 and ascended to the top position the next week , taking the spot from Volume 3 Showstoppers . The EP entered at number seven in Australia on July 4 , 2010 , climbing four places to its peak three weeks later , and in Mexico , a peak of fifty @-@ nine was reached . Second @-@ week sales in the US amounted to 39 @,@ 000 copies as the EP dropped to the tenth position on the Billboard 200 . The EP has spent a total of 39 weeks on the Soundtracks chart . 
 Although none of the tracks were released as singles , all of the tracks managed to chart in several countries ( with the new version of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " charting under the original entry ) . On the Billboard Hot 100 , " Faithfully " debuted highest the week of June 26 , 2010 , at number 37 . The same week on the Canadian Hot 100 , " Over the Rainbow " led the Glee debuts at number 31 . The song was also highest on the Australian and UK Singles Chart , at numbers 42 and 30 , respectively . In Ireland , " Any Way You Want It / Lovin ' Touchin ' Squeezin ' " charted as highest of the Glee entries at number twenty on June 17 , 2010 . " Don 't Stop Believin ' " was regarded as a re @-@ entry of the group 's debut single by most chart companies ; in addition to the debut of the new tracks , it climbed from 71 to 33 in the UK and from 49 to 24 in Ireland . It re @-@ entered the single charts of the US at 59 and Canada at 37 , setting a new peak for the song in the latter . Only the Australian Recording Industry Association regarded it as a separate song , who placed it at number 67 the week of July 12 , 2010 . 
 With sales figures provided by Nielsen SoundScan , a list of the twenty most successful Glee songs was released by Yahoo ! Music on October 22 , 2010 . The best @-@ selling song , with 1 @,@ 005 @,@ 000 copies sold , was " Don 't Stop Believin ' " — 84 @,@ 000 of those came from sales of the Regionals reprise . " Faithfully " was also on the list , at number eighteen with 159 @,@ 000 copies . The EP 's five new Billboard Hot 100 entries brought the cast 's total appearances on the chart to 64 , an accomplishment that placed them seventh among all artists , between Elton John ( 67 ) and Stevie Wonder ( 63 ) . Billboard noted an increase in sales of the original seven songs rising in percentages ranging from 23 % ( " Don 't Stop Believin ' " ) to 557 % ( " To Sir With Love " ) . Additionally , Journey 's compilation Greatest Hits ( 1988 ) saw a 62 % increase in sales , rising from 104 to 57 on the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The cast embarked on an American concert tour , Glee Live ! In Concert ! starting in May 2010 in promotion of their first season . From the EP , " Faithfully " and " Any Way You Want It / Lovin ' Touchin ' Squeezin ' " were included on the set list . Morrison appeared on dates in New York City to sing " Over the Rainbow " whilst playing the ukulele . He was accompanied by Salling when he again sang the number at the annual White House Easter Egg Roll in 2010 . In addition , he also performed the song at The O2 Arena in London with Leona Lewis on June 16 , 2010 , as part of Lewis ' tour , The Labyrinth . On December 5 , 2010 , the cast appeared on the seventh season of UK reality TV series The X Factor to perform " Don 't Stop Believin ' " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ioan C. Filitti = 
 Ioan Constantin Filitti ( Romanian pronunciation : [ iˈon <unk> <unk> ] , first name also Ion ; Francized Jean C. Filitti ; May 8 , 1879 – September 21 , 1945 ) was a Romanian historian , diplomat and conservative theorist , best remembered for his contribution to social history , legal history , genealogy and heraldry . A member of the Conservative Party and an assistant of its senior leader Titu Maiorescu , he had aristocratic ( boyar ) origins and an elitist perspective . Among his diverse contributions , several focus on 19th @-@ century modernization under the Regulamentul Organic regime , during which Romania was ruled upon by the Russian Empire . As a historian , Filitti is noted for his perfectionism , and for constantly revising his own works . 
 I. C. Filitti had an auspicious debut in diplomacy and politics , but his career was mired in controversy . A " Germanophile " by the start of World War I , he secretly opposed the pact between Romania and the Entente Powers , and opted to stay behind in German @-@ occupied territory . He fell into disgrace for serving the collaborationist Lupu Kostaki as Prefect and head of the National Theater , although he eventually managed to overturn his death sentence for treason . Filitti became a recluse , focusing on his scholarship and press polemics , but was allowed to serve on the Legislative Council after 1926 . 
 In his political tracts , written well after the Conservative Party 's demise , I. C. Filitti preserves the orthodox conservative principles of Maiorescu . His attachment to boyar tradition was expanded into a critique of centralized government , <unk> and Romanian liberalism . Toward the end of his life , he supported the dictatorial regime known as National Renaissance Front . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origin and early life = = = 
 Through his paternal family , Filitti descended from historical figures whose careers were intertwined with the history of Wallachia , the Romanian subregion and former autonomous state . It originated with ethnic Greek migrants from the Epirus — where the Filitti family was known to be residing in the 17th century . The main settlers were male monks , whose presence was attested in Buzău County around 1786 : rising through the ranks of the Romanian Orthodox Church , <unk> Filitti served as Wallachian Metropolitan Bishop , assigning nephew <unk> to preside over the Diocese of Buzău . Although his Epirote father was a noted <unk> , the Metropolitan regarded himself as a liberal @-@ minded Wallachian patriot : he founded the local school of divinity , provided scholarships to young Wallachians , and sponsored the growing printing industry . In tandem , he spoke out against the practice of slavery , protecting Romani women from their Wallachian masters and donating money for the release of <unk> victims . During times of turmoil , when Wallachia effectively became a dominion of the Russian Empire , <unk> was swiftly deposed on Russian orders . 
 The historian claimed lineage from the non @-@ monastic branch of the Filitti clan . A <unk> Filitti , active ca . 1810 , was among the first private practitioners in Wallachia . Fully Romanianized , 20th @-@ century Filittis were still members of Romania 's privileged class . A native of Bucharest , Ioan C. was the son of Colonel Constantin Filitti , a former Ordinance Officer of the Romanian <unk> . By then , the family owned a country estate , at <unk> , Ialomița County . The Filittis preserved strong connections with the Ialomița region , where Colonel Filitti had twice served as Prefect . Ioan inherited from him a deep dislike and mistrust toward the dominant National Liberal Party ( PNL ) , sentiments which carried him into Conservative politics : Constantin regarded himself as a political victim of the PNL establishment , and in particular of the Brătianu family . Colonel Filitti had another son , Alexandru — better known under the moniker Filitti @-@ Robănești . 
 The mother , Elena , was born into the Ghica family . Her father , Mihail Ghica , was a staff officer of the Royal Army , who had been married for a while to writer Elena Văcărescu . Thorough his mother 's other relatives , Ioan also descended from the eponymous boyar line of Slatina ( the <unk> ) . 
 I. C. Filitti studied at Saint Sava National College , where he was colleagues with future politician ( and adversary ) Ion G. Duca . He was an eminent student , who earned top distinctions annually , and moved on to study at the École Libre des Sciences <unk> in Paris . His first ever published work as a historian was a French @-@ language tome , Le <unk> <unk> des <unk> de 1700 à 1821 ( " The Diplomatic Role of Phanariotes from 1700 to 1821 " ) . Signed Jean C. Filitti , it was probably his Licence ès Lettres , and , although receiving good reviews , was never listed by its author in his official résumés . He became a Doctor of Law in 1904 , when he published the first draft of his study about Regulamentul Organic as the first ever Romanian constitution . 
 = = = Entry into public life = = = 
 Young Filitti made a remarkably early entry into the diplomatic corps , and stayed on with the Romanian Legation in France . In this capacity , he purposefully embarrassed PNL Foreign Minister Ion I. C. Brătianu by not sending in all Legation employees to receive him during an official visit . During his return trips to Romania , Filitti was focusing on researching his own family archives , and , in 1910 , published the volume <unk> cultural al <unk> <unk> [ h ] ei Filitti , de la <unk> până <unk> ( " Metropolitan <unk> [ h ] ei Filitti 's Cultural Foundation , from Its Establishment to the Present Day " ) . In researching this work , Filitti sought input from the genealogical school in Greece and Macedonia , and from Romanian diplomats working in Istanbul . In a show of perfectionism , Filitti constantly revised the work as new data surfaced , and , in 1936 , declared the 1910 edition to be entirely unusable . 
 Filitti was soon drawn into the Conservative establishment , by politics and family connections . His wife Alexandrina ( " Sanda " ) , descending from another branch of the Ghica clan , was a distant relative of two Conservative potentates and <unk> of the Cantacuzino political family : Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino @-@ Nababul , who was twice the Prime Minister of Romania , and newspaper magnate Grigore Gh . Cantacuzino . She brought in considerable wealth . Filitti was by then also in contact with Junimea , an inner @-@ Conservative club dedicated to cultural criticism , presided upon by the aged literary patron Titu Maiorescu . As noted in 2008 by political scientist Ioan Stanomir , the young diplomat was " an orthodox Junimist who survived the end of his world . " Like other historiographers and <unk> raised by Junimea , Filitti the scholar firmly believed in the preservation of boyar demesnes and , as political scientist Victor <unk> suggests , took part in the century @-@ long debate opposing elitist historians to the advocates of natural law . 
 Filitti 's biographer and posthumous daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Georgeta Penelea @-@ Filitti , also writes that , even in the 1910s , he had become a Conservative apologist , who felt compelled to justify the party line in a " trenchant and unresponsive " manner . Like senior Junimists Maiorescu and Petre P. Carp , Filitti reserved contempt for Take Ionescu , the rising star of Romanian conservatism , whom he depicted as a manipulator with no actual convictions . 
 Filitti 's first important postings were received from the Conservative cabinet of P. P. Carp , wherein Titu Maiorescu held the Foreign Affairs portfolio . After 1910 , Maiorescu appointed Filitti head of the Ministry 's Political Section in Bucharest , and then granted him supervision of the Consular and Litigation sections . Filitti was also sent on regular missions to France , Austria @-@ Hungary , the Ottoman Empire , Serbia and Italy . The missions allowed Filitti to expand his activity as a historiographer and archivist . The main stimulus of this activity was , according to Filitti 's son Manole , a sense of filial duty : " since destiny wished for his parents to have such assets as would allow him to study in Paris for a couple of years , [ my father ] felt compelled to repay them by publishing works which would live up to that degree of education . " According to historian Lucian Boia , although " non @-@ academic " , Filitti 's work has earned deserved praise from within the scholarly community . Georgeta Penelea @-@ Filitti argues that I. C. Filitti 's work , indicative of his personality , covers an impressively " large horizon . " 
 On May 8 , 1913 , shortly before the Second Balkan War , Filitti began keeping a diary , which records the political intrigues of his age , and offers insight into Conservative affairs . One of the first events recorded there is the August 1913 Peace Conference of Bucharest . Filitti was the official Secretary during the proceedings . In this context , he also helped Titu Maiorescu with drafting <unk> Verde ( " The Green Book " ) , that is the official justification of Romanian foreign policy . Decades later , he recalled that the congress had been a magnificent affair , noting especially the triumphant arrival of King Carol I , that " old Nestor of European monarchs " . The Conference , he recalled , " was the swan song of the old Conservative Party . " 
 His services during the Conference earned him public praise from Maiorescu , and Filitti , who feared for his prospects , was kept on at the Ministry even after the National Liberal Emanuel <unk> became Minister in January 1914 . In tandem with his diplomatic endeavors , he spent time researching at the Vatican Library in Rome . As noted by Manole Filitti , Ioan C. received " special recommendations " , which allowed him entry into the less accessible archives of the Holy See . Such study trips resulted in a two @-@ volume anthology of historical sources , Din <unk> <unk> ( " From the Vatican Archives " , 1913 and 1914 ) . 
 = = = Germanophile polemicist and Domniile române ... = = = 
 World War I was a turning point in Filitti 's diplomatic career . Like many of his fellow Conservatives , and against the lobby which dominated the PNL , he believed in tying Romania to the Central Powers , especially to the German Empire and Austria @-@ Hungary . The Entente Powers alternative , he argued , was bankrupt , because Romania would find herself manipulated by a hostile Russian Empire . His core idea , paraphrased by Georgeta Filitti , was that : " Any entente , any attempt to collaborate , any concession made to [ Russia ] would sooner or later turn against us . " The diplomat witnessed with alarm that public opinion was against him , either because of seductive Francophilia , or because a war on Austria @-@ Hungary could bring Romania Transylvania region and other irredenta : " The Russian gold has bought off the press and many private persons . Others are guided by sentimentality " . In restaurants such as Casa Capșa , " Franco @-@ hysteria and Russo @-@ <unk> [ have reached ] a peak " , and " people of no significance " were even proposing to assassinate the Germanophile King Carol . In this context , he believed , Transylvania could only stand to lose its character if ever governed from Bucharest . 
 At around that time , Filitti issued at his expense the Germanophile brochure Cu <unk> <unk> ( " With the Triple Alliance " ) . He prudently signed it with the fake initials F. K. In it , Filitti spoke out at length about containing Pan @-@ Slavism , more important a priority than " the nation 's other aspirations " ( in Transylvania ) : " The best thing one may wish upon Romania is that the Muscovite Empire be evicted as far away as possible from the heart of Europe . " The pamphlet was also noted for its unfulfilled prophecy that Italy would also join the war as a German ally , and for arguing that , either way , Austria @-@ Hungary was set to collapse after the war . The text 's reception , he noted , was disastrous : no reviews were printed , almost no bookstores would sell it , and the few who looked over it attributed it to an agent of influence or to some " paid @-@ off Jew " . In Cu <unk> <unk> and in his diary , the diplomat continued to complain that the Francophile mood was irrational , since France and the Entente as a whole only " love [ Romanians ] when they need us " , which was " only natural " . In the same vein , his diary documents earlier instances where ( he argued ) France had gambled with Romania 's independence . 
 In his more public existence , I. C. Filitti was still regarded with sympathy by the entire political and cultural establishment . In 1915 , he was elected a corresponding member of the Romanian Academy . The institution also granted him its prestigious Năsturel <unk> Award . This was in recognition of his groundbreaking monograph on modernization under the Regulamentul regime : Domniile române sub Regulamentul Organic ( " Romanian Reigns under Regulamentul Organic " ) . It described in some detail the culture shock of the 1830s , when the Westernized elites reversed a process of Turkification [ ? ? controversial use of this term ] , and noted the ambivalent policies of Russian governors . The book also speaks about the 1832 manhunt for , and forced <unk> of , Wallachia 's Romani people , both the fugitive slaves and the free nomads . 
 Domniile române ... was simultaneously published in Bucharest ( by Editura <unk> ) , Leipzig ( Otto Harrassowitz ) and Vienna ( Carl Gerold ) . It was then reprinted by the official Editura <unk> press , under the supervision of historian Nicolae Iorga . The encounter was confrontational : Iorga decided to cut out entire passages where , he argued , the author had gone into too much detail . The intervention was unwittingly destructive , as part of the documents cited by Filitti , and only by him , have since been destroyed . 
 It was also in 1915 that Filitti contributed his views on the thorny issue of " Capitulations " , contracts reputedly signed by two Danubian Principalities ( Wallachia and Moldavia ) when they first came under the Ottoman Empire 's suzerainty . The author postulated that the Capitulations regulated the status of foreigners living in ancient Romania , exempting them from the consequences of common law , and creating major legal problems after 1800 . His research produced the article România față de <unk> <unk> ( " Romania in Relation to the Turkish Capitulations " ) , taken up by the Academy 's official yearbook . It saw print at the same time as his new collection of documents , sampling the archives of French Ambassadors to the Porte : Lettres et <unk> concernant les relations des <unk> <unk> avec la France , 1728 @-@ 1810 ( " Letters and Excerpts on the Relations between the Romanian Principalities and France " ) . 
 = = = Filitti and the Kostaki administration = = = 
 I. C. Filitti was not in a celebratory mood as the National Liberals publicized their August 1916 Treaty , when Romania became part of the Entente . His diaries record not only his general frustration , but also his belief that the decades of PNL rule had left the military ill @-@ prepared , and claims about generalized embezzlement within the Army . He was soon after drafted into the Romanian Land Forces , as officer of the Second Field Army , and stationed in Bucharest . When the German @-@ led counteroffensive forced the army on the retreat , resulting in the Central Powers ' occupation of southern Romania , Filitti took his most controversial decision . In circumstances that are largely unknown , he opted to stay behind in occupied territory , and greeted the enemy . According to Boia , Filitti received two contradictory orders : one to follow the Imperial Russian Army as liaison officer , the other to stay behind in Bucharest ; he conveniently opted to follow the latter . 
 The Filitti family had by then divided its loyalties : judge Ioan D. Filitti , formerly a PNL politico , followed the Germanophile line ; instead , Ioan C. ' s own brother Alexandru entered history when he led a cavalry charge on a German machine gun turret , located outside of Balș . 
 At the time , Lupu Kostaki was organizing left @-@ behind Conservatives and forming a provisional administration , answering to the German command . Filitti served Kostaki as Head of the National Theater Bucharest . Under his management , the Theater took on some 67 new productions of Romanian plays . The Germans also assigned him to an administrative position , making him the Prefect of Ialomița County . However , Filitti himself was troubled by his association with the puppet regime . According to Georgeta Filitti , the diary he kept shows " the efforts to interpose himself between the foreign military authorities and his own administrators , to alleviate the unbearable regime of requisitions , the abuse and Prussian arrogance , [ efforts which ] were , for the most part , ineffectual . " Like other Germanophiles , Filitti justified himself as a protector of Romanian interests during times of chaos , and was discouraged to find out that the German regime regarded him as a servant . He had similar trouble getting along with some of his Romanian colleagues , in particular Virgil Arion , the phantom Minister of Education ( whom he described as nepotistic , aloof , and especially " lazy " ) . 
 Both of his assignments failed to satisfy him : he was , according to Boia , a " strange " choice for the Theater leadership , and gave up on this office in April 1917 ; Filitti himself viewed his Prefect 's job as inane , and repeatedly presented his resignation ( only accepted in February 1918 ) . His departure from the Theater was in fact hastened by the Germans , who took over the location for their own purposes . Filitti informed the troupe members that they had to pay rent , and they moved out in protest . While in Ialomița , Filitti combined his administrative missions ( retold as short notes in his diaries ) with historical research , and tapped into a documentary fund at <unk> . Although only a junior member of the administrative staff , Filitti aimed for a position at the core of government , and demanded from Kostaki a post better suited to his intelligence , " in Bucharest " . He noted that the death of Maiorescu in June 1917 had stripped him of political support inside the Conservative Party , and had derailed his steady advancement . 
 Meanwhile , the legitimate government had relocated to Iași , in besieged Moldavia . Late in 1916 , it court @-@ martialled Filitti in absentia , and sentenced him to death for the crime of high treason . By January 1918 , the collapse of Russian forces on the Eastern Front led the Iași administration into negotiating a separate peace with the Central Powers . Germanophile Alexandru Marghiloman took over as Premier , in what seemed to spell a moral victory for the pro @-@ German camp . However , Filitti was drawing closer to the more disgruntled Germanophiles , led by P. P. Carp , who wanted to sign peace on their own terms : " I ask Carp , should he leave to negotiate for Romania , to take me with him . He says that he 'll take along his son . I note that one does not exclude the other . He agrees " ( January 12 , 1918 ) . Filitti was also upset that Marghiloman himself had not yet offered him a high diplomatic post during negotiations over the Buftea @-@ Bucharest Peace Treaty , and noted that the Ententist King , Ferdinand I , " made it hard " for him to be accepted back into the diplomatic corps . As noted by Georgeta Filitti , Ferdinand vetoed successive proposals to rehire him as public servant . 
 In June 1918 , I. C. Filitti handed himself in to the authorities in Moldavia , and , upon retrial , was acquitted of treason . In addition to presenting evidence of his efforts to curb German excesses , he enlisted the testimony of Ialomița citizens , who vouched for him . However , Boia concludes , the retrial itself was a sham : " A rehabilitation as politicized in the new context as had been his sentencing at the end of 1916 . " 
 = = = Post @-@ 1918 controversy = = = 
 Upon the end of 1918 , when the Central Powers succumbed on the Western Front , the pro @-@ Entente forces regained power . I. C. Filitti faced the political repercussions : blocked out of the Foreign Ministry and diplomatic corps , he had to reinvent himself as a full @-@ time historian , publicist and essayist . He largely immersed himself in his decades @-@ long work , in effect a multilevel historical narrative covering the history of the Danubian Principalities , from the foundation of Wallachia ( 14th century ) to the emergence of United Romania ( 1859 ) . Much of his interest , marked by what Georgeta Filitti calls " excessive accuracy " , was in reviewing the intricate boyar genealogies . He substantiated the various inheritance claims , and , in addition , painstakingly retraced the borders of Wallachia 's oldest demesnes . During his retrial , facing the possibility of execution , Filitti also turned his attention to the philosophy of history , reading profusely from Ernest Renan and Hippolyte Taine . 
 According to Filitti , the war spelled out the end of Romania 's aristocratic order , leaving the country prey to the nouveaux riches and the neo @-@ Jacobins . As the Conservative Party itself collapsed into obscurity , he remained largely cut off from the outside world , and rejected many of the recent innovations . Reportedly , he wrote all his books and articles in dip pen , and never watched a motion picture . After 1919 , he had to recover from financial ruin , having entrusted the bulk of his assets ( what had not been lost in the war ) to a broker , who gambled it away and then committed suicide . 
 Filitti lived secluded in a townhouse on <unk> Street , in the Bucharest quarter of <unk> . He repeatedly complained about street noises , confiscated the footballs of neighborhood children , and eventually received ( from Romanian Police chief <unk> <unk> ) a permanent guard to protect him from distractions . Filitti had few visiting friends , among them Alexandru Filitti @-@ Robănești , teacher Alexandru <unk> , historians <unk> Hagi @-@ <unk> and G. D. Florescu . He was however in constant correspondence with other scholars who shared his passions , including Greek jurist Panagiotis <unk> , His Majesty 's Antiquarian G. T. Kirileanu , bibliophile Constantin <unk> , regional historian G. <unk> , academician @-@ priest Nicolae M. Popescu and Hungarian archivist Endre ( Andrei ) <unk> . In addition to the anti @-@ Germanophile Nicolae Iorga , his rivals in academia included a new generation of leading historians , who were targets of his polemical articles : Gheorghe I. Brătianu , George <unk> , Constantin C. <unk> and P. P. <unk> . The latter was however influenced by Filitti 's ideas on the sources of landed property , and incorporated them into his own historical narrative . 
 An early product of Filitti 's interest in genealogy was a 1919 book about his relatives , the Cantacuzinos : Arhiva Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino ( " The Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino Archive " ) . It refers to the documents collected by Cantacuzino @-@ Nababul , whom the book describes as : " Good and kind , a self @-@ effacing host , confident of the nation 's faculties . " The author tracked down Nababul 's origins to Michael " <unk> " Kantakouzenos , a Byzantine Greek in Ottoman service , active around 1580 . The factual errors of this study caused Filitti great distress , to the point where he planned to entirely revise his version of the Cantacuzino family tree . The book is still considered a particularly relevant source on the obscure genealogies of some high @-@ ranking Greek @-@ Romanian families : Cara ( g ) <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Filitti the politician returned in 1921 with an extended pro <unk> covering his wartime stances : <unk> , Austro @-@ <unk> și Germania față de România ( " Russia , Austria @-@ Hungary and Germany Confront Romania " ) . The same year , in May , Iași 's Viața Românească review hosted his tract on administrative reform , whereby he criticized attempts to impose centralized government on post @-@ war Greater Romania . He proposed three essential policies : decentralization , the <unk> of public administration , and enhanced executive powers for the prefects . These prolonged P. P. Carp 's ideas on local autonomy and , in addition , attempted to protect the existing local government of the newly united Transylvania , Bessarabia and Bukovina . 
 He still struggled with prejudice against Germanophiles : also in 1921 , he tried to obtain the History Chair at the University of Iași , but lost once his old adversary Iorga intervened against him . Two years later , he was present at the funeral ceremony of Dimitrie <unk> , a fellow historian and Junimist . <unk> , whose <unk> had been the topic of a major scandal in 1919 , was honored by Filitti with a funeral oration . It stated : " All of us , we are what our known or unknown ancestors have accumulated in our beings ; we are that which preceding generations have planted in us ; we are the echo of our dead . " 
 = = = Recovery = = = 
 In the early 1920s , I. C. Filitti worked with the formerly Junimist tribune Convorbiri Literare , which published fragments of his research on Maiorescu ( 1922 ) and novelist Costache Negruzzi ( 1923 ) . Filitti subsequently turned his attention to some of the earliest sources on Wallachian history , adding his opinion to the debate surrounding the historicity of Negru Vodă ( described by some early modern sources as Wallachia 's state @-@ builder ) . His topical study , published by in the 1924 Romanian Academy annals , concluded that Negru Vodă was in fact the stuff of legend , concocted by the 17th @-@ century Wallachian Lord Matei Basarab . The next year , he returned to social history , with the book <unk> sociale în <unk> românesc ( " Social Classes in the Romanian Past " ) . It mainly explained the difference between the concepts of nobility in Western Europe , on one hand , and the Danubian Principalities , on the other : Moldo @-@ Wallachian nobility had no concept of knighthood , as all boyars were defined by their demesnes . 
 Eventually , in 1926 , King Ferdinand allowed Filitti to resume his political career , making him a member of the Romanian Legislative Council . An emanation of the 1923 Constitution , it comprised experts tasked with reviewing laws endorsed by Parliament , and whose exact role sparked a series of controversies . Filitti was among those who described the Council as a necessary branch of the legislature , rather than as an organ of the executive . 
 Also in 1926 , Filitti was one of the authors of a legal history overview , <unk> la istoria <unk> <unk> în Principatele române ( " Contributions to the History of Penal Justice in the Romanian Principalities " ) . By means of Iorga 's academic journal Revista Istorică , he also publicized his discovery of a 17th @-@ century Romanian glossary , which emissaries of the Holy See used on their missions to the Danubian Principalities . He returned in 1927 with a work tracing the very history of the Legislative Council : <unk> și <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " The Origin and Purpose of the Legislative Council " ) . 
 Filitti ended the 13th and final notebook of his diary on March 6 , 1928 . By 1929 , he turned his attention to the history of medicine in Wallachia , publishing a study of medical practice between 1784 and 1828 . The same year , he edited the critical edition of the 1829 boyar register ( <unk> ) , originally compiled by Russian authorities under Regulamentul provisions . It notably showed the division of aristocracy into three classes , with only 70 entries in the top , " great boyars " , category . Filitti conclusively showed that , at only 4 @.@ 6 ‰ of the Wallachian population , Wallachian boyars formed one of the thinnest layers of European aristocrats proportional to the respective population . 
 While still involved in the disputes over Legislative Council attributions , Filitti was a member , and later President , of the state 's Heraldry and Genealogy Commission . The appointment again brought him into disagreement with the Romanian monarch , this time involving the heraldic symbols of Greater Romania . Filitti and Kirileanu suggested redesigned coats of arms of the Romanian counties , each bearing the Steel Crown , as a show of national unity ; Ferdinand disagreed , and the counties were only allowed their simple escutcheons . He was turning his attention to the Slătineanu branch of his family , and completed a biographical study on Ion Slătineanu , governor of Brăila in the 1830s ( hosted by the magazine <unk> <unk> , 1 / 1929 ) . 
 Some of Filitti 's biographical work was dedicated to the 16th @-@ century Wallachian hero Michael the Brave . In 1931 , he published an investigation of Michael 's early career as titular Ban of Oltenia . A year later , he detailed Michael 's introduction of serfdom in Wallachia : <unk> " <unk> " lui Mihai Viteazul ( " On ' Bondage ' under Michael the Brave " ) . Between these , the academic review <unk> <unk> și <unk> , Vol . XIV , reissued the 1857 count of emancipated Romani slaves , annotated by Filitti . In 1932 , returning to the history of Oltenian Bans , he gave an account on the <unk> family history , taken up by <unk> <unk> journal . His ongoing research into social issues of the early 19th century produced another book , <unk> <unk> și sociale în Principatele române de la 1821 la 1828 ( " Political and Social Turmoil in the Romanian Principalities from 1821 to 1828 " , <unk> Românească , 1932 ) . It has been described as a " non @-@ partisan analysis " of the Wallachian uprising of 1821 and its reverberations , and features detail on the property dispute between local Orthodox monks and their Greek Orthodox competitors . 
 = = = Conservative theories and Principatele române ... = = = 
 By 1928 , I. C. Filitti 's writing was moving from sheer historical research , as he was taking a stand in political theory . As noted by Ioan Stanomir , Filitti 's evolution in this direction marks a final cycle in the history of classical , " Burkean " , conservatism in Romania , which did not have a political aspect , but was complementary and contemporary with the views of his rival Nicolae Iorga . According to Stanomir , the objectivity professed by Filitti the historiographer was at odds with his ambition to rehabilitate Junimea and the Conservative cause , to prolong their relevancy into the 1930s . Some of his core ideas were updated versions of 19th @-@ century Junimist concepts : the praise of moderation and <unk> , the rejection of state capitalism and its " pseudo @-@ bourgeoisie " , and in particular the critique of generous land reforms . Directly influenced by the agrarian skepticism of Carp and Maiorescu , Filitti argued that the division of large estates into non @-@ lucrative plots had only enhanced endemic problems , such as poverty or an unskilled workforce , and had prevented an organic growth toward good governance . Filitti 's diary chides the political establishment of Greater Romania for not obtaining sufficient guarantees of territorial integrity — particularly so against Russia 's successor , the Soviet Union — and for <unk> the diplomatic corps . 
 From Maiorescu , Filitti borrowed the essential sociological concept of " forms without content " , criticizing all modernization which did not take into account local realities , writing : " After seven decades of bourgeois forms , without a bourgeoisie , with all that maelstrom of laws and regulations , which has grown to cover 20 @,@ 000 pages [ ... ] , the tally shows that [ ... ] the villages of all places have registered no profit , although [ ... ] Romania is , at heart , nothing but one giant village . " In his post @-@ Junimist studies , Filitti angrily noted that the PNL regime had only increased the ranks of the bureaucracy ( and implicitly enlarged their political machine ) , perpetuating <unk> . He proposed measures to counter this trend by encouraging a " rural bourgeoisie " , " self @-@ reliant " , determined to reemerge " from the darkness and routine " of country life , and , in time , capable of supporting a national industry . 
 In 1932 , Filitti , who kept a vivid interest in Romanian Orthodox history , published <unk> și <unk> ( " Churches and <unk> " ) . He was preoccupied with similar thoughts when he decided to sponsor the rebuilding and refurbishing of two ancestral churches : the Dormition Church in Slatina , originally built by his Slătineanu relatives ( whom he commemorated with a coat of arms , displayed over the church entrance ) ; and the Sfântul Dumitru de <unk> <unk> of <unk> Filitti ( whom he had reburied on church premises ) . 
 It was in 1934 that I. C. Filitti registered one of his greatest successes , when he published a revised and extended version of his 1904 study : Principatele române de la 1828 la 1834 . <unk> <unk> și Regulamentul Organic ( " The Romanian Principalities from 1828 to 1834 . The Russian Occupation and Regulamentul Organic " ) . The study even earned him accolades from Iorga , who called it " an extraordinarily rich work of pragmatic history " . The work mainly documents the emergence of a civic consciousness , called " public spirit " by Filitti , over the years when Regulamentul was in force , and speaks about how the Moldo @-@ Wallachian <unk> class turned <unk> as it became acquainted with Tsarist autocracy . Principatele române ... includes additional data on the rift between the liberal youth , with its ideal of national liberation , and the peasantry , more determined to terminate the corvée system . He continued to publish on topical issues of legal history , documenting the antique Wallachian form of <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , " head payment " ) , and on historiography , with a Revista Istorică biography of Wallachian chronicler Radu <unk> . His other book for that year was an extended political manifesto , <unk> <unk> pseudo @-@ <unk> și <unk> ce nu se fac ( " The <unk> of a Pseudo @-@ bourgeoisie and Reforms Not <unk> " ) . 
 In 1935 , Filitti completed his <unk> <unk> în Principatele române până la 1864 ( " Land Ownership in the Romanian Principalities to 1864 " ) and <unk> la istoria <unk> a României în <unk> al XIX @-@ lea ( " Contributions to the Diplomatic History of Romania in the 19th Century " ) . In <unk> <unk> <unk> a <unk> Române până la Regulamentul Organic ( " On the Ancient Fiscal Order of the Romanian Principalities to Regulamentul Organic " ) , he discussed the proliferation of state taxes over the centuries , and the measure to which the Orthodox clergy was exempted . A fourth book , on literary history , saw print with the title <unk> <unk> <unk> la <unk> ( " Old Books Relating to the Romanians " ) . Also in 1935 , he released a selection of his memoirs , as <unk> <unk> ( " Some Recollections " ) , and set in print his conferences for the state Radio Company : <unk> politică a României moderne ( " The Political Development of Modern Romania " ) . Building on his previous research in Arhiva Gheorghe Grigore Cantacuzino , Filitti also contributed an article about the Romanian origins of French diplomat Maurice Paléologue ( Adevărul daily , September 29 , 1935 ) and edited for print the letters of Oltenian engineer <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , 74 @-@ 76 / 1934 ) . 
 His other contribution for 1935 was a collection of texts on political history , called <unk> din istoria României moderne ( " Pages from the History of Modern Romania " ) . The volume criticized the PNL 's historical narrative , Romania 's answer to <unk> , and noted that , from the beginning , the Conservatives were closer to the models of classical liberalism than their revolutionist opponents . Published with the <unk> Graphic Arts Institute in 1936 , Filitti 's new essay revisited the birth and evolution of conservatism in the Danubian Principalities and then Romania : <unk> și <unk> în viața politică <unk> ( " Conservatives and Junimists in Romanian Political Life " ) . The work postulated that local conservatism had in fact originated within the first phase of Romanian liberalism , grouping opponents of the " extremist " , " utopian " , " exulted " force which became the National Liberal elite . He argued that , since the National Liberals had become the establishment and did away with their republican agenda , the Conservatives , " in reality moderate liberals " , came to be falsely depicted as " reactionaries " . His retrospective portrait of Junimea was , according to Stanomir , particularly " melancholy " , his own <unk> " never abjured " . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 In 1936 , I. C. Filitti wrote an article defining the scope and history of the Legislative Council . It was featured in the anniversary collection of articles published by Council President Ioan Ionescu @-@ <unk> . His revised work on the Cantacuzinos , published in Bucharest as Notice sur les Cantacuzène du <unk> au <unk> siècles ( " Note on the Cantacuzinos from the 11th to the 14th Century " ) , traced the family links between Cantacuzino @-@ Nababul and 14th @-@ century Byzantine Emperor John VI , whom Filitti identified as a usurper . Also then , he republished a political pamphlet by the 18th @-@ century poet Alecu Văcărescu , with the journal <unk> Literare . 
 Filitti was preparing his retirement from public life , and designated his only son Manole as a curator of the Filitti Archive . Filitti Jr was a lawyer , financier and amateur rugby footballer , who would later serve as manager of the Phoenix Oil Factory . Married to actress Mimi <unk> , he was for long based in Iași , sharing a villa with the poet Mihail Codreanu . It was there that Ioan C. ' s grandson Ion was born in 1936 . His baptism was a public affair involving some of the established aristocratic houses , and one of the last functions ever attended by Filitti Sr ( who met and befriended Codreanu on the occasion ) . 
 The National Renaissance Front dictatorship , with King Carol II at its helm , put an end to democratic rule in Greater Romania . Under these circumstances , I. C. Filitti was recovered by the official school of historians . From 1938 , sociologist Dimitrie Gusti employed Filitti as an external contributor to the standard Romanian dictionary , Enciclopedia României . His " fundamental " contribution was , according to Stanomir , the " Legislative Council " entry , included in Volume I. Together with I. C. <unk> , Filitti also wrote the section on the administrative reform , whereby Carol had replaced the counties with larger <unk> . This entry justified Carol 's ideas on territorial division , describing the new regions as organic , " moral , cultural , economic and financial " units . The two authors offered praise to the supposedly increased representative powers of communes , and to the laws protecting private property within urban domains . As noted by Georgeta Filitti , I. C. Filitti was again dissatisfied with the finished product : " The [ Enciclopedia ] copy he left comprises numerous rectifications to his own entries and observations made on those of other authors , which would be welcomed for any future <unk> . " Filitti 's other contribution for 1938 is an eponymous volume about the 1821 Wallachian revolutionist Tudor Vladimirescu , with the subtitle : <unk> <unk> lui ( " The Purpose of His Revolt " ) . 
 The outbreak of World War II again pushed Filitti away from public life . Romania was an Axis country , and , as such , Bucharest endured heavy bombardments by the United States Air Force . The air attack of April 4 , 1944 , effectively destroyed the Filitti residence , its art collection ( including Murano glassware ) and scores of unedited documents . The historian survived , but , according to Georgeta Filitti , the incident " hastened his death " . 
 I. C. Filitti died in September 1945 , almost a year after King Michael 's Coup broke with the Axis . By his own account , he had published 82 volumes , 267 topical articles , and completed some 700 family trees . Many of these texts were circular of " rectifications " to previous editions , addressed to the community of scientists at large . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Filitti 's death occurred shortly before a Romanian communist regime came into existence . He was survived by his wife and son . An aristocrats by blood and conservatives by conviction , Ioan C. ' s descendants and relatives suffered heavily as a result of the new policies : the outspoken anti @-@ communist Filitti @-@ Robănești became a political prisoner , as did his cousin <unk> Filitti , who had been the King 's Adjutant . Alexandrina Filitti was stripped of virtually all her land during the land reform and nationalization , but still forced to meet agricultural quotas imposed by the government ; when she failed to do so , Manole Filitti took it upon himself to face the consequences , and spent some three years in communist jails . 
 Upon release , Manole and part of the Filitti clan moved into a single Bucharest home , located near the <unk> <unk> . <unk> as a clerk for nationalized enterprises , he remarried , in 1985 , to historian Georgeta Penelea . Of Croat and <unk> @-@ Romanian ancestry , she is related to prestigious woman reporter Mihaela <unk> . Manole 's son Ion had a career in engineering , but could not advance professionally due to his aristocratic lineage . He emigrated to West Germany , where a branch of the Filittis still resides . 
 Although officially censored , Filitti 's work was not entirely inaccessible . As indicated by Victor <unk> , under orthodox Marxism @-@ Leninism , the idea of boyar precedence in the early Danubian Principalities was not discarded , but rather integrated within a " modes of production " theory . Some of Filitti 's books were reprinted in the 1980s , when national communism allowed selective exposure to Romania 's conservative schools of thought . As noted by historian Ovidiu <unk> , the regime was trying to encourage " autarkic xenophobia " , preventing intellectuals from receiving Western ideas , but in exchange allowing them a selective recovery of old ideas . In 1985 , <unk> <unk> ... , <unk> <unk> și sociale ... and România față de <unk> <unk> were reissued in critical editions . On the academic side , the main contributor to this particular recovery project was Georgeta Penelea @-@ Filitti , also distinguished as the editor of books by Iorga , Mihail Kogălniceanu , etc . 
 The Romanian Revolution of 1989 resulted in more consideration being granted to I. C. Filitti , as both researcher and polemicist . The Filitti Archive , preserved by Manole Filitti , was divided into separate funds , and divided between several institutions : the Romanian Academy Library , the National Archives , the Cotroceni Palace collection , and the Ialomița County Museum . Selections from the historian 's diaries were published by Georgeta Filitti as fascicles in the academic review Revista Istorică , during the early 1990s . Beginning 2008 , she published the diary in book form , with the Ialomița Museum press and Cetatea de <unk> company of <unk> . 
 Romania 's academic community was thus prompted to reassess the overall value of Ioan C. Filitti 's work . The popular history review Magazin <unk> grants an I. C. Filitti Award as one of its four annual distinctions for exceptional research and writing . In 2009 , Editura Compania company published historian Dan Berindei 's book of scholarly biographies , which notably includes a chapter on Filitti . According to Boia , Berindei bracketed out Filitti 's entire career in occupied Romania , while expressing a vague regret that Filitti never reached his full potential in diplomacy . Boia asks rhetorically : " the historian knows [ the reason for this ] , shouldn 't the reader also find it out ? " According to political scientist Cristian <unk> , Ioan Stanomir takes credit for having helped recover Filitti 's contributions as conservative theorist , which had been " all too soon forgotten . " In his 2004 book <unk> <unk> ( " The Conservative Consciousness " ) , Stanomir places Filitti alongside Constantin Rădulescu @-@ Motru , Alexandru <unk> and Virgil Nemoianu , as one of the intellectuals who preserved a place for Junimist conservatism into the latter 20th century and beyond . 
 = Sangay = 
 Sangay ( also known as <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> ) is an active stratovolcano in central Ecuador . It is the most active volcano in Ecuador , having erupted three times in recorded history . It exhibits mostly strombolian activity ; the most recent eruption , which started in 1934 , is still ongoing . Geologically , Sangay marks the southern boundary of the Northern Volcanic Zone , and its position straddling two major pieces of crust accounts for its high level of activity . Sangay 's approximately 500 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old history is one of instability ; two previous versions of the mountain were destroyed in massive flank collapses , evidence of which still litters its surroundings today . 
 Due to its remoteness , Sangay hosts a significant biological community with fauna such as mountain tapirs , giant otters , cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock , and king vultures . Since 1983 , its ecological community has been protected as part of the Sangay National Park . Although climbing the mountain is hampered by its remoteness , poor weather conditions , river flooding , and the danger of falling ejecta , the volcano is regularly climbed , a feat first achieved by Robert T. Moore in 1929 . 
 = = Geological setting = = 
 Lying at the eastern edge of the Andean cordillera , Sangay was formed by volcanic processes associated with the subduction of the Nazca Plate under the South American Plate at the Peru – Chile Trench . It is the southernmost volcano in the Northern Volcanic Zone , a subgroup of Andean volcanoes whose northern limit is Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia . 
 The next active volcano in the chain , Sabancaya , is in Peru , a distant 1 @,@ 600 km ( 990 mi ) to the south . Sangay lies above a <unk> tectonic slab located about 130 km ( 80 mi ) beneath Sabancaya , reflecting a sharp difference in the thermal character of the subducted oceanic crust , between older rock beneath southern Ecuador and Peru ( dated more than 32 million years old ) , and younger rock under northern Ecuador and Colombia ( dated less than 22 million years old ) . The older southern rock is more thermally stable than the northern crust , and to this is attributed the long break in volcanic activity in the Andes ; Sangay occupies a position at the boundary between these two bodies , accounting for its high level of activity . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Sangay developed in three distinct phases . Its oldest edifice , formed between 500 @,@ 000 and 250 @,@ 000 years ago , is evidenced today by a wide scattering of material opening to the east , defined by a crest about 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 120 ft ) high . This first Sangay , pockmarked by secondary ridges , is thought to have been 15 – 16 km ( 9 – 10 mi ) in diameter , with a summit located 2 to 3 km ( 1 to 2 mi ) southeast of the present summit . The curved shape of the remnants of this first structure indicates that it suffered a massive flank collapse , scattering the nearby forest lowlands with debris and causing a large part of its southern caldera wall to slide off the mountain , forming an embayment lower on its slopes . This 400 m ( 1 @,@ 312 ft ) thick block , the best preserved specimen of Sangay 's early construction , consists of sequentially layered breccias , pyroclastic flows , and lahar deposits . Acidic andesites with just under 60 % silicon dioxide dominate these flows , but more basic andesites can be found as well . 
 Sangay 's second edifice began to form anew after the massive sector collapse that damaged the first , being constructed between 100 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 years ago . Remnants of its second structure lie within the southern and eastern parts of the debris from its first collapse ; some remnants of the volcano lie to the west and north as well . Sangay 's second structure is believed to have had an east @-@ to @-@ west elongated summit , and like its first summit structure , it suffered a catastrophic collapse that created a debris avalanche 5 km ( 3 mi ) wide and up to 20 km ( 12 mi ) in length . It was likely less voluminous than the volcano 's first version , and its summit lay near Sangay 's current one . 
 Sangay currently forms an almost perfect glacier @-@ capped cone 5 @,@ 230 m ( 17 @,@ 159 ft ) high , with a 35 ° slope and a slight northeast @-@ southwest tilt . Its eastern flank marks the edge of the Amazon Rainforest , and its western flank is a flat plain of volcanic ash , sculpted into steep gorges up to 600 m ( 1 @,@ 970 ft ) deep by heavy rainfall . It has a west @-@ east trending summit ridge , capped by three active craters and a lava dome . Sangay has been active in its current form for at least 14 @,@ 000 years , and is still filling out the area left bare by its earlier incarnations , being smaller than either of them . Uniquely , in its 500 @,@ 000 years of activity , its magma plume has never changed composition or moved a significant distance . 
 Mainly andesitic in composition , Sangay is highly active . The earliest report of a historical eruption was in 1628 ; ash fell as far away as Riobamba , located 50 km ( 31 mi ) northwest of Sangay , and was severe enough to cover pastures and starve local livestock . The volcano erupted again in 1728 , remaining essentially continuously active through 1916 , with particularly heavy activity in 1738 – 1744 , 1842 – 1843 , 1849 , 1854 – 1859 , 1867 – 1874 , 1872 , and 1903 . After a brief pause , it erupted again on August 8 , 1934 , and has not completely quelled ever since , with heavy eruptive periods occurring in 1934 – 1937 and 1941 – 1942 . 
 Eruptions at Sangay exhibit strombolian activity , producing ashfall , lava flows , pyroclastic flows , and lahars . All known eruptions at the volcano have had a Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) of 3 . Despite its activity , Sangay is located in a remote , uninhabited region ; only a large Plinian eruption could threaten occupied areas 30 – 100 km ( 19 – 62 mi ) to its west . Nonetheless , a flank collapse on its eastern side , possible given the volcano 's construction and history , could displace nearby forest and possibly affect settlements . Access to the volcano is difficult , as its current eruptive states constantly peppers the massif with molten rock and other ejecta . For these reasons , it is not nearly as well @-@ studied as other , similarly active volcanoes in the Andes and elsewhere ; the first detailed study of the volcano was not published until 1999 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Sangay is one of two active volcanoes located within the namesake Sangay National Park , the other being Tungurahua to the north . As such it has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1983 . The area 's isolation has allowed it to maintain a pristine ecology relatively untouched by human interaction , and the park hosts a biome ranging from alpine glaciers on the volcanoes ' peaks to tropical forest on their flanks . Altitude and rainfall are the most significant local factors affecting fauna , and therefore the most lush ecosystems are found on the wetter parts of the volcano 's eastern slope . 
 The highest level below the snowline is dominated by lichen and bryophytes . Below this lies a zone of small trees and shrubs which develops into montane forest , principally in western valleys and on well @-@ irrigated eastern slopes , which occurs below 3 @,@ 750 m ( 12 @,@ 303 ft ) . Tree heights develop from 5 m ( 16 ft ) near the top to up to 12 m ( 39 ft ) below 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 843 ft ) ; below 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) , subtropical rainforest is present , with temperatures between 18 and 24 ° C ( 64 and 75 ° F ) and up to 500 cm ( 196 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall . 
 Fauna is similarly distributed , with distinct altitudinal zonation present . The highest altitudes support endangered mountain tapirs ( <unk> <unk> ) , cougars ( Puma concolor ) , guinea pigs ( Cavia porcellus ) , and Andean foxes ( Lycalopex <unk> ) . Lower down , spectacled bears ( <unk> ornatus ) , jaguars ( Panthera onca ) , <unk> ( Leopardus pardalis ) , <unk> ( Leopardus <unk> ) , white @-@ tailed deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , <unk> deer ( Mazama sp . ) , vulnerable pudús ( Pudu sp . ) , and endangered giant otters ( Pteronura brasiliensis ) can all be found . Bird species common in the area include Andean condors ( Vultur gryphus ) , cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock ( Rupicola sp . ) , giant hummingbirds ( <unk> gigas ) , torrent ducks ( <unk> armata ) , king vultures ( Sarcoramphus papa ) , and swallow @-@ tailed kites ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Sangay can and has been climbed . It was first ascended in 1929 by Robert T. Moore , prior to its current eruption beginning in 1934 . However , the volcano 's current active state presents dangers to mountaineers in the form of falling ejecta ; in 1976 , two members of an expedition on the volcano were stuck and killed by falling debris . In addition , the volcano is located in a remote region with poor roads and is difficult to access , and periods of heavy rainfall can flood rivers and cause landslides , rendering the mountain routes impassable . Nonetheless , the Instituto <unk> <unk> y de Areas Naturales , which maintains an office near the mountain , facilitate such activities by providing local guides and rooms for rent for visitors . Ascension takes between 7 and 10 days from Quito . Conditions on the volcano are usually very wet and foggy , and mountaineers may be visually impaired from viewing the volcano as they ascend it . 
 = Educating the Disfranchised and Disinherited = 
 Educating the Disfranchised and Disinherited is a 1999 biography of American General Samuel Chapman Armstrong and his associated normal school for freedmen , Hampton Institute , written by Robert Francis Engs and published by the University of Tennessee Press . The first full biography of its kind , the book portrays Armstrong as a complex politician and administrator in the postbellum period who balanced the needs of opposed parties surrounding the Virginia school : its African American students , Southern white neighbors , and Northern philanthropist funders . Previous works presented Armstrong in a polarized fashion , as either a savior or handicap for freedmen . The book emphasizes Armstrong 's upbringing as a missionary in Hawaii in the development of his educational philosophy . 
 Reviewers complimented the book 's balanced presentation of Armstrong , grounded use of the period 's thought , and contribution to the historiography of industrial education . They felt the book lacked community and state historical context , as well as recent scholarship on Native Americans at Hampton . 
 = = Summary = = 
 Robert Francis Engs 's Educating the Disfranchised and Disinherited : Samuel Chapman Armstrong and Hampton Institute , 1839 – 1893 is the first biography of General Samuel Chapman Armstrong , the founder of the Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute . The book was published by the University of Tennessee Press in 1999 . It challenges several long @-@ standing ideas about this period : that the " Hampton @-@ Tuskegee system " and its adherents stunted the progress of African Americans , that the Hampton Institute ideology was opposed to that of historically black and historically white colleges , and that the positions of W. E. B. DuBois and Booker T. Washington were diametrically opposed . Engs writes Armstrong as a symbol of postbellum America 's conflicts over race , class , religion , and gender . Engs 's Armstrong , in " paternal ... arrogance " believed that he and others of higher status could best determine how to improve the lots of those suppressed by " lack of opportunity and discrimination " , such as African Americans and American Indians . This intuition , of knowing " what was best for the freedmen " , was influenced by his experience in missionary work , where his parents treated the indigenous Hawaiians as misbehaving children with behavior to be corrected . The biography distills Armstrong 's philosophy , demeanor , and understanding of African Americans from his experiences as a missionary , student of Williams College , and leader in the American Civil War . Engs dismisses polarized interpretations of Armstrong 's legacy as either a savior or a handicap for uneducated blacks . Instead , Armstrong is portrayed as a complex man who believes both in " black inferiority " and that freedmen could improve their lives through his lessons . 
 Armstrong was born and raised in Hawaii in the mid @-@ 1800s . His father was the Kingdom of Hawaii 's ( secular ) minister of public instruction , whose schools practiced the " manual labor principle of education " . Engs wrote that Armstrong 's Hawaiian childhood insulated him from racist sentiment on the mainland . Armstrong attended private schools in Oahu before moving to study on the mainland . He shied away from the ministry , believing as his father , " the shorter one 's creed , the better " . Armstrong 's experience in the Civil War — including as a prisoner of war , leader of the United States Colored Troops , and General — led to his lifelong pursuit of " noble strife " in helping his " fellow man " . He joined the Freedmen 's Bureau and served as the first principal of the Hampton Institute on the Virginia Peninsula . Hampton 's task was to prepare African Americans " to teach their people the ' civilizing ' ways of white men " through " Christian teachings , a strict code of conduct , and manual labor " . Hampton was one of eight American Missionary Association teacher @-@ training schools . Armstrong left a 25 @-@ year legacy , and introduced the school 's manual and industrial teaching methods in the late 1860s despite its increased cost . Engs distinguishes this vision from the post @-@ 1900 industrial education , with Armstrong 's " industry " signifying the industriousness of " self @-@ discipline and self @-@ reliance " . The labor proceeds also supported the black students through school , though only during school months . Armstrong sought to see his " best " graduates ascend to higher education and to occupations " originally envisioned for whites " . As his " most famous student " , " virtual son " , and " spiritual heir " , Booker T. Washington opened the Tuskegee Institute in the style of Hampton . Armstrong later expanded Hampton 's scope to include Native Americans , who were kept apart from the blacks as a " school within a school " . 
 Engs notes that missionaries struggled to reconcile the task of assimilating discriminated peoples into a society that defined itself by that active discrimination . Engs portrays Armstrong as a natural politician , administrator , and " risk @-@ taker " who sought broad @-@ based support from opposed parties , including African Americans , the " anti @-@ Negro white South " , and white philanthropists of the North , which made Armstrong into a " master <unk> " . As a " realist " , Armstrong adopted the subtleties of his patrons to keep Hampton open , and did not confuse " the uplift of African Americans " with " promoting their equality with whites " . Hampton 's curriculum was ultimately set by federal and donor money . In time , Armstrong 's goals for the school were derailed by increased costs and the school 's Northern industrialist backers , who made manual labor education the focus and end of the curriculum , rather than a means . Engs concludes that Armstrong 's black graduates lived in better circumstances than their peers . Many became teachers in the South and were " grateful " for their opportunities . <unk> , Hampton 's Native American graduates suffered in health at the school and had little job opportunity back out West . Engs also concluded that Armstrong 's work was limited by his reliance on the elite , emphasis on white men deciding black lives , and inability to change his philosophy when his assumptions became outdated . Still , Engs thought that Armstrong succeeded in his intent to " civilize " students at Hampton , though this mattered little , Engs wrote , when white society was unprepared to accept them " no matter how civilized they might be " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wilbert Ahern ( Journal of American History ) found the book 's arguments convincing and " gracefully written " , but wanted to know more about Armstrong 's background in financial administration , forming of ties with the Northern philanthropists , and successful students apart from Booker T. Washington . Jennings Wagoner ( History of Education Quarterly ) noted that Armstrong 's intentions were portrayed as comparable to the leaders of George Fredrickson 's Inner Civil War , who saw their work as an extension of that of the Founding Fathers . Wagoner wrote that Engs provided a " well @-@ grounded " biography that handles Armstrong 's " complexities and contradictions " with skillful use of the historiography and understanding of the era . Ahern emphasized the biography 's " balance " in contrast to prior partisan writing on Armstrong . He noted Donald Spivey 's Schooling for the New Slavery and Engs 's first book , the 1979 Freedmen 's First Generation , as examples of work that associates Armstrong with " stifling ... African @-@ American aspirations " . Ahern also wrote that Engs 's work affirms the then @-@ controversial claim in James McPherson 's 1975 The Abolitionist Legacy that Armstrong was " fundamentally dedicated to the advancement of opportunity for African Americans " and other races . Edna Green Medford ( The North Carolina Historical Review ) wrote that the book was particularly valuable to the historiography of industrial education . 
 Medford praised Engs 's contextualization of the late @-@ nineteenth century in American political , racial , and educational thought , but criticized his treatment of the relationship between the school and its community , particularly in stories of its students interacting with the community . Ahern felt that Engs missed relevant , recent literature on Armstrong 's impact on Native Americans . Harold Forsythe ( The Journal of Southern History ) described Engs 's tone as mild , but with a " continuous ... critical bite " . Forsythe also marked the book 's reliance on Armstrong 's and Hampton records and consequent distance from the larger history of Virginia . 
 = Planned Parenthood = 
 Planned Parenthood Federation of America ( PPFA ) , or Planned Parenthood , is a nonprofit organization that provides reproductive health services in the United States and around the world . A member association of the International Planned Parenthood Federation ( IPPF ) , PPFA has its roots in Brooklyn , New York , where Margaret Sanger opened the first birth control clinic in the U.S. in 1916 . In 1921 , Sanger founded the American Birth Control League , which changed its name to Planned Parenthood in 1942 . Planned Parenthood is made up of 159 medical and non @-@ medical affiliates , which operate more than 650 health clinics in the United States , and it also partners with organizations in 12 countries globally . The organization directly provides a variety of reproductive health services and sexual education , contributes to research in reproductive technology , and does advocacy work aimed at protecting and expanding reproductive rights . 
 PPFA is the largest single provider of reproductive health services , including abortion , in the United States . In their 2014 Annual Report , PPFA reported seeing over 2 @.@ 5 million patients in over 4 million clinical visits and performing a total of nearly 9 @.@ 5 million discrete services including 324 @,@ 000 abortions . The organization has a combined annual revenue of US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion , including roughly US $ 530 million in government funding such as Medicaid reimbursements . Throughout its history PPFA and its member clinics have variously experienced support , controversy , protests , and violent attacks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The origins of Planned Parenthood date to October 16 , 1916 , when Margaret Sanger , her sister Ethel Byrne , and Fania <unk> opened the first birth control clinic in the U.S. in the Brownsville section of the New York borough of Brooklyn . They distributed birth control , birth control advice , and birth control information . All three women were arrested and jailed for violating provisions of the Comstock Act , accused of distributing obscene materials at the clinic . The so @-@ called Brownsville trials brought national attention and support to their cause . Sanger and her co @-@ defendants were convicted on misdemeanor charges , which they appealed through two subsequent appeals courts . While the convictions were not overturned , the judge who issued the final ruling also modified the law to permit physician @-@ prescribed birth control . The women 's campaign led to major changes in the laws governing birth control and sex education in the United States . 
 In 1921 the clinic was organized into the American Birth Control League , the core of the only national birth control organization in the U.S. until the 1960s . By 1941 it was operating 222 centers and had served 49 @,@ 000 clients . However , some found its title offensive and " against families " , so the League began discussions for a new name . In 1942 the League became known as the Planned Parenthood Federation of America . 
 Largely relying on a volunteer workforce , by 1960 the Federation had provided family planning counseling in hundreds of communities across the country . Planned Parenthood was one of the founding members of the International Planned Parenthood Federation when it was launched at a conference in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) , India , in 1952 . 
 = = = After Sanger = = = 
 Following Margaret Sanger , Alan Frank <unk> became president of Planned Parenthood , serving from 1962 until 1974 . During his tenure , the Food and Drug Administration approved the sale of the original birth control pill , giving rise to new attitudes towards women 's reproductive freedom . Also during his presidency , Planned Parenthood lobbied the federal government to support reproductive health , culminating with President Richard Nixon 's signing of Title X to provide governmental subsidies for low @-@ income women to access family planning services . The Center for Family Planning Program Development was also founded as a semi @-@ autonomous division during this time . The center became an independent organization and was renamed the <unk> Institute in 1977 . 
 Faye <unk> became the first African American president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America in 1978 . <unk> , who was also the youngest president in Planned Parenthood 's history , served in this role until 1992 . During her term , Planned Parenthood grew to become the seventh largest charity in the country , providing services to four million clients each year through its 170 affiliates , whose activities were spread across 50 states . 
 From 1996 to 2006 , Planned Parenthood was led by Gloria Feldt . Feldt activated the Planned Parenthood Action Fund ( PPAF ) , the organization 's political action committee , launching what was the most far reaching electoral advocacy effort in its history . The PPAF serves as the nonpartisan political advocacy arm of PPFA . It engages in educational and electoral activity , including legislative advocacy , voter education , and grassroots organizing to promote the PPFA mission . Feldt also launched the Responsible Choices Action Agenda , a nationwide campaign to increase services to prevent unwanted pregnancies , improve quality of reproductive care , and ensure access to safe and legal abortions . Another initiative was the commencement of a " Global Partnership Program " , with the aim of building a vibrant activist constituency in support of family planning . 
 On February 15 , 2006 , Cecile Richards , the daughter of former Texas governor Ann Richards , and formerly the deputy chief of staff to the U.S. Rep. Nancy Pelosi ( the Democratic Leader in the United States House of Representatives ) , became president of the organization . In 2012 Richards was voted one of Time magazine 's 100 Most Influential People in the World . 
 = = = Margaret Sanger Awards = = = 
 In 1966 PPFA began awarding the Margaret Sanger Award annually to honor , in their words , " individuals of distinction in recognition of excellence and leadership in furthering reproductive health and reproductive rights " . In the first year , it was awarded to four men , Carl G. Hartman , William H. Draper , Lyndon Baines Johnson , and Martin Luther King , Jr . Later recipients have included John D. Rockefeller III , Katharine Hepburn , Jane Fonda , Hillary Clinton , and Ted Turner . 
 = = Services = = 
 The services provided by PPFA affiliates vary by location , with just over half of all Planned Parenthood affiliates in the United States performing abortions . Services provided by PPFA include birth control and long @-@ acting reversible contraception ; emergency contraception ; breast and cervical cancer screening ; pregnancy testing and pregnancy options counseling ; testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections ; sex education ; vasectomies ; LGBT services ; and abortion . 
 In 2013 PPFA reported seeing 2 @.@ 7 million patients in 4 @.@ 6 million clinical visits . Roughly 16 % of its clients are teenagers . According to PPFA , in 2014 the organization provided 3 @.@ 6 million contraceptive services , 4 @.@ 5 million sexually transmitted infection services , about 1 million cancer related services , over 1 million pregnancy tests and prenatal services , over 324 @,@ 000 abortion services , and over 100 @,@ 000 other services , for a total of 9 @.@ 5 million discrete services . PPFA is well known for providing services to minorities and the poor ; according to PPFA , approximately four out of five of their clients have incomes at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty level . 
 Given that each patient receives about three services on average , the percent of abortions provided out of the total services provided ‍ — ‌ 3 @.@ 4 % ‍ — ‌ may not clearly represent the importance of abortion to PPFA . Each year , 12 percent of PPFA 's patients gets an abortion , which is expensive when compared with other services . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 PPFA has two national offices in the United States : one in Washington , D.C. , and one in New York . It has three international offices , including a hub office in London , England . It has 68 medical and related affiliates and 101 other affiliates including 34 political action committees . These affiliates together operate more than 700 health centers in all 50 states and the District of Columbia . PPFA owns about US $ 54 million in property , including real estate . In addition , PPFA spends a little over US $ 1 million per year for rented space . The largest facility , a US $ 26 million , 78 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 200 @-@ square @-@ metre ) structure , was completed in Houston , Texas , in May 2010 . 
 = = Worldwide availability = = 
 PPFA 's international outreach and other activities are performed by Planned Parenthood Global , a division of PPFA , and by the International Planned Parenthood Federation ( IPPF ) which now consists of more than 149 Member Associations working in more than 189 countries . The IPPF is further associated with International Planned Parenthood Federation affiliates in the Caribbean and the Americas and IPPF European Network , as well as other organizations like Family Planning Queensland , Pro Familia ( Germany ) and mouvement français pour le planning familial ( French Movement for Family Planning ) . Offices are located in New York , NY ; Washington , DC ; Miami , FL ; Guatemala City , Guatemala ; Abuja , Nigeria ; and Nairobi , Kenya . The organization 's focus countries are Guatemala , Nicaragua , Costa Rica , Ecuador , Peru , Senegal , Burkina Faso , Nigeria , Sudan , South Sudan , Uganda , Ethiopia , and Kenya . The Bloomberg <unk> donated US $ 50 million for Planned Parenthood Global 's reproductive health and family planning efforts in Tanzania , Nicaragua , Burkina Faso , Senegal and Uganda . Among specific countries and territories serviced by Planned Parenthood Global 's reproductive planning outreach are Brazil , Colombia , El Salvador , French Guiana , Guatemala , Haiti , Honduras , Martinique , Mexico , Panama , Paraguay , Peru , Suriname , Venezuela , Puerto Rico , U.S. Virgin Islands , Dominican Republic , Barbados , Bolivia , Ecuador , Guadeloupe , Saint Martin , Guyana , Cape Verde and Samoa . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Planned Parenthood has received federal funding since 1970 , when President Richard Nixon signed into law the Family Planning Services and Population Research Act , amending the Public Health Service Act . Title X of that law provides funding for family planning services , including contraception and family planning information . The law had support from both Republicans and Democrats . Nixon described Title X funding as based on the premise that " no American woman should be denied access to family planning assistance because of her economic condition " . 
 In the fiscal year ending June 30 , 2014 , total revenue was US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion : non @-@ government health services revenue was US $ 305 million , government revenue ( such as Medicaid reimbursements ) was US $ 528 million , private contributions totaled US $ 392 million , and US $ 78 million came from other operating revenue . According to Planned Parenthood , 59 % of the group 's revenue is put towards the provision of health services , while non @-@ medical services such as sex education and public policy work make up another 15 % ; management expenses , fundraising , and international family planning programs account for about 16 % , and 10 % of the revenue in 2013 – 2014 was not spent . 
 Planned Parenthood receives over a third of its money in government grants and contracts ( about US $ 528 million in 2014 ) . By law , federal funding cannot be allocated for abortions ( except in rare cases ) , but some opponents of abortion have argued that allocating money to Planned Parenthood for the provision of other medical services allows other funds to be re @-@ allocated for abortions . 
 A coalition of national and local pro @-@ life groups have lobbied federal and state governments to stop funding Planned Parenthood . As a result , federal and state legislators have proposed legislation to reduce funding levels . Eight states ‍ — ‌ Alabama , Arkansas , Indiana , Kansas , Louisiana , New Hampshire , Ohio , and Utah ‍ — ‌ have enacted such proposals . In some cases the courts have overturned such actions , citing conflict with federal or state laws ; in others the federal executive branch has provided funding in lieu of the states . In some states , Planned Parenthood was completely or partially defunded . 
 In August 2015 , Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal attempted to end Louisiana 's contract with Planned Parenthood to treat Medicaid patients at a time when there was an epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases in Louisiana . Planned Parenthood and three patients sued the state of Louisiana , with the United States Department of Justice siding with Planned Parenthood . 
 On February 2 , 2016 , the U.S. House failed to override President Obama 's veto of H.R. <unk> which would have prohibited Planned Parenthood from receiving any federal Medicaid funds for one year . 
 Donors to Planned Parenthood have included the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation , the Buffett Foundation , the Ford Foundation , the Turner Foundation , the <unk> , and others . The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 's contributions to the organization have been specifically marked to avoid funding abortions . Some donors , such as the Buffett Foundation , have supported reproductive health that can include abortion services . Pro @-@ life groups have advocated the boycott of donors to Planned Parenthood . Corporate donors include <unk> Mobile . 
 = = Political advocacy = = 
 Planned Parenthood is an advocate for the legal and political protection of reproductive rights . This advocacy includes helping to sponsor abortion rights and women 's rights events . The Federation opposes restrictions on women 's reproductive health services , including parental consent laws for minors . To justify this position , Planned Parenthood has cited the case of Becky Bell , who died following an illegal abortion rather than seek parental consent for a legal one . Planned Parenthood also takes the position that laws requiring parental notification before an abortion can be performed on a minor are unconstitutional on privacy grounds . 
 The organization opposes laws requiring ultrasounds before abortions , stating that their only purpose is to make abortions more difficult to obtain . Planned Parenthood has also opposed initiatives that require waiting periods before abortions , and bans on late @-@ term abortions including intact dilation and extraction , which has been illegal in the U.S. since 2003 . Planned Parenthood supports the wide availability of emergency contraception such as the Plan B pill . It opposes conscience clauses , which allow pharmacists to refuse to dispense drugs against their beliefs . Planned Parenthood has been critical of hospitals that do not provide access to emergency contraception for rape victims . Citing the need for medically accurate information in sex education , Planned Parenthood opposes abstinence @-@ only education in public schools . Instead , Planned Parenthood is a provider of , and endorses , comprehensive sex education , which includes discussion of both abstinence and birth control . 
 Planned Parenthood 's advocacy activities are executed by the Planned Parenthood Action Fund , which is registered as a 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) charity , and files financial information jointly with PPFA . The committee was founded in 1996 , by then @-@ president Gloria Feldt , for the purpose of maintaining reproductive health rights and supporting political candidates of the same mindset . In the 2012 election cycle , the committee gained prominence based on its effectiveness of spending on candidates . Although the Planned Parenthood Action Fund ( PPAF ) shares some leadership with the Planned Parenthood Federation of America , the president of PPAF , Cecile Richards , testified before Congress in September 2015 that she did not manage the organization . The Planned Parenthood Action Fund has 58 active , separately incorporated chapters in 41 states and maintains national headquarters in New York and Washington , D.C. Planned Parenthood has received grants from the Obama administration to help promote the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , or <unk> . 
 = = = Political spending = = = 
 Planned Parenthood spends money on politics and elections through the Planned Parenthood Action Fund ( its federal political action committee ) , through its Super PAC , and through a variety of related 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) entities . Planned Parenthood endorsed Barack Obama in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections . In the 2014 election cycle , Planned Parenthood spent US $ 6 @,@ 587 @,@ 100 on contributions to candidates and political parties ( overwhelmingly to Democrats ) and on independent expenditures . 
 = = Before the U.S. Supreme Court = = 
 Planned Parenthood regional chapters have been active in the American courts . A number of cases in which Planned Parenthood has been a party have reached the U.S. Supreme Court . Notable among these cases is the 1992 case Planned Parenthood v. Casey , the case that sets forth the current constitutional abortion standard . In this case , " Planned Parenthood " was the Southeast Pennsylvania Chapter , and " Casey " was Robert Casey , the governor of Pennsylvania . The ultimate ruling was split , and Roe v. Wade was narrowed but upheld in an opinion written by Sandra Day O 'Connor , Anthony Kennedy , and David Souter . Harry Blackmun and John Paul Stevens concurred with the main decision in separately written opinions . The Supreme Court struck down spousal consent requirements for married women to obtain abortions , but found no " undue burden " — an alternative to strict scrutiny , which tests the allowable limitations on rights protected under the Constitution — from the other statutory requirements . Dissenting were William Rehnquist , Antonin Scalia , Clarence Thomas , and Byron White . Blackmun , Rehnquist , and White were the only justices who voted on the original Roe v. Wade decision in 1973 who were still on the Supreme Court to rule on this case , and their votes on this case were consistent with their votes on the original decision that legalized abortion . Only Blackmun voted to maintain Roe v. Wade in its entirety . 
 Other related cases include : 
 Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth ( 1976 ) . Planned Parenthood challenged the constitutionality of a Missouri law encompassing parental consent , spousal consent , clinic bookkeeping and allowed abortion methods . Portions of the challenged law were held to be constitutional , others not . 
 Planned Parenthood Association of Kansas City v. Ashcroft ( 1983 ) . Planned Parenthood challenged the constitutionality of a Missouri law encompassing parental consent , clinic record keeping , and hospitalization requirements . Most of the challenged law was held to be constitutional . 
 Planned Parenthood v. <unk> ( 2001 ) . The American Coalition of Life Activists ( <unk> ) released a flier and " Wanted " posters with complete personal information about doctors who performed abortions . A civil jury and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals both found that the materials were indeed " true threats " and not protected speech . 
 Gonzales v. Planned Parenthood ( 2003 ) . Planned Parenthood sued Attorney General Gonzales for an injunction against the enforcement of the Partial @-@ Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 . Planned Parenthood argued the act was unconstitutional because it violated the Fifth Amendment , namely in that it was overly vague , violated women 's constitutional right to have access to abortion , and did not include language for exceptions for the health of the mother . Both the district court and the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit agreed , but that decision was overturned in a 5 – 4 ruling by the Supreme Court . 
 Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New England ( 2006 ) . Planned Parenthood et al. challenged the constitutionality of a New Hampshire parental notification law related to access to abortion . In Sandra Day O 'Connor 's final decision before retirement , the Supreme Court sent the case back to lower courts with instructions to seek a remedy short of wholesale invalidation of the statute . New Hampshire ended up repealing the statute via the legislative process . 
 = = Other court cases = = 
 Some state attorneys general have subpoenaed medical records of patients treated by Planned Parenthood . Planned Parenthood has gone to court to keep from turning over these records , citing medical privacy and concerns about the motivation for seeking the records . 
 In 2006 , Kansas Attorney General Phill Kline , a Republican , released some sealed patient records obtained from Planned Parenthood to the public . His actions were described as " troubling " by the state Supreme Court , but Planned Parenthood was compelled to turn over the medical records , albeit with more stringent court @-@ mandated privacy safeguards for the patients involved . In 2007 Kline 's successor , Paul J. Morrison , a Democrat , notified the clinic that no criminal charges would be filed after a three @-@ year investigation , as " an objective , unbiased and thorough examination " showed no wrongdoing . Morrison stated that he believed Kline had politicized the attorney general 's office . In 2012 a Kansas district attorney found that that the practices of the Kansas City @-@ area Planned Parenthood clinic were " within accepted practices in the medical community " and dropped all of the remaining criminal charges . In all , the Planned Parenthood clinic had faced 107 criminal charges from Kline and other Kansas prosecutors , all of which were ultimately dismissed . 
 In 2006 , the Indiana Court of Appeals ruled that Planned Parenthood was not required to turn over its medical records in an investigation of possible child abuse . In 2005 Planned Parenthood Minnesota / North Dakota / South Dakota was fined US $ 50 @,@ 000 for violating a Minnesota state parental consent law . 
 In 2012 , a Texas state court judge , Gary <unk> , denied Planned Parenthood request for a temporary restraining order against the State of Texas , concluding that the State may exclude otherwise qualified doctors and clinics from receiving state funding if the doctors or clinics advocate for abortion rights . 
 = = Debate and opposition = = 
 = = = Margaret Sanger and eugenics = = = 
 In the 1920s , various theories of eugenics were popular among intellectuals in the United States . ( For example , 75 % of colleges offered courses on eugenics . ) In her campaign to promote birth control , Sanger teamed with eugenics organizations such as the American Eugenics Society , although she argued against many of their positions . Scholars describe Sanger as believing that birth control and sterilization should be voluntary , and not based on race . Sanger advocated for " voluntary motherhood " — the right to choose when to be pregnant — for all women , as an important element of women 's rights . As part of her efforts to promote birth control , however , Sanger found common cause with proponents of eugenics , believing that she and they both sought to " assist the race toward the elimination of the unfit " . 
 Critics of Planned Parenthood often refer to Sanger 's connection with supporters of eugenics to discredit the organization by associating it , and birth control , with the more negative modern view of eugenics . Planned Parenthood has responded to this effort directly in a leaflet acknowledging that Sanger agreed with some of her contemporaries who advocated the voluntary hospitalization or sterilization of people with untreatable , disabling , hereditary conditions , and limits on the immigration of the diseased . The leaflet also states that Planned Parenthood " finds these views objectionable and outmoded " but says that it was compelled to discuss the topic because " anti @-@ family planning activists continue to attack Sanger ... because she is an easier target " than Planned Parenthood . 
 = = = Abortion = = = 
 Planned Parenthood has occupied a central position in the abortion debate in the U.S. , and has been among the most prominent targets of the United States pro @-@ life movement for decades . Some members of Congress , overwhelmingly Republican , have attempted since the 1980s to end federal funding of the organization , nearly leading to a government shutdown over the issue in 2011 . Planned Parenthood has consistently maintained that federal money received by Planned Parenthood is not used to fund abortion services , but pro @-@ life activists have argued that the federal funding frees up other resources that are , in turn , used to provide abortions . 
 Planned Parenthood is the largest single provider of abortions in the U.S. , but pro @-@ choice advocates have argued that the organization 's family planning services reduce the need for abortions ; in the words of Megan <unk> of the Chicago Tribune , Planned Parenthood could be " characterized as America 's largest abortion preventer " . Pro @-@ life activists dispute the evidence that greater access to contraceptives reduces abortion frequency . 
 = = = = Undercover videos by anti @-@ abortion activists = = = = 
 Periodically , pro @-@ life advocates and activists have tried to demonstrate that Planned Parenthood does not follow applicable state or federal laws . The groups called or visited Planned Parenthood health centers posing as victims of statutory rape , minors who by law need parental notification before abortion , racist donors seeking to earmark donations to reduce the African @-@ American population , or pimps seeking abortions for underage prostitutes . As a result of some of these videos , several Planned Parenthood workers have been disciplined or fired . However , a 2005 review by the Bush administration 's Department of Health and Human Services " yielded no evidence of clinics around the nation failing to comply with laws on reporting child abuse , child molestation , sexual abuse , rape or incest " . 
 = = = = = Live Action videos = = = = = 
 Beginning in 2010 , Live Action has released several series of undercover videos filmed in Planned Parenthood centers . Live Action said one series showed Planned Parenthood employees at many affiliates actively assisting or being complicit in aiding a prostitution ring , advising patients on how to procure sex @-@ selective abortions , and one who said they would immerse a child born alive after a botched abortion in a chemical solution to make it stop moving and breathing . No criminal convictions resulted , but some Planned Parenthood employees and volunteers were fired for not following procedure , and the organization committed to retraining its staff . Additionally , one center was placed on probation . 
 = = = = = The Center for Medical Progress videos = = = = = 
 In 2015 an anti @-@ abortion organization called the Center for Medical Progress ( CMP ) released several videos that had been secretly recorded . The videos showed how members of CMP posed as representatives of a biotechnology company in order to gain access to meetings with abortion providers . Members of CMP have since been indicted by a Texas grand jury on felony charges for tampering with governmental records . On July 26 , 2016 , all charges against the CMP members were thrown out by a Texas judge . 
 = = Violence by anti @-@ abortion activists = = 
 In the U.S. , abortion providers have been threatened with death , and facilities that provide abortions have been attacked or vandalized . Planned Parenthood clinics have been the target of a number of instances of violence by anti @-@ abortion activists , including bombing , arson , and attacks with chemical weaponry . In 1994 , John Salvi entered a Brookline , Massachusetts Planned Parenthood clinic and opened fire , murdering receptionist Shannon Elizabeth Lowney and wounding three others . He fled to another Planned Parenthood clinic where he murdered Leane Nichols and wounded two others . In 2012 , a Grand Chute , Wisconsin , Planned Parenthood clinic was subject to a bombing perpetrated by an unknown individual . In 2015 , a Planned Parenthood clinic in Pullman , Washington was heavily damaged by arson . 
 = = = 2015 shooting = = = 
 On November 27 , 2015 , a gunman shot and killed two civilians and a police officer during a five @-@ hour gun battle at the Colorado Springs , Colorado clinic . The 57 @-@ year @-@ old gunman surrendered to police and was taken into custody . During his arrest , he gave a " rambling " interview in which , at one point , he said " no more baby parts " , echoing language used in the news media about the clinic following the Center for Medical Progress videos . 
 = Zoltán of Hungary = 
 Zoltán ( Hungarian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; c . 880 or 903 – c . 950 ) , also Zolta , is mentioned in the Gesta Hungarorum as the third Grand Prince of the Hungarians who succeeded his father Árpád around 907 . Although modern historians tend to deny this report on his reign , because other chronicles do not list him among the Hungarian rulers , there is consensus that even if Zoltán never ascended the throne , all monarchs ruling in Hungary from the House of Árpád after around 955 were descended from him . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Zoltán in the Gesta Hungarorum = = = 
 Modern historians ' main source of Zoltán 's life is the Gesta Hungarorum , a late 12th @-@ century chronicle whose writer is now known as Anonymous . According to this source , Zoltán was the only son of Árpád , Grand Prince of the Hungarians . In contrast , the nearly contemporary Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus writes that " <unk> " was Árpád 's fourth son . Zoltán 's name seemingly derived from the Arabian sultan title with Turkic mediation , but modern scholars have not unanimously accepted this etymology . 
 According to Anonymous , Zoltán was born after 903 , during his father 's second campaign against Menumorut . The latter was one of the many local rulers who are solely mentioned in the Gesta Hungarorum among the opponents of the Hungarians during their conquest of the Carpathian Basin . In the Gesta Hungarorum 's narration , <unk> was forced to surrender and to give his daughter in marriage to Zoltán in 904 or 905 . When Menumorut died , Zoltán inherited his father @-@ in @-@ law 's duchy east of the river Tisza , which Anonymous claims was inhabited by " the peoples that are called <unk> " . Anonymous also states that Zoltán , still a minor , succeeded his father who died around 907 . Zoltán , in turn , later abdicated in favour of his son Taksony and died " in the third year of his son 's reign " . 
 And his son Zolta succeeded [ Árpád ] , who was similar to his father in character but dissimilar in appearance . Prince Zolta was a little lisping and pale , with soft , blonde hair , of middling stature ; a warlike duke , brave in spirit , merciful to his subjects , sweet of speech , but covetous of power , whom all the leading men and warriors of Hungary loved marvelously . Some time later , when Zolta was thirteen , all the leading men of the realm by their common counsel and of their equal wish appointed rectors of the kingdom beneath the prince to mend through the guidance of customary law the conflicts and lawsuits of litigants . 
 = = = Modern historians ' views = = = 
 Nowadays historians reject most details of Zoltán 's life presented by Anonymous . For instance , the Hungarian historian Gyula Kristó says that Zoltán was born around 880 instead of around 903 . His Romanian colleague Alexandru Madgearu likewise writes that either Zoltán was born many years earlier than 903 or his marriage must have happened years after 904 . 
 Zoltán 's father @-@ in @-@ law 's identity is also debated . Medievalist Pál Engel says that Menumorut is one of the " imaginary figures " invented by Anonymous in order to describe the conquering Hungarians ' heroic wars against them . Historian Charles R. Bowlus writes that he was a Moravian ruler whose daughter 's marriage with Zoltán symbolized the end of " Great Moravia " . Medievalist Tudor Sălăgean also says that Menumorut was a real person , the ruler of a one @-@ time duchy inhabited by Romanians , Slavs and many other peoples at the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries . 
 Anonymous 's statement that Zoltán succeeded his father as grand prince , or even the idea that Zoltán ever ruled the federation of the Hungarian tribes have also been challenged . For instance , historian Sándor L. <unk> writes that Zoltán , being the youngest among Árpád 's four sons , could hardly precede his elder brothers in the line of succession . Kristó also says that other Hungarian chroniclers do not make mention of Zoltán 's rule , implying that Anonymous only inserted Zoltán into the incompletely preserved list of the grand princes because he knew that all Hungarian monarchs from the House of Árpád descended from him . 
 = = Family = = 
 The following is a family tree presenting Zoltán 's closest known relatives : 
 * Whether Menumorut is an actual or an invented person is debated by modern scholars . * * All later grand princes and kings of Hungary descended from Taksony . 
 = Military career of Benedict Arnold , 1781 = 
 The military career of Benedict Arnold in 1781 consisted of service in the British Army . Arnold had changed sides in September 1780 , after his plot to surrender the key Continental Army outpost at West Point was exposed . After spending the rest of 1780 recruiting Loyalists for a new regiment called the American Legion , Arnold was sent with 1 @,@ 600 men in late December by General Sir Henry Clinton to Virginia , with instructions to raid Richmond and then establish a strong fortification at Portsmouth . 
 Landing in Virginia on January 4 , 1781 , he raided Richmond the next day . After raiding a few nearby communities , he returned to Portsmouth , where his troops established fortifications . They remained there until late March , when 2 @,@ 000 reinforcements led by General William Phillips arrived . Phillips took command of the forces , and Arnold served under him as they resumed raiding operations aimed at potentially establishing a permanent presence at Richmond . Although they fought off a spirited militia defense in the Battle of Blandford in late April , the timely arrival of Continental forces under the Marquis de Lafayette prevented the taking of Richmond . Phillips continued to raid , but was ordered to Petersburg to effect a junction with General Charles Cornwallis , who was marching up from North Carolina . Phillips died on May 13 of a fever , and Arnold was briefly in command again until Cornwallis arrived a week later . Arnold returned to New York , suffering from a recurrence of gout . 
 When French and American movements to encircle Cornwallis at Yorktown became apparent to General Clinton , he sent Arnold on a raiding expedition in early September to New London , Connecticut in an attempt to draw American resources away from Virginia . Arnold raided the port , but a detachment of his troops was involved in the bloody Battle of Groton Heights at a fort across the Thames River . The operation was the last command Arnold held . In December , he and General Cornwallis , who had been released on parole after his surrender at Yorktown , sailed for England . 
 During his command of British troops , Arnold did not command a great deal of respect from other officers . His actions in Virginia and Connecticut were criticized , and allegations that he was primarily interested in money circulated in New York . On his arrival in England he was also unable to acquire new commands either in the army or with the British East India Company . He resumed his business and trade activities , and died in London in 1801 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Benedict Arnold was born in 1741 into a well @-@ to @-@ do family in the port city of Norwich in the British colony of Connecticut . He was interested in military affairs from an early age , serving briefly ( without seeing action ) in the colonial militia during the French and Indian War in 1757 . He embarked on a career as a businessman , first opening a shop in New Haven , and then engaging in overseas trade . He owned and operated ships , sailing to the West Indies , New France and Europe . When the British Parliament began to impose taxes on its colonies , Arnold 's businesses began to be affected by them and the resulting , sometimes violent , opposition , which he eventually joined . In 1767 he married a local woman , with whom he had three children , one of whom died in infancy . She died in 1775 , and Arnold left his children under the care of his sister Hannah at his home in New Haven . 
 = = Continental Army service , 1775 – 1780 = = 
 Arnold had distinguished himself early in the war , participating in the capture of Fort Ticonderoga in May 1775 and then boldly leading a raid on Fort Saint @-@ Jean near Montreal . He then led a small army from Cambridge , Massachusetts to Quebec City on an expedition through the wilderness of present @-@ day Maine , where he was wounded in the climactic Battle of Quebec on December 31 , 1775 . After leading an ineffectual siege of Quebec until April 1776 , he took over the military command of Montreal . He directed the American retreat from there on the arrival of British reinforcements , and his forces formed the rear guard of the retreating Continental Army as it headed south toward Ticonderoga . Arnold then organized the defense of Lake Champlain , and led the Continental Navy fleet that was defeated in the October 1776 Battle of Valcour Island . 
 During these actions , Arnold made a number of friends and a larger number of enemies within the army power structure and in Congress . He established decent relationships with George Washington , commander of the army , as well as Philip Schuyler and Horatio Gates , both of whom had command of the army 's Northern Department at different times during 1775 and 1776 . However , an acrimonious dispute with Moses Hazen , commander of the 2nd Canadian Regiment , boiled over into a court martial of Hazen at Ticonderoga during the summer of 1776 . Only action by Gates , then his superior at Ticonderoga , prevented his own arrest on countercharges leveled by Hazen . He had also had disagreements with John Brown and James Easton , two lower @-@ level officers with political connections . His conflict with them resulted in ongoing suggestions of improprieties on his part . Brown was particularly vicious , publishing a handbill that claimed of Arnold , " Money is this man 's God , and to get enough of it he would sacrifice his country " . 
 In December 1776 Washington sent Arnold to coordinate the defense of Rhode Island after the British occupied Newport . Due to inadequate supplies and militia training , no offensive action was possible . In February 1777 Arnold , along with several other brigadiers , was passed over by Congress for promotion to major general . While en route to Philadelphia to discuss the matter , he stopped in New Haven to visit his family , and fought in the rearguard Battle of Ridgefield against a British raiding party in which his left leg was injured once again . In Philadelphia , Arnold threatened to resign over the issue of rank , but demurred when it was learned that Ticonderoga had fallen . Sent north to assist in the defense of the Hudson River valley , he helped lift the Siege of Fort Stanwix in August , and then played key roles in the two Battles of Saratoga in September and October . He was stripped of his command after the first battle in a dispute with General Gates , who had come to see Arnold as a competitor for rank and glory . Midway through the second battle he rode off to the battlefield anyway , and led the troops to in a spirited attack on two British redoubts , suffering serious injuries to his leg . 
 After Arnold had recovered from his injuries ( he walked with a cane for the rest of his life ) , Washington gave him the military command of Philadelphia after the British withdrew from the city in May 1778 . There his actions increased political opposition to him , and further inquiries were made into his affairs . He also began consorting with Loyalist sympathizers , and married Peggy Shippen , the daughter of one such man . Shortly after , he opened negotiations with General Sir Henry Clinton , mediated by Major John André , offering his services to their side . After resigning his Philadelphia command in anger after poor treatment by Congress and local opponents , he sought and acquired in July 1780 the command of West Point , the key Continental Army base on the Hudson River . Pursuant to plans to make its taking easier by the British , he systematically weakened its defenses . When the plot was exposed in September 1780 with the capture by American forces of Major André , Arnold fled to New York , and was given a commission as a brigadier general in the British Army . Major André was hanged as a spy , greatly upsetting the British . 
 = = British Army service = = 
 The British gave Arnold a brigadier general 's commission with an annual income of several hundred pounds , but only paid him £ 6 @,@ 315 plus an annual pension of £ 360 because his plot failed . He and his wife settled in New York , where the Loyalist elites at first snubbed them , but were eventually overcome by Peggy 's charm . Arnold began recruiting a new Loyalist regiment , the American Legion , enrolling his young sons in the unit ( at least on paper ) . General Clinton then assigned Arnold to lead an expedition to the Chesapeake Bay . As his force began to take shape in November and December , rumors swirled in the city that many officers were refusing to serve under him . Many of the British soldiers in New York held Arnold responsible for the death of the popular Major André . 
 Arnold 's preparations for the Chesapeake Bay expedition interrupted a scheme hatched by George Washington and Henry " Light Horse Harry " Lee to kidnap Arnold . Pursuant to the plan , Lee 's sergeant major , John Champe staged a " desertion " from Lee 's unit in New Jersey to British lines in New York late in October 1780 , and convinced Arnold to take him on as a senior noncommissioned officer . Champe was supposed to make contact with covert operatives working in New York , with whom he would work to kidnap Arnold . After observing Arnold 's habits , a plan was developed to be executed on the night of December 11 . Arnold ordered his troops , including Champe , to embark on transports on December 11 , and thus scuttled the attempt . ( Champe participated in the start of the expedition , and finally managed to escape several weeks later and return to Lee 's unit . Washington and Lee rewarded him richly , and convinced him to retire from military service so that he would not risk hanging for his role in the affair if he was captured . ) 
 = = = Virginia = = = 
 Arnold 's force of 1 @,@ 600 troops arrived off Virginia on January 1 , 1781 . Landing his troops on January 4 , he captured Richmond by surprise and then went on a rampage through Virginia , destroying supply houses , foundries , and mills . This activity brought out Virginia 's militia , led by Colonel Sampson Mathews , initiating Arnold 's return to Portsmouth to hold the port there . The relative inactivity of holding the port led Arnold to request a change of command . When reinforcements arrived in March , they were led by William Phillips ( who had served under Burgoyne at Saratoga ) , who took over the command . However , Clinton did not issue orders recalling Arnold , so he accompanied Phillips on new raiding expeditions into the Virginia countryside . The force advanced on Petersburg , where they defeated a militia force led by Baron von Steuben at the Battle of Blandford in late April . The arrival at Richmond of the Marquis de Lafayette and 900 Continental troops , sent by General Washington to oppose Arnold , prompted Phillips to begin making his way back to Portsmouth . While en route , they were ordered by Charles Cornwallis , the commander of the British southern army , to return to Petersburg , where he would join them with his force . Phillips fell ill on the way , and died of a fever at Petersburg on May 12 . Arnold commanded the army only until May 20 , when Cornwallis arrived to take over . One colonel wrote to Clinton of Arnold , " there are many officers who must wish some other general in command " . Cornwallis disregarded advice proferred by Arnold to locate a permanent base away from the coast that might have averted his later surrender at Yorktown . Shortly after Cornwallis 's arrival , Arnold suffered a severe attack of gout , and returned to New York . 
 During Arnold 's time in Virginia two things happened that had a negative impact on his reputation . He wrote a letter to Lord George Germain , the British colonial secretary , criticizing Clinton 's conduct of the war . Word of this communication reached Clinton , and Arnold was met on his return to New York with a frosty reception , and assignments to perform menial administrative tasks . Arnold attempted to make amends , writing to Germain , " I find my letter has given umbrage ; I am extremely sorry for it . " The second incident was a dispute with his naval counterpart on the Chesapeake , Captain Thomas Symonds , over the distribution of prizes captured during the various expeditions . Symonds was so incensed by Arnold 's attitude that he refused to leave port to respond to reports of transports carrying Lafayette 's troops on the bay . The incident became widely known when Arnold got back to New York , prompting one officer to write , " [ Arnold ] has hurt himself by discovering too much fondness for cash ... if he is attached to the latter ... he is no acquisition for us . " 
 Arnold 's stint in Virginia also demonstrated that he was a target of Patriot wrath and revenge . Virginia Governor Thomas Jefferson issued a large reward for his capture , and Washington gave orders to Lafayette to summarily hang Arnold should he be captured . Lafayette had shadowed Arnold and Phillips when they went to Petersburg to join with Cornwallis . After Phillips died , Arnold tried to open communications with the marquis ; the letters were returned unopened by Lafayette . Washington approvingly wrote to Lafayette that " your conduct [ ... ] meets my approbation [ ... ] in refusing to correspond with Arnold . " In conversation with one of Lafayette 's officers sent to confer on prisoner exchanges , Arnold is said to have asked what would happen to him should he be captured . The response was , " We should cut off the leg which was wounded in the country 's service , and we should hang the rest of you . " ( The Boot Monument at the Saratoga National Historical Park , honoring his role there , includes a representation of Arnold 's left boot . ) 
 = = = New London = = = 
 On his return to New York in June Arnold made a variety of proposals for continuing to attack economic or military targets ( including West Point ) in order to force the Americans to end the war . Clinton was not interested in most of Arnold 's aggressive ideas , but the arrival of 3 @,@ 000 new Hessian troops led him to relent . He authorized an expedition against the port of New London , Connecticut , near Arnold 's childhood home of Norwich . On September 4 , not long after the birth of his and Peggy 's second son , Arnold 's force of over 1 @,@ 700 men raided and burned New London and captured Fort Griswold , causing damage estimated at $ 500 @,@ 000 . British casualties were high — nearly one quarter of the force sent against Fort Griswold was killed or wounded , a rate at which Clinton claimed he could ill afford more such victories . Although Arnold only reported 44 killed and 127 wounded in his official report , there were unofficial whispers that between 400 and 500 casualties had occurred , with at least one claim that it had been like " a Bunker Hill expedition " . The capture of Fort Griswold included American allegations that the British attackers slaughtered the surviving garrison after it had surrendered ; of a garrison numbering about 150 , more than 130 were killed or seriously wounded . Although Arnold was not in a position to influence what transpired at Fort Griswold ( he remained in New London and observed the action at Fort Griswold across the river ) , he was somewhat predictably blamed by many on both sides for the affair . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Even before the surrender of Cornwallis in October , Arnold had requested permission from Clinton to go to England to give Lord Germain his thoughts on the war in person . When word of the surrender reached New York , Arnold renewed the request , which Clinton then granted . On December 8 , 1781 , Arnold and his family left New York for England . In London he aligned himself with the Tories , advising Germain and King George III to renew the fight against the Americans . In the House of Commons , Edmund Burke expressed the hope that the government would not put Arnold " at the head of a part of a British army " lest " the sentiments of true honor , which every British officer [ holds ] dearer than life , should be afflicted . " To Arnold 's detriment the anti @-@ war Whigs had gotten the upper hand in Parliament , and Germain was forced to resign , with the government of Lord North falling not long after . 
 Arnold then applied to accompany General Carleton , who was going to New York to replace Clinton as commander @-@ in @-@ chief ; this request went nowhere . Other attempts to gain positions within the government or the British East India Company over the next few years all failed , and he was forced to subsist on the reduced pay of non @-@ wartime service . His reputation also came under criticism in the British press , especially when compared to that of Major André , who was celebrated for his patriotism . One particularly harsh critic said that Arnold was a " mean mercenary , who , having adopted a cause for the sake of plunder , quits it when convicted of that charge . " In turning him down for an East India Company posting , George Johnstone wrote , " Although I am satisfied with the purity of your conduct , the generality do not think so . While this is the case , no power in this country could suddenly place you in the situation you aim at under the East India Company . " 
 Despite repeated attempts to gain command positions in the British Army or with the British East India Company , he saw no further military duty . He resumed business activities , engaging in trade while based at first in Saint John , New Brunswick and then London . He died in London in 1801 , and was buried without military honors . 
 = Davis v. Ayala = 
 Davis v. Ayala , 576 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2015 ) was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a death sentence of a Hispanic defendant despite the fact that all Blacks and Hispanics were excluded from the jury during the defendant 's trial . The case involved a habeas corpus petition submitted by Hector Ayala , who was arrested and tried in the late 1980s for the alleged murder of three individuals during an attempted robbery of an automobile body shop in San Diego , California in April 1985 . At trial , the prosecution used peremptory challenges to strike all Black and Hispanic jurors who were available for jury service . The trial court judge allowed the prosecution to explain the basis for the peremptory challenges outside the presence of Ayala 's counsel , " so as not to disclose trial strategy " . Ayala was ultimately sentenced to death , but he filed several appeals challenging the constitutionality of the trial court 's decision to exclude his counsel from the hearings . 
 In a 5 – 4 opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito , the Supreme Court held that even if the trial court committed error , the error was harmless and that Ayala did not suffer any actual prejudice . Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that Ayala 's sentence should be reversed because the exclusion of Ayala 's counsel from the hearings " substantially influenced the outcome " of the case . Additionally , Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he questioned the propriety of Ayala 's placement in solitary confinement . In response , Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a one @-@ paragraph concurring opinion in which he stated that Ayala 's accommodations were " far sight more spacious than those in which his victims ... now rest " . 
 Commentators have described the case as " important " and note that will likely have a " significant effect " on similar cases in the future . However , some analysts have described the outcome as " particularly unjust " . Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion also received significant coverage from the media , and some analysts suggested that solitary confinement may become a " new battleground " for Justice Kennedy . One commentator described Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion as " the single most surprising and heartening development of the term " . 
 = = Legal Background = = 
 = = = Batson challenges = = = 
 In Batson v. Kentucky , the Supreme Court of the United States held that a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution occurs when prosecutors use peremptory challenges to exclude jurors on the basis of race . If a defendant alleges that a prosecutor challenged a prospective juror on the basis of that juror 's race ( a process known as a " Batson challenge " ) , trial courts will conduct a three @-@ part analysis of the peremptory challenge in question : " [ f ] <unk> , a defendant must make a prima facie showing that a peremptory challenge has been exercised on the basis of race ; second , if that showing has been made , the prosecution must offer a race @-@ neutral basis for striking the juror in question ; and third , in light of the parties ’ submissions , the trial court must determine whether the defendant has shown purposeful discrimination . " A court will only sustain a Batson challenge if all three elements of this test are satisfied . On appeal , a trial court 's findings with respect to a Batson challenge will only be reversed if a trial court judge committed clear error . Additionally , the Supreme Court of the United States has held that findings with respect to a prosecutor 's explanation of the reasons for their use of peremptory challenges is " entitled to ' great deference ' " . 
 = = = The right to petition for a writ of habeas corpus under federal law = = = 
 When individuals are convicted for crimes under state law , those individuals have the right to challenge the constitutionality of their convictions in federal court by petitioning for a writ of habeas corpus . This right was codified by the Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 , and in 1953 , the United States Supreme Court held that even when a state court rules against a prisoner , that individual still has the right to seek de novo review of their constitutional claims in federal court . However , in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing , congress passed the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act ( " AEDPA " ) in 1996 to modify federal habeas corpus procedures . Under the AEDPA 's new standards , when a prisoner 's claim has been adjudicated in state court , that individual 's petition for habeas corpus shall not be granted unless the state court decision " was contrary to , or involved an unreasonable application of , clearly established Federal law , as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States " . In 2007 , the United States Supreme Court held that , as a " precondition " for relief under the AEDPA , habeas petitioners must demonstrate evidence that a state court 's error resulted in " actual prejudice " . 
 = = = Federal harmless error doctrine = = = 
 The Supreme Court of the United States has identified a narrow range of errors that require automatic reversal ; for all other errors , the decision of a lower court will be upheld if the error was harmless . In 1967 , the Supreme Court ruled in Chapman v. California that a constitutional error will only be considered harmless when the court is " able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt " . Additionally , when reviewing federal habeas corpus petitions , a petitioner must demonstrate that an error " had substantial and injurious effect or influence in determining the jury 's verdict " . The Supreme Court has also ruled that when reviewing a determination of harmlessness under Chapman , the AEDPA mandates that the reviewing court may not grant a petition for habeas corpus " unless the harmlessness determination itself was unreasonable " . According to the Supreme Court , the rationale underlying this doctrine is the public policy concern that states courts should not be forced to undertake the " arduous task " of retrying criminal defendants " based on mere speculation that the defendant was prejudiced by trial error " . 
 = = Arrest and Trial of Hector Ayala = = 
 Hector Ayala was charged with three counts of murder that allegedly occurred during an attempted robbery of an automobile body shop in San Diego , California in April 1985 . During jury selection , the prosecution used peremptory challenges to strike all Black and Hispanic jurors who were available for jury service . Ayala , who was of Hispanic descent , filed a series of Batson challenges to contest the prosecution 's use of peremptory challenges . The trial judge permitted the prosecution to explain the basis of their peremptory challenges in a closed hearing , outside the presence of Ayala 's counsel , " so as not to disclose trial strategy " . The trial court ultimately concluded that the peremptory challenges were based on race @-@ neutral criteria , and Ayala was convicted of the three counts of murder in August 1989 . The jury returned a sentence of death for the three murder convictions , and the trial judge entered a judgment consistent with the jury 's sentence . On direct appeal , the California Supreme Court upheld Ayala 's conviction and sentence , noting that even if the trial judge committed an error when considering the defense 's Batson challenges , that error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt . Ayala subsequently filed a petition for habeas corpus , which was denied by a district court judge in 2006 . On appeal , the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit granted Ayala 's habeas petition in 2013 , holding that Ayala was denied due process at trial and that the trial court 's error was not harmless . In 2014 , the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the Ninth Circuit 's ruling . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 In his majority opinion , Justice Samuel Alito held that the exclusion of Ayala 's counsel during the Batson hearings was harmless error . Justice Alito emphasized that under federal law , prisoners are not entitled to habeas relief unless they can demonstrate " actual prejudice " . Additionally , Justice Alito noted that under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act , federal courts should be " highly deferential " to state courts " when a prisoner 's ' claim ' has been ' adjudicated on the merits ' in state court " . Applying these standards to the facts of this case , Justice Alito ruled that Ayala did not suffer any actual prejudice and that the California Supreme Court 's opinion " represented an entirely reasonable application of controlling precedent " . Consequently , Justice Alito held that the Ninth Circuit 's ruling should be reversed and that the case should be remanded for reconsideration in light of the Supreme Court 's decision . 
 = = = Concurring opinions = = = 
 Although he noted that his support for the majority 's opinion was " unqualified " , Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he questioned the propriety of solitary confinement . Justice Kennedy observed that since 1989 , Ayala had spent more than twenty five years in solitary confinement . Although the conditions of Ayala 's confinement were not established in the record , Justice Kennedy wrote that " it is likely [ he ] has been held for all or most of the past 20 years or more in a windowless cell no larger than a typical parking spot for 23 hours a day ; and in the one hour when he leaves it , he likely is allowed little or no opportunity for conversation or interaction with anyone " . Justice Kennedy wrote that " [ t ] he human toll wrought by extended terms of isolation long has been understood , and questioned , by writers and commentators " and that solitary confinement " bears a further terror and peculiar mark of infamy " . Justice Kennedy conceded that " in some instances temporary , solitary confinement is a useful or necessary means to impose discipline and to protect prison employees and other inmates " , but that courts should ultimately determine " whether workable alternative systems for long @-@ term confinement exist , and , if so , whether a correctional system should be required to adopt them " . 
 Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate , one @-@ paragraph concurring opinion to respond to Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion . He wrote that the " accommodations in which Ayala is housed are a far sight more spacious than those in which his victims , Ernesto Dominguez Mendez , Marcos Antonio Zamora , and Jose Luis <unk> , now rest " . Justice Thomas also noted that because Ayala 's victims were all 31 years of age or younger , " Ayala will soon have had as much or more time to enjoy those accommodations as his victims had time to enjoy this Earth " . 
 = = = Justice Sotomayor 's dissenting opinion = = = 
 Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she was joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , Justice Stephen Breyer , and Justice Elena Kagan . Justice Sotomayor argued that the exclusion of Ayala 's counsel from the Batson hearings " substantially influenced the outcome " of the case and that " grave doubt exists as to whether [ the exclusion ] was harmless " . She critiqued Justice Alito 's methodological approach , arguing that " [ t ] he proper inquiry is not whether the trial court ’ s determination can be sustained , but whether it may have been different had counsel been present " . Considering the evidence presented in this case , Justice Sotomayor concluded that there " is neither a factual nor a legal basis for the Court ’ s confidence " that the prosecution 's use of peremptory challenges was race neutral . She argued that in light of " the strength of Ayala ’ s prima facie case " , the Court should have upheld the Ninth Circuit 's ruling . 
 = = Commentary and analysis = = 
 Following the release of the Court 's opinion , commentators described Davis v. Ayala as " an important case raising claims about jury selection and harmless error " . Steve <unk> wrote that " [ g ] <unk> forward , the dispute between the majority and dissent will have an especially significant effect on cases in which trial courts conduct Batson proceedings ex parte " . Hadar Aviram wrote that " [ t ] he Court was willing to accept , as a basic premise , that Ayala 's constitutional rights were violated ; but that is not enough to merit a reversal " . In his review of the case for The New Yorker , Lincoln Caplan described the Court 's opinion as " particularly unjust " because the Court " had the opportunity to hold a state prosecutor to account for using trumped @-@ up reasons to justify racial discrimination in a jury selection " but failed to do so . 
 = = = Commentary about Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion = = = 
 Much of the initial commentary about the case focused on Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion . Writing for the Los Angeles Times , David G. Savage described Justice Kennedy 's opinion as " unusual " and " a rare instance of a Supreme Court justice virtually inviting a constitutional challenge to a prison policy " . Marty Lederman described Justice Kennedy 's concurring opinion as " the single most surprising and heartening development of the term " . Matt Ford wrote that " Kennedy ’ s critique of solitary confinement in Davis came without warning or fanfare " and that " [ s ] <unk> confinement is a new battleground for the Court ’ s second @-@ longest serving justice , but not a surprising one " . 
 Although he suggested Justice Kennedy 's concurrence may be " more consequential " than Justice Harry Blackmun 's dissent in <unk> v. Collins , Mark Joseph Stern described Justice Kennedy 's concurrence as " myopic " , noting that " large chunks of the ' legal academy ' in the ' public ' were aware — and outraged — by the practice long before Kennedy condemned it " . Dahlia Lithwick wrote that even though " Kennedy may not come around on the death penalty " and rule it unconstitutional , " after reading his own words in Ayala — he probably should " . In an interview with Harvard Law School dean Martha Minow , Justice Kennedy explained that when he was in the Army , he was locked in a cell for four hours and " slightly tortured " . Justice Kennedy remarked that " [ a ] fter four hours in a cell , I was going mad . These people are in , some for 40 years . It drives people mad and we don ’ t even think about it . We ’ ve got to do something about it " . 
 = The Pest House = 
 " ' The Pest House " is the fourteenth episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on February 27 , 1998 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Allen Coulter . " The Pest House " featured guest appearances by Melinda McGraw , Justin Louis and Michael Massee . 
 Millennium Group offender profilers Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) investigate a series of murders mimicking urban legends . The case soon leads them to a psychiatric hospital for violent criminals , where all is not as it seems . 
 " The Pest House " marked the second of three contributions by Coulter , and saw past Morgan and Wong collaborator McGraw once again work for the writing duo . The episode received positive reviews from critics , and was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 59 million households in its initial broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young couple sit in a car , sharing a story of a serial killer from the area . They hear sounds outside , and the boyfriend steps out to see what they are . His girlfriend is terrified when she hears sounds of a struggle , and investigates to find him dangling above the car , dead . 
 Millennium Group members Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) examine the crime scene . Black is skeptical when Watts notes that similar killings have occurred in the past , believing it is simply an urban legend . However , an inmate at the psychiatric hospital nearby was committed for similar murders . Unconvinced that he could have escaped , the pair nevertheless visit the facility . They meet Dr. Ellen Stoller ( Melinda McGraw ) , who reluctantly assists them in interviewing their suspect , E. Jacob Woodcock . Woodcock admits the killing fits his methods , but denies involvement . The interview is terminated when two inmates begin fighting . 
 That night , another couple is brutally killed on the highway . Black and Watts investigate , but they deem the deaths unconnected . However , Black notices that the newest murders are identical to the prior crimes of " Bear " , one of the inmates involved in the previous day 's fight . Stoller is adamant Bear cannot be responsible — until she finds the victim 's hand in the cafeteria 's stew . Bear insists someone took something " from inside " him , but has a seizure before he can explain . Between this incident and Woodcock insisting that Edward ( Justin Louis ) has stolen his dreams , Black realizes someone in the hospital is causing the deaths . 
 After seeing a vision of Stoller being stabbed in her car , Black warns her that she may be in danger , which she rebukes . However , she is approached by another patient , Purdue ( Michael Massee ) , who insists that Edward is stealing dreams , but will not steal his . Watts researches the facility 's inmates to find who has committed stabbings in the victims ' cars , concluding that Purdue is the one this profile fits . Black attempts to warn Stoller , but she has already driven away from the hospital . Black gives chase , scaring her , and she out @-@ paces him before pulling into a filling station . However , the attendant alerts Stoller that someone is hiding in the back seat of her car , and manages to bring her to the safety of his office . Black arrives and finds the car empty . He drives Stoller back to the hospital while the attendant attempts to call the police . However , he is killed before making the call . 
 Black searches for Purdue in the hospital , but encounters Edward , who tells him a nurse was murdered years before by Woodcock . Edward believes the patients can be cured by having the evil drained from their bodies . The electricity is cut and the lights go off . Black and Stoller roam in the dark , finding the body of the night nurse . Purdue 's voice is heard over the intercom , and the pair move to the office with the tannoy equipment to find him . Edward attacks with a knife — Stoller sees him shape @-@ shift into Purdue , then Bear , and then Woodcock . However , Purdue fights and kills him , proclaiming it " the <unk> thing I ever did . " Black theorizes that Edward somehow absorbed the killers ' violent impulses into himself , but was unable to refrain from acting upon them . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Pest House " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Allen Coulter . The episode was Coulter 's second contribution to the series — he had previously directed " Beware of the Dog " and would return to helm " Siren " later in the second season . " The Pest House " was the eleventh episode to have been written by Morgan and Wong , who had penned several across the first and second seasons . The pair had also taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers for the season . 
 Guest star Melinda McGraw had appeared in several episodes of Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , in a recurring role as Melissa Scully , debuting in an episode of that series also penned by Morgan and Wong . McGraw had also worked with the writers on The <unk> . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Pest House " was first broadcast on the Fox network on February 27 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 7 during its original broadcast , meaning that 5 @.@ 7 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 5 @.@ 59 million households , and left the episode the seventy @-@ fifth most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode an A − , finding it " is , like many episodes of this season before it , a bit of mess , a melange of concepts which don 't always taste so great together " . Handlen felt that the episode began with an " iffy " premise which more closely resembled an episode of The X @-@ Files , but by its end had managed to make it something more distinct and separate . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , writing that it was " an episode that pays lip service to the Group 's interest in this case to merely go back to the same old " killer of the week " conceit " . However , Gibron felt that " the acting is wonderful , and the actual story very moody and atmospheric " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Pest House " three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Shearman praised guest star Massee 's performance , and felt that the script was " great fun " , noting that it worked as a more serious version of the 1996 film Scream . 
 = Slavery in Haiti = 
 Slavery in Haiti has existed since Christopher Columbus arrived on the island in 1492 . The practice was so devastating to the native population that the Spanish began importing African slaves . During the French colonial period beginning in 1625 , the economy of Haiti ( then known as Saint @-@ Domingue ) was based on slavery , and the practice there was regarded as the most brutal in the world . The Haitian Revolution of 1804 , the only successful slave revolt in human history , precipitated the end of slavery not only in Saint @-@ Domingue , but in all French colonies . However , several Haitian leaders following the revolution employed forced labor , believing a plantation @-@ style economy was the only way for Haiti to succeed , and building fortifications to safeguard against attack by the French . During the U.S. occupation between 1915 and 1934 , the U.S. military forced Haitians to work building roads for defense against Haitian resistance fighters . 
 Slavery is still practiced in Haiti today . As many as half a million children are unpaid domestic servants called restaveks , who routinely suffer physical and sexual abuse . Additionally , human trafficking , including child trafficking is a significant problem in Haiti ; trafficked people are brought into , out of , and through Haiti for forced labor , including sex trafficking . The groups most at risk include the poor , women , children , the homeless , and people migrating across the border with the Dominican Republic . The devastating earthquake in 2010 displaced many , rendering them homeless , isolated , and supremely vulnerable to exploitation by traffickers . The chaos following the quake also distracted authorities and hindered efforts to stop trafficking . The government has taken steps to prevent and stop trafficking , ratifying human rights conventions and enacting laws to protect the vulnerable , but enforcement remains difficult . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Spanish Hispaniola ( 1492 – 1625 ) = = = 
 The natives living on the island that would come to be called Hispaniola were peaceful and not trained in military tactics . In the Pre @-@ Columbian era , other Caribbean tribes would sometimes attack the island to kidnap people into slavery . However , when Columbus arrived in 1492 , slavery on the island turned into a major business : colonists quickly began establishing sugar plantations dependent on slave labor . The practice of slavery in the Spanish New World colonies would become so large scale in Spain 's colonization of the Americas that imports of African slaves outnumbered Spanish immigration to the New World by the end of the 1500s . 
 When Columbus arrived in what is today Haiti in December 1492 and met the native Taino Arawak people , they were friendly , exchanging gifts with the Spaniards and volunteering their help . But Columbus was already planning to enslave them . He wrote in a letter to Queen Isabella of Spain that the natives were " tractable , and easily led ; they could be made to grow crops and build cities " . 
 When Columbus returned to Europe in 1493 , 30 of his soldiers stayed to build a fort there called La Navidad . They began stealing from , raping , and enslaving the natives — in some cases they held native women and girls as sex slaves . Finding gold was a chief goal for the Spanish ; they quickly forced enslaved natives to work in gold mines , which took a heavy toll in life and health . In addition to gold the slaves mined copper , and they grew crops for the Spaniards . In response to the brutality , the natives fought back . Some Taino escaped into remote parts of the island 's mountains and formed communities in hiding as " maroons " , who organized attacks against Spaniards ' <unk> the Spanish responded to the native resistance with severe reprisals , for example destroying crops to starve the natives . The Spaniards brought to the island dogs trained to kill the natives and unleashed them upon those who rebelled against enslavement . In 1495 Columbus sent 500 captured natives back to Spain as slaves , but 200 did not survive the voyage , and the others died shortly afterwards . In the late 1490s he planned to send 4000 slaves back to Spain each year , but this expectation failed to take into account the rapid decline the native population would soon suffer and was never achieved . 
 It is not known how many Taino people were on the island prior to Columbus 's arrival — estimates range from several thousand to eight million — but overwork in slavery and diseases introduced by the Europeans quickly killed a large part of the population . Between 1492 and 1494 , one third of the native population on the island died . Two million had been killed within ten years of the Spaniards ' arrival , and by 1514 , 92 % of the native population of the island were killed by enslavement and European diseases . By the 1540s the culture of the natives had disappeared from the island , and by 1548 the native population was under 500 . The rapid rate at which the native slaves died necessitated the import of Africans , for whom contact with Europeans was not new and who therefore had already developed some immunity to European diseases . Columbus 's son Diego Columbus started the African slave trade to the island in 1505 . Some newly arrived slaves from Africa and neighboring islands were able to escape and join maroon communities in the mountains . In 1519 Africans and Native Americans joined forces to start a slave rebellion that turned into a years @-@ long uprising which was eventually crushed by the Spanish in the 1530s . 
 Spanish missionary Bartolomé de las Casas spoke out against the enslavement of the natives and the brutality of the Spaniards . He wrote that to the natives , the Christianity brought by the Spaniards had come to symbolize the brutality with which they had been treated ; he quoted one Taino cacique ( tribal chief ) , " They tell us , these tyrants , that they adore a God of peace and equality , and yet they usurp our land and make us their slaves . They speak to us of an immortal soul and of their eternal rewards and punishments , and yet they rob our belongings , seduce our women , violate our daughters . " Las Casas commented that the Spaniards ' punishment of a Taino man by cutting off his ear " marked the beginning of the spilling of blood , later to become a river of blood , first on this island and then in every corner of these Indies . " Las Casas ' campaign led to an official end of the enslavement of Tainos in 1542 — however it was replaced by the African slave trade . As Las Casas had presaged , the Spaniards ' treatment of the Tainos was the start of a centuries @-@ long legacy of slavery in which abuse such as amputating body parts was commonplace . 
 = = = French Saint Domingue ( 1625 – 1789 ) = = = 
 The Spanish ceded control of the western part of the island of Hispaniola to the French in the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 ; France named its new colonial possession Saint Domingue . The colony , based on the export of slave @-@ grown crops , particularly sugar , would become the richest in the world . Known as the " Pearl of the Antilles " , the colony became the world 's foremost producer of coffee and sugar cane . The French , like the Spanish , imported slaves from Africa . In 1681 there were 2 @,@ 000 African slaves in the future Saint Domingue ; by 1789 there were almost half a million . 
 French plantation @-@ owners worked their African slaves so hard that half died within a few years ; it was cheaper to import new slaves than to improve working conditions enough to increase survival . The rate of death of slaves on Saint Domingue 's plantations was higher than anywhere else in the western hemisphere . Over the French colony 's hundred @-@ year course , slavery killed about a million Africans , and thousands more chose suicide . Slaves newly arrived from Africa , particularly women , were especially likely to kill themselves ; some thought that in death they could return home to Africa . Pregnant slaves usually did not survive long enough or have healthy enough pregnancies to have live babies , but if they did the children often died young . Food was insufficient , and slaves were expected to grow and prepare it for themselves on top of their already crushing , 12 @-@ hour workdays . It was legal for a slaveholder to kill a slave who hit a white person , according to the 1685 Code Noir , a decree by the French king Louis XIV regulating practices of slaves and slavers . Torture of slaves was routine ; they were whipped , burned , buried alive , restrained and allowed to be bitten by swarms of insects , mutilated , raped , and had limbs amputated . Slaves caught eating the sugar cane would be forced to wear tin muzzles in the fields . 
 The Catholic Church condoned slavery and the practices used in the French colony , viewing the institution as a way to convert Africans to Christianity . 
 About 48 @,@ 000 slaves in Saint Domingue managed to escape ; slaveholders hired bounty hunters to catch these maroons . Those who were not caught and re @-@ enslaved established communities away from settled areas . Maroons would organize raids called <unk> on plantations , stealing supplies that their communities needed to survive , such as food , tools , and weapons . One famous maroon , François <unk> , escaped into the mountains in the middle of the 18th century and went on to plan attacks on plantation owners . <unk> was caught and burned at the stake in 1758 , but his legend lived on to inspire rebellion among slaves — and fear among slaveholders . In addition to escaping , slaves resisted by poisoning slaveholders , their families , their livestock , and other slaves — this was a common and feared enough occurrence that in December 1746 the French King banned poisoning in particular . Arson was another form of slave resistance . 
 The rapid rate of death of slaves during this period set the stage for the Haitian revolution by necessitating the import of more slaves from Africa . These were people who had known freedom , some of whom had been captured as soldiers and had military training . Before the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789 there were eight times as many slaves in the colony as there were white and mixed @-@ race people put together . In 1789 the French were importing 30 @,@ 000 slaves a year and there were half a million slaves in the French part of the island alone , compared to about 30 @,@ 000 whites . 
 = = = Revolutionary period ( 1789 – 1804 ) = = = 
 Sex between male masters and female slaves was so common in Saint Domingue that a separate class had emerged consisting of the mixed @-@ race children of these encounters . It was standard for fathers to free these children , leading them to become a new class more privileged than slaves but less so than whites ; they were called gens de couleur , " free people of color " . Some of these free people of color were quite wealthy and some owned slaves . 
 The French Revolution in 1789 presented an opportunity for Haiti 's middle class , who organized a revolt , which was followed shortly thereafter by a general slave revolt . In 1791 , slaves staged a revolt , massacring whites and torching plantations . By 1801 , the revolt had succeeded , putting Toussaint Louverture into power as Governor General of Haiti . Although slavery was outlawed , Louverture , believing that the plantation economy was necessary , forced laborers back to work on the plantations using military might . 
 With a view towards re @-@ establishing slavery , Napoleon Bonaparte sent his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Charles Leclerc to regain control of Haiti , along with a fleet of 86 ships and 22 @,@ 000 soldiers . The Haitians resisted the soldiers , but the French were more numerous and better positioned , until the rainy season brought yellow fever . As French soldiers and officers died , black Haitian soldiers who had allied themselves with the French began to defect to the other side . 
 = = = Jean @-@ Jacques Dessalines = = = 
 In 1802 , Louverture was arrested and deported to France , where he later died in prison , leaving leadership of the military to Jean @-@ Jacques Dessalines . In 1804 , the French were defeated . France officially gave up control of Haiti , making it the second independent country in the Americas ( after the US ) and the first successful slave revolt in the world . Dessalines was the country 's leader , first naming himself Governor @-@ General @-@ for @-@ life , then Emperor of Haiti . 
 After the revolution , newly freed slaves were violently opposed to remaining on plantations , but Dessalines , like Louverture , used military might to keep them there , thinking that plantation labor was the only way to make the economy function . Most ex @-@ slaves viewed Dessalines ' rule as more of the same oppression they had known during de jure slavery . Dessalines was killed by a mob of his own officers in 1806 . 
 = = = Henri Christophe = = = 
 Dessalines ' successor was King Henry Christophe , another general in the revolution . Christophe , fearing another French invasion , continued in Dessalines ' footsteps fortifying the country . For the construction of one citadel , La Citadelle Laferrière , Christophe is thought to have forced hundreds of thousands of people into laboring on it , killing an estimated 20 @,@ 000 of them . 
 Also like his predecessors Louverture and Dessalines , Christophe used military might to force former slaves to stay on the plantations . Plantation workers under Louverture and Christophe were not unpaid — they received one quarter of what they produced , paying the rest to plantation owners and the government . Under Christophe 's rule it was also possible for black people to rent their own land or work in government , and agricultural workers on plantations could make complaints to the royal administration about working conditions . These ex @-@ slaves may also have sometimes had a choice about what plantation they would work on — but they could not choose not to work , and they could not legally leave a plantation they were " attached " to . Many ex @-@ slaves were probably forced to work on the same plantations they had worked on as slaves . 
 The population 's staunch resistance to working on plantations — owned by whites or otherwise — made it too difficult to perpetuate the system , despite its profitability . Christophe and other leaders enacted policies allowing state land to be broken up and sold to citizens , and the plantation system largely gave way to one in which Haitians owned and farmed smaller lots . 
 = = = Jean @-@ Pierre Boyer = = = 
 In 1817 , a Haitian ship seized a Spanish slave ship bound for Cuba which had entered Haiti ’ s waters , and , acting on standing government orders , brought it ashore . All 171 captive Africans were liberated and joyfully accepted into Haitian society , and President Jean @-@ Pierre Boyer himself served as their godfather . The ship ’ s captain , and later Cuban officials , protested to Boyer that his trade was legal , but Boyer maintained that the 1816 constitution decreed that there could be no slaves in Haitian territory , and no reimbursement could be given for their value . Slave ships had also been seized and their human cargo freed under previous leaders Christophe and Alexandre Pétion , and slaves who managed to take control of ships and arrive in Haiti were given asylum . <unk> quickly learned to avoid Haiti ’ s waters . 
 In 1825 France sent an armada to Haiti and threatened to blockade the country , preventing trade unless Boyer agreed to pay France 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 francs to reimburse it for losses of " property " — mostly its slaves . In exchange , France would recognize Haiti as an independent nation , which it had so far refused to do . Boyer agreed without making the decision public beforehand , a move which met with widespread outrage in Haiti . The amount was reduced to 90 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 francs in 1838 , equivalent to USD $ 19 billion in 2015 . Haiti was saddled with this debt until 1947 , and forced to forgo spending on humanitarian programs such as sanitation . In 1838 , an estimated 30 % of the country 's yearly budget went to debt , and in 1900 , the amount had risen to 80 % . Haiti took out loans from Germany , the US , and France itself to come up with this money , further increasing its debt burden and those countries ' centrality in the Haitian economy . 
 Under new pressure to produce money to pay the debt , in 1826 , Boyer enacted a new set of laws called the Code Rural that restricted agricultural workers ' autonomy , required them to work , and prohibited their travel without permission . It also reenacted the system of <unk> , by which police and government authorities could force residents to work temporarily without pay on roads . These laws met with widespread resistance and were difficult to enforce since the workers ' access to land provided them autonomy and they were able to hide from the government . 
 The United States passed laws to keep Haitian merchants away from US soil because slaveholders there did not want their slaves getting ideas about revolt from the Haitians . However the two countries continued trade , with Haiti purchasing the weapons it needed , albeit at disadvantageous prices . The US embargo of Haiti lasted 60 years , but Lincoln declared it unnecessary to deny the country 's independence once the institution in the US began to be ended . He encouraged newly freed slaves to emigrate there to attain a freedom he did not deem possible in the US . 
 = = = US occupation = = = 
 In July 1915 , after political unrest and the mob murder of Haiti 's president <unk> Guillaume Sam , United States marines invaded Haiti . Prior to the occupation peasants had staged uprisings to resist moves by US investors to appropriate their land and convert the style of agriculture in the area from subsistence back to a plantation @-@ like system — the idea of going back to anything like the plantation system faced fierce resistance . Haitians had been afraid that US investors were trying to convert the economy back into a plantation @-@ based one since US businesses had been amassing land and evicting rural peasants from their family land . Rural Haitians formed armies that roamed around the countryside , stealing from farmers and raping women . The motivation of the US occupation of Haiti was partly to protect investments and to prevent European countries from gaining too much power in the area . One stated justification for the occupation had been the practice of enslaving children as domestic servants ; however the US then reinstituted the practice of forced labor under the corvée system . 
 As had occurred under the regimes of Dessalines and Christophe , unfree labor was again employed in a public works program , this time ordered by the US Admiral William Banks Caperton . In 1916 , the US occupiers employed the corvée system of forced labor allowed by Haiti 's 1864 Code Rural until 1918 . Since the Cacos , Haitian resistance fighters , hid out in remote , mountainous areas and waged guerrilla @-@ style warfare against the marines , the military needed roads built to find and fight them . To build these roads , laborers were forcibly taken from their homes , bound together with rope into chain gangs , sometimes beaten and abused , and resisters were executed . Peasants were told they would be paid for their labor and given food , working near their homes — but sometimes the promised food and wages were meager or altogether absent . <unk> was highly unpopular ; Haitians widely believed that whites had returned to Haiti to force them back into slavery . The brutality of the forced labor system strengthened the Cacos ; many Haitians escaped to the mountains to join them , and many more lent their help and support . Reports of the abuses led the commander of the marines to order an end to the practice in 1918 ; however it continued illegally in the North until it was discovered — no one faced punishment for the infraction . When corvée was no longer available , occupiers turned to prison labor , sometimes having men arrested for the purpose when they had too few laborers . The occupation lasted until 1934 . 
 = = Modern day = = 
 Slavery is still widespread in Haiti today . According to the 2014 Global Slavery Index , Haiti has an estimated 237 @,@ 700 enslaved persons making it the country with the second @-@ highest prevalence of slavery in the world , behind only Mauritania . Haiti has more human trafficking than any other Central or South American country . According to the United States Department of State 2013 Trafficking in Persons Report , " Haiti is a major source , passage , and destination country for men , women , and children subjected to forced labor and sex slavery . " Haitians are trafficked out of Haiti and into the neighboring Dominican Republic , as well as to other countries such as Ecuador , Bolivia , Argentina , Brazil , and North American countries as well . Haiti is also a transit country for victims of trafficking en route to the United States . After the 2010 Haiti earthquake , human trafficking has drastically increased . While trafficking often implies moving , particularly smuggling people across borders , it only requires " the use of force , fraud , or coercion to exploit a person for profit , " and it is understood to be a form of slavery . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Child trafficking is a substantial part of the human trafficking crisis in Haiti . One major form of child trafficking and child slavery , affecting an estimated 300 @,@ 000 Haitian children , is called the restavek system , in which children are forced to work as domestic servants . The restavek system accounts for the lion 's share of human trafficking in Haiti . Families send the children into other households , exchanging their labor for upbringing . Impoverished rural parents hope for education and a better life for their children in the city , sending them to wealthier ( or at least less poor ) households . Increasingly , children enter domestic servitude when a parent dies . Paid middlemen may act as recruiters , fetching the children for the host families . Unlike slaves in the traditional sense , restaveks are not bought or sold or owned , could run away or return to their families , and are typically released from servitude when they become adults ; however , the restavek system is commonly understood to be a form of slavery . 
 Some restaveks do receive proper nutrition and education , but they are in the minority . <unk> ' labor includes hauling water and wood , grocery shopping , laundry , house cleaning , and childcare . <unk> work long hours ( commonly 10 to 14 a day ) under harsh conditions , are frequently denied schooling , and are at severe risk of malnutrition and verbal , physical , and sexual abuse . Beatings are a daily occurrence for most restaveks , and most of the girls are sexually abused , which puts them at an elevated risk for HIV infection . Those who are thrown out or run away from their host homes become street children , vulnerable to exploitation including forced prostitution . Those who return to their families may be unwelcome as an added economic burden or shamed and stigmatized for having been a restavek . The trauma of abuse and the deprivation of free time and normal childhood experiences can stunt a child 's development and have long @-@ lasting effects . 
 The term restavek comes from the French " to live with " , <unk> avec . The practice has been around since the end of the revolution but became common in the 20th century as a way for rural people to cope with poverty . The number of restaveks increased after the 2010 earthquake , when many children became orphans or were separated from their families . The US Department of State estimated in 2013 that between 150 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 children were in domestic servitude , accounting for most of Haiti ’ s human trafficking . About 19 % of Haitian children ages 5 to 17 live away from their parents , and about 8 @.@ 2 % are considered domestic workers . In one survey , restaveks were present in 5 @.@ 3 % of households by their heads ' own admission . In one study , 16 % of Haitian children surveyed admitted to being restaveks . It is estimated that an additional 3 @,@ 000 Haitian children are domestic servants in the Dominican Republic . 
 Children are also trafficked out of Haiti by organizations claiming to be adoption agencies , into countries including the US — but some are actually kidnapped from their families . This practice was particularly widespread in the chaos following the 2010 earthquake . While women migrants were vulnerable during this time , the situation of children was underscored because of the phenomenon of irregular adoptions ( one facet of human trafficking ) of supposed “ orphans ” through the Dominican Republic . International outcry arose when on January 29 , 2010 , ten members of the American New Life Children 's Refuge were arrested trying to take 33 Haitian children out of the country to an orphanage — but the children were not orphans . Traffickers pretending to be workers from legitimate charitable organizations have been known to trick refugee families , convincing them that their children would be taken to safety and cared for . In some cases , traffickers run " orphanages " or " care facilities " for children that are difficult to distinguish from legitimate organizations . Children may be smuggled across the border by paid traffickers claiming to be their parents and subsequently forced into laboring for begging rings or as servants . Child trafficking spurred Unicef to fund the Brigade de Protection des <unk> , a branch of the national police that exists to monitor cases of child trafficking , to watch borders and refugee camps for such activity . Children in refugee camps are in particular danger of other kinds of trafficking as well , including sexual exploitation . 
 = = = Sex slavery = = = 
 Although a majority of the modern day slavery cases in Haiti are due to the practice of the restavek system , trafficking for Sexual exploitation in Haiti is a widespread and pressing issue . In recent years , Haiti has become a magnet for sex tourists . Sex slavery includes the practices of coercion , forced prostitution , and trafficking for any sexual purposes . Sheldon Zhang defines sex trafficking as “ migrants [ who ] are transported with the intent to perform sexual services ... and in which the smuggling process is enabled through the use of force , fraud , or coercion . ” Most victims are trafficked for prostitution , but others are used for pornography and stripping . Children tend to be trafficked within their own countries , while young women may be trafficked internally or internationally , sometimes with the consent of their husbands or other family members . 
 Suspicion was raised in 2007 that UN peacekeeping forces ( deployed in 2004 to quell political instability ) were creating an increased demand for sex trafficking after 114 UN soldiers were expelled from Haiti for using prostitutes . In its 2007 yearly report , the US state department found an increase in sex trafficking into Haiti of women and girls to work as prostitutes for peacekeepers . It was the first mention in such a report of women being trafficked into Haiti from the Dominican Republic for sex work . 
 = = = Haitian – Dominican border = = = 
 For decades Haitians have been crossing the Haitian @-@ Dominican border for various reasons , including voluntary and involuntary migration , long- and short @-@ term residence in the Dominican Republic , legal and illegal entry , smuggling , and human trafficking . Haitians move across the Haitian @-@ Dominican border in search of opportunities and they are highly vulnerable to exploitation . In fact , the Dominican Republic has one of the worst records of human rights abuses , including human trafficking , against migrant workers in all of the Caribbean . Haitians in the Dominican Republic are widely disparaged as a migrant minority because of the countries ' proximity . During the dictatorial reign of Jean @-@ Claude Duvalier in the 1970s and 80s , he sold Haitians at bulk rates to work on sugar plantations in the Dominican Republic . 
 Most people who move across the border are women and girls . The migration of Haitian women to the Dominican Republic is intrinsically linked to the “ feminization of migrations ” which is in turn part of the “ new Haitian immigration , ” brought about by changes in labor markets as well as by the fragile situation of women and their families in Haiti . Women migrants are particularly vulnerable to human trafficking , violence and illicit smuggling . When attempting to cross the border , Haitian women are at risk of being robbed , assaulted , raped and murdered , at the hands of smugglers , delinquents and traffickers , both Dominican and Haitian . Given this threat of violence , women turn to alternative , unofficial routes and dependence upon hired <unk> ( informal scouts ) , cousins and other distant family to accompany them across the border . These hired smugglers who have promised to help them , often through force and coercion , trick them instead into forced domestic labor in private homes in Santo Domingo , the capital of Dominican Republic . Hired <unk> also sell women and children into the sex slave trade within the Dominican Republic ( brothels and other venues ) or into sexual slavery as an export . Often , mothers need their young children to help provide for the family , which puts the children in vulnerable positions and allows them to fall prey to predators and traffickers . The number of children smuggled into the Dominican Republic is not known , but a UNICEF estimate placed the number at 2 @,@ 000 in 2009 alone . Haitian officials report that there are three main fates met by children trafficked out of Haiti : domestic work , prostitution , and organ harvesting . 
 Women from the Dominican Republic have also reportedly been trafficked into Haiti to be sex slaves . 
 = = = Government action = = = 
 The 2014 US Trafficking in Persons Report has placed Haiti on the Tier 2 Watch list . The Tier 2 Watch List placement is given to countries whose governments do not fully comply with the Trafficking Victims Protection Act ’ s ( <unk> ) minimum standards , but are making significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance with those standards , and the number of victims of severe forms of trafficking is very significant or significantly increasing . Some of Haiti 's efforts to combat modern day slavery include ratifying several key conventions , including the Universal Declaration on Human Rights ( <unk> ) , the Convention on the Rights of the Child ( CRC ) , the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour , and the ILO Minimum Age Convention . In 2014 Haiti ratified the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children . Conventions such as these , if enforced , could help to combat human trafficking . In 2000 , Haiti signed the UN Protocol to Prevent , <unk> and Punish Trafficking in Persons , especially Women and Children , but has not ratified it . Haiti has not ratified the Convention on Domestic Workers . 
 = = = = Anti @-@ restavek action = = = = 
 In accordance with these international conventions , Haitian law prohibits abuse , violence , exploitation , and servitude of children of any kind that is likely to harm their safety , health , or morals . Additionally , it declares that all children have the right to an education and to be free from degrading and inhumane treatment . Enacted in 2003 , Article 335 of the Haitian Labor code prohibits the employment of children under the age of 15 . Furthermore , an Act passed in June 2003 specifically outlawed the placement of children into restavek service . The law states that a child in domestic service must be treated in the same manner as the biological children of the family ; however it does not contain any criminal sanctions for those who violate its provisions . Despite the enactment of these laws , the practice of restavek persists and grows . Political instability and lack of resources hinder efforts to curtail trafficking in children . 
 = = = = Prosecution and protection = = = = 
 The government took steps to legally address the issue of trafficking of women and children by submitting a bill to Parliament , in response to its ratification of the Palermo Protocol which required it . In 2014 the law CL / 2014 @-@ 0010 was passed , criminalizing trafficking with penalties of up to 15 years of imprisonment . However , enforcement remains elusive . <unk> to combating human trafficking include widespread corruption , the lack of quick responses to cases with trafficking indicators , the slow pace of the judicial branch to resolve criminal cases , and scant funding for government agencies . 
 People displaced by the 2010 earthquake are at an increased risk of sex trafficking and forced labor . The international protections in place for the internally displaced , primarily the 1998 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement , do not apply to earthquake survivors who have crossed an international border . There is nothing protecting the externally displaced , which creates significant protection gaps for those most vulnerable to trafficking — girls and young women — who are treated as migration offenders rather than forced migrants in need of protection . No temporary protected status has been created or granted in the Dominican Republic . 
 Since the 2010 Haiti earthquake , international aid and domestic effort has been focused on relief and recovery , and as a result few resources have been set aside for combating modern day slavery . There are no government @-@ run shelters to aid human trafficking victims . The government refers victims to non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) for services like food and medical care . The majority of victim services are provided by Haitian NGOs such as Foyer l ’ <unk> , Centre d ’ Action pour le <unk> and Organisation des Jeunes Filles en Action that provide accommodation , educational and psycho @-@ social services to victims . Additionally , the IOM has been cooperating with local NGOs and the Haitian Ministry of Social Affairs , the Institute for Social Welfare and Research or the Brigade for the Protection of Minors of the Haitian national police to tackle human trafficking . 
 = = = = Prevention = = = = 
 The government has made efforts to prevent and reduce human trafficking . In June 2012 , the <unk> ( Institut du <unk> Social et de Recherches ) launched a human trafficking hotline and conducted a campaign to raise public awareness about child labor , child trafficking , and child sexual abuse . The government made a hotline to report cases of abuse of restaveks . In December 2012 , the government created a national commission for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor , which involved launching a public awareness campaign on child labor , and highlighting the national day against restavek abuse . In early 2013 , the government created an inter @-@ ministerial working group on human trafficking , chaired by the Judicial Affairs Director of the foreign affairs ministry , to coordinate all anti @-@ trafficking executive branch initiatives . 
 = = = Contributing factors = = = 
 The 2013 Trafficking in Persons Report has identified several individual and structural factors that contribute to the persistence of human trafficking to , through , and out of Haiti , as well as throughout Latin America and the Caribbean . The Haitians at gravest risk of victimization by human traffickers are its poorest people , particularly children . In Haiti , the poorest country in the western hemisphere , over half the population lives on less than a dollar a day and over three quarters live on less than two dollars a day . Severe poverty , compiled with a lack of social services such as education and basic healthcare increases a child ’ s vulnerability to modern slavery . Factors that increase a child 's likelihood of becoming a restavek include illness or loss of one or both parents , lack of access to clean water , lack of educational opportunities , and having access to family in a city . In addition to poverty , individual factors that can lead to exploitation include unemployment , illiteracy , poor educational opportunities , a history of physical or sexual abuse , homelessness , and drug abuse . These individual factors “ push ” people towards pathways of human trafficking and modern day slavery . Oftentimes men , women and children accept slave @-@ like work conditions because there is little hope for better and they need to survive . Some cross national borders in search of positive opportunities , but instead find themselves a part of the exploited work force . Additionally , factors that make people easy targets for traffickers make enslavement more likely . One group at high risk for sexual enslavement and other types of forced labor is internally displaced persons , particularly women and children living in refugee camps , which offer little security . The estimated 10 % of undocumented Haitians , whose births go unreported , are at especial risk of enslavement . 
 Human trafficking along the Haitian @-@ Dominican border persists because both sending and receiving countries have a huge economic stake in continuing the stream of undocumented migration which directly leads to trafficking . Trafficking is a profitable business for traffickers both in Haiti and the Dominican Republic . As long as large economic and social disparities such as poverty , social exclusion , environmental crisis , and political instability exist between the two countries , the trade will continue . 
 There are also structural factors outside of the individual that explain the persistence of modern day slavery in Haiti . The US state department 's Trafficking in Persons report has identified the following eight structural factors that contribute to human trafficking in Latin America and the Caribbean : ( 1 ) the high demand for domestic servants , agricultural laborers , sex workers , and factory labor ; ( 2 ) political , social , or economic crises , as well as natural disasters such as the January 2010 earthquake ; ( 3 ) lingering machismo ( chauvinistic attitudes and practices ) that tends to lead to discrimination against women and girls ; ( 4 ) existence of established trafficking networks with sophisticated recruitment methods ; ( 5 ) public corruption , especially complicity between law enforcement and border agents with traffickers and smugglers of people ; ( 6 ) restrictive immigration policies in some destination countries that have limited the opportunities for legal migration flows to occur ; ( 7 ) government disinterest in the issue of human trafficking ; and ( 8 ) limited economic opportunities for women . The restavek tradition is perpetuated by widespread tolerance for the practice throughout Haiti . Other contributing factors to the restavek system include poverty and lack of access to contraception , education , and employment in the countryside . Poor rural families with many children have few opportunities to feed and educate them , leaving few options other than servitude in the city . 
 = Tsing Yi North Coastal Road = 
 Tsing Yi North Coastal Road , also abbreviated as TYNCR , ( Chinese : <unk> ; Jyutping : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Běi <unk> <unk> ) is a dual carriageway in Tsing Yi , Hong Kong . The road starts at Tsing Tsuen Road , where it travels through the northern part of the island . It ends at Route 3 and Route 8 on the western side of the island at a left @-@ in / left @-@ out interchange , 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) from its eastern terminus . The road was first planned in 1998 to relieve traffic coming from Lantau . It was constructed in 1999 , and was opened in February 2002 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The road starts at the border of the Tsing Ma Control Area , on the eastern exit ramps of the Tam Kong Shan Interchange and the western terminus of Tsing Tsuen Road . The road travels westward , with ramps reemerging from the interchange , which is surrounded by noise barriers . TYNCR then travels across multiple viaducts on the northern side of Tsing Yi , with hills south of the road , and the coastline north of it . About 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from the eastern terminus , TYNCR travels to Tam Kong Shan Road , near a shipyard and a cement factory . The exit ramp is accessible from westbound lanes , and the entrance ramp from Tam Kong Shan Road to eastbound lanes . The road continues eastward and ends at a left @-@ in / left @-@ out intersection , located east of the Lantau Link Visitors Centre . The interchange then connects to Routes 3 and 8 . 
 In 2014 , 15 @,@ 240 vehicles traveled the road between Tam Kong Shan Road interchange and Tsing Tsuen Road . It is measured in average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which measures the amount of traffic daily on average . The road is classified as a District Distributor by the Transport Department . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning for the road began around 1996 , as part of the Tsing Ma Control Area , a small region of highways with special management . The road was to relieve the higher traffic traveling through Tsing Yi , especially with the new Hong Kong International Airport and developments in Lantau being built . The project included the road and its ramps , pedestrian pathways , noise barriers around the highway , surveillance system , and a maintenance centre in Tsing Yi . The Highways Department signed a contract with Gammon Construction Limited for <unk> $ 775 @.@ 6 million in February 1999 , after it invited qualified contractors in October 1998 . Construction began later that month . 
 During construction , techniques were used to prevent air pollution . Water was sprayed on roads , vehicles , and other areas to keep dust from leaving the site . Multiple viaducts , road embankments , and retaining walls were constructed in the project , with a set of walls replaced after its footings were damaged . Construction of the traffic control system began in November 2000 , after the Transport Department signed an agreement with ABB Industrial and Building Systems Limited . The road was opened on February 2 , 2002 , after Donald Tsang inaugurated the road in a ceremony on February 1 . New speed limits were set to 70 kilometres per hour ( 43 mph ) upon opening . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire road is in Kwai Tsing District . 
 = Texas Park Road 3 = 
 Park Road 3 ( PR 3 ) is a 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) Park Road located near Fort Davis , in the U.S. state of Texas . The highway connects the Indian Lodge of Davis Mountains State Park to State Highway 118 ( SH 118 ) . The entire length of the road is located within the park . The highway was constructed in 1933 by the Civilian Conservation Corps . 
 The highway currently has one suffixed route , Park Road 3A , also known as Skyline Drive . This route is 2 @.@ 8 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) long , which is longer than its parent route . This road was created in 1965 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PR 3 's 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) main road begins at SH 118 . Immediately after the intersection , PR 3 divides into two one @-@ way roadways separated by the park headquarters and reuniting just beyond . The road then continues westward through Keesey Canyon one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) passing a couple of small hiking trails to the intersection with PR 3A . Beyond PR 3A , several drives branch off as loops accessing campsites , staff residences , and other park facilities . The road makes a sharp curve and a steep upward grade before ending at Indian Lodge 1 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) west of the intersection with PR 3A . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1924 , the Texas Legislature directed the State Parks Board , a predecessor agency to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department , to consider establishing a major destination park within the Davis Mountains . After the parks board failed to receive appropriations or donated land for a new park , the Legislature then instructed the State Highway Department , which preceded the Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) , to build a Davis Mountains State Park Highway in 1927 . Landowners finally agreed to donate land for the park in 1933 to boost the local economy devastated by the Great Depression . With the creation of the park , a state park highway was no longer necessary , and that highway initially became SH 166 . 
 Construction of PR 3 began in 1933 soon after the establishment of the state park . Like the park , the road was originally constructed by the Civilian Conservation Corps . The road at this time consisted of the main route between the park entrance and Indian Lodge . 
 In 1939 , SH 118 was extended from Fort Davis to Kent over the portion of SH 166 at the terminus of PR 3 . The state ended the SH 166 designation over that same portion in 1941 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in the Davis Mountains State Park , Jeff Davis County . 
 = = Park Road 3A = = 
 Park Road 3A ( PR 3A ) is a 2 @.@ 8 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) suffixed spur of PR 3 . The road travels from a junction with PR 3 to the border of the state park , and provides access to a trail leading to Fort Davis National Historic Site . 
 The road begins at PR 3 and crosses Keesey Creek before turning east in Keesey Canyon . Like PR 3 , the road also has connecting drives acting as loops and cul @-@ de @-@ sacs to campgrounds and park facilities . After leaving the campground , the road begins steeply ascending the ridge between Keesey and Hospital canyons on a climb requiring several switchbacks . The road connects with drives to scenic overlooks , picnic tables , and trail heads before terminating after 2 @.@ 8 miles ( 4 @.@ 5 km ) at a scenic overlook and trail head at the boundary between the park and Fort Davis National Historic Site . 
 Park Road 3A was first created by the CCC in 1933 , when the state park was built . In 1965 , the Texas Department of Transportation numbered the route Park Road 3A . 
 Major junctions 
 The entire highway is in the Davis Mountains State Park , Jeff Davis County . 
 = A Town Called Mercy = 
 " A Town Called Mercy " is the third episode of the seventh series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , transmitted on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2012 . It was written by Toby Whithouse and directed by Saul Metzstein . 
 The episode featured alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) visiting the Wild West , where they encounter a town which is cut off from the rest of the frontier until they hand over Kahler @-@ Jex , an alien doctor , to a cyborg called the Gunslinger . However , the Gunslinger is a product of experiments by Jex to win a civil war on his planet , and the Doctor is unsure of what is the right thing to do . 
 Showrunner Steven Moffat pitched the Wild West theme to Whithouse when thinking of ways to give each episode a distinct theme . Whithouse further developed the theme , including classic Western tropes and a sympathetic villain . " A Town Called Mercy " and the previous episode " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " were the first to enter production for the seventh series . Much of the episode was filmed in March 2012 in the desert area of Almería , Spain , in Mini Hollywood and Fort Bravo , locations used for many Western @-@ set films . Reviewers noted that the episode addressed a moral debate . " A Town Called Mercy " was watched by 8 @.@ 42 million viewers in the UK . Critical reception was generally positive to mixed , with some critical of the Doctor 's actions and pacing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Prequel = = = 
 A prequel to " A Town Called Mercy " was released exclusively onto iTunes , and titled " The Making of The Gunslinger " . It depicts the actual making and formation of the Gunslinger , from a normal humanoid body . It also has an explanation of the making of the Gunslinger in voice @-@ over by Kahler @-@ Jex . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor , Amy , and Rory , while en route to the Day of the Dead festival in Mexico via the TARDIS , instead arrive at the small American Frontier town of Mercy . The Doctor is curious as to a ring of stone and wood that surrounds the town 's border and the availability of electricity to the town ten years too early . They learn from the town 's marshal , Isaac , that they have been kept within town for the last three weeks by " The Gunslinger " , who uses alien weaponry to threaten to kill anyone trying to leave town and blocks the town from receiving any supplies . The Gunslinger has demanded the town turn over " the doctor " , which the Doctor deduces is not himself but a humanoid alien hiding in the marshal 's jail . The alien introduces himself as Kahler @-@ Jex , who had crashed on Earth about ten years earlier , and was rescued from his craft by the town ; in return , Jex has helped the town as their physician , ending a cholera outbreak and providing the town with primitive electricity . However , the town 's food supplies are nearly empty , and while the situation has become more dire , the marshal is reluctant to hand over Jex . 
 The Doctor offers to get the TARDIS and evacuate the town , riding off on horseback to collect it while Isaac and Rory distract the Gunslinger . The Doctor comes across Jex 's craft and enters it , though in doing so he sets off an alarm heard across the plains . He reviews Jex 's records and discovers that Jex was part of a team of scientists from his war @-@ torn homeworld that experimented on a number of volunteers to convert them into cyborgs , who either died or killed countless people in the battle . <unk> , the Doctor leaves the ship to find the Gunslinger waiting for him , and he realises that the Gunslinger is one of Jex 's subjects . The Gunslinger affirms that he is seeking revenge on those that created him , with Jex being the last member alive ; he further explains that his programming prevents him from harming innocents , creating the ring around Mercy to protect the townsfolk while Jex is in their care , but demands of the Doctor that the next person that crosses that line must be Jex . 
 The Doctor returns to Mercy and angrily drags Jex to the edge of town , followed by his companions and the concerned townsfolk . As he forces Jex to cross the line , Amy asserts that the Doctor has changed for the worse from months of travelling on his own . The Gunslinger arrives and holds his weapon to Jex ; Jex tries to offer that he has become better and rejects his past actions , but this does not sway the cyborg . As the Gunslinger is about to fire , Isaac pushes Jex out of the way , taking the lethal shot . Isaac 's final action is to hand his marshal badge to the Doctor and ask him to protect the town . The Gunslinger leaves , warning that he will return at noon tomorrow to collect Jex , even if it puts the townspeople at risk . 
 During the night , Jex explains his guilt to the Doctor , trying to repent for his past knowing what will await him in his afterlife : his culture believes that upon death , one must carry the souls of everyone they have ever wronged up a mountain , giving Jex an unbearable load . An angry mob of townsfolk arrive to demand Jex , but the Doctor warns by doing so they would have not honored Isaac 's death . Further discussions with Jex provide the Doctor with an idea for a plan . The next day , when the Gunslinger arrives the Doctor distracts it by amplifying the electricity sent through town , while other townsfolk , wearing makeup applied in the same fashion as Jex 's facial markings , dash between buildings to confuse the cyborg . Jex flees out of town to his ship as the Doctor planned , but instead of returning to space , Jex initiates the ship 's self @-@ destruct . Before he dies , Jex explains that no matter where he goes , the Gunslinger will follow and more innocents will be caught in the crossfire . Truly wishing to repent of his past actions , he declares that his last act will be to end the war for the Gunslinger and go to face the souls of those he wronged . The Gunslinger becomes desolate with his quest for revenge complete and the realization that Jex was no worse a person than he is . Recognizing that there is no need for a creature of war during a time of peace , the Gunslinger announces his intent to self @-@ destruct far away from town , but the Doctor suggests that he could become the protector of peace as the new marshal . The Doctor takes Amy and Rory home , while the Gunslinger stays on to watch over Mercy . 
 = = Production = = 
 In looking to give each episode of the series a distinct feel , showrunner Steven Moffat pitched the Wild West theme to writer Toby Whithouse , suggesting that the episode could be about a town terrorised by a robot . Moffat was keen on putting Matt Smith in a Western setting , who he called one of the last people one would expect to replace Clint Eastwood . Whithouse had previously written the Doctor Who episodes " School Reunion " ( 2006 ) , " The Vampires of Venice " ( 2010 ) , and " The God Complex " ( 2011 ) . Moffat had been planning for the first five episodes of the series to have " movie marquee " themes . Whithouse noted that it was a genre he had not written before , but he " absolutely [ loved ] it " . The Wild West has not been a setting for a Doctor Who episode since the 1966 third season serial The Gunfighters . Whithouse was advised not to watch The Gunfighters by the other writers , who said it was " not exactly the jewel in the crown " . Whithouse felt obliged to include common Western tropes , such as the Doctor riding a horse and a face @-@ off . He stated the hardest scene to write was where the Doctor is forced to use a gun ; the Doctor is a pacifist and he would need " the right sort of emotional journey " . 
 Whithouse preferred the cyborg villain to be three @-@ dimensional and sympathetic , which would require it to have a " living consciousness " rather than simply be a " soulless automaton " . He wanted its look to be reminiscent of Frankenstein 's monster , and later called the design " fantastic " . It took about three and a half hours for Andrew Brooke to have all the make @-@ up applied . Due to the costume , Brooke had to act with just his left eye . Smith had praise for guest actors Ben Browder , who he said " [ made ] a good cowboy " with " that great drawl " , and Adrian Scarborough , who he said " steals the whole episode " . Browder was offered the role and gladly accepted ; he was aware of the show as his children had watched it , and he also wanted to do a western . Whithouse was " thrilled " with Browder 's performance , as it was how he imagined the character . 
 " A Town Called Mercy " and the previous episode , " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " , were the first episodes to be produced for the seventh series , and both were directed by Saul Metzstein . The two episodes are Metzstein 's first Doctor Who credits . Much of the episode was filmed around the desert area of Almería , Spain , where studios have built Wild West @-@ style streets that have been used in the making of over 100 Western @-@ set films , such as A Fistful of Dollars . Filming the episode in Spain was cheaper than constructing a set in the UK . Moffat stated , " We knew from the start we need some serious location shooting for this one , and given the most iconic American setting imaginable , there was only one place to go – Spain . " They reportedly filmed there from 8 March to 17 March 2012 . Filming took place at <unk> / Mini Hollywood , and Fort Bravo / Texas Hollywood . While Smith was allowed to try riding the horse , most of the action shown in the episode was done by his stuntman . Composer Murray Gold mimicked Western @-@ style scores when creating the music for the episode . 
 = = Themes = = 
 James F. McGrath of the religious website <unk> found that " A Town Called Mercy " had strong religious themes and moral messages , writing that it " really is about mercy , about forgiveness , about war crimes , about vengeance , and about justice " . He interpreted Amy 's comment about how the Doctor 's behaviour was due to him being alone for too long to mean that " when we loosen our ties to other human beings , we can begin to treat matters of mercy and justice , and the fate of other persons , differently , impersonally " . McGrath also noted a " take @-@ home religious message " in the scene near the end where the town gathers in the church while the Gunslinger and the Doctor face off ; he felt that it emphasised the importance of valuing human life . 
 Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph wrote that the Western concept was " effectively window @-@ dressing for Toby Whithouse 's powerful morality tale , where not everything was quite as it seemed and went on to explore issues of morality , ethics , conscience and justice " . The A.V. Club reviewer Keith Phipps noted that the " never @-@ ending struggle between order and chaos " was common in Westerns , and the episode represented this with the question of " what should win out : Lawless revenge or civilized justice ? " . Ian Berriman of SFX interpreted the border around Mercy as a metaphor for the Doctor nearly " crossing [ the ] line " and " [ breaking ] his own moral code " . He likened the Doctor 's debate to that of the Fourth Doctor ( Tom Baker ) in Genesis of the Daleks ( 1975 ) and the Fifth Doctor ( Peter Davison ) in Resurrection of the Daleks ( 1984 ) . In addition , reviewers noted that the episode presented its characters with " shades of grey " , rather than black @-@ and @-@ white villains typically seen in the show . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " A Town Called Mercy " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One and BBC One HD on 15 September 2012 and on the same date on BBC America in the United States . Overnight ratings showed that it was watched by 6 @.@ 6 million viewers live , the highest overnight figure of the seventh series thus far . It was the third most @-@ watched programme of the day , and was also the most popular programme the next day on BBC iPlayer . It later came in third on the iPlayer chart for September with 1 @.@ 4 million requests , behind the first two episodes of the series . When final consolidated viewers were taking into account the figure rose to 8 @.@ 42 million , also beating " Asylum of the Daleks " to be the highest rated of the series . It also received an Appreciation Index of 85 , considered " excellent " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " A Town Called Mercy " received generally positive to mixed reviews from critics . IGN 's Matt Risely rated the episode 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , calling it " a weighty , progressive , sumptuous and entertaining adventure " . He praised Whithouse and Metzstein for setting the right mood and found the highlight to be the Doctor 's moral uncertainty . Dan Martin of The Guardian described it as " a complex morality dilemma fizzing with sharp dialogue " . He wrote that it was Gillan who " emerged as the real star of the episode " , citing Amy 's conversation with the Doctor about how travelling alone had affected him . The A.V. Club reviewer Keith Phipps gave the episode a B + , enjoying that it spent most of the time discussing the morality issue . 
 The Telegraph 's Fuller awarded " A Town Called Mercy " four out of five stars , calling it " an absorbing , thoughtful , adult piece of drama " . He praised Smith 's toned @-@ down performance and his conversations with Jex . Though he also praised the " well @-@ crafted " scene between the Doctor and Amy , he felt that the episode was " a waste of Gillan and Darvill 's talents " as the two did not feature much . Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery also gave it four stars , commending the Western atmosphere and the way the Doctor 's darkness was handled . He also found Browder to bring an American <unk> to his role that a British actor would not have accomplished . However , like Fuller , he called Amy and Rory 's sidelined role " one of the few downsides " . 
 Slant Magazine reviewer Steven Cooper described it as " a very enjoyable episode " , though he noted that " the conclusion of the story is a slight let @-@ down after the excellence of what has preceded it " because the issues between the Doctor and Jex were left unresolved . Neela Debnath , writing for The Independent , praised the " brilliant twist " in having Kahler @-@ Jex be the villain rather than the Gunslinger . She found the Doctor holding Jex at gunpoint as " completely uncharacteristic " , but interpreted it as foreshadowing Amy and Rory 's departure . Likewise , Charlie Jane Anders from io9 felt that the Doctor 's decision to let Jex die was " out of character " . She criticised the Gunslinger for neither simply using its presumably advanced targeting systems to kill Jex or making the townspeople leave so that he would not have human shields . Additionally , according to her , the episode in general " felt [ ... ] like a Deep Space Nine episode transplanted to the Wild West " . 
 SFX reviewer Ian Berriman gave " A Town Called Mercy " three and a half out of five stars . He commented that the ethical debate made it " a surprisingly mature story " , but otherwise the Western tropes made it " occasionally feel a little over @-@ familiar " . He also felt it was missing " another twist or two " , as most of the episode was dedicated to figuring out what to do with Jex rather than discovering more about him . Berriman also had two " nitpicks " that arose with the plot ; the Gunslinger could just walk into the town and take Jex away , or the Doctor could take Jex away in the TARDIS . Dave Golder of the magazine labelled " A Town Called Mercy " as a " disappointing " science fiction Western episode , writing , " There are some great things about this episode ... But in a show that usually has a lot of fun reinventing TV tropes , too much of " A Town Called Mercy " feels a bit been @-@ there , done that . " Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times was more critical , writing that he did not " believe " or " feel " it . He felt that Westerns and Doctor Who were two things that " never quite gelled " and also criticised the " languorous pace " the fact that Rory had little to do . However , he did praise the " gorgeous " set and the " cleverly constructed a morality play " . 
 = Object permanence = 
 Object permanence is the understanding that objects continue to exist even when they cannot be observed ( seen , heard , touched , smelled or sensed in any way ) . This is a fundamental concept studied in the field of developmental psychology , the subfield of psychology that addresses the development of infants ' and children 's social and mental capacities . There is not yet scientific consensus on when the understanding of object permanence emerges in human development . 
 Jean Piaget , the Swiss psychologist who first studied object permanence in infants , argued that object permanence is one of an infant 's most important accomplishments , as without this concept , objects would have no separate , permanent existence . In Piaget 's theory of cognitive development infants develop this understanding by the end of the " sensorimotor stage , " which lasts from birth to about two years of age . Piaget thought that an infant 's perception and understanding of the world depended on their motor development , which was required for the infant to link visual , tactile and motor representations of objects . According to this view , it is through touching and handling objects that infants develop object permanence . 
 = = Early research = = 
 Child development expert Jean Piaget conducted experiments that collected behavioral tests on infants . Piaget studied object permanence by observing infants ' reactions when a favorite object or toy was presented and then was covered with a blanket or removed from sight . Object permanence is considered to be one of the earliest methods for evaluating working memory . An infant that has started to develop object permanence might reach for the toy or try and grab the blanket off the toy . Infants that have not yet developed this might appear confused . Piaget interpreted these behavioral signs as evidence of a belief that the object had ceased to exist . Reactions of most infants that had already started developing object permanence were of frustration because they knew it existed , but didn 't know where it was . However , the reaction of infants that had not yet started developing object permanence was more oblivious . If an infant searched for the object , it was assumed that they believed it continued to exist . 
 Piaget concluded that some infants are too young to understand object permanence , which explains why they do not cry when their mothers are gone ( " out of sight , out of mind " ) . A lack of object permanence can lead to A @-@ not @-@ B errors , where children reach for a thing at a place where it should not be . Older infants are less likely to make the A @-@ not @-@ B error because they are able to understand the concept of object permanence more than younger infants . However , researchers have found that A @-@ not @-@ B errors do not always show up consistently . They concluded that this type of error might be due to a failure in memory or the fact that infants usually tend to repeat a previous motor behavior . 
 = = Stages = = 
 In Piaget 's formulation , there are six stages of object permanence . These are : 
 0 – 1 months : Reflex Schema Stage – Babies learn how the body can move and work . Vision is blurred and attention spans remain short through infancy . They aren 't particularly aware of objects to know they have disappeared from sight . However , babies as young as 7 minutes old prefer to look at faces . The three primary achievements of this stage are : sucking , visual tracking , and hand closure . 
 1 – 4 months : Primary Circular Reactions – Babies notice objects and start following their movements . They continue to look where an object was , but for only a few moments . They ' discover ' their eyes , arms , hands and feet in the course of acting on objects . This stage is marked by responses to familiar images and sounds ( including parent 's face ) and anticipatory responses to familiar events ( such as opening the mouth for a spoon ) . The infant 's actions become less reflexive and intentionality emerges . 
 4 – 8 months : Secondary Circular Reactions – Babies will reach for an object that is partially hidden , indicating knowledge that the whole object is still there . If an object is completely hidden however the baby makes no attempt to retrieve it . The infant learns to coordinate vision and comprehension . Actions are intentional but the child tends to repeat similar actions on the same object . Novel behaviors are not yet imitated . 
 8 – 12 months : Coordination of Secondary Circular Reactions – This is deemed the most important for the cognitive development of the child . At this stage the child understands causality and is goal directed . The very earliest understanding of object permanence emerges , as the child is now able to retrieve an object when its concealment is observed . This stage is associated with the classic A @-@ not @-@ B error . After successfully retrieving a hidden object at one location ( A ) , the child fails to retrieve it at a second location ( B ) . 
 12 – 18 months : Tertiary Circular Reaction – The child gains means @-@ end knowledge and is able to solve new problems . The child is now able to retrieve an object when it is hidden several times within his or her view , but cannot locate it when it is outside their perceptual field . 
 18 – 24 months : Invention of New Means Through Mental Combination – The child fully understands object permanence . They will not fall for A @-@ not @-@ B errors . Also , a baby is able to understand the concept of items that are hidden in containers . If a toy is hidden in a matchbox then the matchbox put under a pillow and then , without the child seeing , the toy is slipped out of the matchbox and the matchbox then given to the child , the child will look under the pillow upon discovery that it is not in the matchbox . The child is able to develop a mental image , hold it in mind , and manipulate it to solve problems , including object permanence problems that are not based solely on perception . The child can now reason about where the object may be when invisible displacement occurs . 
 = = Contradicting evidence = = 
 In more recent years , the original <unk> object permanence account has been challenged by a series of infant studies suggesting that much younger infants do have a clear sense that objects exist even when out of sight . Bower showed object permanence in 3 @-@ month @-@ olds . This goes against Piaget 's coordination of secondary circular reactions stage because infants aren 't supposed to understand that a completely hidden object still exists until they are eight to twelve months old . The two studies below demonstrate this idea . 
 The first study showed infants a toy car that moved down an inclined track , disappeared behind a screen , and then reemerged at the other end , still on the track . The researchers created a " possible event " where a toy mouse was placed behind the tracks but was hidden by the screen as the car rolled by . Then , researchers created an " impossible event . " In this situation , the toy mouse was placed on the tracks but was secretly removed after the screen was lowered so that the car seemed to go through the mouse . Also in the 1991 study the researchers used an experiment involving two differently sized carrots ( one tall and one short ) in order to test the infants response when the carrots would be moved behind a short wall . The wall was specifically designed to make the short carrot disappear , as well as tested the infants for habituation patterns on the disappearance of the tall carrot behind the wall ( impossible event ) . Infants as young as 3 ½ months displayed greater stimulation toward the impossible event and much more habituation at the possible event . This indicated that they may have been surprised by the impossible event , which suggested they remembered not only that the toy mouse still existed ( object permanence ) but also its location . The same was true of the tall carrot in the second experiment . This research suggests that infants understand more about objects earlier than Piaget proposed . 
 There are primarily four challenges to Piaget 's framework : 
 Whether or not infants without disabilities actually demonstrate object permanence earlier than Piaget claimed . 
 There is disagreement about the relative levels of difficulty posed by the use of various types of covers and by different object positions . 
 Controversy concerns whether or not object permanence can be achieved or measured without the motor acts that Piaget regarded as essential . 
 The nature of inferences that can be made from the A @-@ not @-@ B error has been challenged . Studies that have contributed to this discussion have examined the contribution of memory limitations , difficulty with spatial localization , and difficulty in inhibiting the motor act of reaching to location A on the A @-@ not @-@ B error . 
 One criticism of Piaget 's theory is that culture and education exert stronger influences on a child 's development than Piaget maintained . These factors depend on how much practice their culture provides in developmental processes , such as conversational skills . 
 = = In animals = = 
 Experiments in non @-@ human primates suggest that monkeys can track the displacement of invisible targets , that invisible displacement is represented in the prefrontal cortex , and that development of the frontal cortex is linked to the acquisition of object permanence . Various evidence from human infants is consistent with this . For example , formation of synapses in the frontal cortex peaks during human infancy , and recent experiments using near infrared spectroscopy to gather neuroimaging data from infants suggests that activity in the frontal cortex is associated with successful completion of object permanence tasks . 
 However , many other types of animals have been shown to have the ability for object permanence . These include dogs , cats , and a few species of birds such as the carrion crow and food @-@ storing magpies . Dogs are able to reach a level of object permanence that allows them to find food after it has been hidden beneath one of two cups and rotated 90 ° . Similarly , cats are able to understand object permanence but not to the same extent that dogs can . Cats fail to understand that if they see something go into an apparatus in one direction that it will still be there if the cat tries to enter from another direction . A longitudinal study found that carrion crows were able to reach the same level of object permanence as humans . There was only one task , task 15 , that the crows were not able to master . Another study tested the comparison of how long it took food @-@ storing magpies to develop the object permanence necessary for them to be able to live independently . The research suggests that these magpies followed a very similar pattern as human infants while they were developing . 
 = = Recent studies = = 
 One of the areas of focus on object permanence has been how physical disabilities ( blindness , cerebral palsy and deafness ) and intellectual disabilities ( Down syndrome , etc . ) affect the development of object permanence . In a study that was performed in 1975 @-@ 76 , the results showed that the only area where children with intellectual disabilities performed more weakly than children without disabilities was along the lines of social interaction . Other tasks , such as imitation and causality tasks , were performed more weakly by the children without disabilities . However , object permanence was still acquired similarly because it was not related to social interaction . 
 Some psychologists believe that ' while object permanence alone may not predict communicative achievement , object permanence along with several other sensorimotor milestones , plays a critical role in , and interacts with , the communicative development of children with severe disabilities ' . This was observed in 2006 , in a study recognizing where the full mastery of object permanence is one of the milestones that ties into a child 's ability to engage in mental representation . Along with the relationship with language acquisition , object permanence is also related to the achievement of self @-@ recognition . This same study also focused specifically on the effects that Down syndrome has on object permanence . They found that the reason why the children that participated were so successful in acquiring object permanence , was due to their social strength in imitation . Along with imitation being a potential factor in the success , another factor that could impact children with Down syndrome could also be the willingness of the child to cooperate . 
 Other , more recent studies suggest that the idea of object permanence may not be an innate function of young children . While , in reference to Piaget 's theory , it has been established that young children develop object permanence as they age , the question arises : does this occur because of a particular perception that already existed within the minds of these young children ? Is object permanence really an inbred response to the neural pathways developing in young minds ? Studies suggest that a multitude of variables may be responsible for the development of object permanence rather than a natural talent of infants . Evidence suggests that infants use a variety of cues while studying an object and their perception of the object 's permanence can be tested without physically hiding the object . Rather , the object is occluded , slightly obstructed , from the infants view and they are left only other visual cues , such as examining the object from different trajectories . It was also found that the longer an infant focuses on an object may be due to detected discontinuities in their visual field , or the flow of events , with which the infant has become familiar . 
 = FN 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm = 
 The FN 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm is a small @-@ caliber , high @-@ velocity cartridge designed and manufactured by FN Herstal in Belgium . It is a bottlenecked <unk> cartridge that is somewhat similar to the .22 Hornet or .22 K @-@ Hornet . The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm was developed in conjunction with the FN P90 personal defense weapon ( PDW ) and FN Five @-@ seven pistol , in response to NATO requests for a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge . 
 In 2002 and 2003 , NATO conducted a series of tests with the intention of standardizing a PDW cartridge as a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge . The tests compared the relative merits of the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge and the 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm cartridge , which was created by Heckler & Koch as a competitor to the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm . The NATO group subsequently recommended the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge , citing superior performance in testing , but the German delegation objected and the standardization process was indefinitely halted . 
 By 2006 , FN 's 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms — the P90 personal defense weapon and Five @-@ seven pistol — were in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations throughout the world . In the United States , 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms are currently used by numerous law enforcement agencies , including the U.S. Secret Service . 
 In addition to being used in the FN P90 and FN Five @-@ seven firearms , the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge has subsequently been used in a number of other weapons , such as the AR @-@ 57 and FN PS90 carbines . Excel Arms has developed four firearms chambered in 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm , and <unk> Arms offers three different firearms in 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm . The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge itself is produced in a number of varieties , two of which — the SS195LF and SS197SR — are currently offered by FN to civilian shooters . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge was designed in response to NATO requests for a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge . According to the NATO requirement , the new cartridge was to have greater range , accuracy , and terminal performance than the 9 × 19mm cartridge . Additionally , it was to be capable of penetrating body armor . FN Herstal responded to the NATO requirement by developing the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge and two associated weapons : the FN P90 personal defense weapon ( PDW ) and FN Five @-@ seven pistol . 
 The original 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge , called the SS90 , was introduced in 1990 . It used a 1 @.@ 5 gram ( 23 grain ) plastic @-@ core projectile , which was propelled at a muzzle velocity of roughly 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) when fired from the P90 . A United States patent application for the projectile design used in the SS90 was filed by FN 's Jean @-@ Paul Denis and Marc <unk> in 1989 . U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 012 @,@ 743 ( " High @-@ Performance Projectile " ) was received in 1991 . 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm SS90 cartridge was discontinued , and replaced , in 1993 , with the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm SS190 . The SS190 uses a 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mm ( 0 @.@ 11 in ) shorter projectile with a weight of 2 @.@ 0 g ( 31 grains ) , which has , when fired from the P90 , a muzzle velocity of roughly 715 m / s ( 2 @,@ 350 ft / s ) . The shorter length of the SS190 projectile allows it to be more conveniently used in the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm FN Five @-@ seven pistol , which was also being developed at that time . 
 In 1993 , FN introduced a modified version of the P90 with a magazine adapted to use the SS190 cartridge . Several specialized 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm varieties were also developed alongside the SS190 , such as the L191 tracer round and the subsonic SB193 bullet for sound @-@ suppressed use . The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm chambered FN Five @-@ seven pistol then went into production in 1998 . 
 = = = NATO evaluation = = = 
 In 2002 and 2003 , NATO conducted a series of tests with the intention of standardizing a PDW cartridge as a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum . The tests compared the relative merits of the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge and the HK 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm cartridge , which was created by German small arms manufacturer Heckler & Koch as a competitor to the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm . The results of the NATO tests were analyzed by a group formed of experts from Canada , France , the United Kingdom , and the United States , and the group 's conclusion was that the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm was " undoubtedly " the more efficient cartridge . 
 Among other points , the NATO group cited superior effectiveness ( 27 percent greater ) for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm against unprotected targets and equal effectiveness against protected targets . It also cited less sensitivity to extreme temperatures for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm , and cited a greater potential risk of barrel erosion with the 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm . In addition , the group pointed out that 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm is close to the 5 @.@ 56 × 45mm NATO by its design and manufacture process , allowing it to be manufactured on existing production lines . The group also noted that 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms had existed for a longer period of time than 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm firearms , and that the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm FN Five @-@ seven pistol was already in production at that time , while the 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm Heckler & Koch UCP pistol was a new concept . 
 However , the German delegation and others rejected the NATO recommendation that 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm be standardized , halting the standardization process indefinitely . As a result , both the 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm and 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridges ( and the associated weapons ) have been independently adopted by various NATO countries , according to preference ; both the P90 and Five @-@ seven are currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations throughout the world . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 In 2004 , the SS192 hollow @-@ point cartridge was introduced to civilian shooters alongside the new IOM variant of the Five @-@ seven pistol . After being met with controversy , the SS192 variety was discontinued in the same year , and in 2005 the SS196SR variety was introduced using a 2 @.@ 6 g ( 40 grain ) Hornady V @-@ Max projectile . The SS196 was also quickly discontinued in favor of the newer SS195LF and SS197SR varieties , which are currently offered to civilian shooters for use in 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms , followed by the SS198LF variety , which is currently produced but is restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers . 
 FN 's 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition types were briefly manufactured by Olin @-@ Winchester , but today they are made by FN Herstal in Belgium and ( since 2006 ) <unk> in the United States . In 2009 , the National Rifle Association added 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms to its NRA Tactical Police Competition standards , allowing law enforcement agencies to compete in this event using 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms . Starting in 2012 , Federal began producing a new 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm round for civilian shooters , designated the AE5728A . 
 = = Design details = = 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge was designed by FN Herstal specifically for use in the FN P90 personal defense weapon and FN Five @-@ seven pistol . Subsequently , it has been used in a number of other weapons , such as the FN PS90 carbine and the AR @-@ 57 , an upper receiver for M16 and AR @-@ 15 rifles . The ST Kinetics <unk> can be configured for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge by changing the barrel and magazine groups . Excel Arms has developed four firearms chambered in 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm , and <unk> Arms offers three different 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms . 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge weighs 6 @.@ 0 grams ( 93 grains ) — roughly half as much as a typical 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge — making extra ammunition less burdensome , or allowing more ammunition to be carried for the same weight . Since the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge also has a relatively small diameter , a relatively high number of cartridges can be contained in a magazine . The cartridge has a loud report and produces considerable muzzle flash ( when fired from a pistol ) , but it has roughly 30 percent less recoil than the 9 × 19mm cartridge , improving controllability . Due to its high velocity , the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm also exhibits an exceptionally flat trajectory . 
 One of the design intents of the SS190 variety of this cartridge was that it have the ability to penetrate Kevlar protective vests — such as the NATO CRISAT vest — that will stop conventional pistol bullets . Fired from the P90 , the SS190 is capable of penetrating the CRISAT vest at a range of 200 m ( 219 yd ) , or a Level IIIA Kevlar vest at the same range . However , sporting variants of the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm are classified by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) as not armor @-@ piercing . 
 According to FN , the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge has an effective range of 200 m ( 219 yd ) and a maximum range of 1 @,@ 800 m ( 1 @,@ 969 yd ) when fired from the P90 , and an effective range of 50 m ( 55 yd ) and a maximum range of 1 @,@ 510 m ( 1 @,@ 651 yd ) when fired from the Five @-@ seven . In testing , the SS190 and similar 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm projectiles consistently turn base over point ( " tumble " ) as they pass through ballistic gelatin and other media , using the 21 @.@ 6 @-@ mm ( .85 in ) projectile length to create a larger wound cavity . However , some are skeptical of the bullet 's terminal performance , and it is a subject of debate among civilian shooters in the United States . 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm projectile potentially poses less risk of collateral damage than conventional pistol bullets , because the projectile design limits overpenetration , as well as risk of ricochet . The lightweight projectile also poses less risk of collateral damage in the event of a miss , because it loses much of its kinetic energy after traveling only 400 m ( 437 yd ) , whereas a conventional pistol bullet such as the 9 × 19mm retains significant energy beyond 800 m ( 875 yd ) . This range exceeds the engagement distances expected for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge 's intended applications , so the cartridge 's limited energy at long range is not conversely considered to be disadvantageous . 
 Since the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm SS190 projectile does not rely on fragmentation or the expansion of a hollow @-@ point bullet , the cartridge ( and 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm firearms ) are considered suitable for military use under the Hague Convention of 1899 , which prohibits the use of expanding bullets in warfare . 
 FN 's 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge cases are covered with a special polymer coating for easier extraction with the PS90 carbine due to the high chamber pressures and lack of case tapering . In addition , this coating ensures proper feeding and function in the magazines . 
 = = Cartridge dimensions = = 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm has a cartridge case capacity of 0 @.@ 90 ml ( 13 @.@ 85 grains H2O ) . 
 Americans define the shoulder angle at alpha / 2 ≈ 35 degrees . The common rifling twist rate for this cartridge is 1 : 228 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 : 9 in ) , 8 grooves , Ø lands 
 = 5 @.@ 53 mm , Ø grooves = 
 5 @.@ 62 mm , land width = 1 @.@ 63 mm and the recommended primer type is small rifle . 
 According to the official Commission Internationale Permanente pour l <unk> des Armes à Feu <unk> ( CIP ) guidelines the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm case can handle up to 345 MPa ( 50 @,@ 037 psi ) <unk> pressure . In CIP @-@ regulated countries every rifle cartridge combination has to be proofed at 125 % of this maximum CIP pressure to certify for sale to consumers . 
 = = Cartridge types = = 
 SS90 prototype 
 The SS90 was an early prototype round used only in the earliest examples of the P90 . It used a lightweight 1 @.@ 5 @-@ g ( 23 grain ) full metal jacket bullet with a polymer core , which it propelled at a muzzle velocity of roughly 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The SS90 was abandoned in 1994 in favor of the heavier and 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mm ( 0 @.@ 11 in ) shorter SS190 projectile . 
 SS190 duty 
 The SS190 FMJ , a refinement of the SS90 , was introduced in 1993 . It offered superior performance over the prototype projectile as well as slightly reduced length . The latter change allowed it to be used more conveniently in the Five @-@ seven pistol , also being developed at that time . Fired from the P90 , the SS190 propels a 2 @.@ 0 @-@ g ( 31 grain ) bullet at a muzzle velocity of roughly 715 m / s ( 2 @,@ 350 ft / s ) . It has a steel penetrator and an aluminum core . The SS190 has been manufactured with a plain , black , and a black @-@ on @-@ white tip color . It is classified by the ATF as armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) handgun ammunition , and its sale is currently restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers . 
 In testing done by Houston Police Department SWAT , the SS190 fired from the P90 into bare ballistic gelatin exhibited penetration depths ranging from 28 to 34 cm ( 11 to 13 @.@ 5 in ) . In testing in 1999 by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) , the SS190 fired from the P90 at a distance of 25 m ( 27 yd ) exhibited an average penetration depth of 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 85 in ) in ballistic gelatin after passing through a Level II Kevlar vest . 
 L191 tracer 
 The L191 ( also formerly called the <unk> ) is a tracer cartridge designed for easier bullet spotting in dim light . Combustible chemicals packed in the rear of the L191 projectile create a light trail visible up to 200 m ( 219 yd ) . The L191 has been manufactured with red and red @-@ on @-@ black tips . The performance and trajectory of the L191 is identical to the SS190 . For this reason , it is also classified by the ATF as armor @-@ piercing handgun ammunition , and its sale is currently restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers . 
 SS192 hollow @-@ point 
 The SS192 was discontinued in late 2004 . It used a 1 @.@ 8 g ( 28 grain ) hollow point bullet with a copper jacket and an aluminum core . The projectile had a length of 21 @.@ 6 mm ( .85 in ) . It had an unmarked hollow nose with a depth of 7 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) and a 0 @.@ 8 @-@ mm ( 0 @.@ 03 in ) opening . The SS192 was classified by the ATF as not armor @-@ piercing , and in testing by FNH USA it did not penetrate a Level IIIA vest when fired from the Five @-@ seven . 
 SB193 subsonic 
 The SB193 ( also formerly called the <unk> ) is a speed subsonic cartridge featuring a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ g ( 55 grain ) Sierra Game King <unk> ( FMJ boat tail ) projectile . The SB193 's low muzzle velocity eliminates the distinctive " crack " created by supersonic rounds , and when used in conjunction with a sound suppressor , the muzzle report is also reduced . Due to the greatly decreased muzzle velocity , the SB193 benefits from a slightly reduced recoil force of 1 @.@ 3 <unk> / s . The SB193 can be identified by its white tip color . Its sale is currently restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers . 
 <unk> training 
 The <unk> training round was discontinued in 2002 . It could be considered an early version of the SS192 or <unk> . It used the same 1 @.@ 8 @-@ g ( 28 grain ) copper @-@ jacketed aluminum core bullet , propelled at the same muzzle velocity . It had a green tip . 
 SS195LF ( lead free ) 
 The SS195LF is a commercially available cartridge that features a lead @-@ free primer and produces ballistics similar to the SS192 round , which it replaced in late 2004 . It uses the same 1 @.@ 8 @-@ g ( 28 grain ) copper @-@ jacketed aluminum core bullet as the SS192 , and it can be identified by the unmarked , hollow void at the tip and the silver @-@ colored primer . The <unk> is classified by the ATF as not armor @-@ piercing , and it is currently manufactured by FN Herstal in Belgium . 
 SS196SR ( sporting round ) 
 The SS196SR was introduced in 2005 and it is now discontinued in favor of the SS197SR cartridge . It featured a lead core 2 @.@ 6 @-@ g ( 40 grain ) Hornady V @-@ Max bullet which it propelled at a muzzle velocity of roughly 500 m / s ( 1 @,@ 650 ft / s ) when fired from the Five @-@ seven . The polycarbonate tip used in the V @-@ Max bullet acted as a wedge , enhancing expansion of the bullet . The SS196 was classified by the ATF as not armor @-@ piercing , and in testing by FNH USA it did not penetrate a Level II vest when fired from the Five @-@ seven . The SS196 could be identified by its red polymer tip . 
 SS197SR ( sporting round ) 
 The SS197SR is currently offered to civilian shooters in addition to the SS195LF . It uses the same lead core 2 @.@ 6 @-@ g ( 40 grain ) Hornady V @-@ Max projectile as the SS196SR , but it is loaded for a muzzle velocity roughly 30 @-@ m / s ( 100 ft / s ) higher . The projectile has a blue @-@ colored polymer tip instead of the red color used in the SS196 projectile tip . The <unk> has been manufactured by <unk> , under contract for FN Herstal , since 2006 and it is distributed in the United States by Federal Cartridge Company . 
 SS198LF ( lead free ) 
 The SS198LF uses the same lead @-@ free projectile and primer as the SS195LF , but propels it at roughly a 30 @-@ m / s ( 100 ft / s ) higher muzzle velocity . It has a green painted tip , and its sale is currently restricted by FN to military and law enforcement customers . 
 American Eagle ( AE5728A ) <unk> 
 Since 2012 , Federal Cartridge Company produces a 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm round under their American Eagle brand . Designated the AE5728A , this cartridge uses a 40 @-@ grain total metal jacket ( <unk> ) projectile , that is atypical in that it does not use a copper plated bullet ; sectioned pictures show a very thick full copper jacket . The AE5728A casings are of FN manufacture , and the muzzle velocity is slightly lower than that of the SS197SR . 
 Non @-@ FN ammunition 
 Elite Ammunition manufactures a wide variety of reloaded 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition offerings . Belgian ammunition manufacturer VBR @-@ Belgium has also developed specialized 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm projectiles designed for armor penetration and controlled fragmentation . 
 <unk> is possible with 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition , and 5 @.@ 7 @-@ mm ( .224 in ) bullets are widely available due to use in .223 Remington and 5 @.@ 56 × 45mm NATO cartridges . <unk> have noted that the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge is very sensitive to small changes in powder charge or overall length ( OAL ) with a bullet inserted . Bullets weighing 2 @.@ 6 g ( 40 grains ) or less are recommended for optimal use in 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm applications , but the 1 : 231 mm ( 1 : 9 @.@ 1 in ) rifling twist rate ( distance the bullet must travel to complete one full revolution ) used in the firearms ' barrels will stabilize bullets weighing up to 4 @.@ 5 g ( 70 grains ) . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Fired from the longer 40 @.@ 74 cm ( 16 @.@ 04 in ) barrel of the PS90 , the muzzle velocity of SS195LF is roughly 60 m / s ( 200 ft / s ) faster , and the muzzle velocity of SS197SR is roughly 45 m / s ( 150 ft / s ) faster . Fired from the shorter 12 @.@ 2 cm ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) barrel of the Five @-@ seven pistol , the muzzle velocity of SS195LF is roughly 90 m / s ( 300 ft / s ) slower , and the muzzle velocity of SS197SR is roughly 60 m / s ( 200 ft / s ) slower . 
 = A Newsboy Hero = 
 A Newsboy Hero is an American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . A standard melodrama , it has the alcoholic John Bailey return home in a drunken state . He strikes his wife and by this act drives his wife and child from the house . They go out into the snow and fall asleep , but are saved by a newspaper boy and taken home . John searches for them , but believes they are dead after reading a newspaper story and decides to commit suicide . He is saved by a member of the Salvation Army and then is reunited with his family . The only known credit in the production is that of Marie Eline as the couple 's child , Marie . The film was released on February 24 , 1911 , and it received mixed reviews by critics over its melodramatic plot , but the actors strong skills was the strongest redeeming factor in the negative reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film is a melodrama focuses on a young working man named John Bailey ( alternatively Jack ) . His alcoholism had caused much strife in his home and his wife , May , prays and pleads for him to stop drinking . One night he returns home in a drunken state and strikes her . His wife decides to leave with their child , Marie and goes out into the world without help . They wander in the snow and become exhausted and fall asleep . They are saved from certain death by a cripple newspaper boy named Jim Sands . He brings them back to his home and they take refuge with Jim 's poor family . Realizing his mistake , John searches for his wife and child in vain until he sees a newspaper story ( claimed to be two weeks later ) about the death of a woman and child in the storm . Believing May and Marie are dead , he decides to commit suicide by drowning himself . He is saved by Jim , a member of the Salvation Army and decides that he has to atone for his sins . Jim learns of John and May 's relation and reunites family again . 
 = = Production = = 
 The only known credit in the production is that of Marie Eline as the child , Marie . Thanhouser films , as moral as they were , did not depict the actual violence which would be formally alluded to in the synopsis . The New York Dramatic Mirror 's reviewer would state that the male lead was drunk and stated that he did not drive them from the house . There was no depiction of any violence towards the wife or apparent mention by inter @-@ title of any physical abuse . The synopsis published describes what was not shown , but it also gives names that were not provided for audiences . Thanhouser 's advertising for the film included the tag line " And a child shall lead them " , which is a reference to Isaiah 11 : 6 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on February 24 , 1911 . The film had mixed reviews from critics . The New York Dramatic Mirror reviewer was thorough in the analysis of the film who did not like the production for its poor rehashed story and maudlin melodrama . The characters behavior was not logical and the series of events relied on deus ex machina elements , such as the Salvation Army suddenly decides to march down to the water 's edge , then stop and remain in the background so that they can save his soul at the opportune moment . The reviewer did state that the acting was good . The Billboard ' review agreed that the story was implausible , but agreed that the skill of the actors made it more plausible than it otherwise would have been . The Morning Telegraph and Walton of The Moving Picture News would praise the film for its pathos and heart . The film is presumed lost because the film is not known to be held in any archive or by any collector . 
 = Ziggurat ( video game ) = 
 Ziggurat , stylized as <unk> , is a retro @-@ style arcade shooter video game developed by Action Button Entertainment for iOS platforms . As the world 's last human fighting off incoming alien freaks from atop a ziggurat , the player uses simple touch controls to charge and shoot the enemies away , and dies if hit by an enemy . The game has 16 @-@ bit graphics style and an 8 @-@ bit chiptune soundtrack . Action Button designer Tim Rogers developed the game idea based on his experience with Angry Birds , which later led to his forming Action Button as a company with Ziggurat as its first release on February 17 , 2012 . 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers praised Ziggurat 's nuanced controls and minimalism . Time magazine picked the game as one of the best for the then new high @-@ resolution third generation iPad . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As the " Last Human on Earth " , the player fights off approaching enemies with their laser rifle . The player @-@ character , stationary atop a mountain peak ( ziggurat ) at the top of the world and end of time , attacks incoming mono @-@ eyed alien freaks and dies upon the first hit from any enemy . The player earns a score based on their number of aliens killed before succumbing . The aliens vary in size and shape , from " blue freaks " who pogo like the <unk> from Zelda , to stealth yellow freaks , to shielded , aggressive red freaks , to bullet @-@ sponge giant freaks . 
 There are two shooting modes : Precision and Slingshot . In Precision , players control the shot by sliding their fingers along the bottom of the screen , which calculates the arc and direction of the shot . In Slingshot , like Angry Birds , players draw back their shots like slingshots . The shot grows in power the longer the screen is held , and the shot is fired when the player lets go . Weak shots will also arc down with gravity , and strong shots will decrease in power if held too long . There are no power @-@ ups , no <unk> micropayments , and no pause function , but there are achievements such as living to see the end of the universe . It also integrates " pro @-@ social " features like <unk> and Twitter . 
 Ziggurat uses retro @-@ style 16 @-@ bit graphics and an 8 @-@ bit chiptune soundtrack . The player @-@ character is blonde and dressed in a red jumpsuit , and clouds pass by in parallax motion in the background . The sun 's position in the distance appears as a function of game 's duration . The chiptune soundtrack includes wailing solos , and its pitch appears to intensify with the game 's difficulty . The player 's death is accompanied by a " wince @-@ inducing digital screech " or siren and a " blood @-@ red screen " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Action Button Entertainment was founded by Tim Rogers . The studio consists of Rogers , Brent Porter , Michael Kerwin , and Nicholas Wasilewski , who have built all of the studio 's four games from Ziggurat through Videoball . Their games are consistently simple in their aesthetics and controls . Rogers cited Angry Birds as the inspiration for Ziggurat . He found the former " an incredible collision of game design concepts " that worked , though he wanted the game to be more of a " driving range " where he could throw birds at falling stuff , an idea which he refined into a Raiders of the Lost Ark @-@ themed game of slowly hurling projectiles that push back bats in a corridor with no limit of projectiles . When riding the Bay Area Rapid Transit from Oakland to San Francisco a year later , Rogers watched a man play Angry Birds as he perfected a level , whereupon Rogers decided to make his game idea . He asked his friend and indie developer Adam Saltsman for advice , who confirmed and encouraged Rogers 's interest in trying <unk> , the Adobe Flash tools used to make Saltsman 's Canabalt . Upon deciding that he lacked the expertise , he tweeted to recruit others on the project and received some responses that later fell through . 
 Rogers continued to work as a video game design consultant and met Bob <unk> ( of Bob 's Game ) at the 2010 Game Developers Conference . The two worked on games ( including Ziggurat ) together . Rogers put out a call for artists on Twitter with a submissions request of " fan art of the Japanese box art of Phantasy Star II " , and Action Button artist Brent Porter replied in under an hour with an entry Rogers called " incredible " . In mid 2011 , Rogers decided to work on an iPhone game for a few weeks as a break from a larger project . While <unk> was against the <unk> iPhone as a platform , Rogers said the team was convinced by his design document . He contacted an Internet acquaintance who had previously mocked up a design idea from Rogers 's Kotaku column , programmer Michael Kerwin , who came through in a week with a version without graphics or sound , which was later added . Rogers recorded " some insane and rough music " with his band , Large Prime Numbers , that Andrew Toups converted into an 8 @-@ bit soundtrack in the " original Nintendo sound format " that Rogers found " breathtaking " . His friend , QWOP creator Bennett Foddy deemed the game " sort of interesting " . 
 Six months passed as Rogers worked on a social game before he chose to make a few more changes : more enemy types and progression , graphics in the background , and so emailed people to continue development . Rogers described his own critical list of video games as having minimalist aesthetics with no overt story to tell other than through its game mechanics , and wanted the game to live up to those expectations . He fine @-@ tuned the game with gut @-@ driven decisions . For example , he applied a concept he called " sticky friction " from Super Mario Bros. 3 to the game 's controls . One of the final features was the " scream sound effect " Rogers made with his guitar and " crushed " for a distorted and quasi @-@ digital sound that he compared to those made by eccentric Japanese musicians whose records he owned . 
 Rogers explained that they did not add a pause option because he did not want non @-@ game icons in the screen and because ( like in Contra ) players would die too soon after resuming . He saw the game as simultaneously a " snow globe of an electric toy " and a " gosh darn airtight hardcore video game " homage to the Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis , and called Ziggurat a descendant of his hobbies : Ibara : Black Label and the Rubik 's Cube . Rogers added that the game contained nine hours of scripted events and that the <unk> alien " is only the beginning " . Rogers produced a trailer for the game . It was released for iOS platforms on February 17 , 2012 . Two months later , <unk> , the game 's publisher , signed Ziggurat as the first client for Gimme , an in @-@ game achievement to " real @-@ life rewards " incentive program . The game received two spikes in sales following positive reviews from journalists , and from a mock infomercial 's release on YouTube , all postrelease and not at the time of launch . Brandon Sheffield , writing for Game Developer , thought that Rogers handled the postrelease well since leaking details to the press before the game was available may have impacted sales . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . It won a Destructoid Editors ' Choice Award , and Time magazine picked the game as one of the best for the then new high @-@ resolution third generation iPad . 
 Edge compared the game to a more pleasurable version of Halo : Reach 's final scene . The magazine also compared the feeling of prioritization as a swarm of enemies appear to the feeling of clutter when stacking Tetris blocks haphazardly . Edge also called the red screen and sound effect that flashes upon the player 's death " brash and lo @-@ fi and unexpectedly poignant " , for which they noted Rogers 's interest in noise rock and credited the effect as " a beguiling personal signature " . Alternatively , Paste 's Joe Bernardi thought the sound did not accomplish what it intended . Joseph Leray of TouchArcade noticed how the guitar sound in Gears of War was reaffirming but the opposite in Ziggurat . Edge noted that nuances such as gravity 's influence on the arc of uncharged shots make Ziggurat more of a basketball or golf @-@ like sport skill than a " 2D Halo " . Edge awarded the game a 9 of 10 , adding that it " prized immediacy " in a manner that matched the iOS platform . 
 Eurogamer 's Martin Robinson said the game made him nostalgic for a score attack game from the early 90s that does not exist , and as such called Ziggurat " one of the finer simple score @-@ attack shooters ... on the App Store " and an expression of the golden age of the Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis . He called the game 's mechanics " fine @-@ tuned " and the gun 's abilities collated from the best elements of other video games . Danny Cowan of IndieGames.com likewise found the controls " very well suited " for touchscreens . He also praised the chained explosions and shot charging as " satisfying " , and compared the game to Missile Command in its allure . Robinson of Eurogamer said the game 's deserving peers were Geometry Wars and Robotron for their refined play styles that make players predict what enemies are about to act . TouchArcade 's Leray praised the game design and never reached a place where his skills plateaued . He advised against using the Slingshot mode controls . 
 Joe Bernardi of Paste put Ziggurat in a lineage of iOS games where the player tries to do a fun thing as much as possible before dying , including Canabalt , Bit Pilot , and Super Crate Box . He connected Ziggurat 's mechanics to Rogers 's longstanding interest in " infinite mode " without external rewards , and praised the charge time mechanics as " excellent " and the perfect awkward length to confuse muscle memory . Leray of TouchArcade praised its attention to detail , especially in the character sprites . Paste 's Bernardi called Action Button 's design restraint " admirable " and lauded the game 's balance . He noted its " extremely focused shallowness " as defining , like a Dorito , and called it " one of the best iOS games [ he had ] ever played " . Reviewing for ActionButton.net , indie developer Adam Saltsman called Ziggurat " French New Wave action videogame fan art " . 
 = Kentucky Railway Museum = 
 The Kentucky Railway Museum , now located in New Haven , Kentucky , United States , is a non @-@ profit railroad museum dedicated to educating the public regarding the history and heritage of Kentucky 's railroads and the people who built them . Originally created in 1954 in Louisville , Kentucky , the museum is at its third location , in extreme southern Nelson County . It is one of the oldest railroad stations in the United States . 
 The museum owns four steam locomotives , six diesel locomotives and over a hundred pieces of rolling stock . Four of the pieces are separately on the National Register of Historic Places : the Louisville and Nashville Steam Locomotive No. 152 , the Louisville and Nashville Combine Car Number 665 , the Mt . Broderick Pullman Lounge @-@ <unk> @-@ Sleeping Car , and the Frankfort and Cincinnati Model 55 Rail Car . 
 = = History = = 
 The site of the current museum was built by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad from 1856 to 1857 , on their old line , which ran to Lebanon , Kentucky . The line was of vital importance to the Union cause , making it a frequent target of Confederate forces under John Hunt Morgan , and others , during the 1860s ; the nearby bridge was even destroyed . The railroad station on the site now is a 1990s replica of the station which was built at the site in 1910 . 
 The museum was chartered in 1954 by railroad enthusiasts from Louisville , through the Kentucky General Assembly , who wished to preserve steam locomotives and other rail paraphernalia . One of its very first displays was the Louisville and Nashville # 152 locomotive , a caboose , and a wooden coach . These first donations , including railroad track , were from the Monon Railroad , and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . The museum has moved twice since it was chartered , from its original location in Louisville . The first site was at 1837 East River Road , where the Louisville Soccer Fields are now located . This first location was 6 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 ha ) in size , and was fenced and lighted by the Louisville Parks Department . The site opened for the public on May 30 , 1958 , with its dedication taking place on September 30 , 1957 . The museum eventually left the first location because of flooding from the nearby Ohio River , and a general lack of necessary space . The worst of these floods was in March 1964 . 
 In December 1975 it was decided to move the museum to a larger and safer location . The museum was moved in 1977 to the Ormsby Village area at the corner of La Grange Road and Dorsey Lane on land leased from Jefferson County , and known as Ormsby Station . The Louisville and Nashville # 152 locomotive was left at River Road to be repaired . Ormsby Station was situated on 32 acres ( 13 ha ) . However , the county informed the museum that the lease would not be renewed in 1993 ; the land was in a highly @-@ valuable commercial area . 
 With the edict from Jefferson County , it became necessary to move to the current site in New Haven , which opened on July 4 , 1990 . The original New Haven location was 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) , with a building , and was donated by Lewis and Chester Simms , two New Haven businessmen , along with their wives ( Elizabeth Jo and Nora respectively ) . It used the last eighteen miles remaining of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad 's old Lebanon line , then under the control of CSX Transportation , which had taken control of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad in the 1970s . Train excursions began at the New Haven site in May 1991 . The move also inspired the renovation of the New Sherwood Hotel . 
 Many of the donations to move the museum from Louisville to New Haven were due to the efforts of Glenn Rutherford , a reporter for the Louisville Courier @-@ Journal . During the fund raising for the move Rutherford told many stories regarding the trains at the museum . He was singularly honored for his efforts in November 2003 . 
 The Kentucky Railway Museum faced vandalism concerns in its new location . In June 1992 it became necessary to build a razor wire perimeter fence after three juveniles ( of an average age of twelve ) damaged several of the historic cars and trains . Rich Collins , then the museum director , worried about the facility looking " like Fort Knox or a penal colony " . 
 In 1999 the Kentucky Railway Museum was given a grant by CSX Transportation to start a traveling exhibit . 
 There is one other heritage railroad in Nelson County : My Old Kentucky Dinner Train , which is based at the Old Louisville and Nashville Station in Bardstown , Kentucky . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 Among the steam locomotives is Louisville and Nashville Railroad # 152 , a 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific style that is believed to be the last operating steam locomotive from the L & N. The museum operates a heritage railroad and offers excursion trains on selected weekends in summer and fall . The line is a portion of the L & N 's former main line from Lebanon Junction to Corbin ; the museum operates the segment from Boston to New Haven , with the line having been abandoned east of the museum site . There is a large model train layout and a gift shop at New Haven , in a brick building that is a replica of the former L & N depot there . 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 The old Louisville and Nashville Steam Locomotive # 152 is one of the trains used to take passengers to Boston , Kentucky , and back . It was donated to the museum by Louisville and Nashville Railroad President William H. Kendall in 1957 . It is the oldest known remaining 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific to exist . It is also the " Official State Locomotive of Kentucky " , designated as such on March 6 , 2000 . 
 Another locomotive that dates back to the Kentucky Railway Museum 's early days is Monon Route 's Diesel Engine No. 32 . It was painted black and gold by Monon , and kept as such , to match the school colors of Purdue University , located in West Lafayette , Indiana . It was purchased by Monon in 1948 , and then acquired by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad in August 1971 . It became a display at the museum in 1972 . 
 = = = Rail Cars = = = 
 Several historic rail cars are at the facility . 
 The Louisville and Nashville Combine Car Number 665 was one of only two " two wood side steel " train cars ever made . It was designed for the times of the Jim Crow laws ; whichever end was the front during the trip would hold white passengers , while the rear held black passengers . It was given to the Kentucky Railway Museum by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad in 1958 . During the Civil War Centennial observances of the 1960s this car was pulled by the famous Civil War @-@ era steam locomotive The General , touring various parts of the Eastern U.S. rail network . 
 The Mt . Broderick Pullman Car was a four @-@ star hotel on rails , with polished brass restroom fixtures , and pull out beds . The Pullman Company sold the car to the museum in 1958 . 
 The other historic car at the facility on the National Register is the Frankfort and Cincinnati Model 55 Rail Car , also known as The Cardinal due to its red color . It is a gas @-@ powered motor rail car that formerly ran the Frankfort and Cincinnati Railroad 's " Whiskey Route " between Frankfort , Kentucky and Paris , Kentucky . 
 = = = Excursions = = = 
 Train rides leave regularly from the museum to Boston , Kentucky , and back , with picturesque views of the Rolling Fork River Valley along the way . The train crosses roads fourteen times on a single one @-@ way trip . The total trip is 22 miles ( 35 km ) and lasts approximately one hour . At various times special excursions will involve themes such as train robberies , haunted trains , Easter Bunny , Santa Claus , and Thomas the Tank Engine . 
 = = = Exhibits = = = 
 One of the buildings at the facility holds a model train display . The model trains are in glass covered dioramas , covering a total area of 3 @,@ 000 square feet ( 280 m2 ) . <unk> include a German @-@ landscape featuring a village and carnival , and another depicting convicts working on placing rails . 
 = Winter service vehicle = 
 A winter service vehicle ( <unk> ) , or snow removal vehicle , is used to clear thoroughfares of ice and snow . Winter service vehicles are usually based on a dump truck chassis , with adaptations allowing them to carry specially designed snow removal equipment . Many authorities also use smaller vehicles on sidewalks , footpaths , and cycleways . Road maintenance agencies and contractors in temperate or polar areas often own several winter service vehicles , using them to keep the roads clear of snow and ice and safe for driving during winter . Airports use winter service vehicles to keep both aircraft surfaces , and runways and taxiways free of snow and ice , which , besides endangering aircraft takeoff and landing , can interfere with the aerodynamics of the craft . 
 The earliest winter service vehicles were snow rollers , designed to maintain a smooth , even road surface for sleds , although horse @-@ drawn snowplows and gritting vehicles are recorded in use as early as 1862 . The increase in motor car traffic and aviation in the early 20th century led to the development and popularisation of large motorised winter service vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 Although snow removal dates back to at least the Middle Ages , early attempts merely involved using a shovel or broom to remove snow from walkways and roads . Before motorised transport , snow removal was seen as less of a concern ; unpaved roads in rural areas were dangerous and bumpy , and snow and ice made the surface far smoother . Most farmers could simply replace their wagons with sleds , allowing the transport of heavy materials such as timber with relative ease . Early communities in the northern regions of the United States and Canada even used animal @-@ drawn snow rollers , the earliest winter service vehicles , to compress the snow covering roads . The compression increased the life of the snow and eased passage for sleds . Some communities even employed snow wardens to spread or " pave " snow onto exposed areas such as bridges , to allow sleds to use these routes . 
 However , with the increase in paved roads and the increasing size of cities , snow @-@ paving fell out of favour , as the resultant slippery surfaces posed a danger to pedestrians and traffic . The earliest patents for snowplows date back to 1840 , but there are no records of their actual use until 1862 , when the city of Milwaukee began operating horse @-@ drawn carts fitted with snowplows . The horse @-@ drawn snowplow quickly spread to other cities , especially those in areas prone to heavy snowfall . 
 The first motorised snowplows were developed in 1913 , based on truck and tractor bodies . These machines allowed the mechanisation of the snow clearing process , reducing the labor required for snow removal and increasing the speed and efficiency of the process . The expansion of the aviation industry also acted as a catalyst for the development of winter service vehicles during the early 20th century . Even a light dusting of snow or ice could cause an aeroplane to crash , so airports erected snow fences around airfields to prevent snowdrifts , and began to maintain fleets of vehicles to clear runways in heavy weather . 
 With the popularisation of the motor car , it was found that plowing alone was insufficient for removing all snow and ice from the roadway , leading to the development of gritting vehicles , which used sodium chloride to accelerate the melting of the snow . Early attempts at gritting were resisted , as the salt used encouraged rusting , causing damage to the metal structures of bridges and the shoes of pedestrians . However , as the number of motoring accidents increased , the protests subsided and by the end of the 1920s , many cities in the United States used salt and sand to clear the roads and increase road safety . As environmental awareness increased through the 1960s and 1970s , gritting once again came under criticism due to its environmental impact , leading to the development of alternative de @-@ icing chemicals and more efficient spreading systems . 
 = = Design = = 
 Winter service vehicles are usually based on a dump truck chassis , which are then converted into winter service vehicles either by the manufacturer or an aftermarket third @-@ party . A typical modification involves the replacement of steel components of the vehicle with corrosion resistant aluminium or fibreglass , waterproofing any exposed electronic components , replacement of the stock hopper with a specially designed gritting body , the addition of a plow frame , reinforcement of the wheels , bumpers to support the heavy blade , and the addition of extra headlamps , a light bar , and <unk> for visibility . 
 Other common changes include the replacement of the factory stock tires with rain tires or mud and snow tires and the shortening of the vehicle 's wheelbase to improve maneuverability . For smaller applications smaller trucks are used . In Canada pickup trucks are used with snow removal operations with a blade mounted in front and optional de @-@ icing equipment installed in the rear . <unk> scrapers are also used by some agencies and are mounted between axles , distributing plowing stresses on the chassis more evenly . 
 In most countries , winter service vehicles usually have amber light bars , which are activated to indicate that the vehicle is operating below the local speed limit or otherwise poses a danger to other traffic , either by straddling lanes or by spreading grit or de @-@ icer . In some areas , such as the Canadian province of Ontario , winter service vehicles use the blue flashing lights associated with emergency service vehicles , rather than the amber or orange used elsewhere . Many agencies also paint their vehicles in high @-@ contrast orange or yellow to allow the vehicles to be seen more clearly in whiteout conditions . 
 Some winter service vehicles , especially those designed for use on footpaths or pedestrian zones , are built on a far smaller chassis using small tractors or custom made vehicles . These vehicles are often multi @-@ purpose , and can be fitted with other equipment such as brushes , lawnmowers or cranes — as these operations are generally unable to run during heavy snowfalls , there is generally little overlap between the different uses , reducing the size of the fleet required by the agency or contractor . 
 Modern winter service vehicles will usually also have a satellite navigation system connected to a weather forecast feed , allowing the driver to choose the best areas to treat and to avoid areas in which rain is likely , which can wash away the grit used — the most advanced can even adapt to changing conditions , ensuring optimal gritter and plow settings . Most run on wheels , often with snow chains or studded tires , but some are mounted on caterpillar tracks , with the tracks themselves adapted to throw the snow towards the side of the road . Off @-@ road winter service vehicles mounted on caterpillar tracks are known as snowcats . <unk> are commonly fitted with snowplows or snow groomers , and are used by ski resorts to smooth and maintain pistes and snowmobile runs , although they can also be used as a replacement for chairlifts . 
 Military winter service vehicles are heavily armoured to allow for their use in combat zones , especially in Arctic and mountain warfare , and often based on combat bulldozers or Humvees . Military winter service vehicles have been used by the United Nations , Kosovo Force , and the US Army in Central Europe during the Kosovo War , while during the Cold War , the Royal Marines and Royal Corps of Signals deployed a number of tracked vehicles in Norway to patrol the NATO border with the Soviet Union . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Winter service vehicles are operated by both government agencies and by private subcontractors . Public works in areas which regularly receive snowfall usually maintain a fleet of their own vehicles or pay retainers to contractors for priority access to vehicles in winter , while cities where snow is a less regular occurrence may simply hire the vehicles as needed . Winter service vehicles in the United Kingdom are the only road @-@ going vehicles entitled to use red diesel . Though the vehicles still use public highways , they are used to keep the road network operational , and forcing them to pay extra tax to do so would discourage private contractors from assisting with snow removal on public roads . Winter service vehicle drivers in the United States must hold a Class A or Class B commercial driver 's license . Although some agencies in some areas , such as the US state of Minnesota , allow winter service vehicle drivers to operate without any extra training , most provide supplemental lessons to drivers to teach them the most effective and safe methods of snow removal . Many require that trainee drivers ride @-@ along with more experienced drivers , and some even operate specially designed driving simulators , which can safely replicate dangerous winter driving conditions . Other organisations require that all staff have a recognised additional licence or certificate — the United Kingdom Highways Agency for example requires that all staff have both a City & Guilds qualification and a supplemental Winter Maintenance Licence . 
 Winter service vehicle drivers usually work part time , before and during inclement weather only , with drivers working a 12- to 16 @-@ hour shift . Main roads are typically gritted in advance , to reduce the disruption to the network . Salt barns are provided at regular intervals for drivers to collect more grit , and bedding is provided at road maintenance depots for drivers to use between shifts in heavy or prolonged storms . 
 Weather conditions typically vary greatly depending on altitude ; hot countries can experience heavy snowfall in mountainous regions yet receive very little in low @-@ lying areas , increasing the accident rate among drivers inexperienced in winter driving . In addition , road surface temperatures can fall rapidly at higher altitudes , precipitating rapid frost formation . As a result , gritting and plowing runs are often prioritised in favour of clearing these mountain roads , especially at the start and end of the snow season . The hazardous roads through mountain passes pose additional problems for the large winter service vehicles . The heavy metal frame and bulky grit makes hill climbing demanding for the vehicle , so vehicles have extremely high torque transmission systems to provide enough power to make the climb . Furthermore , because the tight hairpin turns found on mountain slopes are difficult for long vehicles to navigate , winter service vehicles for use in mountainous areas are shortened , usually from six wheels to four . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = De @-@ icer = = = 
 De @-@ <unk> spray heated de @-@ icing fluid , often propylene glycol or ethylene glycol , onto icy surfaces such as the bodies of aircraft and road surfaces . These prevent ice from forming on the body of the aircraft while on the ground . Ice makes the surface of the wings rougher , reducing the amount of lift they provide while increasing drag . The ice also increases the weight of the aircraft and can affect its balance . 
 Aircraft de @-@ icing vehicles usually consist of a large tanker truck , containing the concentrated de @-@ icing fluid , with a water feed to dilute the fluid according to the ambient temperature . The vehicle also normally has a cherry picker crane , allowing the operator to spray the entire aircraft in as little time as possible ; an entire Boeing 737 can be treated in under 10 minutes by a single de @-@ icing vehicle . 
 In road snow and ice control , brine is often used as an anti @-@ icer rather than a de @-@ icer . A vehicle carries a tank of brine , which is sprayed on the road surface before or at the onset of the storm . This keeps snow and ice from adhering to the surface and makes mechanical removal by plows easier . Solid salt is also wetted with brine or other liquid <unk> . This speeds de @-@ icing action and helps keep it from bouncing off the pavement into the gutter or ditch . Brine acts faster than solid salt and does not require compression by passing traffic to become effective . The brine is also more environmentally friendly , as less salt is required to treat the same length of road . 
 Airport runways are also de @-@ iced by sprayers fitted with long spraying arms . These arms are wide enough to cross the entire runway , and allow de @-@ icing of the entire airstrip to take place in a single pass , reducing the length of time that the runway is unavailable . 
 = = = Front @-@ end loader = = = 
 Front @-@ end loaders are commonly used to remove snow especially from sidewalks , parking lots , and other areas too small for using snowplows and other heavy equipment . They are sometimes used as snowplows with a snowplow attachment but commonly have a bucket or <unk> , which can also be used to load snow into the rear compartment of a snowplow or dump truck . Front end loaders with large box @-@ like front end attachment are used to clear snow in parking lots in malls and other institutions . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A gritter , also known as a <unk> , salt spreader or salt truck , is found on most winter service vehicles . Indeed , the gritter is so commonly seen on winter service vehicles that the terms are sometimes used synonymously . Gritters are used to spread grit ( rock salt ) , onto roads . The grit is stored in the large hopper on the rear of the vehicle , with a wire mesh over the top to prevent foreign objects from entering the spreading mechanism and hence becoming jammed . The salt is generally spread across the roadway by an impeller , attached by a hydraulic drive system to a small onboard engine . However , until the 1970s , the grit was often spread manually using shovels by men riding on the back of the truck , and some older spreading mechanisms still require grit be manually loaded into the impeller from the hopper . 
 Salt reduces the melting point of ice by freezing @-@ point depression , causing it to melt at lower temperatures and run off to the edge of the road , while sand increases traction by increasing friction between car tires and roadways . The amount of salt dropped varies with the condition of the road ; to prevent the formation of light ice , approximately 10 g / m2 ( 2 @.@ 0 lb / 1000 sq ft ; 0 @.@ 018 lb / sq yd ) is dropped , while thick snow can require up to 40 g / m2 ( 8 @.@ 2 lb / 1000 sq ft ; 0 @.@ 074 lb / sq yd ) of salt , independent of the volume of sand dropped . The grit is sometimes mixed with molasses to help adhesion to the road surface . However , the sweet molasses often attracts livestock , who lick the road . 
 Gritters are among the winter service vehicles also used in airports , to keep runways free of ice . However , the salt normally used to clear roads can damage the airframe of aircraft and interferes with the sensitive navigation equipment . As a result , airport <unk> spread less dangerous potassium acetate or urea onto the runways instead , as these do not corrode the aircraft or the airside equipment . 
 Gritters can also be used in hot weather , when temperatures are high enough to melt the bitumen used in asphalt . The grit is dropped to provide a protective layer between the road surface and the tires of passing vehicles , which would otherwise damage the road surface by " plucking out " the bitumen @-@ coated aggregate from the road surface . 
 = = = Snow blower = = = 
 Snow blowers , also known as rotating snowplows or snow cutters , can be used in place of snowplows on winter service vehicles . A snow blower consists of a rapidly spinning auger which cuts through the snow , forcing it out of a funnel attached to the top of the blower . Snow blowers typically clear much faster than plows , with some clearing in excess of 5 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ; 5 @,@ 500 short tons ) of snow per hour , and can cut through far deeper snow drifts than a snowplow can . In addition , snow blowers can remove snow from the roadway completely , rather than piling it at the side of the road , making passage easier for other road users and preventing the <unk> from blocking driveways . 
 = = = Jet @-@ powered snow blower = = = 
 Some railroads occasionally use air @-@ blowing machines , each powered by a jet engine to clear snow from tracks and switches . In addition to physically blowing snow with the force of the air , they melt <unk> precipitation with exhaust temperatures over 1 @,@ 000 degrees Fahrenheit ( 538 ° C ) . Approximately 100 are believed to have been manufactured in the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s ; they are used so rarely that they are generally maintained indefinitely rather than being replaced . For example , in the Boston area the MBTA uses two model RP @-@ 3 <unk> RMC Hurricane Jet Snow Blowers , nicknamed " <unk> " to clear heavy snows from the Ashmont – Mattapan High Speed Line and Wellington Yard . The jet snow blowers can be faster and gentler than conventional removal methods , but consume a large amount of fuel . 
 = = = Snow groomer = = = 
 A snow groomer is a machine designed to smooth and compact the snow , rather than removing it altogether . Early snow groomers were used by residents of rural areas to compress the snow close to their homes , and consisted of a heavy roller hauled by oxen which compacted the snow to make a smooth surface for sledging . With the invention of the motor car , snow groomers were replaced by snowplows and snow blowers on public thoroughfares , but remained in use at ski resorts , where they are used to maintain smooth , safe trails for various <unk> , including skiing , snowboarding and snowmobiling . Snow groomers remained unchanged throughout the 20th century , with most consisting of heavy roller which could be attached to a tractor or <unk> and then hauled across the area to be groomed . 
 The development of more advanced electronic systems in the 1980s allowed manufacturers to produce snow groomers which could work on and replicate a much wider range of terrains , with the most modern even able to produce half @-@ pipes and ramps for snowboarding . Snow groomers are also used in conjunction with snow cannons , to ensure that the snow produced is spread evenly across the resort . However , snow groomers have a detrimental effect on the environment within the resort . Regular pressure from the grooming vehicle increases the infiltration rate of the soil while decreasing the field capacity . This increases the rate at which water can soak through the soil , making it more prone to erosion . 
 = = = Snow melter = = = 
 A snow melting vehicle works by scooping snow into a melting pit located in a large tank at the rear of the vehicle . Around the melting pit is a thin jacket full of warm water , heated by a powerful burner . The gases from the burner are bubbled through the water , causing some of the heated water to spill over into the melting pit , melting the snow instantly . The meltwater is discharged into the storm drains . 
 Because they have to carry the large water tank and fuel for the burner , snow melting machines tend to be much larger and heavier than most winter service vehicles , at around 18 metres ( 59 ft ) , with the largest being hauled by semi @-@ trailer tractor units . In addition , the complicated melting process means that snow melting vehicles have a much lower capacity than the equivalent plow or blower vehicle ; the largest snow melter can remove 500 metric tons of snow per hour , compared to the 5 @,@ 000 metric tons per hour capacity of any large snow blower . 
 Snow <unk> are in some ways more environmentally friendly than <unk> , as they do not spray hazardous materials , and pollutants from the road surface can be separated from the meltwater and disposed of safely . In addition , because the snow is melted on board , the costs of transporting snow from the site are eliminated . On the other hand , snow melting can require large amounts of energy , which has its own costs and environmental impact . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Many winter service vehicles can be fitted with snowplows , to clear roads which are blocked by deep snow . In most cases , the plows are mounted on hydraulically @-@ actuated arms , allowing them to be raised , lowered , and angled to better move snow . Most winter service vehicles include either permanently fixed plows or plow frames : 75 % of the UK 's Highways Agency vehicles include a plow frame to which a blade can be attached . Winter service vehicles with both a plow frame and a gritting body are known as " all purpose vehicles " , and while these are more efficient than using dedicated vehicles , the weight of the hopper often decreases the range of the vehicle . Therefore , most operators will keep at least a few dedicated plowing vehicles in store for heavy storms . 
 In the event that specially designed winter service vehicles are not available for plowing , other service or construction vehicles can be used instead : among those used by various authorities are graders , bulldozers , skid loaders , pickup trucks and rubbish trucks . Front @-@ end loaders can also be used to plow snow . Either a snowplow attachment can be mounted on the loader 's arm in place of the bucket , or the bucket or <unk> can be used to load snow into the rear compartment of a snowplow or dump truck , which then hauls it away . <unk> are dangerous to overtake ; often , the oncoming lane may not be completely free of snow . In addition , the plow blade causes considerable spray of snow on both sides , which can obscure the vision of other road users . 
 = = = Snow sweeper = = = 
 A snow sweeper uses brushes to remove thin layers of snow from the pavement surface . Snow sweepers are used after plowing to remove any remaining material missed by the larger vehicles in areas with very low snow @-@ tolerance , such as airport runways and racing tracks , as the flexible brushes follow the terrain better than the rigid blades of snowplows and snow blowers . These brushes also allow the vehicle to be used on the tactile tiles found at traffic lights and tram stops , without damaging the delicate surface . Unlike other winter service vehicles , snow sweepers do not compress the snow , leaving a rough , high friction , surface behind them . This makes snow sweepers the most efficient method of snow removal for snow depths below 10 centimetres ( 4 in ) . Snow deeper than this however can clog the brushes , and most snow sweepers cannot be used to clear snow deeper than 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) . A more advanced version of the snow sweeper is the jet sweeper , which adds an air @-@ blower just behind the brushes , in order to blow the swept snow clear of the pavement and prevent the loosened snow from settling . 
 = = = Surface friction tester = = = 
 The surface friction tester is a small fifth wheel attached to a hydraulic system mounted on the rear axle of the vehicle , used to measure road <unk> . The wheel , allowed to roll freely , is slightly turned relative to the ground so that it partially slides . Sensors attached to the axis of the wheel calculate the friction between the wheel and the pavement by measuring the torque produced by the rotation of the wheel . Surface friction testers are used at airports and on major roadways before ice formation or after snow removal . The vehicle can relay the surface friction data back to the control centre , allowing gritting and clearing to be planned so that the vehicles are deployed most efficiently . Surface friction testers often include a water spraying system , to simulate the effects of rain on the road surface before the rain occurs . The sensors are usually mounted to small compact or estate cars or to a small trailer , rather than the large trucks used for other winter service equipment , as the surface friction tester works best when attached to a lightweight vehicle . 
 = = Materials = = 
 To improve traction and melt ice or snow , winter service vehicles spread granular or liquid ice melting chemicals and grit , such as sand or gravel . 
 The most common chemical is rock salt , which can melt snow at low temperatures , but has some unwanted side effects . If the salt concentration becomes high enough , it can be toxic to plant and animal life and greatly accelerate corrosion of metals , so operators should limit gritting to an absolute minimum . The dropped salt is eventually washed away and lost , so it cannot be reused or collected after gritting runs . By contrast , the insoluble sand can be collected and recycled by street sweeping vehicles and mixed with new salt crystals to be reused in later batches of grit . 
 Sea salt cannot be used , as it is too fine and dissolves too quickly , so all salt used in gritting comes from salt mines , a non @-@ renewable source . As a result , some road maintenance agencies have networks of ice prediction stations , to prevent unnecessary gritting which not only wastes salt , but can damage the environment and disrupt traffic . 
 The US state of Oregon uses magnesium chloride , a relatively cheap chemical similar in snow @-@ melting effects to sodium chloride , but less reactive , while New Zealand uses calcium magnesium acetate , which avoids the environmentally harmful chloride ion altogether . <unk> is sometimes used to grit suspension bridges , as it does not corrode iron or steel at all , but urea is less effective than salt , and can cost up to 7 times more weight @-@ for @-@ weight . 
 In some areas of the world , including Berlin , Germany , dropping salt is prohibited altogether except on the highest @-@ risk roads ; plain sand without any melting agents is spread instead . Although this protects the environment , it is more labour @-@ intensive , as more gritting runs are needed ; because the sand is insoluble , it tends to accumulate at the sides of the road , making it more difficult for buses to pull in at bus stops . 
 Grit is often mixed with hydrous sodium ferrocyanide as an anticaking agent which , while harmless in its natural form , can undergo photodissociation in strong sunlight to produce the extremely toxic chemical hydrogen cyanide . Although sunlight is generally not intense enough to cause this in polar and temperate regions , salt deposits must kept as far as possible from waterways to avert the possibility of cyanide @-@ tainted runoff water entering fisheries or farms . 
 <unk> vehicles are also dangerous to overtake ; as grit is scattered across the entire roadway , loose pieces can damage the paintwork and windows of passing cars . Loose salt does not provide sufficient traction for motorcycles , which can lead to skidding , especially around corners . 
 = K @-@ 232 ( Kansas highway ) = 
 K @-@ 232 is a 17 @.@ 263 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 27 @.@ 782 km ) north – south state highway in central Kansas connecting the towns of Wilson and Lucas . The highway was first established in 1962 and expanded over the following two years . K @-@ 232 is designated by the Kansas Department of Transportation as the Post Rock Scenic Byway . The scenic byway derives its name from the abundant limestone in the area which early settlers used as fence posts and in other construction in place of wood . The route was designated as a scenic byway both for the natural beauty of the area and unique towns located each end of the highway . Annual average daily traffic on the highway ranges from 238 to 340 , and the entire route is paved with partial design bituminous pavement . 
 = = History = = 
 K @-@ 232 's route was first designated as the part of the current highway between Interstate 70 and Old U.S. 40 ( then U.S. Route 40 ) in 1962 . The rest of the highway 's route was established over the following two years . K @-@ 232 has been paved since the highway was designated . Due to the area 's natural beauty and unique heritage , K @-@ 232 has been designated by the Kansas Department of Transportation as the Post Rock Scenic Byway , named for the abundance of limestone <unk> found throughout the Smoky Hills region . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway begins at an intersection with Old U.S. 40 in Ellsworth County , on the eastern side of the city of Wilson . From there , it travels northward 1 @.@ 753 miles ( 2 @.@ 821 km ) along the eastern side of Wilson and through agricultural lands to a junction with Interstate 70 . After crossing Interstate 70 , K @-@ 232 turns and continues in a generally west of north direction across the Ellsworth / Lincoln county line . After crossing the county line , the highway continues on a slightly west of north heading until reaching Wilson Lake . Upon reaching Wilson Lake , K @-@ 232 travels along the eastern side of the lake , crossing into Russell County . K @-@ 232 then has a junction with K @-@ 181 at the southeastern end of Wilson Dam , turns northwest , and travels along the top of the dam . A short distance after crossing the dam , K @-@ 232 turns due north and travels through more rural land to its northern terminus at K @-@ 18 highway . 
 K @-@ 232 is not a part of the United States National Highway System . K @-@ 232 connects to the National Highway System at its junction with Interstate 70 . The entire route is paved with partial design bituminous pavement . Annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) in Ellsworth County ranges from 307 from Interstate 70 to the Ellsworth / Lincoln county line to 333 closer to the city of Wilson . In Lincoln County , AADT values are 308 for the first three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) , 315 for the next one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , and 340 for the final one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before entering Russell County . In Russell County , AADT values range from 305 to 340 south of the junction with K @-@ 181 and from 238 to 280 between K @-@ 181 and the northern terminus at K @-@ 18 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Palestinian cuisine = 
 Palestinian cuisine consists of foods from or commonly eaten by Palestinians — which includes those living in Palestine , Israel , Jordan , refugee camps in nearby countries as well as by the Palestinian diaspora . The cuisine is a diffusion of the cultures of civilizations that settled in the region of Palestine , particularly during and after the Islamic era beginning with the Arab Ummayad conquest , then the eventual Persian @-@ influenced Abbasids and ending with the strong influences of Turkish cuisine , resulting from the coming of the Ottoman Turks . It is similar to other Levantine cuisines , including Lebanese , Syrian and Jordanian . 
 Cooking styles vary by region and each type of cooking style and the ingredients used are generally based on the climate and location of the particular region and on traditions . Rice and variations of <unk> are common in the Galilee . The West Bank engages primarily in heavier meals involving the use of taboon bread , rice and meat and coastal plain inhabitants frequent fish , other seafood , and lentils . The Gaza cuisine is a variation of the Levant cuisine , but is more diverse in seafood and spices . Gaza 's inhabitants heavily consume chili peppers too . Meals are usually eaten in the household but dining out has become prominent particularly during parties where light meals like salads , bread dips and skewered meats are served . 
 The area is also home to many desserts , ranging from those made regularly and those that are commonly reserved for the holidays . Most Palestinian sweets are pastries filled with either sweetened cheeses , dates or various nuts such as almonds , walnuts or pistachios . Beverages could also depend on holidays such as during Ramadan , where carob , tamarind and apricot juices are consumed at sunset . Coffee is consumed throughout the day and liquor is not very prevalent among the population , however , some alcoholic beverages such as arak or beer are consumed by Christians and less conservative Muslims . 
