 The county entered into negotiations with the US Air Force to lease the county airport for use as an Air Force Base in 1954 ; a lease was signed on January 24 , 1955 , and the base was active the next year . In the mid @-@ 1960s , the rail line and roadway in the area were moved to go around a section of the runway complex 's cargo ramps ; this relocation also added a new rail line crossing to CR 553 . In 1975 , residents of a trailer park on Pioneer Road and city officials asked the county road commission to reconfigure the intersection between the county road , Division Street and Pioneer Road to reduce accidents . 
 In 1976 , the MCRC shifted the southern end of CR 553 westward to its current alignment from K.I. Sawyer AFB to New Swanzy so that the road crossed the railroad in a different location , using a bridge instead of the previous at @-@ grade crossing . Later in the decade , another section of the roadway was realigned through Sands Township ; this segment was moved by 1979 south of the Crossroads area . The southern end of this project was completed by 1981 , and the roadway directly angled northwesterly instead of utilizing a long sweeping curve between the road to the south and the new road to the north . Later in 1986 , the roadway carrying CR 553 over the Carp River was washed away during spring flooding ; the county had to replace the culverts that supported the road with new ones , forcing a temporary road closure . The bridge over the rail line near the Air Force Base had weakened sufficiently by December 1988 that the MCRC had to lower the truck weight limits for the structure from 77 to 33 short tons ( 70 to 30 t ) for single @-@ unit trucks and 40 or 42 short tons ( 36 or 38 t ) for double- or triple @-@ unit trucks ; repairs to the structure were planned for the following year . 
 The City of Marquette started planning an extension of McClellan Avenue southward to CR 553 in the 1970s . When the projects were started in the 1990s , the goal was to reroute traffic and relieve congestion in town . By April 1994 , the street had been extended south from the retail corridor along the business loop north of the Marquette Bypass to the Superior Hills Elementary School . Funding at that time was in place for the extension only as far as Pioneer Road . The last segment between Pioneer Road and CR 553 was held up over environmental clearances and funding ; there were some wetlands in the path of the proposed construction . The US Congress initially denied funding for the extension in 1993 , but they approved funding for this section of the McClellan Avenue project later in 1994 while the environmental assessments were being reviewed . In 1995 , a passing lane was approved to run uphill southbound approaching Glass ' Corner in a project funded by the federal government based on MDOT recommendations . 
 The city and county continued to improve CR 553 and McClellan Avenue during 1996 . The county closed the road between the Carp River and the Crossroads starting in June 1996 . During the closure , they built the previously approved 1 @.@ 6 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) passing lane for southbound traffic headed uphill near Marquette Mountain ; the project was completed on November 1 , 1996 . By the end of that month , the city had the necessary environmental approvals and cleared the land needed for the last southward extension of McClellan Avenue ; construction crews were working on blasting rock , drainage and other earthworks for the project . 
 Local business owners near the intersection between McClellan Avenue and the Marquette Bypass petitioned the city and MDOT in November 1996 to reconfigure the intersection , calling it " confusing " , " dangerous " and " inconvenient " . The intersection was configured as a Michigan left design when McClellan Avenue was extended southward past the expressway in 1994 . Transportation planners defended the design , saying that the intersection was actually safer than several others in the city , even if its unique status made it unfamiliar to local drivers . Michigan left intersections are common in the Lower Peninsula , but this intersection was the first in the UP built that way . 
 In 1993 , the federal government announced plans to close K. I. Sawyer Air Force Base in 1995 . The after effects of the base closure were the impetus for a December 1996 study by UP counties on the designation of a north – south highway corridor in the region to help fuel redevelopment at the base ; the study would help MDOT and the counties prioritize transportation funding . When the local study group completed its report in June 1997 , CR 553 was included with M @-@ 35 and US 41 as part of the primary north – south traffic corridor in the Central Upper Peninsula . The group cited the redevelopment efforts at the former air force base for the designation . The McClellan Avenue extension was finished the following September , and CR 553 was realigned to flow into the south end of McClellan . Instead of curving to the northeast in the area , the county road turned northward and a T @-@ shaped intersection was built to reconnect CR 553 with the remainder of its routing into South Marquette , requiring the county road to make a right @-@ angle turn . 
 = = = State trunkline period = = = 
 As part of Governor John Engler 's " Build Michigan II " plan in the late 1990s , about 9 @,@ 200 miles ( 14 @,@ 800 km ) of roadway were investigated as potential candidates for state maintenance as part of the Rationalization plan . Included in these queries were county roads 553 , 460 and 462 ; the latter two roadways connected east – west across the former base . Traffic to and from the base was increasing as a byproduct of economic redevelopment at K.I. Sawyer , and if the state took control of the roadways , they would be marked on the state map like other state trunklines , further benefiting redevelopment . Local officials were concerned at the time because at least one proposal included a total of 103 miles ( 166 km ) of roads , one @-@ third of the county 's primary county road network . The MCRC manager was concerned that such a transfer could impact the level of funding the commission received for the maintenance of the roads that would remain under county jurisdiction . 
 The three county roads were transferred to state jurisdiction on October 1 , 1998 . MDOT renumbered the two roads across K.I. Sawyer as an extension of M @-@ 94 , and designated M @-@ 553 along most of CR 553 . The latter highway designation then terminated at the southern end of McClellan Avenue in the city of Marquette ; the remainder of CR 553 to the intersection with Pioneer Road and Division Street was given the M @-@ 554 moniker by the state . 
 The city and local residents expressed safety issues concerning pedestrians at Marquette Mountain in 2000 , and driveways access was consolidated by MDOT in a construction project while a specific pedestrian crossing was installed by the ski hill owner . The Carp River flooded on April 16 , 2002 , washing out the roadway where M @-@ 553 crossed the river . The washout sent " tons of sediment " into the river , impacting the fish habitat before the Central Lake Superior Watershed Partnership could assist MDOT to stabilize the banks . Before the event , the highway had crossed the water body using two 8 @-@ by @-@ 12 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m × 3 @.@ 7 m ) , oval metal culverts . The flood waters overwhelmed these culverts and washed away a 64 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 20 m ) section of roadway . MDOT budgeted $ 750 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 2015 ) that May to rebuild the river crossing using a concrete bridge instead . 
 In April 2005 , the City of Marquette initially agreed to exchange jurisdiction over a number of roadways with MDOT . These transfers placed former Business US 41 ( Bus . US 41 ) and M @-@ 554 under city jurisdiction ; at the same time , the state would take over a section of McClellan Avenue to extend M @-@ 553 to its current northern terminus at the Marquette Bypass . One of the city 's requests in negotiating the transfer was to have MDOT defer to city zoning ordinances along McClellan Avenue regarding driveway access and snowmobile access . The transfers were made official on October 11 , 2005 , and signage was updated on November 9 . 
 Because of the transfer , MDOT initiated a speed study to determine what speed limits should apply on the extension . The McClellan Avenue section of M @-@ 553 was placed under a temporary traffic control order leaving the 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) limit in place . A school zone was considered near the Superior <unk> Elementary school . In 2009 , the speed limit along McClellan Avenue was raised to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . The school zone was implemented in December 2011 , reducing the speed limit to 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) for two 40 @-@ minute periods during the morning and afternoon . The reduced speed limit is indicated by a set of flashing lights installed in December 2011 . 
 MDOT started construction of a new 20 @-@ space commuter parking lot at the southern terminus of M @-@ 553 at M @-@ 35 on August 11 , 2008 , as part of an effort to offer expanded ride @-@ sharing opportunities in Marquette County . Another carpool lot was added at the Crossroads when MDOT partnered with the restaurant there . The state paved the gravel parking lot , and the business allowed the installation of signs . 
 = = Future = = 
 The section of M @-@ 553 known as Glass ' Corner has come to the attention of MDOT in 2012 as one of the more dangerous stretches of highway in the state . Short sight distances combined with the end of a southbound uphill passing lane immediately before the curve have been blamed for some serious crashes . In the short term , the department is going to install additional signage in 2012 to warn motorists approaching the section of highway . An audit of the area also recommended the installation of street lighting by Sands Township . Another intermediate @-@ term proposal is to study a reduction of the speed limit from 55 to 50 mph ( 89 to 80 km / h ) , an action that would require the involvement of the Michigan State Police . MDOT is seeking funding for a project to straighten some of the curves and decrease the grade of the roadway . This long @-@ term solution is forecast to cost $ 5 million in a project to be completed in 2017 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Marquette County . 
 = = Related trunkline = = 
 M @-@ 554 was a short state trunkline highway in the city of Marquette that follows what is now a part of Division Street . The southern terminus was at the intersection with M @-@ 553 and McClellan Avenue . From there , the highway ran just under a mile ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) within Marquette in a tree @-@ lined section of the city that is relatively flat ; the roadway that carried the M @-@ 554 designation has a few gentle curves . At the intersection with Pioneer Road and Division Street , the M @-@ 554 designation ended , and the roadway continued as Division Street . The only signage present along the route to indicate the highway number was the street signs erected by the City of Marquette Department of Public Works ; MDOT never posted the standard reassurance markers along the road , leaving M @-@ 554 as an unsigned highway , although at least one map manufacturer included the highway on its maps . 
 When CR 553 was transferred from the county to the state on October 1 , 1998 , one segment was not included in the routing for M @-@ 553 ; that section between the McClellan Avenue and Pioneer Road intersections was numbered M @-@ 554 by MDOT . The City of Marquette approved a plan to accept jurisdiction of M @-@ 554 from MDOT in April 2005 ; the plan also affected two other roads ( Bus . US 41 and M @-@ 553 ) . On October 10 , 2005 , the city and the state exchanged jurisdiction of the three roadways in Marquette . The signage was changed on November 9 , 2005 , reflecting the changeover of M @-@ 554 and Bus . US 41 to the city 's control and McClellan Avenue to the state 's control . This change ended the existence of M @-@ 554 . Since the transfer , the former M @-@ 554 is now part of an extended Division Street . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway was in Marquette , Marquette County . 
 = Sinosauropteryx = 
 Sinosauropteryx ( meaning " Chinese reptilian wing " , Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Zhōnghuá <unk> <unk> ; literally : " China dragon bird " ) is a compsognathid dinosaur . Described in 1996 , it was the first dinosaur taxon outside of Avialae ( birds and their immediate relatives ) to be found with evidence of feathers . It was covered with a coat of very simple filament @-@ like feathers . Structures that indicate colouration have also been preserved in some of its feathers , which makes Sinosauropteryx the first non @-@ <unk> dinosaurs where colouration has been determined . The colouration includes a reddish and light banded tail . Some contention has arisen with an alternative interpretation of the filamentous impression as remains of collagen fibres , but this has not been widely accepted . 
 Sinosauropteryx was a small theropod with an unusually long tail and short arms . The longest known specimen reaches up to 1 @.@ 07 metres ( 3 @.@ 5 feet ) in length , with an estimated weight of 0 @.@ 55 kilograms ( 1 @.@ 2 pounds ) It was a close relative of the similar but older genus Compsognathus , both genera belonging to the family Compsognathidae . Only one species of Sinosauropteryx has been named : S. prima , meaning " first " in reference to its status as the first feathered non @-@ <unk> dinosaur species discovered . Three specimens have been described . The third specimen previously assigned to this genus represents either a second , as @-@ yet unnamed species or a distinct , related genus . 
 Sinosauropteryx lived in what is now northeastern China during the early Cretaceous period . It was among the first dinosaurs discovered from the Yixian Formation in Liaoning Province , and was a member of the Jehol Biota . Well @-@ preserved fossils of this species illustrate many aspects of its biology , such as its diet and reproduction . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sinosauropteryx was a small bipedal theropod , noted for its short arms , large first finger ( thumbs ) , and long tail . The taxon includes some of the smallest known adult non @-@ avian theropod specimens , with the holotype specimen measuring only 68 cm ( 27 in ) in length , including the tail . However , this individual was relatively young . The longest known specimen reaches up to 1 @.@ 07 m ( 3 @.@ 5 ft ) in length , with an estimated weight of 0 @.@ 55 kg ( 1 @.@ 2 lb ) . 
 Sinosauropteryx was anatomically similar to Compsognathus , differing from its European relatives in its proportions . The skull of Sinosauropteryx was 15 % longer than its thigh bones , unlike in Compsognathus , where the skull and thigh bones are approximately equivalent in length . The arms of Sinosauropteryx ( humerus and radius ) were only 30 % the length of its legs ( thigh bone and shin ) , compared to 40 % in Compsognathus . Additionally , Sinosauropteryx had several features unique among all other theropods . It had 64 vertebrae in its tail . This high number made its tail the longest relative to body length of any theropod . Its hands were long compared to its arms , about 84 % to 91 % of the length of the rest of the arm ( humerus and radius ) , and half the length of the foot . The first and second digits were about the same length , with a large claw on the first digit . The first fingers were large , being both longer and thicker than either of the bones of the forearm . The teeth differed slightly ( they were heterodont ) based on position : those near the tips of the upper jaws ( on the premaxillae ) were slender and lacked serrations , while those behind them ( on the maxillae ) were serrated and laterally compressed . The teeth of the lower jaws were similarly differentiated . 
 A pigmented area in the abdomen of the holotype has been suggested as possible traces of organs , and was interpreted as the liver by John Ruben and colleagues , which they described as part of a crocodilian @-@ like " hepatic piston " respiratory system . A later study , while agreeing that the pigmented area represented something originally inside the body , found no defined structure and noted that any organs would have been distorted by the processes that flattened the skeleton into an essentially two @-@ dimensional form . Dark pigment is also present in the eye region of the holotype and another specimen . 
 = = = Feathers = = = 
 All described specimens of Sinosauropteryx preserve integumentary structures ( filaments arising from the skin ) which most palaeontologists interpret as very primitive type of feathers . These short , down @-@ like filaments are preserved along the back half of the skull , the arms , neck , back , and top and bottom of the tail . Additional patches of feathers have been identified on the sides of the body , and palaeontologists Chen , Dong and Zheng proposed that the density of the feathers on the back and the randomness of the patches elsewhere on the body indicated the animals would have been fully feathered in life , with the ventral feathers having been removed by decomposition . 
 The filaments are preserved with a gap between the bones , which several authors have noted corresponds closely to the expected amount of skin and muscle tissue that would have been present in life . The feathers are closest to the bone on the skull and end of the tail , where little to no muscle was present , and the gap increases over the back vertebrae , where more musculature would be expected , indicating that the filaments were external to the skin and do not correspond with subcutaneous structures . 
 The filaments exhibit random orientations and are often wavy , which has been interpreted as evidence that they were soft and pliable in life . Microscopic examination shows that individual filaments appear dark along the edges and light internally , suggesting that they were hollow , like modern feathers . Compared to modern mammals the filaments were quite coarse , with each individual strand much larger and thicker than the corresponding hairs of similarly sized mammals . 
 The length of the filaments varies across the body . On the type specimen , they are shortest just in front of the eyes , with a length of 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) . Going further along the body , the filaments rapidly increase in length until reaching lengths of 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) over the shoulder blades . The length remains uniform over the back , until beyond the hips , when the filaments lengthen again and reach their maximum length midway down the tail at 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) . The filaments on the underside of the tail are shorter overall and decrease in length more rapidly than those on the dorsal surface . By the 25th tail vertebrae , the filaments on the underside reach a length of only 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) . The longest feathers present on the forearm measured 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) . 
 Though the feathers are too dense to isolate a single structure for examination , several studies have suggested the presence of two distinct filament types ( thick and thin ) interspersed with each other . The thick filaments tend to appear ' stiffer ' than thin filaments , and the thin filaments tend to lie parallel to each other but at angles to nearby thick filaments . These properties suggest that the individual feathers consisted of a central quill ( rachis ) with thinner barbs branching off from it , similar to but more primitive in structure than modern bird feathers . Overall , the filaments most closely resemble the " <unk> " or down @-@ like feathers of some modern birds , with a thick central quill and long , thin barbs . The same structures are seen in other fossils from the Yixian Formation , including Confuciusornis . 
 While Sinosauropteryx had feather @-@ like structures , it was not very closely related to the previous " first bird " Archaeopteryx . There are many dinosaur clades that were more closely related to Archaeopteryx than Sinosauropteryx was , including the <unk> , the oviraptorosaurians , and the <unk> . This indicates that feathers may have been a characteristic of many theropod dinosaurs , not just the obviously bird @-@ like ones , making it possible that equally distant animals such as Compsognathus had feathers as well . 
 = = = = Colouration = = = = 
 Sinosauropteryx was the first dinosaur to have its life colouration described by scientists based on physical evidence . Some fossils of Sinosauropteryx show an alternation of lighter and darker bands preserved on the tail . Chen and colleagues initially interpreted this banding pattern as an artifact of the splitting between the main slab and counter @-@ slab in which the original specimen was preserved . However , Longrich suggested in his 2002 presentation for the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology that these specimens actually preserve remnants of the colouration pattern the animal would have exhibited in life . He argued that the dark , banded areas on the tail were too evenly spaced to have been caused by random separation of the fossil slabs , and that they represent fossilized pigments present in the feathers . Additionally , rather than an artifact of preservation or decomposition , the presence of dark feathers along only the top of the body may also reflect the colour pattern in life , indicating that Sinosauropteryx prima was countershaded with dark colouration on its back and lighter colouration on its underside , with bands or stripes on the tail for camouflage . 
 Longrich 's conclusions were supported in a paper first published online in the journal Nature in January 2010 . <unk> Zhang and colleagues examined the fossilized feathers of several dinosaurs and early birds , and found evidence that they preserved melanosomes , the cells that give the feathers of modern birds their colour . Among the specimens studied was a previously undescribed specimen of Sinosauropteryx , IVPP <unk> . By examining <unk> structure and distribution , Zhang and colleagues were able to confirm the presence of light and dark bands of colour in the tail feathers of Sinosauropteryx . Furthermore , the team was able to compare <unk> types to those of modern birds to determine a general range of colour . From the presence of <unk> , spherical melanosomes that make and store red pigment , they concluded that the darker feathers of Sinosauropteryx were chestnut or reddish brown in colour . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Despite its feathers , most palaeontologists do not consider Sinosauropteryx to be birds . Phylogenetically , the genus is only distantly related to the clade Aves , usually defined as Archaeopteryx lithographica plus modern birds . The scientists who described Sinosauropteryx , however , used a character @-@ based , or <unk> , definition of the Class Aves , in which any animal with feathers is considered to be a bird . They argued that the filamentous plumes of Sinosauropteryx represent true feathers with a rachis and barbs , and thus that Sinosauropteryx should be considered a true bird . They classified the genus as belonging to a new biological order , <unk> , family <unk> , within the subclass <unk> . These proposals have not been accepted , and Sinosauropteryx is generally classified in the family Compsognathidae , a group of small @-@ bodied long @-@ tailed coelurosaurian theropods known from the Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous of Asia , Europe , and South America . 
 Below is a cladogram showing the placement of Sinosauropteryx within Coelurosauria by Senter et al. in 2012 . 
 There is only one named species of Sinosauropteryx , S. prima . A possible second species is represented by the specimen GMV 2124 ( aka <unk> 2124 ) , which was described as a third , larger specimen of S. prima by Ji and Ji in 1997 . However , in a 2002 presentation and abstract for the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology , Nick Longrich showed that this specimen differs in several anatomical aspects from the others , including its relatively large size , proportionally longer shins , and shorter tail . Longrich suggested that GMV 2124 was a compsognathid coelurosaurian , while Sinosauropteryx proper was a more primitive kind of coelurosaurian or even a basal carnosaurian . In 2007 , <unk> and Gauthier concurred that this specimen was probably a new taxon , and tentatively re @-@ classified it as Sinosauropteryx ? sp . , though they suggested it may belong in a new genus . Also in 2007 , Ji , Ji and colleagues wrote that GMV 2124 is probably a new genus , noting the differences in tail length and hindlimb proportions . 
 = = = Distinguishing anatomical features = = = 
 Ji and Ji ( 1996 ) identified many features that set Sinosauropteryx apart from other birds and dinosaurs . They found that it was a small primitive bird with a relatively high skull , blunt rostrum and a slightly high premaxilla ; that the antorbital fenestra was elliptical but not enlarged , the dentary was robust , the surangular was narrow and elongated , and the dentition is extremely well developed and acute ; that there are over 50 extremely elongated caudals , constituting 60 % of the body length , and the forelimb is extremely short with a short and thick humerus ; the pubis was elongated and extremely inflated at its distal end and the ischium is broad ; the hind limb was long and robust , the tibia is only slightly longer than the femur , the tarsals are separated , and the metatarsals are relatively robust with unfused proximal ends ; the feathers are short , small , and uniform ; many ornament the top of the skull , cervical , and dorsal regions , in addition to the dorsal and ventral caudal region . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 The first fossil specimen of the dinosaur later named Sinosauropteryx prima was uncovered in August 1996 by Li Yumin . Yumin was a farmer and part @-@ time fossil hunter who often prospected around Liaoning Province to acquire fossils to sell to individuals and museums . Yumin recognized the unique quality of the specimen , which was separated into two slabs , and sold the slabs to two separate museums in China : the National Geological Museum in Beijing , and the Nanjing Institute of Geology and Paleontology . The director of the Beijing museum , Ji Qiang , recognized the importance of the find , as did visiting Canadian palaeontologist Phil Currie and artist Michael <unk> , who became aware of the fossil by chance as they explored the Beijing museum 's collections after leading a fossil tour of the area during the first week of October , 1996 . Currie recognized the significance of the fossil immediately . As The New York Times quoted him , " When I saw this slab of silt stone mixed with volcanic ash in which the creature is embedded , I was bowled over . " When originally described , the authors named Sinosauropteryx , meaning " Chinese Reptilian Wing . 
 Chinese authorities initially barred photographs of the specimen from publication . However , Currie brought a photograph to the 1996 meeting of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History in New York , causing crowds of palaeontologists to gather and discuss the new discovery . The news reportedly left palaeontologist John Ostrom , who in the 1970s had pioneered the theory that birds evolved from dinosaurs , " in a state of shock . " Ostrom later joined an international team of researchers who gathered in Beijing to examine the fossils ; other team members included feather expert Alan Brush , fossil bird expert Larry Martin , and Peter Wellnhofer , an expert on the early bird Archaeopteryx . 
 Three specimens have been assigned to Sinosauropteryx prima : the holotype GMV <unk> ( and its counter slab [ opposite face ] , NIGP <unk> ) , NIGP 127587 , and D <unk> . Another specimen , IVPP <unk> , was assigned to the genus but not to the only species by Zhang and colleagues . The assignment of an additional larger specimen to S. prima , GMV 2124 , was later found to be in error . All of the fossils were found in the <unk> or <unk> Beds of the Yixian Formation in the <unk> and <unk> regions of Liaoning , China . These fossil beds have been dated to 124 @.@ 6 – 122 million years ago , during the late Barremian to early Aptian stages of the Early Cretaceous . 
 = = = Identity of filaments = = = 
 Controversy regarding the identity of the filaments preserved in the first Sinosauropteryx specimen began almost immediately , as the team of scientists spent three days in Beijing examining the specimen under a microscope . The results of their studies ( reported during a press conference at the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences on Thursday , April 24 , 1997 ) were inconclusive ; the team agreed that the structures preserved on Sinosauropteryx were not modern feathers , but suggested further research was required to discover their exact nature . Palaeontologist Alan Feduccia , who had not yet examined the specimen , wrote in Audubon Magazine that the structures of Sinosauropteryx ( which he considered at the time to be a synonym of Compsognathus , as Compsognathus prima ) were stiffening structures from a frill running along the back , and that dinosaur palaeontologists were engaging in wishful thinking when equating the structures with feathers . Subsequent publications saw some of the team members disagreeing over the identity of the structures . 
 Feduccia 's frill argument was followed up in several other publications , in which researchers interpreted the filamentous impressions around Sinosauropteryx fossils as remains of collagen fibres rather than primitive feathers . Since the structures are clearly external to the body , these researchers have proposed that the fibres formed a frill on the back of the animal and underside of its tail , similar to some modern aquatic lizards . The absence of feathers would refute the proposal that Sinosauropteryx is the most basal known theropod genus with feathers , and also raise questions about the current theory of feather origins itself . It calls into question the idea that the first feathers evolved not for flight but for insulation , and that they made their first appearance in relatively basal dinosaur lineages that later evolved into modern birds . 
 Most researchers have disagreed with the identification of the structures as collagen or other structural fibres . Notably , the team of scientists that reported the presence of pigmentation cells in the structures argued that their presence proved the structures were feathers , not collagen , because collagen does not contain pigment . Gregory S. Paul <unk> what the collagen hypothesis 's proponents consider a body outline outside of the fibres as an artefact of preparation : breakage and brushed @-@ on sealant have been misidentified as the outline of the body . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The specimen NIGP 127587 was preserved with the remains of a lizard in its gut region , indicating that small , fast @-@ moving animals made up part of the diet of Sinosauropteryx prima . Numerous lizards of this type have been found in the same rocks as Sinosauropteryx , but have yet to be described . 
 The possible Sinosauropteryx specimen GMV 2124 ( Sinosauropteryx ? sp . ) was found with three mammal jaws in its gut region . Hurum , Luo , and Kielan @-@ Jaworowska ( 2006 ) identified two of these jaws as belonging to <unk> and the third to <unk> , showing that these two mammals were part of the animal 's diet . <unk> is known to have had a spur on the ankle , like the modern platypus , which would indicate that Sinosauropteryx fed on possibly venomous mammals . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The same specimen of S. prima which had preserved a lizard in its stomach contents ( NIGP 127587 ) also had several small eggs in its abdomen . Two eggs were preserved just in front of and above the pubic boot , and several more may lie underneath them on the slab . It is unlikely that they were eaten by the animal , as they are in the wrong part of the body cavity for the egg shells to have remained intact . It is more likely that they are unlaid eggs produced by the animal itself . Each egg measured 36 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) long by 26 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) wide . The presence of two developed eggs suggests that Sinosauropteryx had dual oviducts and laid eggs in pairs , like other theropods . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 Sinosauropteryx , as a Yixian Formation dinosaur , is a member of the Jehol Biota , the assemblage of organisms found in the Yixian Formation and overlying Jiufotang Formation . The Yixian Formation is composed largely of volcanic rocks such as andesite and basalt . Between the volcanic layers are several beds of sedimentary rocks representing deposition in a lake . The freshwater lake strata of the Yixian Formation have preserved a wide variety of plants , invertebrates , and vertebrates . Gymnosperm forests were extensive , with a few early flowering plants as well . <unk> and insects were diverse , and bivalves and gastropods were abundant . Mammals and birds are also well @-@ known from the formation . The setting was subject to periodic mortality events including volcanic eruptions , wildfires , and noxious gases erupting from the lakes . The climate has been interpreted as temperate , with distinct wet and dry seasons . The yearly temperature during this time period averaged about 10 degrees <unk> ( 50 degrees Fahrenheit ) , indicating a temperate climate with unusually cold winters for the generally warm Mesozoic era , possibly due to northern China 's high latitude during this time . 
 = Bjorli Station = 
 Bjorli Station ( Norwegian : Bjorli stasjon ) is a railway station on the Rauma Line located at Bjorli in <unk> , Norway . The station opened on 19 November 1921 and was the line 's terminus until 1923 . In addition to a station building , Bjorli had a water tower , roundhouse , turntable and a restaurant seating 700 people , the latter which was bombed to pieces in 1940 . The station is served by Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) trains four times per day per direction . In the summer , the station is the terminus of a tourist services from Åndalsnes . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of the station started in 1918 and was finished in 1921 . The station , excluding its water tower and restaurant , cost 117 @,@ 062 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) to build and took 26 @,@ 883 man @-@ hours . The station and axillary buildings were designed by Gudmund Hoel of NSB Arkitektkontor . The station opened with the first part of the Rauma Line on 19 November 1921 . It remained the terminus until 25 November 1923 , when the next section , to Verma Station , opened . 
 The station is located in a wide , flat terrain , so getting sufficient pressure to supply water for the steam locomotives would be very expensive . Instead , a water tower was built at the station , with water pumped from the river Rauma . The pump is located 140 meters ( 460 ft ) from the tower , with the water intake being another 50 meters ( 160 ft ) from the pump . The water tower was built in natural stone brick and is square . After the steam locomotive services ended , was used as a storage facility . The tower cost NOK 103 @,@ 795 to build . The station also received a turntable , which cost NOK 101 @,@ 236 , which had a 20 @-@ meter ( 66 ft ) diameter . Although it was planned completed on 1 August 1921 , construction was delayed and it was taken into use one month after the station opened . Bjorli had a temporary roundhouse while the station was the terminus . Built out of wood , the building cost NOK 30 @,@ 373 . 
 On 1 July 1927 , a separate restaurant building with place for 700 diners opened . Open only during summer until September , it was aimed at cruise ship tourists who took the line from Åndalsnes to Bjorli . Operated by Norsk Spisevognselskap , it was highly profitable . However , during the German occupation of Norway in 1940 , the building was bombed and burnt down , and was never rebuilt . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station building is owned by Rom Eiendom , a subsidiary of NSB , while the tracks and infrastructure are owned and operated by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . The station building is unstaffed , but the waiting room is open from 07 : 00 to 22 : 00 . The line lacks centralized traffic control , so the station must be manned for trains to pass . The station has three tracks : two which are used for trains to pass and one which is designed for loading , and has an effective length of 75 meters ( 246 ft ) . The station has ten parking spaces but lacks ticket vending machines . The station is 575 meters ( 1 @,@ 886 ft ) above mean sea level and located 57 kilometers ( 35 mi ) from both Dombås and Åndalsnes , and 400 kilometers ( 250 mi ) from Oslo . It is located in the village of Bjorli in <unk> , that serves as an Alpine skiing center . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways operates passenger train services on the line . Using Class 93 trains , they operate four services in each direction per day . During the summer , from June through August , NSB operates the trains as tourist trains , limiting the service from Åndalsnes to Bjorli . 
 = Basil Hayden = 
 Basil Ewing Hayden ( May 19 , 1899 – January 9 , 2003 ) was an American college basketball player and coach . A Kentucky native , he began playing the sport in the sixth grade and , after a year at Transylvania University , transferred to the University of Kentucky to study chemistry and play on the school 's basketball squad . He captained the team to victory at the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association Championship and was named an All @-@ American for his efforts – the first basketball player to earn the honor at the University of Kentucky . 
 After graduating in 1922 Hayden took on a number of different jobs and was called to coach the University of Kentucky 's basketball team in 1926 following the departure of Ray Eklund . After a 3 – 13 record in his first year he was replaced with John Mauer and returned to his previous occupations . When he died in 2003 , at the age of 103 , he was the University of Kentucky 's oldest former athlete , and his jersey is among those hung in the school 's Rupp Arena . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hayden was born in Stanford , Kentucky ; his father Joseph was a grocer , and his mother Annie ( née : Brown ) was a tutor . He moved to Paris , Kentucky at an early age and began playing basketball in the sixth grade , which he continued upon entering Paris High School . He was drafted into the United States Army during World War I , but the conflict ended before he was shipped out . He entered Transylvania University in 1918 , intending to become a minister , but switched to the University of Kentucky the following year to study industrial chemistry . While there , he played tennis and competed in the javelin throw , setting a school record . 
 = = Basketball career = = 
 Hayden joined the school 's basketball team for the 1919 @-@ 1920 season and was the squad 's leading scorer with 133 points in 12 games , leading to an average of 11 @.@ 8 points per game ; no other player on the team scored more than 56 points or had an average greater than 7 . While he slipped to 9 @.@ 71 points per game the following year ( and finished second in both points and average to rookie William King ) , he found success captaining the team to the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association Championship – the University of Kentucky 's first victory at a major basketball tournament . He was named an All @-@ American in 1921 , the first University of Kentucky basketball player to be so honored . He also had his highest @-@ scoring game ever that season , scoring 20 points against Georgetown College . He injured his knee in the high jump prior to his final 1921 @-@ 1922 season but still finished with an average of 4 @.@ 92 points per game , the third best average on the team that season and the fourth highest amount of points . At the peak of his playing career he was 5 ' 11 " , weighed 165 pounds , and was nicknamed " The Blond Adonis " . His overall career statistics saw him amass 333 points in 39 games – an average of about 8 @.@ 5 points per game . 
 After his graduation Hayden moved to Detroit to work for Dodge but returned to Kentucky after the first summer because of homesickness . During the 1922 @-@ 23 basketball season he coached at Kentucky Wesleyan College which was in Winchester at the time . In his one season at Kentucky Wesleyan he went 8 @-@ 1 . He then taught and coached at George Rogers Clark High School while taking a job in the insurance business in Richmond , Kentucky . In 1926 he was called to replace Ray Eklund as the head basketball coach at the University of Kentucky but was given only one week to prepare for the task with a team made up of unskilled members . The squad consisted primarily of football players , many of whom lacked the incentive to fully participate . The team finished with a 3 – 13 record , winning once against the University of Florida and twice against Centre College . When Harry <unk> was named the new head coach of the university 's football squad , he had Hayden replaced with John Mauer . The team would not have another losing season until 1988 – 89 under Eddie Sutton . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his experiment with coaching , Hayden went returned to the insurance business and also worked as a banker , accountant , a hospital administrator , school teacher , and Kentucky state bank inspector . He also worked as the treasurer of a Methodist church until his mid @-@ 70s . He was a lifetime member of Rotary International and the Kappa Sigma Fraternity . He was married to Mary Hardin for 67 years until her death ; he would remarry to Edna Lytle . At the time of his death on January 9 , 2003 , at the age of 103 , his jersey was one of 41 retired jerseys hanging in Rupp Arena , ( with his name only , as the jerseys did not have numbers during his era ) , and he was the oldest living former University of Kentucky athlete . As of 2009 , he is the only one of the 49 University of Kentucky basketball All @-@ Americans to have been born in the 19th century , as well as probably being the shortest . He is a member of the Paris High School Greyhound Hall of Fame . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = Beer = 
 Beer is the world 's most widely consumed and probably the oldest alcoholic beverage ; it is the third most popular drink overall , after water and tea . The production of beer is called brewing , which involves the fermentation of starches , mainly derived from cereal grains — most commonly malted barley , although wheat , maize ( corn ) , and rice are widely used . Most beer is flavoured with hops , which add bitterness and act as a natural preservative , though other flavourings such as herbs or fruit may occasionally be included . The fermentation process causes a natural carbonation effect , although this is often removed during processing , and replaced with forced carbonation . Some of humanity 's earliest known writings refer to the production and distribution of beer : the Code of Hammurabi included laws regulating beer and beer parlours , and " The Hymn to Ninkasi " , a prayer to the Mesopotamian goddess of beer , served as both a prayer and as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people . 
 Beer is sold in bottles and cans ; it may also be available on draught , particularly in pubs and bars . The brewing industry is a global business , consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries . The strength of beer is usually around 4 % to 6 % alcohol by volume ( abv ) , although it may vary between 0 @.@ 5 % and 20 % , with some breweries creating examples of 40 % abv and above . Beer forms part of the culture of beer @-@ drinking nations and is associated with social traditions such as beer festivals , as well as a rich pub culture involving activities like pub crawling , and pub games such as bar billiards . 
 = = History = = 
 Beer is one of the world 's oldest prepared beverages , possibly dating back to the early Neolithic or 9500 BC , when cereal was first farmed , and is recorded in the written history of ancient Iraq and ancient Egypt . Archaeologists speculate that beer was instrumental in the formation of civilizations . Approximately 5000 years ago , workers in the city of Uruk ( modern day Iraq ) were paid by their employers in beer . During the building of the Great Pyramids in Giza , Egypt , each worker got a daily ration of four to five liters of beer , which served as both nutrition and refreshment that was crucial to the pyramids ' construction . 
 The earliest known chemical evidence of barley beer dates to circa 3500 – 3100 BC from the site of Godin Tepe in the Zagros Mountains of western Iran . Some of the earliest Sumerian writings contain references to beer ; examples include a prayer to the goddess Ninkasi , known as " The Hymn to Ninkasi " , which served as both a prayer as well as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people , and the ancient advice ( Fill your belly . Day and night make merry ) to Gilgamesh , recorded in the Epic of Gilgamesh , by the ale @-@ wife <unk> may , at least in part , have referred to the consumption of beer . The Ebla tablets , discovered in 1974 in Ebla , Syria , show that beer was produced in the city in 2500 BC . A fermented beverage using rice and fruit was made in China around 7000 BC . Unlike sake , mould was not used to <unk> the rice ( <unk> fermentation ) ; the rice was probably prepared for fermentation by mastication or malting . 
 Almost any substance containing sugar can naturally undergo alcoholic fermentation . It is likely that many cultures , on observing that a sweet liquid could be obtained from a source of starch , independently invented beer . Bread and beer increased prosperity to a level that allowed time for development of other technologies and contributed to the building of civilizations . 
 Beer was spread through Europe by Germanic and Celtic tribes as far back as 3000 BC , and it was mainly brewed on a domestic scale . The product that the early Europeans drank might not be recognised as beer by most people today . Alongside the basic starch source , the early European beers might contain fruits , honey , numerous types of plants , spices and other substances such as narcotic herbs . What they did not contain was hops , as that was a later addition , first mentioned in Europe around 822 by a Carolingian Abbot and again in 1067 by Abbess Hildegard of Bingen . 
 In 1516 , William IV , Duke of Bavaria , adopted the <unk> ( purity law ) , perhaps the oldest food @-@ quality regulation still in use in the 21st century , according to which the only allowed ingredients of beer are water , hops and barley @-@ malt . Beer produced before the Industrial Revolution continued to be made and sold on a domestic scale , although by the 7th century AD , beer was also being produced and sold by European monasteries . During the Industrial Revolution , the production of beer moved from artisanal manufacture to industrial manufacture , and domestic manufacture ceased to be significant by the end of the 19th century . The development of <unk> and thermometers changed brewing by allowing the brewer more control of the process and greater knowledge of the results . 
 Today , the brewing industry is a global business , consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries . As of 2006 , more than 133 billion liters ( 35 billion gallons ) , the equivalent of a cube 510 metres on a side , of beer are sold per year , producing total global revenues of $ 294 @.@ 5 billion ( £ 147 @.@ 7 billion ) . 
 In 2010 , China 's beer consumption hit 450 million hectolitres ( 45 billion litres ) , or nearly twice that of the United States , but only 5 percent sold were premium draught beers , compared with 50 percent in France and Germany . 
 = = Brewing = = 
 The process of making beer is known as brewing . A dedicated building for the making of beer is called a brewery , though beer can be made in the home and has been for much of its history . A company that makes beer is called either a brewery or a brewing company . Beer made on a domestic scale for non @-@ commercial reasons is classified as homebrewing regardless of where it is made , though most <unk> beer is made in the home . Brewing beer is subject to legislation and taxation in developed countries , which from the late 19th century largely restricted brewing to a commercial operation only . However , the UK government relaxed legislation in 1963 , followed by Australia in 1972 and the US in 1978 , allowing homebrewing to become a popular hobby . 
 The purpose of brewing is to convert the starch source into a sugary liquid called wort and to convert the wort into the alcoholic beverage known as beer in a fermentation process effected by yeast . 
 The first step , where the wort is prepared by mixing the starch source ( normally malted barley ) with hot water , is known as " mashing " . Hot water ( known as " liquor " in brewing terms ) is mixed with crushed malt or malts ( known as " grist " ) in a mash tun . The mashing process takes around 1 to 2 hours , during which the starches are converted to sugars , and then the sweet wort is drained off the grains . The grains are now washed in a process known as " <unk> " . This washing allows the brewer to gather as much of the fermentable liquid from the grains as possible . The process of filtering the spent grain from the wort and sparge water is called wort separation . The traditional process for wort separation is <unk> , in which the grain bed itself serves as the filter medium . Some modern breweries prefer the use of filter frames which allow a more finely ground grist . 
 Most modern breweries use a continuous sparge , collecting the original wort and the sparge water together . However , it is possible to collect a second or even third wash with the not quite spent grains as separate batches . Each run would produce a weaker wort and thus a weaker beer . This process is known as second ( and third ) runnings . Brewing with several runnings is called parti <unk> brewing . 
 The sweet wort collected from <unk> is put into a kettle , or " copper " ( so called because these vessels were traditionally made from copper ) , and boiled , usually for about one hour . During boiling , water in the wort evaporates , but the sugars and other components of the wort remain ; this allows more efficient use of the starch sources in the beer . Boiling also destroys any remaining enzymes left over from the mashing stage . Hops are added during boiling as a source of bitterness , flavour and aroma . Hops may be added at more than one point during the boil . The longer the hops are boiled , the more bitterness they contribute , but the less hop flavour and aroma remains in the beer . 
 After boiling , the hopped wort is now cooled , ready for the yeast . In some breweries , the hopped wort may pass through a <unk> , which is a small vat filled with hops , to add aromatic hop flavouring and to act as a filter ; but usually the hopped wort is simply cooled for the fermenter , where the yeast is added . During fermentation , the wort becomes beer in a process which requires a week to months depending on the type of yeast and strength of the beer . In addition to producing ethanol , fine particulate matter suspended in the wort settles during fermentation . Once fermentation is complete , the yeast also settles , leaving the beer clear . 
 Fermentation is sometimes carried out in two stages , primary and secondary . Once most of the alcohol has been produced during primary fermentation , the beer is transferred to a new vessel and allowed a period of secondary fermentation . Secondary fermentation is used when the beer requires long storage before packaging or greater clarity . When the beer has fermented , it is packaged either into casks for cask ale or kegs , aluminium cans , or bottles for other sorts of beer . 
 = = Ingredients = = 
 The basic ingredients of beer are water ; a starch source , such as malted barley , able to be <unk> ( converted to sugars ) then fermented ( converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide ) ; a brewer 's yeast to produce the fermentation ; and a flavouring such as hops . A mixture of starch sources may be used , with a secondary starch source , such as maize ( corn ) , rice or sugar , often being termed an adjunct , especially when used as a lower @-@ cost substitute for malted barley . Less widely used starch sources include millet , sorghum and cassava root in Africa , and potato in Brazil , and agave in Mexico , among others . The amount of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill . 
 Water 
 Beer is composed mostly of water . Regions have water with different mineral components ; as a result , different regions were originally better suited to making certain types of beer , thus giving them a regional character . For example , Dublin has hard water well @-@ suited to making stout , such as Guinness ; while the Plzeň Region has soft water well @-@ suited to making Pilsner ( pale lager ) , such as Pilsner <unk> . The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum , which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ales will add gypsum to the local water in a process known as <unk> . 
 Starch source 
 The starch source in a beer provides the fermentable material and is a key determinant of the strength and flavour of the beer . The most common starch source used in beer is malted grain . Grain is malted by soaking it in water , allowing it to begin germination , and then drying the partially germinated grain in a kiln . <unk> grain produces enzymes that convert starches in the grain into fermentable sugars . Different roasting times and temperatures are used to produce different colours of malt from the same grain . Darker malts will produce darker beers . 
 Nearly all beer includes barley malt as the majority of the starch . This is because its fibrous hull remains attached to the grain during threshing . After malting , barley is milled , which finally removes the hull , breaking it into large pieces . These pieces remain with the grain during the mash , and act as a filter bed during <unk> , when sweet wort is separated from insoluble grain material . Other malted and <unk> grains ( including wheat , rice , oats , and rye , and less frequently , corn and sorghum ) may be used . Some brewers have produced gluten @-@ free beer , made with sorghum with no barley malt , for those who cannot consume gluten @-@ containing grains like wheat , barley , and rye . 
 Hops 
 <unk> beer is the sole major commercial use of hops . The flower of the hop vine is used as a flavouring and preservative agent in nearly all beer made today . The flowers themselves are often called " hops " . 
 The first historical mention of the use of hops in beer was from 822 AD in monastery rules written by <unk> the Elder , also known as <unk> of Corbie , though the date normally given for widespread cultivation of hops for use in beer is the thirteenth century . Before the thirteenth century , and until the sixteenth century , during which hops took over as the dominant flavouring , beer was flavoured with other plants ; for instance , grains of paradise or <unk> . Combinations of various aromatic herbs , berries , and even ingredients like wormwood would be combined into a mixture known as <unk> and used as hops are now used . Some beers today , such as Fraoch ' by the Scottish Heather Ales company and <unk> Lancelot by the French Brasserie @-@ Lancelot company , use plants other than hops for flavouring . 
 Hops contain several characteristics that brewers desire in beer . Hops contribute a bitterness that balances the sweetness of the malt ; the bitterness of beers is measured on the International Bitterness Units scale . Hops contribute floral , citrus , and herbal aromas and flavours to beer . Hops have an antibiotic effect that favours the activity of brewer 's yeast over less desirable microorganisms and aids in " head retention " , the length of time that a foamy head created by carbonation will last . The acidity of hops is a preservative . 
 Yeast 
 Yeast is the microorganism that is responsible for fermentation in beer . Yeast metabolises the sugars extracted from grains , which produces alcohol and carbon dioxide , and thereby turns wort into beer . In addition to fermenting the beer , yeast influences the character and flavour . 
 The dominant types of yeast used to make beer are the top @-@ fermenting Saccharomyces cerevisiae and bottom @-@ fermenting Saccharomyces <unk> . Brettanomyces ferments lambics , and <unk> <unk> ferments Bavarian <unk> . 
 Before the role of yeast in fermentation was understood , fermentation involved wild or airborne yeasts . A few styles such as lambics rely on this method today , but most modern fermentation adds pure yeast cultures . 
 <unk> agent 
 Some brewers add one or more clarifying agents to beer , which typically precipitate ( collect as a solid ) out of the beer along with protein solids and are found only in trace amounts in the finished product . This process makes the beer appear bright and clean , rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles of beer such as wheat beers . 
 Examples of clarifying agents include isinglass , obtained from <unk> of fish ; Irish moss , a seaweed ; kappa <unk> , from the seaweed <unk> <unk> ; <unk> ( artificial ) ; and gelatin . If a beer is marked " suitable for Vegans " , it was clarified either with seaweed or with artificial agents . 
 = = Brewing industry = = 
 The brewing industry is a global business , consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries . More than 133 billion litres ( 35 billion gallons ) are sold per year — producing total global revenues of $ 294 @.@ 5 billion ( £ 147 @.@ 7 billion ) in 2006 . 
 The history of breweries in the 21st century has been one of larger breweries absorbing smaller breweries in order to ensure economy of scale . In 2002 South African Breweries bought the North American Miller Brewing Company to found SABMiller , becoming the second largest brewery , after North American Anheuser @-@ Bush . In 2004 the Belgian Interbrew was the third largest brewery by volume and the Brazilian <unk> was the fifth largest . They merged into InBev , becoming the largest brewery . In 2007 , SABMiller surpassed InBev and Anheuser @-@ Bush when it acquired Royal <unk> , brewer of Dutch premium beer brand <unk> in 2007 . In 2008 , when InBev ( the second @-@ largest ) bought Anheuser @-@ Busch ( the third largest ) , the new Anheuser @-@ Busch InBev company became again the largest brewer in the world . As of 2015 AB InBev remains the largest brewery , with SABMiller second , and Heineken International third . 
 A microbrewery , or craft brewery , produces a limited amount of beer . The maximum amount of beer a brewery can produce and still be classed as a microbrewery varies by region and by authority , though is usually around 15 @,@ 000 barrels ( 1 @.@ 8 megalitres , 396 thousand imperial gallons or 475 thousand US gallons ) a year . A brewpub is a type of microbrewery that incorporates a pub or other eating establishment . The highest density of breweries in the world , most of them microbreweries , exists in the German Region of Franconia , especially in the district of Upper Franconia , which has about 200 breweries . The Benedictine <unk> Brewery in Bavaria , Germany , can trace its roots to the year 768 , as a document from that year refers to a hop garden in the area paying a tithe to the monastery . The brewery was licensed by the City of Freising in 1040 , and therefore is the oldest working brewery in the world . 
 Brewing at home is subject to regulation and prohibition in many countries . Restrictions on homebrewing were lifted in the UK in 1963 , Australia followed suit in 1972 , and the US in 1978 , though individual states were allowed to pass their own laws limiting production . 
 = = Varieties = = 
 While there are many types of beer brewed , the basics of brewing beer are shared across national and cultural boundaries . The traditional European brewing regions — Germany , Belgium , England and the Czech Republic — have local varieties of beer . 
 English writer Michael Jackson , in his 1977 book The World Guide To Beer , categorised beers from around the world in local style groups suggested by local customs and names . Fred Eckhardt furthered Jackson 's work in The Essentials of Beer Style in 1989 . 
 Top @-@ fermented beers are most commonly produced with Saccharomyces cerevisiae , a top @-@ fermenting yeast which clumps and rises to the surface , typically between 15 and 24 ° C ( 60 and 75 ° F ) . At these temperatures , yeast produces significant amounts of esters and other secondary flavour and aroma products , and the result is often a beer with slightly " fruity " compounds resembling apple , pear , pineapple , banana , plum , or prune , among others . 
 After the introduction of hops into England from Flanders in the 15th century , " ale " referred to an <unk> fermented beverage , " beer " being used to describe a brew with an infusion of hops . 
 The word ale comes from Old English <unk> ( plural <unk> ) , in turn from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> ( plural * <unk> ) , ultimately from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European base * h ₂ <unk> , which holds connotations of " sorcery , magic , possession , intoxication " . The word beer comes from Old English <unk> , from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> , probably from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European * <unk> , originally " brewer 's yeast , beer dregs " , although other theories have been provided connecting the word with Old English <unk> , " barley " , or Latin <unk> , " to drink " . On the currency of two words for the same thing in the Germanic languages , the 12th @-@ century Old Icelandic poem Alvíssmál says , " Ale it is called among men , but among the gods , beer . " 
 Real ale is the term coined by the Campaign for Real Ale ( CAMRA ) in 1973 for " beer brewed from traditional ingredients , matured by secondary fermentation in the container from which it is dispensed , and served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide " . It is applied to bottle conditioned and cask conditioned beers . 
 Pale ale 
 Pale ale is a beer which uses a top @-@ fermenting yeast and predominantly pale malt . It is one of the world 's major beer styles . 
 Stout 
 Stout and porter are dark beers made using roasted malts or roast barley , and typically brewed with slow fermenting yeast . There are a number of variations including Baltic porter , dry stout , and Imperial stout . The name " porter " was first used in 1721 to describe a dark brown beer popular with the street and river porters of London . This same beer later also became known as stout , though the word stout had been used as early as 1677 . The history and development of stout and porter are intertwined . 
 Mild 
 Mild ale has a predominantly <unk> palate . It is usually dark coloured with an abv of 3 % to 3 @.@ 6 % , although there are lighter hued <unk> as well as stronger examples reaching 6 % abv and higher . 
 Wheat 
 Wheat beer is brewed with a large proportion of wheat although it often also contains a significant proportion of malted barley . Wheat beers are usually top @-@ fermented ( in Germany they have to be by law ) . The flavour of wheat beers varies considerably , depending upon the specific style . 
 <unk> 
 <unk> , a beer of Belgium , is naturally fermented using wild yeasts , rather than cultivated . Many of these are not strains of brewer 's yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) and may have significant differences in aroma and sourness . Yeast varieties such as Brettanomyces <unk> and Brettanomyces <unk> are common in lambics . In addition , other organisms such as Lactobacillus bacteria produce acids which contribute to the sourness . 
 Lager 
 Lager is cool fermented beer . Pale lagers are the most commonly consumed beers in the world . The name " lager " comes from the German " <unk> " for " to store " , as brewers around Bavaria stored beer in cool cellars and caves during the warm summer months . These brewers noticed that the beers continued to ferment , and to also clear of sediment , when stored in cool conditions . 
 Lager yeast is a cool bottom @-@ fermenting yeast ( Saccharomyces <unk> ) and typically undergoes primary fermentation at 7 – 12 ° C ( 45 – 54 ° F ) ( the fermentation phase ) , and then is given a long secondary fermentation at 0 – 4 ° C ( 32 – 39 ° F ) ( the <unk> phase ) . During the secondary stage , the lager clears and mellows . The cooler conditions also inhibit the natural production of esters and other byproducts , resulting in a " cleaner " <unk> beer . 
 Modern methods of producing lager were pioneered by Gabriel <unk> the Younger , who perfected dark brown lagers at the <unk> Brewery in Bavaria , and Anton Dreher , who began brewing a lager ( now known as Vienna lager ) , probably of amber @-@ red colour , in Vienna in 1840 – 1841 . With improved modern yeast strains , most lager breweries use only short periods of cold storage , typically 1 – 3 weeks . 
 = = Measurement = = 
 Beer is measured and assessed by bitterness , by strength and by colour . The perceived bitterness is measured by the International Bitterness Units scale ( IBU ) , defined in co @-@ operation between the American Society of Brewing Chemists and the European Brewery Convention . The international scale was a development of the European Bitterness Units scale , often abbreviated as EBU , and the bitterness values should be identical . 
 = = = Colour = = = 
 Beer colour is determined by the malt . The most common colour is a pale amber produced from using pale malts . Pale lager and pale ale are terms used for beers made from malt dried with coke . Coke was first used for roasting malt in 1642 , but it was not until around 1703 that the term pale ale was used . 
 In terms of sales volume , most of today 's beer is based on the pale lager brewed in 1842 in the town of Pilsen in the present @-@ day Czech Republic . The modern pale lager is light in colour with a noticeable carbonation ( fizzy bubbles ) and a typical alcohol by volume content of around 5 % . The Pilsner <unk> , <unk> , and Heineken brands of beer are typical examples of pale lager , as are the American brands Budweiser , Coors , and Miller . 
 Dark beers are usually brewed from a pale malt or lager malt base with a small proportion of darker malt added to achieve the desired shade . Other <unk> — such as caramel — are also widely used to darken beers . Very dark beers , such as stout , use dark or patent malts that have been roasted longer . Some have roasted <unk> barley . 
 = = = Strength = = = 
 Beer ranges from less than 3 % alcohol by volume ( abv ) to around 14 % abv , though this strength can be increased to around 20 % by re @-@ pitching with champagne yeast , and to 55 % abv by the freeze @-@ distilling process . The alcohol content of beer varies by local practice or beer style . The pale lagers that most consumers are familiar with fall in the range of 4 – 6 % , with a typical abv of 5 % . The customary strength of British ales is quite low , with many session beers being around 4 % abv . Some beers , such as table beer are of such low alcohol content ( 1 % – 4 % ) that they are served instead of soft drinks in some schools . 
 The alcohol in beer comes primarily from the metabolism of sugars that are produced during fermentation . The quantity of fermentable sugars in the wort and the variety of yeast used to ferment the wort are the primary factors that determine the amount of alcohol in the final beer . Additional fermentable sugars are sometimes added to increase alcohol content , and enzymes are often added to the wort for certain styles of beer ( primarily " light " beers ) to convert more complex carbohydrates ( starches ) to fermentable sugars . Alcohol is a by @-@ product of yeast metabolism and is toxic to the yeast ; typical brewing yeast cannot survive at alcohol concentrations above 12 % by volume . Low temperatures and too little fermentation time decreases the effectiveness of yeasts and consequently decreases the alcohol content . 
 Strongest beer 
 The strength of beers has climbed during the later years of the 20th century . Vetter 33 , a 10 @.@ 5 % abv ( 33 degrees Plato , hence Vetter " 33 " ) <unk> , was listed in the 1994 Guinness Book of World Records as the strongest beer at that time , though <unk> , by the Swiss brewer <unk> , had also been listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the strongest at 14 % abv . Since then , some brewers have used champagne yeasts to increase the alcohol content of their beers . Samuel Adams reached 20 % abv with Millennium , and then surpassed that amount to 25 @.@ 6 % abv with <unk> . The strongest beer brewed in Britain was Baz 's Super Brew by Parish Brewery , a 23 % abv beer . In September 2011 , the Scottish brewery <unk> produced Ghost Deer , which , at 28 % , they claim to be the world 's strongest beer produced by fermentation alone . 
 The product claimed to be the strongest beer made is <unk> 's 2011 <unk> 57 with 57 @,@ 5 % . It was preceded by The End of History , a 55 % Belgian ale , made by <unk> in 2010 . The same company had previously made Sink The Bismarck ! , a 41 % abv IPA , and Tactical Nuclear Penguin , a 32 % abv Imperial stout . Each of these beers are made using the <unk> method of fractional freezing , in which a strong ale is partially frozen and the ice is repeatedly removed , until the desired strength is reached , a process that may class the product as spirits rather than beer . The German brewery <unk> 's <unk> , a 31 % abv <unk> , and Hair of the Dog 's Dave , a 29 % abv barley wine made in 1994 , used the same fractional freezing method . A 60 % abv blend of beer with whiskey was jokingly claimed as the strongest beer by a Dutch brewery in July 2010 . 
 = = Serving = = 
 = = = Draught = = = 
 Draught beer from a pressurised keg is the most common method of dispensing in bars around the world . A metal keg is pressurised with carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) gas which drives the beer to the dispensing tap or faucet . Some beers may be served with a nitrogen / carbon dioxide mixture . Nitrogen produces fine bubbles , resulting in a dense head and a creamy <unk> . Some types of beer can also be found in smaller , disposable kegs called beer balls . 
 In the 1980s , Guinness introduced the beer widget , a nitrogen @-@ pressurised ball inside a can which creates a dense , tight head , similar to beer served from a nitrogen system . The words draft and draught can be used as marketing terms to describe canned or bottled beers containing a beer widget , or which are cold @-@ filtered rather than pasteurised . 
 Cask @-@ conditioned ales ( or cask ales ) are unfiltered and <unk> beers . These beers are termed " real ale " by the CAMRA organisation . Typically , when a cask arrives in a pub , it is placed horizontally on a frame called a " <unk> " which is designed to hold it steady and at the right angle , and then allowed to cool to cellar temperature ( typically between 11 – 13 ° C or 52 – 55 ° F ) , before being tapped and vented — a tap is driven through a ( usually rubber ) bung at the bottom of one end , and a hard <unk> or other implement is used to open a hole in the side of the cask , which is now uppermost . The act of <unk> and then venting a beer in this manner typically disturbs all the sediment , so it must be left for a suitable period to " drop " ( clear ) again , as well as to fully condition — this period can take anywhere from several hours to several days . At this point the beer is ready to sell , either being pulled through a beer line with a hand pump , or simply being " gravity @-@ fed " directly into the glass . 
 Draught beer 's environmental impact can be 68 % lower than bottled beer due to packaging differences . A life cycle study of one beer brand , including grain production , brewing , bottling , distribution and waste management , shows that the CO2 emissions from a 6 @-@ pack of micro @-@ brew beer is about 3 kilograms ( 6 @.@ 6 pounds ) . The loss of natural habitat potential from the 6 @-@ pack of micro @-@ brew beer is estimated to be 2 @.@ 5 square meters ( 26 square feet ) . Downstream emissions from distribution , retail , storage and disposal of waste can be over 45 % of a bottled micro @-@ brew beer 's CO2 emissions . Where legal , the use of a refillable jug , reusable bottle or other reusable containers to transport draught beer from a store or a bar , rather than buying pre @-@ bottled beer , can reduce the environmental impact of beer consumption . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 Most beers are cleared of yeast by filtering when packaged in bottles and cans . However , bottle conditioned beers retain some yeast — either by being unfiltered , or by being filtered and then reseeded with fresh yeast . It is usually recommended that the beer be poured slowly , leaving any yeast sediment at the bottom of the bottle . However , some drinkers prefer to pour in the yeast ; this practice is customary with wheat beers . Typically , when serving a <unk> wheat beer , 90 % of the contents are poured , and the remainder is swirled to suspend the sediment before pouring it into the glass . Alternatively , the bottle may be inverted prior to opening . Glass bottles are always used for bottle conditioned beers . 
 Many beers are sold in cans , though there is considerable variation in the proportion between different countries . In Sweden in 2001 , 63 @.@ 9 % of beer was sold in cans . People either drink from the can or pour the beer into a glass . A technology developed by Crown Holdings for the 2010 FIFA World Cup is the ' full aperture ' can , so named because the entire lid is removed during the opening process , turning the can into a drinking cup . Cans protect the beer from light ( thereby preventing " <unk> " beer ) and have a seal less prone to leaking over time than bottles . Cans were initially viewed as a technological breakthrough for maintaining the quality of a beer , then became commonly associated with less expensive , mass @-@ produced beers , even though the quality of storage in cans is much like bottles . Plastic ( PET ) bottles are used by some breweries . 
 = = = Temperature = = = 
 The temperature of a beer has an influence on a drinker 's experience ; warmer temperatures reveal the range of flavours in a beer but cooler temperatures are more refreshing . Most drinkers prefer pale lager to be served chilled , a low- or medium @-@ strength pale ale to be served cool , while a strong barley wine or imperial stout to be served at room temperature . 
 Beer writer Michael Jackson proposed a five @-@ level scale for serving temperatures : well chilled ( 7 ° C or 45 ° F ) for " light " beers ( pale lagers ) ; chilled ( 8 ° C or 46 ° F ) for Berliner Weisse and other wheat beers ; lightly chilled ( 9 ° C or 48 ° F ) for all dark lagers , <unk> and German wheat beers ; cellar temperature ( 13 ° C or 55 ° F ) for regular British ale , stout and most Belgian specialities ; and room temperature ( 15 @.@ 5 ° C or 60 ° F ) for strong dark ales ( especially <unk> beer ) and barley wine . 
 Drinking chilled beer began with the development of artificial refrigeration and by the 1870s , was spread in those countries that concentrated on brewing pale lager . Chilling beer makes it more refreshing , though below 15 @.@ 5 ° C the chilling starts to reduce taste awareness and reduces it significantly below 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) . Beer served <unk> — either cool or at room temperature — reveal more of their flavours . Cask Marque , a non @-@ profit UK beer organisation , has set a temperature standard range of 12 ° – 14 ° C ( 53 ° – 57 ° F ) for cask ales to be served . 
 = = = Vessels = = = 
 Beer is consumed out of a variety of vessels , such as a glass , a beer <unk> , a mug , a pewter tankard , a beer bottle or a can . The shape of the glass from which beer is consumed can influence the perception of the beer and can define and accent the character of the style . Breweries offer branded glassware intended only for their own beers as a marketing promotion , as this increases sales . 
 The pouring process has an influence on a beer 's presentation . The rate of flow from the tap or other serving vessel , tilt of the glass , and position of the pour ( in the centre or down the side ) into the glass all influence the end result , such as the size and longevity of the head , lacing ( the pattern left by the head as it moves down the glass as the beer is drunk ) , and the release of carbonation . 
 A beer tower is a beer dispensing device , usually found in bars and pubs , that consists of a cylinder attached to a beer cooling device at the bottom . Beer is dispensed from the beer tower into a drinking vessel . 
 = = Health effects = = 
 = = = Short @-@ term effects = = = 
 Beer contains ethyl alcohol , the same chemical that is present in wine and distilled spirits and as such , beer consumption has short @-@ term psychological and physiological effects on the user . Different concentrations of alcohol in the human body have different effects on a person . The effects of alcohol depend on the amount an individual has drunk , the percentage of alcohol in the beer and the timespan over which the consumption took place , the amount of food eaten and whether an individual has taken other prescription , over @-@ the @-@ counter or street drugs , among other factors . Drinking enough to cause a blood alcohol concentration ( BAC ) of 0 @.@ 03 % <unk> % typically causes an overall improvement in mood and possible euphoria , increased self @-@ confidence and sociability , decreased anxiety , a flushed , red appearance in the face and impaired judgment and fine muscle coordination . A BAC of 0 @.@ 09 % to 0 @.@ 25 % causes lethargy , sedation , balance problems and blurred vision . A BAC from 0 @.@ 18 % to 0 @.@ 30 % causes profound confusion , impaired speech ( e.g. , slurred speech ) , staggering , dizziness and vomiting . A BAC from 0 @.@ 25 % to 0 @.@ 40 % causes stupor , unconsciousness , anterograde amnesia , vomiting ( death may occur due to inhalation of vomit ( pulmonary aspiration ) while unconscious and respiratory depression ( potentially life @-@ threatening ) . A BAC from 0 @.@ 35 % to 0 @.@ 80 % causes a coma ( unconsciousness ) , life @-@ threatening respiratory depression and possibly fatal alcohol poisoning . As with all alcoholic drinks , drinking while driving , operating an aircraft or heavy machinery increases the risk of an accident ; many countries have severe criminal penalties against drunk driving . 
 = = = Long @-@ term effects = = = 
 The main active ingredient of beer is alcohol , and therefore , the health effects of alcohol apply to beer . Consumption of small quantities of alcohol ( less than one drink in women and two in men ) is associated with a decreased risk of cardiac disease , stroke and diabetes mellitus . The long term health effects of continuous , moderate or heavy alcohol consumption include the risk of developing alcoholism and alcoholic liver disease . 
 Alcoholism , also known as " alcohol use disorder " , is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in problems . It was previously divided into two types : alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence . In a medical context , alcoholism is said to exist when two or more of the following conditions is present : a person drinks large amounts over a long time period , has difficulty cutting down , acquiring and drinking alcohol takes up a great deal of time , alcohol is strongly desired , usage results in not fulfilling responsibilities , usage results in social problems , usage results in health problems , usage results in risky situations , withdrawal occurs when stopping , and alcohol tolerance has occurred with use . Alcoholism reduces a person 's life expectancy by around ten years and alcohol use is the third leading cause of early death in the United States . No professional medical association recommends that people who are <unk> should start drinking wine . A total of 3 @.@ 3 million deaths ( 5 @.@ 9 % of all deaths ) are believed to be due to alcohol . 
 Beers vary in their nutritional content . Brewer 's yeast is known to be a rich source of nutrients ; therefore , as expected , beer can contain significant amounts of nutrients , including magnesium , selenium , potassium , phosphorus , biotin , chromium and B vitamins . Beer is sometimes referred to as " liquid bread " . 
 It is considered that overeating and lack of muscle tone is the main cause of a beer belly , rather than beer consumption . A 2004 study , however , found a link between binge drinking and a beer belly . But with most overconsumption , it is more a problem of improper exercise and overconsumption of carbohydrates than the product itself . Several diet books quote beer as having an undesirably high glycemic index of 110 , the same as maltose ; however , the maltose in beer undergoes metabolism by yeast during fermentation so that beer consists mostly of water , hop oils and only trace amounts of sugars , including maltose . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 In many societies , beer is the most popular alcoholic drink . Various social traditions and activities are associated with beer drinking , such as playing cards , darts , or other pub games ; attending beer festivals ; engaging in <unk> ( the study of beer ) ; visiting a series of pubs in one evening ; visiting breweries ; beer @-@ oriented tourism ; or rating beer . Drinking games , such as beer pong , are also popular . A relatively new profession is that of the beer sommelier , who informs restaurant patrons about beers and food pairings . 
 Beer is considered to be a social lubricant in many societies and is consumed in countries all over the world . There are breweries in Middle Eastern countries such as Syria , and in some African countries . Sales of beer are four times those of wine , which is the second most popular alcoholic drink . 
 A study published in the <unk> journal in 2013 revealed the finding that the flavour of beer alone could provoke dopamine activity in the brain of the male participants , who wanted to drink more as a result . The 49 men in the study were subject to positron emission tomography scans , while a computer @-@ controlled device sprayed minute amounts of beer , water and a sports drink onto their tongues . Compared with the taste of the sports drink , the taste of beer significantly increased the participants desire to drink . Test results indicated that the flavour of the beer triggered a dopamine release , even though alcohol content in the spray was insufficient for the purpose of becoming intoxicated . 
 Some breweries have developed beers to pair with food . Wine writer Malcolm Gluck disputed the need to pair beer with food , while beer writers Roger Protz and Melissa Cole contested that claim . 
 = = Related drinks = = 
 Around the world , there are many traditional and ancient starch @-@ based drinks classed as beer . In Africa , there are various ethnic beers made from sorghum or millet , such as <unk> in Namibia and Tella in Ethiopia . Kyrgyzstan also has a beer made from millet ; it is a low alcohol , somewhat porridge @-@ like drink called " Bozo " . Bhutan , Nepal , Tibet and Sikkim also use millet in <unk> , a popular semi @-@ fermented rice / millet drink in the eastern Himalayas . Further east in China are found <unk> and <unk> — traditional rice @-@ based beverages related to beer . 
 The Andes in South America has <unk> , made from germinated maize ( corn ) ; while the indigenous peoples in Brazil have <unk> , a traditional beverage made since pre @-@ Columbian times by chewing manioc so that an enzyme ( amylase ) present in human saliva can break down the starch into fermentable sugars ; this is similar to Masato in Peru . 
 Some beers which are made from bread , which is linked to the earliest forms of beer , are <unk> in Finland , Kvass in Russia and Ukraine , and Bouza in Sudan . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Beer contains the phenolic acids 4 @-@ <unk> acid , <unk> acid , caffeic acid , <unk> acid , p @-@ <unk> acid , ferulic acid and <unk> acid . Alkaline hydrolysis experiments show that the most of the phenolic acids are present as bound forms and only a small portion can be detected as free compounds . 
 Hops , and beer made with it , contain 8 @-@ <unk> which is a potent <unk> . Hop also contains <unk> , humulene , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , tannins and resin . The alcohol <unk> is a component of hops brewing . 
 Barley , in the form of malt , brings the condensed tannins <unk> B3 , B9 and C2 . 
 <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are aromatic higher alcohols found in beer as secondary products of alcoholic fermentation ( products also known as congeners ) by Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
 = Christy Jenkins = 
 Christy Jenkins is a fictional character from the American television supernatural drama Charmed , which aired on the WB Television Network ( the WB ) from 1998 to 2006 . Charmed follows the supernatural adventures of the Charmed Ones , a trio of sisters known as the most powerful witches of all time . The character was created by executive producer Brad Kern and was portrayed by actress Marnette Patterson . Developed in response to the WB 's request for a new character , Christy was originally planned to expand the show in a new direction for a possible ninth season or spin @-@ off . 
 Introduced as Billie Jenkins 's long @-@ lost sister , she secretly collaborates with the demonic council known as the Triad with their plans to destroy the Charmed Ones . She possesses the powers of telepathy and pyrokinesis and is referred to as the key to the " Ultimate Power " due to her connection to Billie , who is prophesied to be the " Ultimate Power " . She eventually convinces Billie that the Charmed Ones are corrupt , and use their power to fulfill their own personal desires , rather than help for the greater good . Billie kills Christy in self @-@ defense after being unable to convince her to understand the Halliwell sisters were good , and to return home with her . The character is further referenced in the canonical comic books Charmed : Season 9 as well as in one of the novels . The exact nature of Christy 's morality has been the subject of debate among critics and fans . 
 After speculation as to whether the character would be featured in a spin @-@ off , it was confirmed that all future plans for the show were cancelled following the WB 's closure to launch CW Television Network ( The CW ) . Kern later felt that focusing the final season on Billie and Christy changed the show from its original meaning , while Patterson described the role as expanding her appreciation for science fiction . Critical response to the character was mixed : some critics praised her storyline with Billie , while others criticized Patterson 's acting , and the character 's development as a sign of the show 's declining quality . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept and creation = = = 
 The WB Television Network ( the WB ) renewed Charmed for an eighth season on condition that it incorporate new characters that could either sustain a ninth season or a spin @-@ off series because lead actors Alyssa Milano , Holly Marie Combs , and Rose McGowan did not want to renew their contracts for future seasons . Brian Krause , who played Leo Wyatt , expressed confusion at the direction of the final season , stating : " I don 't know if they were trying to groom talent to go on to something else " . During the WB 's merge with United Paramount Network ( UPN ) to form the CW in 2006 , network executives said there was not enough room for a Charmed spin @-@ off . In an interview with E ! ' s Kristin Veitch , Cuoco confirmed that a spin @-@ off involving her character would not be developed , saying " Charmed is done " . Executive producer Brad Kern initially called the sisterhood between Billie and Christy a " poetic " way to preserve the show 's focus on family . Patterson said that the opportunity to be featured on an established series was " really great " , saying : " it was great to be a part of a highly anticipated finale . " She added that she had " instant chemistry " with Cuoco , and that their connection made it easier to act out their storyline as sisters . 
 = = = Characterization and powers = = = 
 Christy has been described as a " source of fandom controversy " over the definition of her morality . Kern called Christy " a little traumatized " and " mysterious " , raising the question if she was " the sweet child " or someone " Stockholm Syndrome 'd and now believes in the demonic way " . He cited the nature versus nurture debate as one of the factors behind the development of the character . Brittany Spanos of Vulture.com viewed Christy as an evil witch because of her betrayal of Billie and the Charmed Ones , and SpoilerTV 's Gavin Hetherington identified her as the season 's big bad . In their book The Book of Three , authors Diana G. Gallagher and Paul Ruditis write that she was the Triad 's protégée . Ruditis , who later became the lead writer on Charmed Season 9 , viewed Billie as a pawn , instead of a proper villain , and questioned the lack of a strong , female antagonist on the show . Demain of Television Without Pity compared Christy 's identification as the key to the " Ultimate Power " to Buffy the Vampire Slayer character Dawn Summers ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) , who was also known as the Key . 
 Christy is the oldest of Carl and Helen Jenkins 's two daughters . Both of her parents are mortal , and her powers were inherited from her maternal grandmother , making her a carrier of the genes determining magical ability . As a witch , Christy possesses the basic ability to cast spells , perform rituals , brew potions , scry for lost people or objects through the use of a crystal pendent , and communicate with the dead . She also possesses an advanced form of telepathy , enabling her to hear and project her thoughts , as well as channeling other magical creatures ' powers . Carl and Helen Jenkins ( David <unk> and Barbara Niven ) said Christy heard voices prior to her kidnapping , implying that this power was already active . As a firestarter , Christy had the power of pyrokinesis ; this power could be augmented by Billie 's projection powers to vanquish demons previously believed to be invincible . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 As a child , Christy was kidnapped by a demon called Reinhardt ( Brian <unk> ) as part of a plan by the demonic council known as the Triad ( Steven J. Oliver , <unk> Oliver , and Leland Crooke ) to destroy the Charmed Ones : Piper Halliwell ( Holly Marie Combs ) , Phoebe Halliwell ( Alyssa Milano ) , and Paige Matthews ( Rose McGowan ) . Prior to her abduction , the Triad sent the demon Dumain ( Anthony <unk> ) to pose as Christy 's imaginary friend and corrupt her . It is implied that Christy has some awareness about the Triad as her parents find the council 's symbol on the final page of her diary . During the fifteen years of her kidnapping , Christy is taught to believe that it is her destiny to unite with her sister Billie Jenkins and to stop the Charmed Ones since they have become corrupted by their selfish desires . After gaining the power to warp reality , Billie travels back in time to speak with an 11 @-@ year @-@ old Christy and track down her location . She rescues Christy off @-@ screen between the episodes " 12 Angry Zen " and " The Last Temptation of Christy " . 
 With the Halliwells ' help , Billie attempts to help Christy reintegrate back into everyday life and to gain control over her powers . Billie and the Halliwells are unaware of Christy 's collaboration with the Triad . At this time , Billie is identified as the " Ultimate Power " foreshadowed in earlier episodes as the season 's big bad , and Christy as the key to the " Ultimate Power " . The Triad arranges for Christy 's parents to be killed by a pair of Noxon demons ( John Rosenfeld and David S. Lee ) , believing prolonged contact with them could sway her morality to the side of good . Billie becomes angry and feels betrayed by the Halliwell sisters when they decide to interrogate the demons to gather more information about the " Ultimate Power " rather than killing them to avenge her parents ' deaths . Christy uses this moment to turn Billie against the Charmed Ones . Billie and Christy vanquish the Noxon demons , who were previously believed to be invincible , and the Halliwell sisters realize that Billie is the " Ultimate Power " . 
 Christy attempts to convince Billie that the Charmed Ones only use their powers for their own personal gain rather than to support the greater good , and it is their destiny to stop them . Billie agrees with Christy 's plans to kill the Halliwells after exploring the sisters ' dreams and believing their " inner @-@ truths " were driven by selfish desires . After turning the magical community against the Halliwells , Billie and Christy engage in the ultimate battle with the sisters , which destroys Halliwell Manor and kills Christy , Phoebe , and Paige . Billie uses her projection power to travel back in time to save Christy , but discovers that she was being manipulated by the Triad . She realizes that Christy is working with the Triad and begins to question her morality . Christy and Dumain steal the cupid Coop 's ( Victor Webster ) ring to travel back in time to warn the Triad about the outcome of the ultimate battle . Billie helps the sisters project back in time to vanquish the Triad and the past and present versions of Dumain . Billie attempts unsuccessfully to convince Christy to come back home with her . Christy throws a fireball at Billie and the Halliwell sisters , forcing Billie to telekinetically deflect it back at her and kill her . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Christy is also referenced in a novel and the comic books based on the Charmed television series . In " <unk> Treat " , Paige experiences guilt for being unable to prevent the massacre of the magic community because Christy puts her under a hex turning her inner truth into obsession . Charmed : Season 9 , a canonical comic book continuation of the television show written by Ruditis , reveals that Billie and Christy were not intended to be powerful enough to confront the Charmed Ones . The eldest sister Prue Halliwell 's bond to the Charmed Ones prophecy , even after death , restricted her sisters from reaching their true powers , and made them vulnerable to the Triad 's plot with Billie and Christy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Throughout her run on Charmed , Christy Jenkins received mixed critical feedback . Sheldon Wiebe of the entertainment website <unk> praised the Billie and Christy storyline for having a " dark undercurrent " reminiscent of the show 's first and second seasons . Vulture.com 's Brittany Spanos placed Christy as number three on its list of 161 " demons , <unk> , and baddies " as ranked by " scariness " . Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk felt that the Billie and Christy storyline was the strongest part of season eight . Demain of Television Without Pity praised Christy as an interesting character following the reveal that she was secretly working for the Triad , and parodied her as " <unk> " and " <unk> Evil <unk> " from Cuoco 's pronunciation of the character 's name . 
 Alternatively , SpoilerTV 's Gavin Hetherington wrote he was " impartial " about Christy and opined that the Jenkins sisters were disappointing villains for the show 's final season compared to those of previous seasons . Nadim of the television and film review website Nad 's Reviews praised the concept of the Charmed Ones engaging in an ultimate battle with another set of sisters , but described its execution as a " downright embarrassing affair " . Jon Langmead of PopMatters described the familial relationship between Christy and Billie as weak in comparison to those from previous seasons . Langmead was critical of Patterson 's performance , saying she " <unk> and puffs through her on @-@ camera time " . Digital Spy 's Hugh Armitage listed the Jenkins sisters as " the gruesome twosome " and one of the eight things that derailed the show . Armitage criticized Patterson for having " a habit of pulling ' evil ' faces when no one could see her like a pantomime villain " . 
 = Kepler @-@ 11e = 
 Kepler @-@ 11e is an exoplanet ( extrasolar planet ) discovered in the orbit of the sunlike star Kepler @-@ 11 . It is the fourth of six planets around Kepler @-@ 11 discovered by NASA 's Kepler spacecraft . Kepler @-@ 11e was found by using the transit method , in which the dimming effect that a planet causes as it crosses in front of its star is measured . Kepler @-@ 11e is most likely a gas giant like Neptune , having a density that is less than that of Saturn , the least dense planet in the Solar System . Its low density can probably be attributed to a large hydrogen and helium atmosphere . Kepler @-@ 11e has a mass eight times of Earth 's mass and a radius 4 @.@ 5 times that of Earth . The planet orbits its star every 31 days in an ellipse that would fit within the orbit of Mercury . Kepler @-@ 11e was announced on February 2 , 2011 with its five sister planets after it was confirmed by several observatories . 
 = = Name and discovery = = 
 At the time when Kepler @-@ 11 was first noted as a host to a potential transit event , the star was given the designation KOI @-@ 157 . It was later assigned the name " Kepler @-@ 11 " after the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA satellite tasked with discovering planets in transit of , or crossing in front of , their stars . This transit causes a slight and regular change in the host star 's brightness , which can then tested to prove the planet 's existence and , later , to extrapolate the orbital parameters of the planet . Kepler @-@ 11e is first given the designation by its host star , Kepler @-@ 11 . Since Kepler @-@ 11e was announced with five other planets , the letters added to the star are sorted by the planet 's distance from its star . Kepler @-@ 11e is the fourth planet from Kepler @-@ 11 , it is given the designation " e " . 
 Follow @-@ up confirmation observations were made by the Keck 1 telescope at the W.M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii , the Hale and Shane telescopes in California , the Harlan J. Smith and Hobby @-@ Eberly telescopes in west Texas , the Nordic Optical Telescope in the Canary Islands , and by telescopes at the WIYN ( including MMT ) and Whipple observatories in Arizona . The Spitzer Space Telescope was also used . Kepler @-@ 11 's planetary system became the first discovered extrasolar system with more than three transiting planets , as well as the most compact and flattest system yet discovered , according to NASA . The planets of Kepler @-@ 11 , including Kepler @-@ 11e , were announced jointly at a press conference on February 2 , 2011 . The findings were published in the journal Nature on February 3 . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 is a G @-@ type star located in the Cygnus . It has a mass of .95 Msun and a radius of 1 @.@ 1 Rsun , and is thus almost the same mass and radius as the Sun . With an effective temperature of 5680 K , it is also almost as hot as the Sun , and with a metallicity of 0 , Kepler @-@ 11 is almost as metal @-@ rich as the Sun is . Metal @-@ rich stars tend to have easily detectable planets because higher metallicities tend to either facilitate the creation of gas giants or to promote planetary migration , in which the planet orbits more closely to its star . However , Kepler @-@ 11 is almost 1 @.@ 73 times older than the Sun , as it has an estimated age of eight billion years . Kepler @-@ 11 is 613 parsecs away from the Earth ; its distance contributes to its apparent magnitude of 14 @.@ 2 ( V ) . It , thus , cannot be seen with the naked eye . Other than Kepler @-@ 11e , Kepler @-@ 11 is the host star of the planets Kepler @-@ 11b , Kepler @-@ 11c , Kepler @-@ 11d , Kepler @-@ 11f , and Kepler @-@ 11g . The inner five planets in the system orbit in a tightly knit configuration that would fit within the orbit of planet Mercury , while Kepler @-@ 11g , compared to its inner sister planets , orbits at a much further distance . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11e , which formed within the first few million years of the star system 's formation , has a mass 8 @.@ 4 times that of Earth 's , and radius 4 @.@ 52 times that of Earth 's . With a density of 0 @.@ 5 grams / cm3 , Kepler @-@ 11e has a density that is half of that of pure water at standard temperature and pressure and slightly less than the density of Saturn . Kepler @-@ 11e has a surface equilibrium temperature of 617 K , and is thus has an equilibrium temperature approximately 2 @.@ 4 times hotter than Earth 's . Kepler @-@ 11e orbits its star at a mean distance of .194 AU , making it the fourth planet from its star . It completes an orbit every 31 @.@ <unk> days . In comparison , Mercury orbits the Sun every 87 @.@ 97 days at a distance of .387 AU . Kepler @-@ 11e 's orbital inclination is 88 @.@ 8 ° , making it almost entirely edge @-@ on to its star as seen from Earth . 
 Because it isn 't as close to its star as its sister planets Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c , the Kepler team suggests that its light density may come from a large hydrogen and helium atmosphere that has not been blown away by the stellar wind . 
 = 1689 Boston revolt = 
 The 1689 Boston revolt was a popular uprising on April 18 , 1689 , against the rule of Sir Edmund Andros , the governor of the Dominion of New England . A well @-@ organized " mob " of provincial militia and citizens formed in the city and arrested dominion officials . Members of the Church of England , believed by Puritans to sympathize with the administration of the dominion , were also taken into custody by the rebels . Neither faction sustained casualties during the revolt . Leaders of the former Massachusetts Bay Colony then reclaimed control of the government . In other colonies , members of governments displaced by the dominion were returned to power . 
 Andros , commissioned governor of New England in 1686 , had earned the enmity of the local populace by enforcing the restrictive Navigation Acts , denying the validity of existing land titles , restricting town meetings , and appointing unpopular regular officers to lead colonial militia , among other actions . Furthermore , he had infuriated Puritans in Boston by promoting the Church of England , which was rejected by many Nonconformist New England colonists . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1680s , King Charles II of England began taking steps to reorganize the colonies of New England . The charter of the Massachusetts Bay Colony was revoked in 1684 after its Puritan rulers refused to act on his demands for reforms in the colony , when Charles sought to streamline the administration of the small colonies and bring them more closely under crown control . He died in 1685 and his successor , the Roman Catholic James II , continued the process , which culminated in the creation of the Dominion of New England . 
 In 1686 , the former governor of New York , Sir Edmund Andros , was appointed as dominion governor . The dominion was composed of the territories of the Massachusetts Bay , Plymouth , Connecticut , New Hampshire , and Rhode Island colonies . In 1688 , its jurisdiction was expanded to include New York , and East and West Jersey . 
 Andros 's rule was extremely unpopular in New England . He disregarded local representation , denied the validity of existing land titles in Massachusetts ( which had been dependent on the old charter ) , restricted town meetings , and actively promoted the Church of England in largely Puritan regions . He also enforced the Navigation Acts , <unk> laws that threatened the existence of certain trading practices of New England . The royal troops stationed in Boston were often mistreated by their officers who were supporters of the governor and often either Anglican or Roman Catholic . 
 Meanwhile , in England , James became increasingly unpopular . The king alienated otherwise supportive Tories with his attempts to relax the Penal Laws , and in 1687 issued the Declaration of Indulgence , establishing some freedom of religion , a move opposed by the Anglican church hierarchy . He increased the power of the regular army , an action seen by many Parliamentarians as a threat to their authority , and placed Catholics in important military positions . James also attempted to place sympathizers in Parliament who he hoped would repeal the Test Act , which required a strict Anglican religious test for many civil offices . With the birth of his son and potential successor James in June 1688 , some Whigs and Tories set aside their political differences and conspired to replace James with his Protestant son @-@ in @-@ law , William , Prince of Orange . The Dutch prince , who had tried fruitlessly to get James to reconsider his policies , agreed to an invasion , and the nearly bloodless revolution that followed in November and December 1688 established William and his wife Mary as co @-@ rulers . 
 The religious leaders of Massachusetts , led by Cotton and Increase Mather , were opposed to the rule of Andros , and they organized dissent targeted to influence the court in London . After King James published the Declaration of Indulgence , Increase Mather sent an appreciation letter to the king regarding the declaration , and suggested to other Massachusetts pastors that they also express gratitude to the king as a means to gain favor and influence . Ten pastors agreed to do so , and they decided to send Increase Mather to England to press their case against Andros . Despite dominion secretary Edward Randolph 's repeated attempts to stop him ( including pressing criminal charges ) , Mather was clandestinely spirited aboard a ship bound for England in April 1688 . He and other Massachusetts agents were received by James , who promised in October 1688 that the colony 's concerns would be addressed . The events of the revolution , however , halted this attempt to gain redress . 
 The Massachusetts agents then petitioned the new monarchs and the Lords of Trade ( predecessors to the Board of Trade that oversaw colonial affairs ) for restoration of the Massachusetts charter . Mather furthermore convinced the Lords of Trade to delay notifying Andros of the revolution . He had already dispatched , to previous colonial governor Simon Bradstreet , a letter containing news of a report ( prepared before the revolution ) that the annulment of the Massachusetts charter had been illegal , and that the magistrates should " prepare the minds of the people for a change " . Rumors of the revolution apparently reached some individuals in Boston before official news arrived . John Nelson , a Boston merchant who would figure prominently in the revolt , wrote of the events in a letter dated late March , and the letter prompted a meeting of senior anti @-@ Andros political and religious leaders in Massachusetts . 
 Andros first received a warning of the impending revolt against his control while leading an expedition to fortify Pemaquid ( present @-@ day Bristol , Maine ) , intending to protect the area against French and Indian attacks . In early January 1688 / 9 , he received a letter from James describing the Dutch military buildup . On January 10 he issued a proclamation warning against Protestant agitation and prohibiting an uprising against the dominion . The military force he led in Maine was composed of British regulars and militia from Massachusetts and Maine . The militia companies were commanded by regulars , who imposed harsh discipline that alienated the militiamen from their officers . Alerted to the meetings in Boston , and in receipt of unofficial reports of the revolution , Andros returned there from Maine in mid @-@ March . Amid wild rumors that Andros had brought them to Maine as part of a so @-@ called " popish plot " , the militia there mutinied , and those from Massachusetts began to make their way home . When a copy of a proclamation announcing the revolution reached Boston in early April , Andros had the messenger arrested , but his news was distributed , emboldening the people . Andros wrote to his commander at Pemaquid on April 16 that " there is a general buzzing among the people , great with expectation of their old charter " , even as he prepared to have the returning deserters arrested and shipped back to Maine . The threat of arrests by their own colonial militia increased tensions between the people of Boston and the dominion government . 
 = = Revolt in Boston = = 
 At about 5 : 00 am on April 18 , militia companies began gathering outside Boston at Charlestown just across the Charles River and at Roxbury , located at the far end of the neck connecting Boston to the mainland . At about 8 : 00 am the Charlestown companies boarded boats and crossed the river , while the Roxbury companies marched down the neck and into the city . Simultaneously , conspirators from the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company entered the homes of the regimental drummers in the city , confiscating their equipment . Joined by a growing mob , the militia companies met up at about 8 : 30 and began arresting dominion and regimental leaders . They eventually surrounded Fort Mary , where Andros was quartered . 
 Among the first to be arrested was Captain John George of the HMS Rose , who came ashore between 9 : 00 and 10 : 00 , only to be met by a platoon of militia and the ship 's carpenter , who had joined the rebels . When George demanded to see an arrest warrant , the militiamen drew their swords and took him into custody . By about 10 : 00 , most of the dominion and military officials either had been arrested or had fled to the safety of Castle Island or other fortified outposts . Boston Anglicans , including a churchwarden and an apothecary , were rounded up by the mob . Sometime before noon an orange flag was raised on Beacon Hill , signaling another 1 @,@ 500 militiamen to enter the city . These troops formed up in the market square , where a declaration was read . In it , the leaders claimed to support " the noble Undertaking of the Prince of Orange " , and to rise up because of a " horrid Popish Plot " that had been uncovered . 
 The old Massachusetts colonial leadership , headed by ex @-@ governor Simon Bradstreet , then urged Governor Andros to surrender for his own safety , citing the mob of which they claimed to be " wholly ignorant " . He refused and instead tried to escape to the Rose . A boat that came ashore from the Rose was intercepted by militia , and Andros was forced back into Fort Mary . Negotiations ensued and Andros agreed to leave the fort to meet with the rebel council . Promised safe conduct , he was marched under guard to the townhouse where the council had assembled . There he was told ( as an anonymous account of the exchange described it ) that " they must and would have the Government in their own hands " , and that he was under arrest . He was taken to the home of dominion official John Usher , and held under close watch . 
 The Rose and Fort William on Castle Island refused to surrender immediately . On the 19th , when the ship 's crew on the Rose was told that the captain had planned to take the ship to France to join the exiled James , a struggle ensued , and the Protestants among the crew took down the ship 's rigging . After the troops on Castle Island saw this , they surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Fort Mary fell on the 19th , Andros was moved there from Usher 's house . He was confined with Joseph Dudley and other dominion officials until June 7 , when he was transferred to Castle Island . A story circulated widely that he attempted an escape dressed in women 's clothing . This was disputed by the Anglican minister in Boston , Robert Ratcliff , who claimed that story and others had " not the least foundation of Truth " , and that they were " falsehoods , and lies " propagated to " render the Governour odious to his people " . Andros did make a successful escape from Castle Island on August 2 , after his servant bribed the sentries with liquor . He managed to flee to Rhode Island , but was recaptured soon thereafter and kept in what was virtually solitary confinement . He and others arrested in the wake of the revolt were held for 10 months before being sent to England for trial . Massachusetts agents in London refused to sign the documents listing the charges against Andros , so he was summarily acquitted and released . He later served as governor of Virginia and Maryland . 
 = = Dissolution of the dominion = = 
 When the other New England colonies in the dominion were informed of the overthrow of Andros , pre @-@ dominion colonial authorities moved to restore their former governments to power . Rhode Island and Connecticut resumed governance under their earlier charters , and Massachusetts resumed governance according to its vacated charter after being temporarily governed by a committee composed of magistrates , Massachusetts Bay officials , and a majority of Andros 's council . The committee was disbanded after some Boston leaders felt that radical rebels held too much sway over it . New Hampshire was temporarily left without formal government and was controlled by Massachusetts and its governor , Simon Bradstreet , who served as de facto ruler of the northern colony . Plymouth also resumed its previous form of governance . 
 During his captivity , Andros had been able to send a message to Francis Nicholson , his New York @-@ based lieutenant governor . Nicholson received the request for assistance in mid @-@ May , but most of his troops had been sent to Maine , and with rising tensions in New York , he was unable to take any effective action . Nicholson himself was overthrown by a faction led by Jacob Leisler , and he fled to England . Leisler governed New York until 1691 , when a detachment of troops arrived , followed by Henry Sloughter , commissioned governor by William and Mary . Sloughter had Leisler tried on charges of high treason ; he was convicted and executed . 
 After the suppression of Leisler 's Rebellion and the reinstatement of colonial governments in New England , no further effort was made by English officials to restore the " shattered " dominion . Once the fait accompli of Andros ' arrest was known , the discussion in London turned to dealing with Massachusetts and its revoked charter . Out of these discussions came the formation of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in 1691 , merging Massachusetts with the <unk> Plymouth Colony and territories previously belonging to New York , including Nantucket , Martha 's Vineyard , the Elizabeth Islands , and parts of Maine . Increase Mather was unsuccessful in his attempts to restore the old Puritan rule : the new charter called for an appointed governor and religious toleration . 
 = Perijá tapaculo = 
 The Perijá tapaculo ( Scytalopus perijanus ) is a species of passerine bird in the family <unk> ( tapaculos ) . Endemic to the Serranía del Perijá mountain range on the Colombia – Venezuela border , the Perijá tapaculo is found at altitudes of 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 225 metres ( 5 @,@ 200 – 10 @,@ 600 feet ) . It measures 10 to 12 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 7 inches ) , and its tail is around 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long . Specimens have long been stored in museums , but the species was only described in 2015 based on sixteen specimens found between July 2008 and February 2009 . It is considered endangered . 
 Adults have neutral grey heads , brown necks , brown @-@ sepia striped backs , and grey @-@ white bellies , breasts , and throats . Males have some buff markings on their breasts , and less sharp brown spots on their napes than females . The Perijá tapaculo is a secretive bird and therefore difficult to observe ; as a result its ecology is poorly known . It feeds on insects and reproduces between April and July . Its range is partially within <unk> de Perijá Bird Reserve in Colombia and the Sierra de Perijá National Park in Venezuela . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 <unk> are the most primitive family of suboscines , divided into 12 genera containing 60 species . Scytalopus , the genus to which the Perijá tapaculo belongs , has an abundance of similar species , many of which are difficult to classify through appearance . Some individual species from other genera are like Scytalopus in size and plumage , but have different behaviour and morphological features . Vocal studies and mitochondrial DNA analysis are often used to differentiate between species within the genus ; a number of visually identical species previously classified as subspecies of the Magellanic tapaculo ( S. <unk> ) have been identified through these methods , and the majority of subspecies within the genus have subsequently been reclassified as separate species . 
 Between 1941 and 1942 , American ornithologist Melbourne Armstrong <unk> collected 27 specimens of the Perijá tapaculo in six locations on the western side of the Serranía del Perijá . He identified them as specimens of the northern white @-@ crowned tapaculo ( S. atratus ) , despite size and colour differences , and sent them to the National Museum of Natural History in Washington , D.C. In 1953 , the specimens began to attract the attention of biologists , and were successively identified as the brown @-@ rumped tapaculo ( S. latebricola ) , the Caracas tapaculo ( S. <unk> ) , and the Mérida tapaculo ( S. <unk> ) . Some further believed that the specimens could belong to an undescribed species , or constitute a subspecies of the pale @-@ bellied tapaculo ( S. <unk> ) or the Mérida tapaculo based on morphological studies , but they were never classified as any of these . 
 In September 2006 , biologists Juan Pablo López and Alexander Cortés <unk> found two specimens in a cloud forest at an altitude of 2 @,@ 450 m ( 8 @,@ 000 ft ) on the western side of the Serranía del Perijá in Colombia , but the information collected was insufficient to identify a new species . Between July 2008 and February 2009 , sixteen new specimens were collected in an area previously explored by <unk> . New vocal , morphological , genetic , and ecological studies of these specimens confirmed that they constituted a new species , Scytalopus perijanus , first described by Jorge Enrique Avendaño et al. on 11 March 2015 following a three @-@ year expedition , and accepted by the South American Classification Committee . The Latin word perijanus refers to the Serranía del Perijá mountain range , and the genus name Scytalopus comes from the Greek <unk> ( stick ) and pous ( foot ) . 
 The type specimen of the Perijá tapaculo , an adult male , was found in the Serranía del Perijá near the El Cinco <unk> of <unk> , Cesar Department , Colombia , at an altitude of 2 @,@ 450 m ( 8 @,@ 000 ft ) . Jorge Enrique Avendaño lured the specimen by playing a recording of its song on 10 July 2008 at the edge of a montane forest . Sequence analysis of the mitochondrial gene <unk> from the Perijá tapaculo showed that its nearest relatives are the brown @-@ rumped tapaculo , Caracas tapaculo , and Mérida tapaculo . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Perijá tapaculo is a small bird , 10 to 12 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) in length with an average mass of 17 to 18 grams ( around 0 @.@ 6 oz ) . The bill averages 6 @.@ 8 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 27 inches ) long , 2 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 11 in ) wide , and 3 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 14 in ) high . The legs are about 21 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) long . The Perijá tapaculo 's tarsus averages 21 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) long . The wings measure 57 @.@ 4 mm ( 2 @.@ 26 in ) on average and the tail is about 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long with between 8 and 12 rectrices . 
 The forehead , lores , crown , mantle , and scapular area are a neutral grey colour . There is a brown spot on the nape . The top of the tail is brown , and the bottom is faintly striped brown . The bird 's back and rump are striped brown @-@ sepia , and the throat , breast , and belly are grey @-@ white . Its lower belly and flanks are tawny . The iris is dark brown . Male specimens are distinguished by having less sharp brown spots on their napes , and the bottom of their breasts are mixed with a pale buff colour . The legs are brown on the back and whitish on the front . Young birds have a yellowish appearance with striped brown flanks . 
 The bird 's plumage colouration is most similar to the pale @-@ bellied tapaculo . The S. g. <unk> subspecies of the pale @-@ bellied tapaculo can be differentiated from the Perijá tapaculo by its entirely brown back and nape , and its different calls . Juveniles of this subspecies have a dull ventral plumage , while the Perijá tapaculo has a more yellow plumage . It also resembles the Caracas tapaculo but has a duller ventral colour . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Like other species in genus Scytalopus , the Perijá tapaculo is secretive and therefore difficult to observe . The call and song differ from those of most other species in the genus , and the latter is composed of two short churrs repeating up to 65 times at 0 @.@ 5 to 3 second intervals . The diet of the species is little known , but studies of the stomach contents of seven specimens suggested that they fed exclusively on insects . 
 Little is known about the reproduction of the species , but it is believed to nest between April and July . The species builds its globular nests in underground cavities about 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter and around 14 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) in height , lined with mosses , grasses , and plant roots around a central space about 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) wide . The nests are accessed by a short tunnel with a depth of 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) and a diameter of 4 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) . Young birds may leave the nest at the end of June . Like those of other Scytalopus species , male specimens have demonstrated involvement in parenting . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Perijá tapaculo is endemic to the Serranía del Perijá , a mountain range on the Colombia – Venezuela border known for its high rates of endemism . It has been observed in nineteen localities on both sides of the border between altitudes of 1 @,@ 600 and 3 @,@ 225 m ( 5 @,@ 200 and 10 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level ; in its northern range , there are no suitable forests below 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) . The bird has been observed at 1 @,@ 800 – 3 @,@ 120 m ( 5 @,@ 900 – 10 @,@ 200 ft ) on the Venezuelan side , and at 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 225 m on the Colombian side . 
 The Perijá tapaculo lives in and on the edges of humid rainforests , as well as in elfin forests and amongst woody páramo shrubs in high @-@ mountain grassland areas , especially at altitudes of 2 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 m ( 8 @,@ 200 – 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . Some specimens have been observed feeding in dense thickets within 1 m ( 3 ft ) of the ground , often near the forest . Others have been observed running through open grassy areas between bushes . 
 The species has not been identified as being sympatric with any other species of the genus Scytalopus . However , there is a possibility that its range overlaps with that of the S. atratus nigricans , which occupies a different micro @-@ habitat on the eastern side of the Serranía del Perijá at altitudes of 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 900 m ( 4 @,@ 900 – 6 @,@ 200 ft ) ; or that it may be found within the range of the pale @-@ bellied tapaculo in the lower reaches of the Serranía de Los <unk> mountain range , south of the Serranía del Perijá . 
 = = Threats and protection = = 
 Jorge Enrique Avendaño et al. wrote in the original description of the Perijá tapaculo that the size and quality of the species ' range are being reduced , although it can tolerate a certain level of fragmentation of its range . Its natural habitat covers about 5 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 sq mi ) . The description suggests that this species meets the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) criteria for an endangered species . The authors believe that to protect the Perijá tapaculo , conservation measures on the Colombian side of the border should reflect those on the Venezuelan side , as the forests of the Serranía del Perijá have been largely destroyed on the Colombian side by logging activities and forest clearance for agriculture . 
 On 28 January 2014 , prior to the formal description of the bird , the <unk> de Perijá Bird Reserve was created by Fundación <unk> to maintain one of Colombia 's most fragile habitats . In addition to the Perijá tapaculo , several other Perijá @-@ endemic endangered species , such as the Perijá <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and Perijá <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) are protected within this reserve 's 749 hectares ( 1 @,@ 850 acres ) . The Colombian section of the Serranía del Perijá is dangerous for scientific excursions due to the presence of the FARC guerrilla group in the region . In Venezuela , the Sierra de Perijá National Park covers 300 @,@ 000 hectares ( 740 @,@ 000 acres ) and partially protects the habitat of the Perijá tapaculo . 
 = Ron and Tammy = 
 " Ron and Tammy " is the eighth episode of the second season of Parks and Recreation , and the fourteenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 5 , 2009 . In the episode , the library department tries to take control of a vacant lot where Leslie plans to build a park . Ron 's ex @-@ wife , one of Leslie 's directors , tries to use Ron to get her way . The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Troy Miller . 
 " Ron and Tammy " featured Megan Mullally , the real @-@ life wife of Parks actor Nick Offerman , in a guest appearance as Ron 's ex @-@ wife , Tammy . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was seen by 4 @.@ 93 million household viewers ; its rating of 2 @.@ 2 was the season 's highest to that point . " Ron and Tammy " received highly positive reviews and is widely considered one of the best Parks and Recreation episodes , with many commentators praising Offerman 's performance . Tammy later returned for the third season sequel episode , " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " and several subsequent episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy ( Chris Pratt ) takes over as the shoeshiner at the Pawnee town hall , replacing " Old Gus " ( Jack Carter ) , who insults everybody during a farewell party . Later , Mark ( Paul Schneider ) breaks the bad news to Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) that the Pawnee library has placed a planning claim for Lot 48 , which Leslie has been working to turn into a park . Leslie and the rest of the parks department express hatred for the library , which Leslie declares a " diabolical , ruthless bunch of bureaucrats " , much to the confusion of Ann ( Rashida Jones ) . Ron ( Nick Offerman ) is particularly angry to learn his ex @-@ wife Tammy ( Megan Mullally ) , who he insists is evil incarnate , is the new library director . 
 Leslie decides to confront Tammy directly , only to find Tammy seems to be a friendly woman who instantly agrees to let Leslie have Lot 48 as a " professional courtesy " . Impressed , Leslie brings Tammy to the parks department so she can talk to Ron and work out their differences . Tammy and an agitated Ron go off to have coffee , and Donna ( Retta ) insists to Leslie that the arrangement is a mistake because the two act crazy when they are together . At a local diner , Ron and Tammy immediately start a very loud argument in front of the other patrons . Moments later , however , the two are publicly making out on the table in front of everyone . The two rush off to a motel , where they are removing their clothing before even entering the building . 
 Ann and her boyfriend Mark run into Andy , Ann 's ex @-@ boyfriend . Andy flirts with Ann in front of Mark , and openly admits he plans to win her back from him . Mark asks advice from Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) , who suggests Mark should take the high road ( although Tom tells the documentary crew that he never takes the high road , but tells everyone else to do so , so there is more room for him on " the low road " ) . Mark tries to have a gentlemanly discussion with Andy , who continues to insist he loves Ann , pointing to the many photos he has of her around his shoeshine station . Finally , Ann confronts Andy and tells him to stop discussing her with Mark , as well as to remove her photos from the wall . 
 A cheery and singing Ron ( who is wearing his " Tiger Woods " outfit , which is an outfit he wears after having sex ) openly discusses the details his sexual exploits with Tammy to an uncomfortable Leslie . Although she is initially pleased with the results of her meddling , Leslie soon realizes Tammy is using sex to manipulate Ron to give her control of Lot 48 . Leslie confronts Tammy , who admits to the plot and brags that this is how the library operates . Leslie tries to get Ron to break up with Tammy , but he insists he cannot confront her without Leslie 's help . The two go to the library , where Ron starts to cave in when Tammy flirts with him . Leslie tells Ron to do whatever will make him happy , even if it means giving up the lot . Ron , impressed that a woman would put his own needs first , decides instead to break up with Tammy and give the lot back to Leslie . After breaking the news to Tammy , he leaves the library with a push @-@ pin stuck in his forehead , and part of his mustache missing , and he and Leslie flee the library . The two share a drink , where Ron insults Tammy . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ron and Tammy " was written by Mike Scully and directed by Troy Miller . The episode featured comedian and actress Megan Mullally in a guest appearance as Ron 's ex @-@ wife , Tammy . Mullally is the real @-@ life wife of Nick Offerman , who plays Ron . Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Michael Schur conceived the idea for the story , and asked Offerman whether he and Mullally would be opposed to her playing such a terrible character . Offerman was extremely responsive to the idea . Mullally said she enjoyed the script , particularly the dialogue of Ron describing Tammy , more than Tammy 's part herself . Offerman and Mullally improvised many of their on @-@ screen fights , as well as the varied methods of unusual kissing between the two characters . During the diner scene , in which Ron and Tammy switch between violent fighting and passionate kissing , Offerman accidentally pulled a diner table out of the wall after placing Mullally on top of it and kissing her . The scene was used in the final episode . Offerman said of filming the diner scenes , " At the end of doing that for a few hours , we said , you know that feels like it was five weeks worth of really good therapy . " 
 During a scene with Ron and Tammy start stripping while running into a motel room , Mullally removed her top and appeared topless during filming . Mullally improvised the move and did not tell the crew she planned to do it . She said of filming the scene , " I didn 't care , it was six in the morning , who cares , I didn 't know anybody . " Offerman said his favorite scene in the episode was the one in which Leslie tried to break up with Tammy for him . He particularly enjoyed the rapport between Poehler and Mullally , and said he " just wanted to pinch himself " to prevent from laughing . After reuniting with Tammy , Ron puts a framed photo on his wall of a brunette woman holding a plate of breakfast , which he said symbolizes his relationship with Tammy and the breakfast she made him after sex . In the pilot episode of Parks and Recreation , a photo of retired basketball coach Bobby Knight is on the wall . When it had to be removed for legal reasons , Parks and Recreation Schur searched an image library for " things we thought Ron would like " and found the breakfast photo . Schur said he thought it was perfect for the character , and it inspired the prop and the dialogue in the episode . The character Tammy later returned for the third season sequel episode , " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " . 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , two deleted scenes from " Ron and Tammy " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the first two @-@ minute @-@ long clip , Ron describes Tammy to Leslie in increasingly horrible ways , and Leslie talks to Tammy about previous problem the two had , including an instance in which Tammy seduces Ron 's father . In the second 90 @-@ second clip , Tom directs customers to Andy 's shoeshine in exchange for a 40 percent commission , while Mark tries to get Ann to abandon her nursing patients to spend more time with him . Lawrence , a neighbor with a long @-@ standing feud with Andy , mocks him by giving him dozens of soiled shoes to clean . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The day after having sex with Tammy , Ron comes to work wearing a red shirt and black pants , which prompts Tom to observe that Ron always dresses like golf pro Tiger Woods after having sex . This joke was written before the story of Woods ' extramarital affairs scandal broke in the news in November 2009 . Andy is said to have auditioned for the reality television show Survivor and the television game show Deal or No Deal . During an audition tape , he is shown gutting a fish to prove he could perform on Deal or No Deal , even though the action is far more appropriate for Survivor . During one scene , to Leslie 's shock and confusion , Tammy said she would rather be Cleopatra , the last pharaoh of Egypt 's Ptolemaic dynasty , than Eleanor Roosevelt , the former First Lady and wife of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 5 , 2009 , " Ron and Tammy " was seen by 4 @.@ 93 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . Among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , the episode drew a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 6 share ; a share represents the percentage of households using a television at the time the program is airing . It was the highest rating to that point for the season , and a 10 percent jump from the previous episode , " Greg Pikitis " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Ron and Tammy " received critical acclaim and is widely considered one of the best episodes of Parks and Recreation . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said " Ron and Tammy " was the funniest episode of the season , particularly for the dead @-@ pan performance of Nick Offerman . Sepinwall also praised the parks employees ' hatred for the library , and the fact that minor characters Jerry and Donna are further developing . Matt Fowler of IGN called it a " particularly solid episode " , and he enjoyed seeing Leslie serve as the voice of reason . Fowler said the Andy subplot was less funny than the main plot , but it advanced Andy 's character . Steve Heisler from The A.V. Club praised the episode and the performance of Offerman , whom he said showed a deeper comedic range than in previous episodes . Heisler also praised Pratt and Poehler , who he said shined in showing a more sensible side . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis called the episode " damn near perfect " and said it made her " fall truly , madly , deeply in love with Parks and Recreation . " Ross <unk> of The Huffington Post called " Ron and Tammy " one of the highlights of the season . 
 Steve Kandell of New York magazine called " Ron and Tammy " one of the moments when Parks and Recreation " found its voice and its footing " . Dose writer Kat Angus said " Ron and Tammy " solidified Parks and Recreation as " the funniest show on TV this season " . Angus praised Offerman 's performance and his pairing with Mullally . TV Guide writer Matt Roush , who had previously been very critical of Parks and Recreation , called " Ron and Tammy " " unquestionably the show ’ s best episode to date " . Roush particularly praised the comedic chemistry between Offerman and Mullally , who he said " make beautiful comic music together " . Time magazine reviewer James Poniewozik called it an " excellent episode " , and said it balanced well the show 's formula of comedy focused on people and small @-@ town government . H.T. " Hercules " Strong , a regular columnist with Ain 't it Cool News , praised Poehler and Mullally , and said the editing , particularly during the diner scene with Ron and Tammy , was worthy of an Emmy Award nomination . CNN associated producer Henry Hanks praised the " uproarious performances " of both Offerman and Mullally , while another CNN review of called Mullally 's guest performance " Emmy @-@ worthy " , and praised the performances of Offerman , Poehler and Pratt . It also said , " Poehler ’ s development of her character this season has been great to watch " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Ron and Tammy " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . It also included a commentary track for " Ron and Tammy " featuring Nick Offerman , Megan Mullally , and series co @-@ creators Michael Schur and Greg Daniels . 
 = Louis Ngwat @-@ Mahop = 
 Louis Clément Ngwat @-@ Mahop ( born 16 September 1987 ) is a Cameroonian footballer who plays for Austrian side SC Rheindorf Altach as a striker and a right winger . He started his career in his hometown 's club Dragon Club de Yaoundé before being signed by German giants FC Bayern Munich in 2006 . He played with them for one season , featuring mainly in matches of Bayern Munich II in the Regionalliga Süd . After being released by FC Bayern Munich in the summer of 2007 , due to issues that arose with his French passport , he signed for Austrian club Red Bull Salzburg . At first he was assigned to play in the Regionalliga West with the club 's reserve squad , Red Bull Salzburg Juniors , but he managed to make it to the first team . In total , Ngwat @-@ Mahop spent three and a half years with the Austrian club , managing to win the Austrian Bundesliga in no less than two occasions . In January 2011 he signed for Greek Superleague outfit Iraklis . He played for Karlsruher SC for the 2011 – 12 season before signing for Rheindorf Altach in 2012 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Ngwat @-@ Mahop was born in Yaoundé on 16 September 1987 , and grew up having Samuel Eto 'o as his idol . He started his career for Cameroonian minnows Dragon Club de Yaoundé , being one of the most notable players ever to come out of the club . 
 = = = Bayern Munich = = = 
 In May 2006 , he went on trial at Bayern Munich II . Hermann Gerland , the club 's manager , was impressed by Ngwat @-@ Mahop 's athleticism and assertiveness and recommended his signing . Gerland characterised Ngwat @-@ Mahop as a rough diamond . He made his debut for Bayern Munich II in the opening day of the 2006 – 07 Regionalliga season . He started the match , but he was brought out in the 62nd minute , in a match that Bayern II lost at home by a 0 – 2 scoreline by <unk> Hessen Kassel . Ngwat @-@ Mahop scored his first goal for Bayern II on 12 August 2006 . It was the sole goal of the match , helping Bayern Munich II overcome the obstacle of Hoffenheim . Two weeks later he managed to score once again , taking the credit for opening the score in a 4 – 4 goal glut against SV <unk> . Ngwat @-@ Mahop continued to play regularly in Bayern II until the end of the season , featuring in 33 matches , out of 34 , all as a starter . He also added five more to his tally , to reach a total of seven goals in the 2006 – 07 Regionalliga campaign . 
 While approaching the closing stages of the season , his good performances with Bayern Munich II made Ottmar Hitzfeld , the manager of Bayern 's first team , to call him to train with the professional squad . Due to the injuries of a lot of first team players , Ngwat @-@ Mahop was included in Bayern 's squad for a match against Borussia Mönchengladbach , although he did not get any playing time in that match . Ngwat @-@ Mahop was also included in Bayern 's squad for yet another match , this time against for an away contest against Energie Cottbus . In this match , on 12 May 2007 , he was brought in , to replace Ali Karimi in the 88th minute , wearing number 38 , to make his full professional debut for FC Bayern Munich , in what was an away 0 – 3 win for his team . That was his sole appearance in the Bundesliga for the 2006 – 07 season . 
 = = = Passport issue = = = 
 On 29 June 2007 , just before Bayern 's Asian tour in Hong @-@ Kong , Ngwat @-@ Mahop found out that he had lost his French passport and started the procedure to get a new one , so he could follow his team in the tour . Upon his request , French authorities found out that Ngwat @-@ Mahop 's passport had the same number as that of a woman residing in Paris . After the Bayern Munich officials were informed of the passport issue they decided to terminate his contract . After that Ngwat @-@ Mahop started travelling in France and Germany with the German police in his pursuit . Meanwhile , 1 . FC Saarbrücken , having just been relegated from Regionalliga Süd , sued Bayern for an alleged 1 million € losses due to its relegation . 1 . FC Saarbrücken asked FC Bayern Munich II to lose every game that Ngwat @-@ Mahop was included . This would result in Bayern 's II relegation instead of Saarbrücken . Saarbrücken finally lost the case in court , a case called ridiculous by Bayern 's president Uli Hoeneß . 
 = = = Red Bull Salzburg = = = 
 After being released by FC Bayern Munich Ngwat @-@ Mahop ended up as a trialist in Red Bull Salzburg . He managed to persuade FC Red Bull Salzburg 's manager Giovanni Trapattoni of his football skills and he signed a two @-@ year contract with the Austrian club . After the signing of his contract he was sent to Red Bull Salzburg Juniors to get playing time . There he made his debut in a 5 – 1 away defeat by FK Austria Wien II . In his second match with Red Bull Salzburg Juniors he handed two assists , to his teammates <unk> and <unk> , to help them score the first and second goal of their team in a 2 – 2 home draw with SC @-@ ESV <unk> . He scored his first goal for his team in an 1 – 3 away win against DSV Leoben in the 70th minute after an assist by <unk> . In his next match Ngwat @-@ Mahop scored once , in a 2 – 1 home win against Austria <unk> . On 26 October , he netted a goal in the 80th minute of a 2 – 0 home win against Bad <unk> , to put the game beyond any doubt . In the next match against SK <unk> he proved himself a prolific forward by scoring the opening goal of the match , in the first minute , and serving the second to his teammate David <unk> . Red Bull Salzburg Juniors finally lost the game by a 3 – 2 scoreline . Ngwat @-@ Mahop continued scoring for his team in 2 – 1 home win against FK Austria Wien II , by scoring the opening goal of the match . Ngwat @-@ Mahop featured in 13 matches and scored five goals for Red Bull Salzburg Juniors until the winter break . That resulted in him being called to play with FC Red Bull Salzburg 's first team . After playing in some friendly matches with Red Bull Salzburg during the winter break , he made his league debut for the club on 23 February 2008 , in a 3 – 1 away defeat from Austria Wien , as he replaced Alexander Zickler in the 52nd minute . Ngwat @-@ Mahop continued to feature regularly in Red Bull Salzburg 's playing squad until the end of the season , although mostly as a substitute . He also managed to score his first goal with Red Bull Salzburg in a 3 – 0 home win against Sturm Graz . At the end of the season he totalled one goal in 12 appearances . In April 2008 , Ngwat @-@ Mahop signed a contract extension with Red Bull Salzburg until the summer of 2011 . 
 Ngwat @-@ Mahop contributed greatly in his club 's season opener , as he scored the fourth goal and assisted the sixth , in Red Bull Salzburg 's 6 – 0 home devastation against SV <unk> . A few days later he added two more to his tally , as his club won Armenian club <unk> by a 7 – 0 scoreline at home , for the first Qualifying round of the 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup . He once again scored in his club 's first leg match for the second Qualifying round of the 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup , against Lithuanian club FK Sūduva . He continued his scoring trends three days later for the first round of the ÖFB @-@ Cup , in a 1 – 4 away win against <unk> . It took him almost a month to find the net again , as he scored the last goal in his club 's 4 – 2 home win against <unk> for the 2nd round of the ÖFB @-@ Cup . A week later he managed to score the opening goal , in Red Bull Salzburg 's 2 – 2 away draw against Sturm Graz . Until the end of the season he featured regularly in his team 's matches , although mostly as a substitute , and only managed to score one more goal in a 4 – 1 home win against Austria Kärnten . At the end he counted 36 appearances with Red Bull Salzburg , of which 27 in the Bundesliga , six in the UEFA Cup and three in the ÖFB @-@ Cup . Out of these matches he scored a total of eight goals , of which three in the Bundesliga , three in the UEFA Cup and two in the ÖFB @-@ Cup . 
 In the summer of 2009 there were rumours that 1860 Munich was interested in signing him . Finally Ngwat @-@ Mahop stayed with Red Bull Salzburg and he featured in the whole match , in what was Red Bull Salzburg 's first match of the season , an 1 – 1 home draw against Irish outfit Bohemians for the second Qualifying round of the 2009 – 2010 UEFA Champions League . He was , once again , a starter at Red Bull Salzburg ' opening match of the 2009 – 10 Bundesliga season , but he was substituted in the 40th minute by his fellow countryman <unk> <unk> . Later it was known that Ngwat @-@ Mahop suffered a tear of the left anterior thigh muscle , an injury that would keep him out of action for months . He managed to fully heal from his injury and play again for Red Bull Salzburg almost nine months later , in a 4 – 2 home win against SC Magna Wiener Neustadt , as he came in as a late substitute for <unk> <unk> . At the meantime Ngwat @-@ Mahop played in five games for Red Bull Salzburg Juniors managing to score four goals , two of them in a single match , a 3 – 0 home win against SC Austria <unk> . At the end of the season he had only managed to play in two league games and one European game for Red Bull Salzburg and did not score any goals . 
 Ngwat @-@ Mahop played in Red Bull Salzburg 's opening match for the 2010 – 11 Bundesliga season , on 17 July 2010 , coming in as a substitute in the 57th minute , in what was a 0 – 0 away draw against SV <unk> . Three days later he once again played as a substitute for Jakob <unk> , in his team 's second leg match , against Faroese champions HB <unk> for the second Qualifying round of the 2010 – 11 UEFA Champions League . He scored his first goal of the season in a match for the 1st round of the ÖFB @-@ Cup against St. Pölten II , that Red Bull Salzburg won by 1 – 4 . On 24 August , he made the cross that resulted in Red <unk> 's goal , in his team 's second leg match for the third Qualifying round of the 2010 – 11 UEFA Champions League against Hapoel Tel Aviv . Ngwat @-@ Mahop was substituted in the 65th minute of a match that ended an 1 – 1 draw , resulting in Red Bull Salzburg 's elimination . Later it was made known that he was again injured , and due to this he made his come back with Red Bull Salzburg almost three months later , in a 2 – 0 home win against Sturm Graz . That was meant to be Ngwat @-@ Mahop 's last game with the Red Bull Salzburg shirt , as in January he was sold to Greek Superleague outfit Iraklis Thessaloniki for an undisclosed fee . 
 = = = Iraklis Thessaloniki = = = 
 On 8 January 2011 , Greek club Iraklis Thessaloniki announced that it had signed Ngwat @-@ Mahop until the summer of 2012 . He debuted for the Greek club on 23 January 2011 , as he was in the starting line @-@ up in a 3 – 0 away defeat by AO Kavala . At the time he was substituted , in the 57th minute , the scoreline was 0 – 0 . Ngwat @-@ Mahop scored his first goal with Iraklis , by opening his club 's tally in an 1 – 2 away win against <unk> . His goal was scored after an assist by teammate Karim <unk> and helped Iraklis to record its first away win in eleven months . 
 = = = Karlsruher SC = = = 
 In 2011 , he returned to Germany , signing with Karlsruher SC . He made his league debut on 10 September 2011 , where he scored the club 's second <unk> goal , in a 2 – 4 away defeat against Fortuna Düsseldorf . 
 = = = Rheindorf Altach = = = 
 Being a free agent , Ngwat @-@ Mahop signed for Rheindorf Altach in the summer of 2012 . One day after his commitment with the club , on 7 August 2012 , he made his debut in an 1 – 4 home defeat against St. Pölten , where he even managed to score his first goal . Throughout the season he appeared in 33 matches ending up being the club 's second league goalscorer with 10 goals . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 6 May 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Red Bull Salzburg 
 Austrian Football Bundesliga : 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 Rheindorf Altach 
 Austrian Football First League : 2013 – 14 
 = Plegmund = 
 Plegmund ( or <unk> ; died 2 August either 914 or 923 ) was a medieval English Archbishop of Canterbury . He may have been a hermit before he became archbishop in 890 . As archbishop , he reorganised the Diocese of Winchester , creating four new sees , and worked with other scholars in translating religious works . He was canonised after his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known of the early life of Plegmund except that he was of Mercian descent . A later tradition , dating 300 years after his death , stated that Plegmund lived as a hermit at <unk> in Cheshire . His reputation as a scholar attracted the attention of King Alfred the Great , who was trying to revive scholarship . Some time before 887 , Alfred summoned Plegmund to his court . There he worked with three other scholars , <unk> , Bishop of Worcester , Æthelstan and <unk> in working on translating Pope Gregory the Great 's treatise Pastoral Care into Old English . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 Plegmund was selected for the see of Canterbury in 890 by King Alfred . Plegmund 's election to the Archbishopric of Canterbury is recorded in Manuscript E of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle : " Here Archbishop Plegmund was elected by God and all the people . " Fulk , Archbishop of Reims , praised the election of Plegmund , stating that he would help root out the last remnants of paganism in the people . However , there was a gap in time between the death of the previous Archbishop of Canterbury , Ethelred , and the consecration of Plegmund ; this may have been because the see had been offered to Grimbald , a Flemish monk and scholar , who refused it . Plegmund was granted his pallium by Pope Formosus . 
 During the 9th century , the see of Canterbury was at a low point . As such , one of Plegmund 's responsibilities was to re @-@ establish its authority , and , in an attempt to do this , between 909 and 918 he created new sees within the existing Diocese of Winchester in Crediton , Ramsbury , Sherborne and Wells . This meant that each future shire of Wessex had its own bishop ; of Crediton for Devon and Cornwall , of Ramsbury for Wiltshire , of Sherborne for Dorset and of Wells for Somerset , as well as the diocese of Winchester for Hampshire . To do this , Plegmund had to gain the approval of Pope Sergius III , who had annulled all of the acts of Pope Formosus , and in 908 Plegmund travelled to Rome so that he could be regranted his pallium . He was the first archbishop of Canterbury to visit Rome for nearly a century , and he returned with the relics of Saint Blaise . 
 Under Plegmund 's archbishopric , the quality of the Latin used by his scribes improved , surpassing the poor quality used by the scribes of the previous two archbishops , Ceolnoth and Æthelred . When Alfred died in 899 , Plegmund crowned his son Edward as king . 
 In addition to his religious duties , Plegmund was involved in matters of state and he attended the formal councils held by Edward the Elder in 901 , 903 , 904 and 909 . He dedicated the tall tower of the New Minster at Winchester in 909 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Plegmund died on 2 August 914 or 2 August 923 . After his death Plegmund was considered a saint , with a feast day of 2 August . However , his cult dates only from the 13th century . 
 = Huế Phật Đản shootings = 
 The Huế Phật Đản shootings were the deaths of nine unarmed Buddhist civilians on 8 May 1963 , in the city of Huế , South Vietnam , at the hands of the army and security forces of the Roman Catholic fundamentalist government of Ngô Đình Diệm . The army and police fired guns and launched grenades into a crowd of Buddhists who had been protesting against a government ban on the flying of the Buddhist flag on the day of Phật Đản , which commemorates the birth of Gautama Buddha . Diệm 's denial of governmental responsibility for the incident — he instead blamed the Việt Cộng — added to discontent among the Buddhist majority . 
 The incident spurred a protest movement by Buddhists against the religious discrimination perpetrated by the Roman Catholic @-@ dominated Diệm regime , known as the Buddhist crisis , and widespread large @-@ scale civil disobedience among the South Vietnamese . On 1 November 1963 , after six months of tension and growing opposition to the regime , generals from the Army of the Republic of Vietnam conducted a coup , which saw the removal and assassination of Diệm on 2 November 1963 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In a country where surveys of the religious composition estimated the Buddhist majority to be between 70 and 90 percent , the policies of the staunchly Catholic President Ngô Đình Diệm generated claims of religious bias . As a member of the Catholic Vietnamese minority , he is widely regarded by historians as having pursued pro @-@ Catholic policies that antagonized many Buddhists . Specifically , the government was regarded as being biased towards Catholics in public service and military promotions , as well as the allocation of land , business favors and tax concessions . 
 Diệm once told a high @-@ ranking officer , forgetting the man was of Buddhist descent , " Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places . They can be trusted . " Many officers in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam converted to Catholicism in the belief that their military prospects depended on it . Additionally , the distribution of firearms to village self @-@ defense militias intended to repel Việt Cộng guerrillas saw weapons only given to Catholics , with Buddhists in the army being denied promotion if they refused to convert to Catholicism . Some Catholic priests ran their own private armies , and in some areas forced conversions , looting , shelling and demolition of pagodas occurred . Some Buddhist villages converted en masse in order to receive aid or to avoid forcible resettlement by Diệm 's regime . The Catholic Church was the largest landowner in the country , and the " private " status that was imposed on Buddhism by the French , which required official permission to conduct public Buddhist activities , was not repealed by Diệm . Land owned by the Catholic Church was exempt from land reform measures . Catholics were also de facto exempt from the corvée labor that the government obliged all citizens to perform ; U.S. aid was disproportionately distributed to Catholic majority villages . Under Diệm , the Catholic Church enjoyed special exemptions in property acquisition , and in 1959 , he dedicated the country to the Virgin Mary . The white and gold Vatican flag was regularly flown at major public events in South Vietnam . 
 A rarely enforced 1958 law known as Decree Number 10 was invoked on 7 May 1963 to prohibit the display of religious flags . This disallowed the flying of Buddhist flags on Phật Đản , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . The invoking official was the deputy province chief in charge of security , Major Đặng Sỹ , a Catholic who was charged with maintaining public security and was commander of the Huế garrison . The application of the law caused indignation among Buddhists on the eve of the most important religious festival of the year , since a week earlier Catholics had been allowed to display Vatican flags to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the appointment of Diệm 's brother Thục as Archbishop of Huế . The celebrations had been bankrolled by Diệm 's regime through a national committee which asked the population to donate money to Thục 's jubilee . Buddhists complained that they had been forced to give a month 's wages to pay for the celebration . <unk> the law , the authorities tore down thousands of Buddhist flags that had already been unfurled on homes and pagodas in preparation for Phật Đản . The origin of the order to enforce the law on the Buddhists has been attributed to Thục . Despite protestations from the Saigon representative to the central provinces , the order was enacted upon consultation with Saigon . Villages in the central region had converted en masse to Catholicism , with priests allowed special access to government facilities and funds . The designation of Buddhism as an " association " prevented it from acquiring land for the construction of pagodas . 
 = = Protest and shootings = = 
 On Phật Đản , thousands of Buddhists defied the ban on flag flying . More than 500 people marched across the Perfume River , carrying signs and placards , congregating at the Từ Đàm Pagoda before a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong demonstration , calling for religious equality , took place in the city centre as government security officials surrounded the area with armoured personnel carriers and civil guardsmen . The signs were in both Vietnamese and English to convey the message to western observers . Despite the ban on religious flags , Vatican flags hoisted on the bridge from the Catholic celebration were never taken down . The leading Buddhist activist monk Thích Trí Quang addressed the crowd and exhorted them to rise up against Catholic discrimination against Buddhism . He called the Buddhists to congregate outside the government radio station in the evening for a rally . Tension increased throughout the day with demonstrators chanting and displaying anti @-@ government slogans as the crowd grew . They expected to hear another speech from Thích Trí Quang , but the speech was withdrawn from broadcast by the government censor . The Armed Forces were called in to disperse the discontented crowd . After two explosions shook the ground , the crowd thought that the troops had resorted to using bombs . Major Sy reportedly fired into the air and his men responded by launching grenades into the crowd as fire hoses were unleashed on the demonstrators . His troops fired directly into the crowd . In the end nine were killed and four severely injured . Two of the dead , both children , had been crushed underneath armored personnel carriers . Some people of nine had been mutilated and decapitated . 
 = = Government reaction = = 
 Diệm and his government alleged that a Việt Cộng guerrilla had caused the incident by setting off the initial explosion , sparking a stampede . He initially refused to take any disciplinary action against the local authorities , claiming that they had acted properly . The government claimed that only percussion grenades had been used , not lethal fragmentation grenades . The force of the explosion cast doubt on whether the Việt Cộng would have had access to sufficiently powerful explosives . Another theory at the time was that a CIA agent had caused the blasts with the aim of fomenting sectarian tension and destabilising the Diệm regime . Eyewitness testimony disputed the official version of events , citing amateur footage , which showed government troops firing on the crowd . A local doctor concluded that there was no evidence of the fatal injuries being inflicted by plastic explosives ; he was subsequently jailed . Diệm refused to be swayed from his account of the incident , and ordered the bodies of the victims to be buried without autopsy . Thích Trí Quang spent the night riding through the streets of Huế with a loudspeaker , accusing the government of firing on the demonstrators . U.S. Ambassador Frederick Nolting , known for his policy of appeasement of Diệm , attempted to spread the responsibility . He claimed all parties were responsible , the demonstrators for ( as he alleged ) trying to take over the radio station , the government for deploying the army , which later opened fire , and " agitators " for throwing the explosives . When the government later ignored his version and refused to assign responsibility , Nolting called its actions " objective , accurate and fair . " 
 = = Buddhist reaction and protests = = 
 At 11 am on 9 May , Major Sỹ announced to nearly 800 youthful pro @-@ Buddhist demonstrators that " <unk> agitators " had forced troops to take the severe measures to maintain order in the face of Việt Cộng agitation . The protesters showed their anger at such an improbable explanation by marching around the old citadel quarter of Huế , chanting anti @-@ Catholic and anti @-@ Diệm slogans . A government organised counter @-@ demonstration to condemn the " <unk> terrorist act " under the leadership of Diệm 's brother , Ngô Đình Nhu attracted almost nobody . Thích Trí Quang , who had traveled throughout the country protesting against religious inequality and the flag ban , began rallying Buddhists in central Vietnam . He called them to attend a public mass funeral for the Huế victims scheduled for 10 May . Such an emotion @-@ charged spectacle would have attracted thousands of spectators and placed pressure on Diệm 's regime to grant reforms , so the government announced a curfew and put all armed personnel on duty around the clock to " prevent VC infiltration " . A confrontation was averted when Thích Trí Quang persuaded the protesters to lay down their flags and slogans and observe the 9 pm curfew . The following day , tensions increased again as a crowd of around 6 @,@ 000 Buddhists attended Tu Dam Pagoda for the funerals and a series of meetings . Major Sy was present with ARVN troops and armed police . Slogans and speeches calling for religious equality and anti @-@ government sentiment were prevalent . Quang called on Buddhists to use unarmed struggle and follow Gandhian principles , saying " Carry no weapons ; be prepared to die ... follow Gandhi 's policies " . After Sy echoed Buddhist calls for compensation and expressed sorrow for the victims , the meeting dissolved without violence . 
 = = Buddhist demands for equality = = 
 On 10 May , Quang proclaimed a five @-@ point " manifesto of the monks " that demanded freedom to fly the Buddhist flag , religious equality between Buddhists and Catholics , compensation for the victims ' families , an end to arbitrary arrests , and punishment for the officials responsible . 
 On 13 May , a committee of Buddhist monks formalized their request to Diệm for the five demands . Although the signatories had couched the declaration as " requests " , they had expectations that these would be met . On 15 May , a delegation of six monks and two laymen met Diệm to present the document . After the meeting , the monks held a press conference at the Xá Lợi Pagoda . It was to be the first of many in which they attempted to publicise their cause to the foreign press corps . Diệm agreed to meet with a Buddhist delegation , but increased tension further by demeaning them . Initially , Diệm refused to pay compensation , believing it was a sign of weakness . He claimed there was no discrimination in South Vietnam and that all religions had been treated equally with respect to the flag issue . In regard to the classification of Buddhism as an " association " under Decree 10 , Diệm claimed it was an " administrative oversight " that would be fixed ( although no action was taken on the matter during his final six months of office ) ; Diệm labeled the Buddhists " damn fools " for demanding something that according to him , they already enjoyed . The government press release detailing the meeting also used the expression " damn fools " . 
 As the demonstrations continued , Ambassador Nolting managed to extract theoretical concessions from Diệm on 18 May . Diệm agreed a modest compensation package of USD $ 7000 for the families of the victims as a conciliatory gesture . Diệm also agreed to dismiss those responsible for the shootings . However , the publicly stated reason for this action was that the officials had failed to maintain order , rather than that they had been responsible for the deaths of the protesters . Despite these concessions , Diệm maintained that his government was not responsible for the deaths , resolutely continuing to blame the Việt Cộng . It was enough to satisfy Nolting , who immediately departed for his vacation . His absence allowed the remaining American diplomatic staff led by William Trueheart , Nolting 's deputy , to end Nolting 's policy of appeasing Diệm . 
 = = Trial = = 
 After the fall of the Diệm regime in a coup on 1 November 1963 , Đặng Sỹ faced a trial held under a government led by Nguyễn Khánh . Some of the accusations were that Sy 's men had fired on the crowd and crushed the victims with armoured cars , or that the grenades had been launched at his orders and caused the deaths . Sy later reportedly revealed that Archbishop Thục had personally given him the order to shoot the Buddhists but refused to testify against Thục , who was by that time living in exile in Rome . Sy was sentenced to life imprisonment and ordered to compensate the victims ' families . His lawyer contended that the court had been unable to establish the nature and source of the lethal explosions . The Defense Minister , General Trần Thiện Khiêm , a Catholic who had helped Khánh in his January 1964 coup , later claimed Khánh had rigged the trial to gain Quang 's support , and released Sy from prison ; Sy later emigrated to the United States . In 1970 , the Saigon @-@ based Catholic newspaper , Hòa Bình ran a story claiming that CIA agents had used a secret new explosive to foment trouble for Diệm 's regime whose relations with the United States were deteriorating . 
 = Montreal Canadiens = 
 The Montreal Canadiens ( French : Les Canadiens de Montréal ) are a Canadian professional ice hockey team based in Montreal , Quebec , that competes in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . They are members of the league 's Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference . 
 The club 's official name is le Club de hockey Canadien . The team is frequently referred to in English and French as the Habs . French nicknames for the team include Les Canadiens ( or Le Canadien ) , Le Bleu @-@ Blanc @-@ Rouge , La Sainte @-@ <unk> , Le Tricolore , Les Glorieux ( or Nos Glorieux ) , Les Habitants , Le CH and Le Grand Club . 
 Founded in 1909 , the Canadiens are the longest continuously operating professional ice hockey team worldwide , and the only existing NHL club to predate the founding of the NHL . One of the oldest North American professional sports franchises , the Canadiens ' history predates that of every other Canadian franchise outside of football as well as every American franchise outside of baseball and the National Football League 's Arizona Cardinals . The franchise is one of the " Original Six " teams , a description used for the teams that made up the NHL from 1942 until the 1967 expansion . The team 's championship season in 1992 – 93 was the last time a Canadian team won the Stanley Cup . 
 The Canadiens have won the Stanley Cup more times than any other franchise . They have won 24 championships , 22 of them since 1927 , when NHL teams became the only ones to compete for the Stanley Cup . On a percentage basis , as of 2014 , the franchise has won 25 @.@ 3 % of all Stanley Cup championships contested after the Challenge Cup era , making it the second most successful professional sports team of the traditional four major sports of Canada and the United States , behind only the Boston Celtics . 
 Since 1996 , the Canadiens have played their home games at Centre Bell , originally known as Centre Molson . The team previously played at the Montreal Forum which housed the team for seven decades and all but their first two Stanley Cup championships . 
 = = History = = 
 The Canadiens were founded by J. Ambrose O 'Brien on December 4 , 1909 , as a charter member of the National Hockey Association , the forerunner to the National Hockey League . It was to be the team of the francophone community in Montreal , composed of francophone players , and under francophone ownership as soon as possible . The team 's first season was not a success , as they placed last . After the first year , ownership was transferred to George Kennedy of Montreal and the team 's fortunes improved over the next seasons . The team won its first Stanley Cup championship in the 1915 – 16 season . In 1917 , with four other NHA teams , the Canadiens formed the NHL , and they won their first NHL Stanley Cup during the 1923 – 24 season , led by Howie Morenz . The team moved from the Mount Royal Arena to the Montreal Forum for the 1926 – 27 season . 
 The club began the 1930s decade successfully , with Stanley Cup wins in 1930 and 1931 . The Canadiens and its then @-@ Montreal rival , the Montreal Maroons , declined both on the ice and economically during the Great Depression . Losses grew to the point where the team owners considering selling the team to interests in Cleveland , Ohio , though local investors were ultimately found to finance the Canadiens . The Maroons still suspended operations , and several of their players moved to the Canadiens . 
 Led by the " Punch Line " of Maurice " Rocket " Richard , Toe Blake and Elmer Lach in the 1940s , the Canadiens enjoyed success again atop the NHL . From 1953 to 1960 , the franchise won six Stanley Cups , including a record five straight from 1956 to 1960 , with a new set of stars coming to prominence : Jean Beliveau , Dickie Moore , Doug Harvey , Bernie " Boom Boom " Geoffrion , Jacques Plante and Richard 's younger brother , Henri . 
 The Canadiens added ten more championships in 15 seasons from 1965 to 1979 , with another dynastic run of four @-@ straight Cups from 1976 to 1979 . In the 1976 – 77 season , the Canadiens set two still @-@ standing team records — for most points , with 132 , and fewest losses , by only losing eight games in an 80 @-@ game season . The next season , 1977 – 78 , the team had a 28 @-@ game unbeaten streak , the second @-@ longest in NHL history . The next generation of stars included Guy Lafleur , Yvan Cournoyer , Ken Dryden , Pete Mahovlich , Jacques Lemaire , Pierre Larouche , Steve Shutt , Bob Gainey , Serge Savard , Guy Lapointe and Larry Robinson . Scotty Bowman , who would later set a record for most NHL victories by a coach , was the team 's head coach for its last five Stanley Cup victories in the 1970s . 
 The Canadiens won Stanley Cups in 1986 , led by rookie star goaltender Patrick Roy , and in 1993 , continuing their streak of winning at least one championship in every decade from the 1910s to the 1990s ( this streak came to an end in the 2000s ) . In 1996 , the Habs moved from the Montreal Forum , their home during 70 seasons and 22 Stanley Cups , to Centre Molson ( now called Centre Bell ) . 
 Following Roy 's departure in 1995 , the Canadiens fell into an extended stretch of mediocrity , missing the playoffs in four of their next ten seasons and failing to advance past the second round of the playoffs until 2010 . By the late 1990s , with both an ailing team and monetary losses exacerbated by a record @-@ low value of the Canadian dollar , Montreal fans feared their team would end up relocated to the United States . Team owner Molson Brewery sold control of the franchise and the Molson Centre to American businessman George N. Gillett Jr. in 2001 , with the right of first refusal for any future sale by Gillett and a condition that the NHL Board of Governors must unanimously approve any attempt to move to a new city . Led by president Pierre Boivin , the Canadiens returned to being a lucrative enterprise , earning additional revenues from broadcasting and arena events . In 2009 , Gillett sold the franchise to a consortium led by the Molson family which included The Woodbridge Company , BCE / Bell , the <unk> Solidarity Fund , Michael <unk> , Luc Bertrand and the National Bank Financial Group for $ 575 million , more than double the $ 275 million he spent on the purchase eight years prior . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , the Canadiens celebrated their 100th anniversary with various events , including hosting both the 2009 NHL All @-@ Star Game , and the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . Said season also marked the Canadiens as the first team in NHL history to reach 3 @,@ 000 victories , reaching the milestone after their 5 – 2 victory over the Florida Panthers on December 29 , 2008 . 
 = = Team identity = = 
 The Canadiens organization operates in both English and French . For many years , public address announcements and press releases have been given in both languages , and the team Web site and social media outlets are in both languages as well . 
 = = = Crest and sweater design = = = 
 One of sport 's oldest and most recognizable logos , the classic ' C ' and ' H ' of the Montreal Canadiens was first used together in the 1917 – 18 season , when the club changed its name to " Club de hockey Canadien " from " Club <unk> Canadien " , before evolving to its current form in 1952 – 53 . The " H " stands for " hockey " , not " Habitants , " a popular misconception . According to NHL.com , the first man to refer to the team as " the Habs " was American Tex Rickard , owner of the Madison Square Garden , in 1924 . Rickard apparently told a reporter that the " H " on the Canadiens ' sweaters was for " Habitants " . 
 The team 's colours since 1911 are blue , red , and white . The home sweater is predominantly red in colour . There are four blue and white stripes , one across each arm , one across the chest and the other across the waistline . The main road sweater is mainly white with a red and blue stripe across the waist , red at the end of both arm sleeves red shoulder yokes . The basic design has been in use since 1914 and took its current form in 1925 , generally evolving as materials changed . Because of the team 's lengthy history and significance in Quebec , the sweater has been referred to as ' La Sainte @-@ <unk> ' ( the holy flannel sweater ) . 
 The Canadiens used multiple designs prior to adopting the aforementioned design in 1914 . The original shirt of the 1909 – 10 season was blue with a white C. The second season had a red shirt featuring a green maple leaf with the C logo , and green pants . Lastly , the season before adopting the current look the Canadiens wore a " barber pole " design jersey with red , white and blue stripes , and the logo being a white maple leaf reading " CAC " , " Club <unk> Canadien " . All three designs were worn during the 2009 – 10 season as part of the Canadiens centenary . 
 The Canadiens ' colours are a readily identifiable aspect of French Canadian culture . In the short story " The Hockey Sweater " , Roch Carrier described the influence of the Canadiens and their jersey within rural Quebec communities during the 1940s . The story was later made into an animated short , The Sweater , narrated by Carrier . A passage from the short story appears on the 2002 issue of the Canadian five dollar bill . 
 = = = Motto = = = 
 Nos bras <unk> vous <unk> le <unk> , à vous <unk> de le porter bien haut . 
 To you from failing hands we throw the torch . Be yours to hold it high . 
 The motto is from the poem " In Flanders Fields " by John McCrae which was written in 1915 , the year the Canadiens won their first Stanley Cup championship . The motto appears on the wall of the Canadiens dressing room . 
 = = = Mascot = = = 
 Beginning in the 2004 – 05 NHL season , the Canadiens adopted Youppi as their official mascot , the first costumed mascot in their long history . Youppi was the longtime mascot for the Montreal Expos baseball team , but was dropped from the franchise when they moved to Washington , D.C. in 2004 and became the Washington Nationals . With the switch , Youppi became the first mascot in professional sports to switch leagues . 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 The Canadiens have developed strong rivalries with two fellow Original Six franchises , with whom they frequently shared divisions and competed in post @-@ season play . The oldest is with the Toronto Maple Leafs , who first faced the Canadiens as the Toronto Arenas in 1917 . The teams met 15 times in the playoffs , including five Stanley Cup finals . Featuring the two largest cities in Canada and two of the largest fanbases in the league , the rivalry is sometimes dramatized as being emblematic of Canada 's English and French linguistic divide . From 1938 to 1970 , they were the only two Canadian teams in the league . 
 The team 's other Original Six rival are the Boston Bruins , who since their NHL debut in 1924 have played the Canadiens more than any other team in both regular season play and the playoffs combined . The teams have played 34 playoff series , seven of which were in the finals . 
 The Canadiens also had an <unk> rivalry with the Quebec Nordiques during its existence from 1979 @-@ 1995 , nicknamed the " Battle of Quebec . " 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 Montreal Canadiens games are broadcast locally in both the French and English languages . On radio , Canadiens games are broadcast in French by <unk> 98 @.@ 5 , and in English by <unk> , TSN Radio 690 , who acquired the English broadcast rights under a 7 @-@ year deal which began in the 2011 @-@ 12 season . 
 Regional television rights in French are currently held by Réseau des sports under a 12 @-@ year deal , effective as of the 2014 – 15 NHL season . A sister to the English @-@ language network TSN , RDS was the only French @-@ language sports channel in Canada until the 2011 launch of TVA Sports , and was also the previous national French <unk> of the NHL ; as a result , the Canadiens forewent a separate regional contract , and allowed its games to be televised nationally as part of RDS 's national rights package . 
 With TVA Sports becoming the national French <unk> in the 2014 – 15 season through a sub @-@ licensing agreement with Rogers Communications , RDS parent company Bell Media subsequently announced a 12 @-@ year deal to maintain regional rights to Canadiens games not shown on TVA Sports . As a result , games on RDS are blacked out outside of the Canadiens ' home market of Quebec , Atlantic Canada and parts of Ontario shared with the Ottawa Senators . At least 22 Canadiens games per season ( primarily through its Saturday night La super soirée <unk> ) , including all playoff games , are televised nationally by TVA Sports . 
 Regional television rights in English are held by Sportsnet East in a 3 @-@ year deal announced by Rogers on September 2 , 2014 , with selected games ( three in its inaugural season ) airing on <unk> City Montreal . The remaining games are aired nationally through Rogers ' aforementioned NHL rights deal ( including additional games on Sportsnet , City , or on CBC during Hockey Night in Canada ) , thus giving Rogers rights to over all English @-@ language telecasts of the Canadiens . Regional Canadiens games on Sportsnet East and City are called by John Bartlett and Jason York . TSN previously held regional , English @-@ language television rights to the Canadiens from 2010 through 2014 . They were broadcast on a part @-@ time TSN feed with Dave <unk> on play @-@ by @-@ play ; these rights were not renewed by Bell Media past the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = Seasons and records = = 
 = = = Season by season results = = = 
 This is a list of the last five seasons completed by the Canadiens . For the full season @-@ by @-@ season history , see List of Montreal Canadiens seasons . 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played , W = 
 Wins , L 
 = Losses , T = 
 Ties , OTL 
 = Overtime Losses , Pts = 
 Points , GF 
 = Goals for , GA = 
 Goals against 
 = = Franchise individual records = = 
 = = = Franchise scoring leaders = = = 
 These are the top @-@ ten point @-@ scorers in franchise history . Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season . 
 Note : Pos 
 = Position ; GP = 
 Games Played ; G 
 = Goals ; A = 
 Assists ; Pts 
 = Points ; P / G = 
 Points per game 
 Sources : " Statistics | Historical Website of the Montreal Canadiens " . Montreal Canadiens . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 06 @-@ 27 . , " Hockey @-@ Reference.com " . 2010 @-@ 06 @-@ 17 . 
 = = = Records – skaters = = = 
 Career 
 Most seasons : 20 , Henri Richard 
 Most games : 1256 , Henri Richard 
 Most goals : 544 , Maurice Richard 
 Most assists : 728 , Guy Lafleur 
 Most points : 1246 ( <unk> , <unk> ) , Guy Lafleur 
 Most penalty minutes : 2248 , Chris Nilan 
 Most consecutive games played : 560 , Doug Jarvis 
 Season 
 Most goals in a season : 60 , Steve Shutt ( 1976 – 77 ) ; Guy Lafleur ( 1977 – 78 ) 
 Most powerplay goals in a season : 20 , Yvan Cournoyer ( 1966 – 67 ) 
 Most powerplay goals in a season , defenceman : 19 , Sheldon Souray ( 2006 – 07 ) * 
 Most assists in a season : 82 , Pete Mahovlich ( 1974 – 75 ) 
 Most points in a season : 136 , Guy Lafleur ( 1976 – 77 ) 
 Most penalty minutes in a season : 358 , Chris Nilan ( 1984 – 85 ) 
 Most points in a season , defenceman : 85 , Larry Robinson ( 1976 – 77 ) 
 Most points in a season , rookie : 71 , Mats Naslund ( 1982 – 83 ) ; Kjell <unk> ( 1985 – 86 ) 
 Most goals in a season , defenceman : 28 , Guy Lapointe ( 1974 – 75 ) 
 * Indicates a league record . 
 Source : " Season records – Individual records – Skaters | Historical Website of the Montreal Canadiens " . Montreal Canadiens . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 12 @-@ 12 . 
 = = = Records – goaltenders = = = 
 Career 
 Most games played : 556 , Jacques Plante 
 Most shutouts : 75 , George Hainsworth 
 Most wins : 314 , Jacques Plante 
 Season 
 Most games in a season : 72 , Carey Price ( 2010 – 11 ) 
 Most wins in a season : 44 , Carey Price ( 2014 – 15 ) 
 Most shutouts in a season : 22 , George Hainsworth ( 1928 – 29 ) * 
 * Indicates a league record . 
 Source : " Season records – Individual records – goaltenders | Historical Website of the Montreal Canadiens " . Montreal Canadiens . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 12 @-@ 12 . 
 = = Current roster = = 
 Updated July 7 , 2016 . 
 = = Leaders = = 
 = = = Team captains = = = 
 = = = Head coaches = = = 
 Source : " Historical Website of the Montreal Canadiens " . Montreal Canadiens . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 12 @-@ 12 . 
 = = Honoured members = = 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 The Canadiens have retired 15 numbers in honour of 18 players , the most of any team in the NHL . All of the honourees were born in Canada . Howie Morenz was the first <unk> , on November 2 , 1937 . 
 = = = Hockey Hall of Fame = = = 
 Sixty @-@ two people associated with the Canadiens have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Thirty @-@ six of these players are from three separate notable dynasties : 12 from 1955 – 60 , 11 from 1964 – 69 and 13 from 1975 – 79 . Howie Morenz and Georges Vezina were the first Canadiens given the honour in 1945 , while Rogatien Vachon was the most recently inducted , in 2016 . 
 The following are members of the Hockey Hall of Fame in the Builders category . The first inductee was Vice @-@ President William <unk> in 1945 . The most recent inductee was head coach Pat Burns in 2014 . 
 = HalloWeekends = 
 HalloWeekends is an annual Halloween event at Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky , Ohio . It was introduced in 1997 , and takes place during the Halloween season , usually from the second Friday after Labor Day until the Sunday before Halloween . The event is open on Friday nights , Saturdays and Sundays . It is included free with park admission . As of 2014 , HalloWeekends features 11 haunted houses and nighttime scare zones , and there are several children 's attractions including a parade that takes place on the main midway . It is advised that children under 13 years old be accompanied by an adult . <unk> 's yearly slogan is " All You Fear is Here ! " . Other Cedar Fair parks including Dorney Park , Valley Fair , and Worlds of Fun all have formerly used the HalloWeekends name . The name has changed to Halloween Haunt at all 3 parks . Cedar Point is the only Cedar Fair park that still uses the HalloWeekends name . 
 = = Overview = = 
 HalloWeekends debuted in 1997 and was only open for three weekends . It has since grown to be held on Friday nights , Saturdays and Sundays during seven weekends in September and October . However , not all of the rides and attractions are open on Friday nights . Attractions include Haunted Houses and Scare Zones . The park is decorated with 1 @,@ 735 bales of hay , 28 @,@ 800 <unk> , 23 @,@ 000 pounds of pumpkins and other Halloween related items . Located underneath the Sky Ride on the Main Midway in front of Raptor is the Cedar Point Graveyard , also known as " The Land of the Lost Thrills " , which was added to HalloWeekends in 2004 and features tombstones of the park 's rides that have been retired from the 1960s onwards . Cars from retired rides are placed around the park . For example , cars from Frontier Lift and Mantis lie in the Cedar Point Graveyard , one from WildCat lies near Gemini and a car from Disaster Transport lies near Power Tower . 
 During HalloWeekends , the park offers an express ticketing system called Fright Lane for the haunt attractions , similar to Fast Lane . It offers front @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line access for one visit to Eternity Infirmary , CornStalkers , Eden Musee , Eerie Estate and Zombie High School , and unlimited visits through Fear Faire , Blood on the Bayou , Screamworks and Cut Throat Cove . 
 HalloWeekends has been ranked as one of the best Halloween events in the US . It was ranked fifth for " Best Halloween Event " in the Golden Ticket Awards between 2005 and 2008 . In addition , it was ranked fifth again in 2013 and 2014 . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 Cedar Fair , the park 's owner , acquired Knott 's Berry Farm — the first park with a Halloween Haunt — in 1997 , and implemented the event throughout the chain , starting with Cedar Point . At its debut , there were only two haunt attractions , Eerie Manor and Cedar Point Cemetery . Guests could travel on the Cedar Point Spooky Express through haunted lagoons and graveyards . The first new attraction , Toxic Tunnel of Terror , was introduced in 1998 . Camp Spooky debuted a year later with children 's activities in Camp Snoopy . In 2000 , Cedar Point Cemetery was re @-@ themed into Pharaoh 's Secret . The park added three attractions in 2001 , Eerie Manor was re @-@ themed into Undertaker U. , and Fright Zone and Magical House on Boo Hill were added . 
 Werewolf Canyon debuted in 2003 in Thunder Canyon . 2004 saw the addition of CarnEvil and Lair of the Vampire . Werewolf Canyon was also expanded that year . Fear Faire , with a medieval theme , was added in 2006 . In 2007 , the park added the Monster Midway Invasion Celebration Parade which goes from Gemini to the main midway . In 2008 , HalloWeekends received a major expansion . CornStalkers replaced Werewolf Canyon , Club Blood replaced Lair of the Vampire , CarnEvil was relocated to Camp Snoopy and Terror Island was added under Millennium Force . The area near Blue Streak was turned into a children 's area , Magical House on Boo Hill was relocated and a <unk> maze was added . HalloWeekends was extended to eight weekends for the first time . 
 In 2009 , the park replaced Pharaoh 's Secret with Happy Jack 's Toy Factory and G.A. Boeckling 's Eerie Estate opened . Dr. D. <unk> 's Asylum for the Criminally Insane was added in 2010 . For the 2011 HalloWeekends , Cedar Point renamed two attractions due to protests . Dr. D <unk> 's Asylum for the <unk> Insane was renamed Eternity Infirmary and The Edge of Madness show became The Edge of Madness -- Six Feet Under . Screamworks replaced Fright Zone and Blood on the Bayou was added along the lagoons under Iron Dragon . When Disaster Transport closed in 2012 , so did Happy Jack 's Toy Factory . Terror Island was relocated under Maverick because the Dinosaurs Alive ! attraction was using the path for Terror Island . Its name was changed to Cut Throat Cove . A new haunted house called Eden Musee was built inside Mean Streak 's infield . For the 2013 event , Cedar Point introduced Zombie High School , which replaced Club Blood at the front of the park . Trick @-@ or @-@ Treat with the Dinosaurs , which takes place on Adventure Island , was also introduced for kids to collect candy from the dinosaurs . 
 = = = Current = = = 
 The outdoor attractions are run by the HalloWeekends ' Screamsters , a group of Cedar Point staff members who are commanded to scare visitors by The Overlord when night falls . The Overlord debuted in 2009 and he commands all the Screamsters to scare people at every opportunity . However , he did not appear for the 2013 season , Knott 's Scary Farm 's very own Sarah " The Green Witch " Morgan @-@ Marshall took over HalloWeekends as their new and 1st female leader of the Screamsters in 2014 . The Screamsters were introduced in 2005 , with 70 staff . As of 2013 , there are about 400 Screamsters , and 25 make @-@ up artists who provide their masks . Each <unk> has an individual character . 
 As of 2014 , HalloWeekends features 11 attractions , including six scare zones and five haunted houses . The outdoor attractions are Blood on the Bayou , Cut Throat Cove , Screamworks , Tombstone Terror @-@ tory , CarnEvil , and CornStalkers . The indoor attractions are G.A. Boeckling 's Eerie Estate , Zombie High School , Eden Musee , <unk> and Eternity Infirmary . 
 In March 2014 , the Halloween horror music duo , Midnight Syndicate , announced plans for a series of live multimedia concerts entitled Midnight Syndicate Live ! Legacy of Shadows that would run throughout the 2014 HalloWeekends event . They also announced that they would be teaming up with special effects artist , Robert Kurtzman ( From Dusk Till Dawn ) as well as director Gary Jones ( Axe Giant ) and Face Off contestants , Beki Ingram and David <unk> . The show opened on September 12 to very positive reviews . The Akron Beacon Journal described it as " Part concert , part movie , part theater , part just plain creepy , " going on to call it " top @-@ notch and ambitious . " 
 = = Children 's attractions = = 
 The park features several attractions for children . Several live shows , including the Skeleton Crew acrobatics show that takes place in Celebration Plaza , are performed each day . The Monster Midway Invasion Celebration Parade , which travels along the Main Midway from Gemini to Pink 's on Saturdays , and travels the reverse route on Sundays , takes place at 4 pm . In 2013 , the park introduced Howl @-@ O @-@ <unk> in the Blue Streak plaza . It includes several Halloween attractions for children , including a haunted house named Magical House on Boo Hill , a <unk> maze and a Kids ' Costume Contest . The Planet Snoopy children 's area is transformed into Planet Spooky . 
 = Follow the Leader ( Korn album ) = 
 Follow the Leader is the third studio album by the American nu metal band Korn . The album was released on August 18 , 1998 , through Immortal / Epic . This was their first album not produced by Ross Robinson . Instead , it was produced by Steve Thompson and Toby Wright . 
 The album peaked at number one on four charts , including the Billboard 200 with 268 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week of release , and is often credited with launching nu metal into the mainstream . The album received a 5 × Platinum certification in the United States on March 15 , 2002 as well as a 3 × Platinum in Australia and Canada . Its singles " Got the Life " , and " Freak on a Leash " , both charted on more than three charts , and their music videos are considered to be the first music videos retired from MTV , most notably the MTV show " Total Request Live " . The album generally received positive reviews by critics . Korn was praised by AllMusic saying the album is " an effective follow @-@ up to their first two alt @-@ metal landmarks . " 
 The Family Values Tour promoted the album , along with its five singles . The song " Freak on a Leash " was nominated for nine MTV Video Music Awards , and won for the Best Rock Video award , as well as Best Editing . The music video for " Freak on a Leash " won Best Short Form Music Video at the 2000 Grammy Awards . Follow the Leader has sold over 7 million copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan as of January 4 , 2013 and over 14 million copies worldwide , making it Korn 's most successful album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 By early 1998 , Korn returned to the studio to record Follow the Leader . Even though Korn was impressed by the work Ross Robinson had done on their previous albums , they decided to work with Steve Thompson and Toby Wright . Robinson did however work with singer Jonathan Davis as a vocal coach for the album . Korn was shown making the video on <unk> . The reason they exposed themselves making the album was because they wanted to let their fans see what they were doing in the studio and behind the scenes . Follow the Leader features numerous guest vocalists , including Ice Cube on " Children of the Korn " , Tre Hardson of The Pharcyde on " <unk> " and Limp Bizkit 's Fred Durst on " All in the Family " . 
 In a 2013 interview , the band revealed that they partied heavily during the production of Follow the Leader , with massive amounts of alcohol , drugs , and women in the studio . Davis explained further , saying that while recording the vocals for " It 's On " , there were " people getting <unk> right behind me , there was girls banging each other in front of me , people getting boned in the closet right behind me , it was the craziest shit I 've ever seen in my life and I sang that song . " According to Davis , he only agreed to begin tracking vocals when producer Toby Wright met his demands for an eight @-@ ball ( a one @-@ eighth ounce of cocaine ) . 
 = = = Photography and illustration = = = 
 The artwork for Follow the Leader was done by Todd McFarlane Entertainment , with McFarlane and fellow Image Comics artists Greg Capullo ( penciller ) and Brian Hagelin ( colorist ) doing the album cover , and designer Brent Ashe handling the graphics work . According to drummer David Silveria , the band got interested in McFarlane after hearing that " Todd had actually referred to us as ' the Doors of the 90 's ' " , leading to them recording a song for Spawn , a film based on a comic book by McFarlane , and eventually approaching the artist to make an album cover for them . The cover art depicts a child hopscotching off a cliff and a gathering of kids waiting to follow , a concept that begun with bassist Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu and sketched by a friend of Jonathan Davis before being submitted to McFarlane . It marked the third straight Korn cover featuring children in a disturbing context , which Davis explained by saying that " Children are always scared when they 're all happy and stuff . They 're the most beautiful thing in the world , but when you see it in our artwork , the way we 've placed it , it 's just kinda fuckin ' weird . " The " Freak on a Leash " music video features animated segments by McFarlane featuring this cover art . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Follow the Leader is recognized as Korn 's mainstream breakthrough , and the album that launched nu metal into the mainstream . Follow the Leader was released August 18 , 1998 , and was awarded multi @-@ platinum certification for shipments in excess of five million copies , by the RIAA on March 15 , 2002 . In fall of 1998 , Korn started the Family Values Tour . According to Arvizu , the tour name was due to " so many of their friends who were like family to us played in bands " . The tour started on September 22 , 1998 , ending on October 31 , 1998 . The tour grossed over 6 @.@ 4 million ( 6 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 ) . Korn maintained a generally low ticket price , usually no more than thirty dollars . Korn toured with the band Limp Bizkit , as well as Ice Cube , Orgy , Incubus , and Rammstein . The tour was considered to be a major success , and promoted Follow the Leader to sales that were considered to have " skyrocketed " . 
 The album was also promoted through Concrete Marketing 's Concrete Corner program . The promotion saw 100 @,@ 000 copies of a compilation CD featuring tracks of breakthrough artists approved by Korn , as well as a previously unreleased Korn track , being shrink @-@ wrapped to the album at participating stores and given away for free with each purchase of the album . Band artists ( at the time ) featured on this CD included Kid Rock , Orgy , Powerman 5000 and Limp Bizkit . The album had five singles issued : " All in the Family " , " Got the Life " , " Freak on a Leash " , " Children of the Korn " , and " <unk> " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Follow the Leader is seventy minutes and eight seconds long . AllMusic said , " They write songs , but those wind up not being nearly as memorable as their lurching metallic hip @-@ hop grind . " Entertainment Weekly commented that Follow the Leader was Korn 's " gimmick " , while saying the album had " steely riffs " and " stomping beats " . Tower Records said the album " combines streamlined metal with ominous industrial touches and an undercurrent of hip @-@ hop rhythm , " and also said it was an " urban nightmare " . The album is considered to be nu metal , but also spans other genres such as alternative metal and heavy metal . 
 The album features 25 tracks , 12 of which last five seconds of silence , making the first 60 seconds of the album all silent . Winston @-@ Salem Journal writer Ed Bumgardner described Korn 's work as having " shaped rap , metal and punk into a sonic maelstrom that is brutal , aggressive - and reasonably musical " . The Daily News said that " the band shovels chunky beats into an already complex sound ... " Michael Mehle of Rocky Mountain News said , " For the uninitiated , the classic Korn sound comes rumbling out of the speakers on the first cut : It 's On ! grinds fuzzy guitars , thunderous beats and shouts of gut @-@ wrenching rage into an anthem for the alienated " , and gave other positive remarks . The Charlotte Observer said the album was dark , but humble . A Zeeland high school assistant principal said in an interview for a Michigan newspaper that the music is " indecent , vulgar , obscene and intends to be insulting " . She said this after giving a student a one @-@ day suspension for wearing a shirt with Korn on it . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Follow the Leader received generally positive reviews . Stephan Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave the album four out of five stars , saying that it " is an effective follow @-@ up to their first two alt @-@ metal landmarks . " Erlewine also said that the songs were " vehicles for the metal grind " . Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B – . Reviewer Jim Farber said that the lyrics " provide a new blend of metal and remnants of alt @-@ rock . " Jon Pareles from The New York Times said the album was " choppy " , and also said that lead singer Jonathan Davis was " wrestling with self @-@ hatred , violent impulses , parental execration , and a confused sexual identity ... " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice said that , although Korn " deny they 're metal " , they " nevertheless demonstrate that the essence of metal ... is self @-@ obliterating volume and self @-@ aggrandizing display . " Rolling Stone gave the album four out of five stars , while saying that Korn " have an ideal record for those long , black days when all you can do is say ' What the Fuck ! What the Fuck ! What the Fuck ! ' at bloody murder volume " . The album is featured in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 The album peaked at number one on four charts , including the Billboard 200 . Follow the Leader peaked at number five in the United Kingdom . The album received a 5 × Platinum certification in the United States , as well as a triple platinum in Australia and Canada . Follow the Leader also received a gold certification in the Netherlands . The album 's first charting single , " Got the Life " , released on July 24 , 1998 , peaked at number fifteen on the Mainstream Rock Songs chart , and received a gold certification in Australia . The album 's next charting single , " Freak on a Leash " , released in February 1999 , peaked at number six on the Alternative Songs chart , as well as number six on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 , and like " Got the Life " , received a gold certification in Australia . " Freak on a Leash " was nominated for nine MTV Video Music Awards , and won for the Best Rock Video award , as well as Best Editing . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Korn except " Earache My Eye " written by Tommy Chong , Gaye Delorme and Richard Marin . All guest appearances feature an extra writing credit by the guest . 
 The original physical release features 25 tracks . The music begins on track 13 and ends on track 25 , Starting the album with 12 hidden tracks consisting of five seconds of silence each , totaling 1 minute of silence out of respect for a deceased fan , who also had track 10 ( Justin ) named after him . Later prints move the silent tracks after the music . In interviews Jon Davis also mentioned he was very superstitious and did not want to end an album on track 13 . 
 " My Gift to You " stops at 7 : 12 and is followed by two minutes of silence . At 9 : 12 , a hidden track titled " Earache My Eye " starts playing after an anecdote from Fieldy during the studio session . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Lost Our Lisa = 
 " Lost Our Lisa " is the twenty @-@ fourth episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 10 , 1998 . The episode contains the last appearance of the character Lionel Hutz . When Lisa learns that Marge cannot give her a ride to the museum and forbids her to take the bus , she tricks Homer into giving her permission . After Lisa gets lost , Homer goes looking for her and the two end up visiting the museum together . The episode is analyzed in the books Planet Simpson , The Psychology of the Simpsons : D 'oh ! , and The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer , and received positive mention in I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Milhouse visit a joke shop . Meanwhile , Marge and Lisa plan a trip to the <unk> Museum so they can see the Egyptian Treasures of Isis exhibit and the Orb of Isis . Marge has to take Bart to a doctor instead , since he has <unk> various novelty items to his face . Since this is Lisa 's last chance to see the exhibit , she phones Homer to ask him if she can take the bus . He seems uncertain , which prompts her to trick him into letting her take the bus . 
 However , once on the bus , Lisa realizes she is on the wrong bus and is dropped off in the middle on nowhere . During his lunch break at work , Homer has a conversation with Lenny and Carl . He tells them that he let Lisa ride the bus alone . Lenny and Carl point out the error of his judgment , and Homer leaves work to go look for her . He heads to the museum and ends up in downtown Springfield . He uses a <unk> to get up higher . Homer and Lisa spot each other , but the vehicle 's wheels creak backwards and it rolls down a hill . It slides off the edge of a pier at the harbor into a river . Lisa tells the drawbridge operator to close the bridge so Homer can grab on . His head is caught between the two closing halves and he survives with nothing more than a few tire marks across his forehead . 
 With Homer and Lisa re @-@ united , he tells her that it is all right to take risks in life . The two decide to go to the museum after all , by illegally entering since it is now closed . While there , they make a fascinating discovery that the Orb of Isis is a music box which had gone overlooked by scientists and museum staff . Lisa concludes that what her father said about risks was right – until the alarm goes off and guard dogs chase them out of the building . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Mike Scully came up with the idea for the plot because he used to live in West Springfield , Massachusetts and he would ask his parents if he could take the bus to Springfield , Massachusetts and they finally agreed to let him one day . The production team faced several challenges during development of this episode . The animators had to come up with a special mouth chart to draw Bart 's mouth with the joke teeth in . The pile of dead animals in the back of Cletus ' truck originally included dead puppies , but the animators thought it was too sad , so they removed them . Scully used to write jokes for Yakov Smirnoff so he called him up to get the signs in Russian . Dan Castellaneta had to learn proper Russian pronunciation so he could speak it during the chess scene in which he voiced the Russian chess player . 
 In the season 9 DVD release of the episode , The Simpsons animators use a <unk> to show similarities between Krusty and Homer in the episode . This episode contains the last showing of character Lionel Hutz . He is seen standing at the bus stop with Lisa , but does not speak . Due to Phil Hartman 's death , the recurring characters of Lionel Hutz and Troy McClure were retired . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner cites Lisa 's experiences on the bus as an example of " satirical laughs scored at the expense of Lisa 's idealism " . " Lost Our Lisa " is cited in The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer along with episodes " Lisa the Iconoclast " , " Lisa the Beauty Queen " , and " Lisa 's Sax " , in order to illustrate Homer 's " success bonding with Lisa " . 
 In The Psychology of the Simpsons : D 'oh ! , the authors utilize statements made by Homer in the episode to analyze the difference between heuristic and algorithmic decision @-@ making . Homer explains to Lisa , " Stupid risks are what make life worth living . Now your mother , she 's the steady type and that 's fine in small doses , but me , I 'm a risk @-@ taker . That 's why I have so many adventures ! " The authors of The Psychology of The Simpsons interpret this statement by Homer to mean that he " relies on his past experiences of taking massive , death @-@ defying risks and winding up okay to justify forging ahead in the most extreme circumstances " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Lost Our Lisa " finished 45th in ratings for the week of May 4 – 10 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 7 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Ally McBeal , and King of the Hill . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood write positively of the episode in their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide : " A smashing episode , loads of good jokes and clever situations ... and best of all , Lisa working intelligently . The teaming up of father and daughter has rarely been more enjoyable and lovely . Gives you a warm feeling . " A review of The Simpsons season 9 DVD release in the Daily Post notes that it includes " super illustrated colour commentaries " on " All Singing , All Dancing " and " Lost Our Lisa " . 
 = Euryoryzomys emmonsae = 
 Euryoryzomys emmonsae , also known as Emmons 's Rice Rat or Emmons ' Oryzomys , is a rodent from Amazonian Brazil in the genus Euryoryzomys of the family Cricetidae . Initially misidentified as E. macconnelli or E. nitidus , it was formally described in 1998 . A rainforest species , it may be scansorial , climbing but also spending time on the ground . It occurs only in a limited area south of the Amazon River in the state of Pará , a distribution that is apparently unique among the muroid rodents of the region . 
 Euryoryzomys emmonsae is a relatively large rice rat , weighing 46 to 78 g ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 oz ) , with a distinctly long tail and relatively long , tawny brown fur . The skull is slender and the incisive foramina ( openings in the bone of the palate ) are broad . The animal has 80 chromosomes and its karyotype is similar to that of other Euryoryzomys . Its conservation status is assessed as " Data Deficient " , but deforestation may pose a threat to this species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1998 , Guy Musser , Michael Carleton , Eric Brothers , and Alfred Gardner reviewed the taxonomy of species previously lumped under " Oryzomys capito " ( now classified in the genera Hylaeamys , Euryoryzomys , and Transandinomys ) . They described the new species Oryzomys emmonsae on the basis of 17 specimens from three locations in the state of Pará in northern Brazil ; these animals had been previously identified as Oryzomys macconnelli ( now Euryoryzomys macconnelli ) and then as Oryzomys nitidus ( now Euryoryzomys nitidus ) . The specific name honors Louise H. Emmons , who , among other contributions to Neotropical mammalogy , collected three of the known examples of the species in 1986 , including the holotype . The new species was placed in what they termed the " Oryzomys nitidus group " , which also included O. <unk> , O. nitidus , and O. russatus . 
 In 2000 , James Patton , Maria da Silva , and Jay Malcolm reported on mammals collected at the Rio <unk> in western Brazil . In this report , they provided further information on the Oryzomys species reviewed by Musser and colleagues , including sequence data from the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene . Their analysis reaffirmed that O. emmonsae was a distinct species and found that it was closest to O. macconnelli and O. russatus , differing from both by about 12 % in the cytochrome b sequence ; O. nitidus was more distantly related , differing by 14 @.@ 7 % . The average sequence difference between the three O. emmonsae studied was 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 In 2006 , an extensive morphological and molecular phylogenetic analysis by Marcelo Weksler showed that species then placed in the genus Oryzomys did not form a single , cohesive ( monophyletic ) group ; for example , O. macconnelli , O. <unk> ( placed under O. russatus by Musser and colleagues ) and O. russatus clustered together in a single natural group ( clade ) , but were not closely related to the type species of Oryzomys , the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) . Later in 2006 , Weksler and colleagues described several new genera to accommodate species previously placed in Oryzomys , among which was Euryoryzomys for the " O. nitidus complex " , including O. emmonsae . 
 Thus , the species is now known as Euryoryzomys emmonsae . As a species of Euryoryzomys , it is classified within the tribe Oryzomyini ( " rice rats " ) , which includes over a hundred species , mainly from South and Central America . Oryzomyini in turn is part of the subfamily Sigmodontinae of family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Euryoryzomys emmonsae is a fairly large , long @-@ tailed rice rat with long , soft fur . The hairs on the back are 8 to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) long . It generally resembles E. nitidus in these and other characters , but has a longer tail . E. macconnelli is slightly larger and has longer and duller fur . In E. emmonsae , the upperparts are tawny brown , but a bit darker on the head because many hairs have black tips . The hairs of the underparts are gray at the bases and white at the tips ; overall , the fur appears mostly white . In most specimens , there is a patch on the chest where the gray bases are absent . The longest of the vibrissae ( whiskers ) of the face extend slightly beyond the ears . The eyelids are black . The ears are covered with small , yellowish brown hairs and appear dark brown overall . The feet are covered with white hairs above and brown below . There are six pads on the plantar surface , but the hypothenar is reduced . The ungual tufts , tufts of hair which surround the bases of the claws , are well @-@ developed . The tail is like the body in color above , and mostly white below , but in the 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) nearest the tail tip it is brown below . 
 Compared to E. nitidus and E. macconnelli , the skull is relatively small and slender . It has broad and short incisive foramina ( perforations of the palate between the incisors and the molars ) and lacks sphenopalatine vacuities which perforate the mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the end of the palate . The animal is similar to other members of the genus in the pattern of the arteries of the head . The alisphenoid strut , an extension of the alisphenoid bone which separates two foramina ( openings ) in the skull ( the masticatory @-@ buccinator foramen and the foramen ovale accessorium ) is rarely present ; its presence is more frequent in E. nitidus . The capsular process , a raising of the bone of the mandible ( lower jaw ) behind the third molar , houses the back end of the lower incisor in most Euryoryzomys , but is absent in E. emmonsae and E. macconnelli . Traits of the teeth are similar to those of E. nitidus and other Euryoryzomys . 
 The karyotype includes 80 chromosomes with a total of 86 major arms ( 2n 
 = 80 ; FN = 
 86 ) . The X chromosome is subtelocentric ( with one pair of long arms and one pair of short arms ) and the Y chromosome is acrocentric ( with only one pair of arms , or with a minute second pair ) . Among the autosomes ( non @-@ sex chromosomes ) , the four metacentric or submetacentric ( with two pairs of arms as long as or not much shorter than the other ) pairs of chromosomes are small , and the 35 pairs of acrocentrics range from large to small . Some of those have a minute second pair of arms and could also be classified as subtelocentric , which would raise FN to 90 . This karyotype is similar to other known karyotypes of members of Euryoryzomys . 
 In thirteen specimens measured by Musser , head and body length ranges from 120 to 142 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 6 in ) , tail length ( 12 specimens only ) from 130 to 160 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 to 6 @.@ 3 in ) , hindfoot length from 32 to 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 4 in ) , ear length ( three specimens only ) from 23 to 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 to 0 @.@ 94 in ) , and body mass from 46 to 78 g ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 oz ) . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 The known distribution of Euryoryzomys emmonsae is limited to a portion of the Amazon Rainforest south of the Amazon River in the state of Pará , between the <unk> and Tocantins rivers , but the limits of its range remain inadequately known . No other South American rainforest muroid rodent is known to have a similar distribution . Musser and colleagues reported it from three locations and Patton and others added a fourth ; in some of those it occurs together with E. macconnelli or Hylaeamys megacephalus . 
 Specimens of E. emmonsae for which detailed habitat data are available were caught in " <unk> forest " , a microhabitat that often included much bamboo . All were captured on the ground , some in bamboo thickets and another under a log . Musser and colleagues speculated that E. emmonsae may be scansorial , spending time both on the ground and climbing in vegetation , like the similarly long @-@ tailed rice rat Cerradomys <unk> . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN currently lists Euryoryzomys emmonsae as " Data Deficient " because it is so poorly known . It may be threatened by deforestation and logging , but occurs in at least one protected area , the <unk> Nacional de <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = Liturgical calendar ( Lutheran ) = 
 The Lutheran liturgical calendar is a listing which details the primary annual festivals and events that are celebrated liturgically by various Lutheran churches . The calendars of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America ( ELCA ) and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada ( <unk> ) are from the 1978 Lutheran Book of Worship and the calendar of Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod ( LCMS ) and the Lutheran Church - Canada use the Lutheran Book of Worship and the 1982 Lutheran Worship . Elements unique to the ELCA have been updated from the Lutheran Book of Worship to reflect changes resulting from the publication of Evangelical Lutheran Worship in 2006 . The elements of the calendar unique to the LCMS have also been updated from Lutheran Worship and the Lutheran Book of Worship to reflect the 2006 publication of the Lutheran Service Book . 
 The basic element to the calendar is Sunday , which is a festival of Jesus ’ resurrection . However , Christian Churches have historically observed other festivals which commemorate events in the life of Jesus or of significant individuals in the history of the Church . The purpose of the liturgical calendar is to guide commemorations as a part of the daily worship of the Lutheran Church . There is some variation associated with the observance of the calendar , as each Lutheran Church creates its own calendar and each congregation must choose independently how many individuals will be commemorated within a given year and how many festivals and lesser festivals they will publicly celebrate , especially if they do not coincide with a Sunday . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Lutheran calendar operates on two different cycles : the Temporal Cycle and the Sanctoral Cycle . The Temporal Cycle pivots on the festivals of Christmas and Easter . All Sundays , Seasons , and Festivals are related to these festivals . Because Easter varies in date each year based on the vernal equinox and the phases of the moon , it is called a moveable feast ( see : <unk> ) . Dates affected by placement of Easter include Ash Wednesday and the start of Lent , the start of Easter itself , Pentecost , and Holy Trinity . Advent , the other pivotal season on the calendar , comes exactly four Sundays before the start of Christmas ( if Christmas falls on a Sunday , that day does not count ) , or the Sunday closest to St. Andrew 's Day ( November 30 ) . Like the other Western Church calendars , the first Sunday of Advent is also the first day of the liturgical year . The Sanctoral Cycle is the fixed daily commemorations of individuals and events not related to the Temporal Cycle of Sundays , Festivals , and Seasons . It is the Sanctoral Cycle which is sometimes thought of as being the “ Calendar of Saints ” of a Church . 
 Beyond their place in the Temporal or Sanctoral Cycles , the events commemorated on the Lutheran liturgical calendar fall into one of three different categories depending upon their liturgical priority : Festivals , Lesser Festivals , and Commemorations . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 The Festivals are Nativity , Epiphany , the Baptism of our Lord , the Transfiguration , the Annunciation , Palm Sunday , Easter , the Ascension , Pentecost , Holy Trinity , All Saints , and Christ the King . Most of these festivals are tied to the moveable feast of Easter . Festivals take precedence over all other days , including Sundays , have their own collects and Eucharistic proper prefaces . Of the festivals , Christmas is considered to be twelve days in length ( from December 25 until January 5 ) and Easter is fifty days in length ( from Easter Sunday up to and inclusive of Pentecost ) . For Easter , Sundays are considered to be another part of the festival . For the Ascension which , falling on fortieth day of Easter , will always be on a Thursday , the festival is sometimes transferred to the Seventh Sunday of Easter in addition to or in place of the normal part of the Easter festival for that day . 
 There is another type of day which , while not a festival , is considered to be equal with a festival . These days , called Days of Special Devotion , are Ash Wednesday and all the days of Holy Week , especially Good Friday . These particular days , like other festivals , automatically take precedence over any event on the calendar and sometimes even over other festivals . A good example of this would be in 2005 when Good Friday and the Annunciation fell on the same day ( March 25 ) . The Annunciation was transferred to March 28 , or the second day of Easter , to make room for Good Friday . The principle of the Church of Sweden is that the Annunciation is celebrated on the Sunday between 21 – 27 March ; although , should Good Friday or any other day of Holy Week , or Easter Sunday or Monday respectively , fall on 25 March , Annunciation is moved to the Sunday before Palm Sunday . ( For instance , in 2003 Annunciation was celebrated on 13 March ; 2008 ( when Easter Sunday was 23 March ) it was celebrated on the 9th . ) One unique feature of the ELCA calendar is that it has given congregations the options of two dates for the Transfiguration . Following most other Western Churches , the ELCA moved the Transfiguration from its August 6 date to the Last Sunday after Epiphany ( the Sunday immediately preceding Ash Wednesday ) as an option to the traditional Last Sunday after Epiphany in an effort to encourage a wider observance of the Transfiguration within congregations . However , the traditional date of August 6 was left on the calendar . Congregations were given the option of observing Transfiguration on the Last Sunday after the Epiphany and August 6 , thus leaving open the possibility that the Transfiguration could be commemorated twice within a calendar year . In Sweden , Transfiguration Day is celebrated on the seventh Sunday after Trinity Sunday , which is the eighth Sunday after Pentecost . 
 = = = Lesser Festivals = = = 
 These are days which are associated with the life of Christ or the Apostles and deserve attention in their own right . Lesser Festivals do not have priority over festivals and technically do not have precedence over ordinary Sundays . However , the Lutheran Book of Worship does permit the celebration of a Lesser Festival on Sundays where the normal color of the day would be green ( that is , seasons after Epiphany or after Pentecost ) or on the Sundays in Christmas . This is abrogated for patronal festivals ( that is , the day commemorating the saint or event for which a congregation is named ) provided that they do not take place in Lent , Advent , or Easter , in which case they must also be transferred to the next convenient weekday . Most Lesser Festivals have their own collects and a few , such as All Saints , have their own proper . 
 = = = Commemorations = = = 
 Commemorations are for individuals or events which have been noteworthy in the life of the Church and in the history of Lutheranism in particular . These days do not take precedence over any other festival day , and if there is a conflict between a commemoration and a festival of any other rank , the commemoration is generally transferred to the next open weekday . If a commemoration falls on a Sunday where the color of the day is green , the collect for which that individual or event belong to could be said before the daily collect / prayer of the day or in place of it . For example , if September 13 fell on a Sunday and there was a desire to commemorate St. John Chrysostom , the pastor would recite the common of theologians and then the prayer of the day or the common of theologians on its own . The person may also be mentioned by name in the prayers of the faithful in addition to recitation of the applicable collect . Finally , their lives might be summarized or their teachings related to the day 's lessons in some way . 
 In cases of conflict between commemorations ( for example , November 11 with St. Martin of Tours and Søren Kierkegaard ) , there is no order of precedence , and individual worship planners need to choose which commemoration , if any , to highlight . In some cases , several individuals are listed together ( June 14 with St. Basil the Great , St. Gregory the Theologian , and St. Gregory of Nyssa ) because of their close association with each other , and they are thus designed to be commemorated jointly , not as a choice between one or the other . 
 The schedule of commemorations within the ELCA has been specifically designed so that there is at least one person on the calendar from each century so as to emphasize the continuity of Christian tradition . Clearly , some centuries have more commemorations than others , the largest number of persons commemorated being in the first four centuries of Christian history and immediately following the Reformation . This leaves the space from the 5th to the 15th centuries and the 16th to the 20th centuries rather sparse ; nevertheless , it is an improvement over some calendars wherein only a very few persons , all from the patristic or Reformation periods , were commemorated . ¢ † ‡ 
 = = Liturgical colors = = 
 The service books of Lutheran Churches designate specific colors for events which are listed on the liturgical calendars and the seasons which are a part of the Temporal Cycle . This color is sometimes known as “ the color of the day . ” The Lutheran Church generally follows the color scheme which is used by other churches in Western Christianity since Lutheranism has historically been linked with the Roman Catholic Church . The color of the day dictates the color of the vestments for all ministers and the color of paraments . White is the color designated for Festivals of Christ , with gold sometimes offered as an alternative for the first days of Easter . Festivals for which white is the color of the day include : 
 Christmas ( all twelve days ) 
 Epiphany 
 The Baptism of our Lord ( First Sunday after Epiphany ) 
 Transfiguration ( Last Sunday after Epiphany and / or August 6 ) 
 Easter ( all days except Pentecost ) 
 Holy Trinity 
 Christ the King 
 White is also used as the color for anyone commemorated on the calendar who was not martyred and is the color appointed for funerals regardless of whatever the color of the day might otherwise be . Purple is commonly used for the season of Lent . It is also optional for use during Advent , though blue is the preferred color for this season because of its hopeful connotations rather than the penitential character implied by purple and its association with Lent . Red is used for the commemorations of martyrs and is used on the Day of Pentecost . Scarlet is also used for Holy Week , though purple is also allowed . Black ( with purple as an alternative ) may be used on Ash Wednesday . The only day which does not have a color is Good Friday , when all the paraments are traditionally removed from the church . The color for Holy Saturday is white or gold since it is the day when the Great Vigil of Easter is celebrated , though until the vigil , the church would remain void of paraments . 
 = = Historical development = = 
 Liturgical calendars began to be developed in Christianity around the fourth century , with the church calendar as it is known today coming into full development in the period of the medieval <unk> . While Sunday had long been established in the weekly calendar , festivals such as Easter and Christmas were also a fixed part of the calendar by this time . The ninth century also saw the inclusion of numerous saints in the calendar ( a practice already begun by the second century ) , even to the point that normal Sunday <unk> were taking place over those normally appointed for Sunday . The Lutheran calendar owes much to the proliferation of commemorations of the medieval calendars of Western Christianity . 
 = = = Reformation era = = = 
 All of the Reformers attempted to reduce the number of individual commemorations and “ saint ’ s days ” , though this reduction was sometimes more drastic than others . In the case of the Lutheran churches , most of the saints ' days were removed ( with the exception of some New Testament personages ) , though the basic temporal cycle of the calendar remained more or less intact . In some instances , a celebration of the Reformation was added to October 31 , the first instance being the church order prepared by Johannes Bugenhagen , though other churches selected alternative dates , including June 25 , the anniversary of the presentation of the Augsburg Confession . The commemoration of the Reformation quickly died out before the Thirty Years War . 
 = = = = In Germany = = = = 
 The content of the liturgical calendar ( like the content of the liturgy itself ) was the responsibility of territory in which the church was found . Thus , there was a different order for Saxony , one for Prussia , one for Hesse , and one for Wittenberg , among others . Despite their differences , the calendars and liturgies maintained significant similarities between each other as well as the calendar of the Roman Catholic Church . The church year continued to begin with the First Sunday of Advent ( which was still fixed based on the traditional formula ) , and many of the festivals surrounding Christmas ( St. Stephen , St. John , the Holy Innocents ) remained in place , even if they were often ignored . Epiphany also continued to be celebrated as the visit of the Magi , though Martin Luther preferred to commemorate the baptism of Christ . 
 Brandenburg and <unk> and Göttingen retained Lent and the fasting days associated with the season . They also retained the violet or black vestments for the penitential season . However , popular devotions such as the blessing of palms or the imposition of ashes were suppressed in most church orders , despite the fact that a number of them had retained Ash Wednesday as the start of Lent . Good Friday , while kept with solemnity , was often a celebration of Holy Communion , thus less somber than the contemporary Roman Catholic Church . And while Easter had been a common day of communion in the church before the reformation , “ the reformers tried to prevent too many communions on this day , and instead urged the faithful to receive it on various Sundays throughout the year . ” The Reformation also saw the development of a new “ festival ” connected to Easter , where the second Sunday became popularly known as “ Good Shepherd Sunday ” based on the opening of the psalm appointed for the day , Misericordia domini or “ Goodness of the Lord ” . In addition , Corpus Christi was commonly retained until about 1600 , owing to its significant popularity in the Medieval period . 
 While many saints were removed from liturgical calendars by the reformers , some were nevertheless retained . St. Ansgar was commemorated in Halberstadt and <unk> with a special thanksgiving service on the Sunday after 3 February , no doubt because of the saint ’ s historic connection to the area . The same was true of Elizabeth of Thuringia in the <unk> Order , and St. George was also commemorated in <unk> . Festivals of the apostles and evangelists were also found on Lutheran calendars of the era , but were not always observed if they fell on a day other than Sunday . Some of the Marian festivals , notably the Nativity of Mary ( September 8 ) and her Assumption ( August 15 ) were retained by Luther whereas the feasts of her conception and presentation in the Temple were suppressed “ because they were judged to have no scriptural or dogmatic interest . ” 
 = = = = In Scandinavian countries = = = = 
 When the Lutheran Reformation was brought to Sweden from Germany via Denmark after the election of Gustav Vasa in 1523 , the movement from the start had its own distinct characteristics . The development of Swedish liturgy was , in part , thanks to Olavus Petri , which is sometimes regarded as his most important work . His Swedish Mass , 1531 remained in use , with only slight modifications , until the twentieth century . The Swedish Mass draws from a number of different sources , though Luther ’ s <unk> <unk> is apparent in regards to the Eucharistic structure This included revising the calendar along similar lines as those in Germany . Laurentius Petri further revised the Swedish Mass 1557 . In large part , the Swedish liturgy retained “ vestments , altars and frontals , gold and silver chalices and patens ” and many other “ popish ” customs . Following Laurentius ’ death in 1573 , King John III embarked on a separate , though similar , religious policy more conciliatory towards Catholicism . Much of his work was in the area of liturgy and his Nova <unk> reinstated much of the <unk> cycle from the Old Swedish Mass , reviving the feasts of St. Mary Magdalene , St. Lawrence , Corpus Christi , and the Assumption and Nativity of the Virgin Mary . Many of John ’ s reforms were controversial . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 The majority of calendars between the start of the Reformation and the 20th century were quite minimal in their commemorations . Most included events such as the Annunciation or persons such as Saint Paul , these days often went unobserved despite scrupulous attention to the temporal cycle . Even further , the commemoration of some biblical persons of note ( including the Virgin Mary ) were often omitted entirely . During the 20th century , especially at the instigation of the liturgical movement , familiar saints began make a reemergence onto the calendar , along with newer names and events . 
 = = = = The calendar in Europe = = = = 
 Many of the changes to the calendar that had accompanied the Reformation remained in place during the subsequent centuries . In Saxony in the eighteenth century , in addition to chief festivals of Christmas , Easter , and Pentecost , a number of festivals were also celebrated with Vespers and Holy Communion , including Saint Stephen , Saint John , the Circumcision , Epiphany , Purification of Mary , the Annunciation , the Ascension , Holy Trinity , Nativity of Saint John the Baptist , the Visitation ( on July 2 ) , and Saint Michael ( on September 29 ) . When Holy Communion was celebrated , a chasuble was used in the color of the day , though especially at <unk> , these colors were different from the ones normally used today . In the twentieth century , Lutherans in Europe came under the influence of the Liturgical Movement and many Lutheran churches adopted new calendars and rubrics similar to the Roman Calendar as revised by Vatican II . The Swedish Church also experienced a similar reform of its liturgy and calendar during this same period . 
 = = = = The calendar in North America = = = = 
 When Lutherans came to North America , they brought with them their disparate liturgical traditions . The Pennsylvania Ministerium composed the first liturgy for North America , including its calendar along somewhat minimal lines . However , since the last quarter of the nineteenth century , the calendar within North American Lutheran churches has been expanding . In 1868 , four chief festivals in the Church Book were Christmas , New Year ’ s Day , Epiphany , and Reformation Day , with Easter and Pentecost being considered a separate category because they invariably fell on Sunday . The Church Book also included several minor festivals , including festivals for all the Apostles , and the Annunciation . The Common Service Book ( 1918 ) also expanded the calendar to help congregations determine which days took priority over others in cases of coincidence . It added to the calendar the Sundays of Advent , Transfiguration ( last Sunday after Epiphany ) , Septuagesima , Sexagesima , Quinquagesima , Ash Wednesday , Sundays in Lent , all days in Holy Week , Ascension and the following Sunday , and Holy Trinity . It also included All Saints , and Saints Mark and Luke , both of which were omitted from the Church Book . The Service Book and Hymnal ( 1941 ) also moved the Transfiguration to August 6 and added Holy Innocents to the calendar . 
 The previous North American calendar of the ELCA was different from its European counterparts in that it does not give equal weight ( and sometimes gives no mention ) to persons who may be commemorated in Scandinavian regions . One example would be the absence of St. Lucia on December 13 , although she enjoys particular popularity in Sweden . But Lutheran calendars also differ amongst one another in North America , with some individuals commemorated on multiple calendars but on different days ( e.g. , St. Bernard of Clairvaux on August 19 in the LCMS and August 20 in the ELCA ) or individuals commemorated on one calendar and not the other ( e.g. , Martin Luther King , Jr. on January 15 for the ELCA and C. F. W. Walther on May 7 for the LCMS ) ; with the 2006 publication of Evangelical Lutheran Worship ( <unk> ) as a replacement to the Lutheran Book of Worship ( LBW ) , some of these deficiencies in the ELCA calendar have been corrected . Within the ELCA , This Far by Faith and Libro de <unk> y <unk> both prescribe calendars with additional commemorations specific to the ethnic communities they were intended to be used in ( African Americans and Latinos respectively ) . The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod has a different , somewhat minimized calendar when compared the LCMS and especially the ELCA . 
 = = Differences from other calendars = = 
 The Lutheran calendar is most similar to the calendar of The Episcopal Church and thus to the Anglican Calendar of Saints , though it also bears resemblance to the Roman Calendar of Saints because it commemorates many of the same individuals . However , the Lutheran calendar differs from both in two very significant ways , aside from its emphasis on commemorating persons important to the Lutheran tradition . 
 First , the Lutheran calendar , while commemorating many of the same events or persons , often does so on different days from either calendar ( St. Cyprian of Carthage on September 16 for Lutherans , but September 13 in the Episcopal Church ) . In other cases ( such as St. Valentine on February 14 ) , individuals who have long standing within Western Christianity are not mentioned in the Lutheran calendar , or are only mentioned in the calendars of some Lutheran churches . Furthermore , some Lutheran calendars ( such as that of the LCMS ) still venerate individuals whose commemorations have been suppressed in other Western Churches . Finally , the Lutheran calendar commemorates persons or events ( such as the presentation of the Augsburg Confession on June 25 ) which are not commemorated in any other Christian calendar because of their specific importance to the Lutheran Church . In general , like the Anglican counterpart , the Lutheran calendar has taken on many of the precedents established by the post @-@ Vatican II reforms of the liturgy in the Roman Catholic Church . 
 The other significant difference is that the Lutheran calendar commemorates a wider variety of individuals than does either of its counterparts . Included on the calendar are musicians and artists who are associated with the Church , but are not typically thought of as “ saints ” in the classical sense . The intent is to provide a wider venue for commemoration of outstanding individuals who have served the Church through their vocations rather than simply commemorating the outstanding among the religious . 
 The calendar for the ELCA is similar to many other Western <unk> in that it does not commemorate any persons from the Old Testament . The calendars of the Orthodox Churches have Old Testament individuals , and the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod has done the same . At one point there was a proposal to include a day on the Episcopal Church calendar ( which was taken into consideration by the Inter @-@ Lutheran Commission on Worship in developing the Lutheran Book of Worship ) for Old Testament saints following the octave of All Saints ( November 8 ) , but this idea was ultimately rejected as tokenism . 
 = = " Saints " in the liturgical calendar = = 
 There is also no use of the title " saint " for anyone other than biblical persons ( and even then the title is used with a certain degree of exclusivity ) . This is to prevent oddities of convention ( such as St. Nicolaus Copernicus ) as well as to underline the Lutheran emphasis on the priesthood of all believers . Nevertheless , individuals who typically have " saint " affixed to their given name are still referred to as such in common discourse ( so that Francis of Assisi would still be called " St. Francis " rather than just " Francis " ) . 
 In the New Testament , all Christians are referred to as saints . However , the use of " saint " as a title for an individual who had led a good and exemplary life or who had been martyred began to develop in Christianity . By the time of the Reformation , the use of " saint " was almost exclusively the restrictive , titular sense . One of the effects of the Reformation was to eliminate the abuses of the cult of saints , and as a result , it is a common misconception that Lutherans do not have ( or rather , do not venerate ) saints . However , the confessional documents of the Lutheran Church , particularly the Augsburg Confession , accept both the general and particular use of the word saints . In regards to the titular sense , the Augsburg Confession commends that " it should be taught among us that saints should be kept in remembrance so that our faith may be strengthened when we see what grace they received and how they were sustained in faith . Moreover , their good works are to be an example for us , each of us in his own calling . " Article XXI of The Apology to the Augsburg Confession goes further to describe three types of honor which are due to the saints and acknowledgment that the saints pray for the Church . However , the Augsburg Confession opposes prayer to saints , stating , " Scripture does not teach calling on the saints or pleading for help from them . For it sets before us Christ alone as mediator , atoning sacrifice , high priest , and intercessor . " 
 = Death of Abdulredha Buhmaid = 
 Abdulredha Mohamed Hasan Buhmaid ( or <unk> , Arabic : <unk> محمد حسن <unk> ) was a 28 @-@ year @-@ old Bahraini protester shot by a live bullet in the head on 18 February 2011 . He died in hospital three days later , the seventh death in the Bahraini uprising . 
 Buhmaid was among a group of protesters who on 18 February marched toward the Pearl Roundabout following the funeral procession of protester Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima , who was killed four days earlier . When the protesters neared Pearl Roundabout , the army opened fire . Buhmaid collapsed to the ground , and blood poured from his head after it was hit by a bullet . The army opened fire twice more . Protesters regrouped after each round of shooting . Riot police finally intervened and dispersed protesters . Over one hundred protesters were injured , some seriously . Buhmaid was taken to Salmaniya hospital where attempts to revive him failed over the course of three days . He died on the afternoon of 21 February . 
 Several witnesses including journalists and medics accused authorities of shooting directly at protesters , preventing some ambulances from reaching the site and firing at others . The government however , denied those statements . It stated that warning shots were fired in the air and accused protesters of faking injuries . An investigation by a government @-@ appointed commission of inquiry blamed the army for Buhmaid 's death . The incident marked the first time that the Royal Bahraini Army was used to confront civilians , and at the time was considered " the bloodiest " incident since protests erupted . 
 Following the incident , the government offered dialogue which the opposition said they will only take part in after the withdrawal of the army . The general labor union called for a general strike . Internationally , the attack on protesters was condemned by Barack Obama and Human Rights Watch . High Representative of European Union expressed her deep concerns and called for restrain and immediate dialogue . Britain revoked over forty arms licenses to Bahrain after an earlier announcement that it would review them and German president canceled a planned visit to the country . Buhmaid is remembered by the opposition as a martyr , leader and symbol of peacefulness . 
 = = Short biography = = 
 Buhmaid ( or <unk> , 28 ) was married and had three children . He lived in Malkiya , south west of Manama . According to his wife , he had strong ties with his brothers . In an interview with the Bahraini newspaper Al Wasat , she said he used to take part in any political event in his area . " He was hoping to be Malkiya 's first martyr and so he became " , she added . 
 = = Background = = 
 Inspired by the successful uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia , protests erupted in Bahrain on 14 February . During the day named as the Day of Rage , over 6 @,@ 000 people participated in fifty @-@ five demonstrations and political rallies in twenty @-@ five different locations throughout Bahrain . Security forces responded to protests by firing tear gas , rubber bullets , sound bombs and birdshot . More than thirty protesters were injured and Ali Mushaima died as a result of birdshot injury in his back . The following day , during the deceased funeral , another protester was killed the same way . Angry protesters marched to and occupied Pearl Roundabout . By nightfall , their numbers had swelled to over 10 @,@ 000 . On 16 February , thousands of protesters continued to occupy Pearl Roundabout . 
 On 17 February ( later referred to as the Bloody Thursday ) , police launched a pre @-@ dawn raid on sleeping protesters . Four protesters were killed and more than 300 were injured bringing the number of those killed in the events to six . Health workers and a journalist were allegedly attacked by security forces . The army was deployed following clearance of Pearl roundabout which then set up checkpoints and barriers . The Interior Ministry issued a warning to stay off the streets , and the army warned that it was ready to take " punitive measures " to restore order . Protesters resorted to Salmaniya Hospital 's car parks where thousands of them protested against the government . All 18 Members of Parliament from Al Wefaq , the only opposition political party represented in Parliament , submitted their resignations . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On 18 February , over 50 @,@ 000 participated in the funerals of crackdown victims . One was held in Al Daih , another in Karzakan . The largest however , was in Sitra . At about 4 : 46 in the afternoon , about a thousand protesters , most of them young men who participated in Al Daih funeral of Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima marched toward Manama , defying the government ban on gatherings . By 5 : 18 they had reached a road junction ; to the right was Salmaniya hospital and to the left Pearl Roundabout . They turned left after a short pause . On their way , they clashed with riot police who withdrew from the site . Protesters continued their march removing barriers set by police a day ago . 
 By 5 : 30 protesters were 80 to 200 meters away from army forces stationed in Pearl Roundabout which " were armed with M16 assault rifles , Dilmun rifles and Browning .50 calibre machine guns mounted on top of armoured vehicles " . The protest was peaceful and protesters were " holding their hands in the air and chanting ' peaceful , peaceful ' " . Some were holding flowers . As protesters continued marching , army troops opened fire . 
 Abdulredha Buhmaid was among the protesters . He was shot by a bullet in the head , collapsed to the ground and in the words of a witness , " blood was rushing from his head " . Others sustained severe injuries inflicted by gunshots , two of whom also fell to the ground . Several eyewitnesses said army troops " gave no warning " , but one witness said he heard them issue a warning several minutes after the initial shooting . Another witness said they heard a " faint voice of someone over a loudspeaker in the distance but could not make out what the speaker was saying " . 
 Most protesters ran after hearing gunshots and a helicopter chased them . After shooting stopped , protesters regrouped . One youth picked a rock and headed toward the army , only to be stopped by four other protesters . A witness interviewed by Physicians for Human Rights said that he and other protesters moved closer to army forces following the initial shooting . According to him he asked " Why do you shoot us ? We had our hands up . We are peaceful . What do you want from us ? " , one soldier replied " I want you to leave . If you do not turn back , I have orders to shoot " . Arriving ambulances started evacuating the injured when army opened fire again . 
 When the shooting stopped , about fifty protesters started praying on the road , and few stood in front facing the army with their hands in the air . The army opened fire for a third time . The period of each shooting was short , because " people immediately started running away " , witnesses said . After that , riot police intervened , firing tear gas and birdshot to disperse protesters , inflicting more injuries among them . 
 A cameraman working for the Associated Press said he saw " army units shooting anti @-@ aircraft weapons , fitted on top of armored personnel carriers , above the protesters in apparent warning shots and attempts to drive them back from security cordons " . Bahraini photojournalist Mazen Mahdi said that the army shot " live fire from machine guns " and that paramedics were blocked from helping the wounded . " The first was a warning shot in the air . But after that , they just opened fire at the people ... They shot at the ambulances when they came in " , he added . 
 A senior emergencies researcher and medics interviewed by Human Rights Watch confirmed that some of the twelve ambulances sent were prevented by security forces from reaching the site . The Daily Telegraph said ambulances and paramedics " were shot at " and that " several were detained and at least one ambulance was impounded " . Michael <unk> of The New York Times reported that he and a colleague were " shot at from a helicopter " shortly after army opened fire on protesters . Associated Press witnesses , The Daily Telegraph , and The New York Times mentioned that army personnel positioned in high buildings and helicopters fired on protesters . Jalal <unk> , resigned MP of Al Wefaq , Bahrain 's main opposition party , said he saw soldiers fire on protesters . A report by three local rights groups mentioned that " photos of the injuries suggest that army aimed at the upper body area " . 
 Riot police chased down protesters who fled to Salmaniya , Bahrain 's main hospital . Security forces backed off after initially advancing toward the hospital and firing tear gas into it . That night , over seven thousand protesters staged an anti @-@ government sit @-@ in in hospital parks , described by The Guardian as " the only place in Manama where they now feel safe to gather in numbers " . The incident marked the first time that the Royal Bahraini Army was used to confront civilians , and at the time was considered " the bloodiest " incident since protests erupted . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 At least 120 people were injured according to medical officials . Salmaniya hospital was " overwhelmed " with casualties , some of whom were taken to private hospitals . Doctors said that nine of the thirty @-@ two casualties who reached Salmaniya hospital were in critical condition . Some medics cried while treating the injured , some of whom had bullets still lodged into their bodies , X @-@ rays showed . A doctor interviewed by Al Jazeera English pleaded for help from " all countries in the world " . Describing the situation in hospital as a war , Dr. Ghassan said , " They are shooting at people 's heads . Not at the legs . People are having their brains blown out " . Two doctors said they treated patients who " seemed to be [ injured by ] live bullets rather than shotgun pellets , judging by the entry and exit holes " . 
 Buhmaid was taken to Salmaniya hospital . Blood was still " pouring from his head and he was unconscious " . He was " clinging to life " in intensive care unit where doctors " struggled to stop his bleeding " . " This is a bullet , gunshot wound , direct to his head and he 's bleeding profusely from his nose , from his ear , his brain is shattered into pieces " , said a doctor . Buhmaid 's " brain was destroyed , but his body was still alive " . His clinical death prompted a nurse on 20 February to smash a glass @-@ framed image of the Prime Minister . Remaining in ICU for three days , Buhmaid was medically declared to be dead early in the afternoon of 21 February , becoming the seventh victim of the uprising . 
 Listing him under " Deaths Attributed to Security Forces " , the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry appointed by King Hamad to investigate the events stated that Buhmaid 's death " may be attributed to the BDF [ army ] " while also referring to the contrary result of the military investigation . 
 = = = Government account = = = 
 On the night of 18 February , <unk> al @-@ Hamar , then the Minister of Health , issued a press release aired on the national TV which denied there had been any deaths . He said the situation at Salmaniya hospital was calm and that only seven people were being treated for minor injuries . He also warned against what he called " rumors " spread in some satellite channels and websites . Bahrain 's ambassador to the United States said that if army forces did fire live ammunition , " Probably they were warning shots only " . " The forces that were used were proportional according to the law , they were legal , they were necessary because they were stopping the shops . The economy was hurting , the national economy . We had to take action and action was taken by the law , " he added . However he admitted protesters did not use live rounds and promised that " Investigations will happen . And they will continue " . 
 The army said that protesters defied its orders to evacuate the area . According to its statement , after at least fifteen minutes of repeating the same orders , soldiers fired warning shots to the air . It also alleged that protesters were accompanied by " a line of ambulances " out of which they took blood bags to " feign that they had been injured " . Military prosecutors carried out an investigation and concluded that the trajectory of the bullet that killed Buhmaid were inconsistent with the bullet having been shot by the BDF , on the basis of an ordnance expert 's report that concluded the shot was fired from a high elevation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the incident , the government offered dialogue with opposition and ordered army to withdraw from Pearl Roundabout . On 19 February , army troops were replaced by riot police . Hundreds of protesters moved to the site from different locations . A standoff between protesters and riot police was created , until the latter suddenly moved away . Thousands of protesters re @-@ occupied the site following police withdrawal . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Buhmaid 's funeral was held on 22 February in his village , Malkiya . Over 9 @,@ 000 participated in the funeral procession which started from roundabout 13 in Hamad Town and ended in Malkiya graveyard . At the same day during afternoon , over 100 @,@ 000 participated in a protest dubbed " March of loyalty to martyrs " in honor of the seven victims of the uprising . 
 = = = Medics ' trial = = = 
 In May 2011 , 47 doctors , nurses , and dentists were charged for their actions during the uprising . One of the charges was conducting unnecessary operations to Buhmaid , which led to his death . In a press conference , Minister of Justice said " Buhmaid was shot in the head and he underwent a surgery in the presence of the media . His head had been open in an exaggerated manner , which led to his death " . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Buhmaid 's family said they were sad for his death , but their pride had overcome it . Appearing on the national TV , the crown prince authorized by his father , the king , offered unconditional dialogue with opposition . He offered " condolences to the people of Bahrain for the painful days they are living " and asked them to remain calm . Opposition activists demanded withdrawal of army and resignation of government for the dialogue to begin . " [ There is no ] serious will for dialogue because the military is in the streets " , said Matar Matar , resigned MP of Al Wefaq . The general labor union called for an indefinite general strike " unless the army is pulled out from the streets and peaceful demonstrations are permitted " . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Barack Obama criticized the government actions . In reference to government of Bahrain and Yemen , he said " The United States condemns the use of violence by governments against peaceful protesters in those countries and wherever else it may occur " . Catherine Ashton , the High Representative of European Union demanded " restraint " from all parties and said that report of violence " deeply concerned " her . She called for dialogue to begin " without delay " . The United Kingdom revoked forty four arm licenses to Bahrain , twenty of them open licenses . Foreign Office Minister Alistair Burt said " We are deeply concerned about the situation in Bahrain and the events which have led to the deaths of several protesters " . 
 German president canceled a planned trip to the country . " Freedom of assembly and freedom of speech in Bahrain have to be fully guaranteed " , a spokesman quoted him saying . Lawrence Cannon , then Canada 's Foreign Minister called the Bahraini government to " exercise restraint " and lunch an investigation into protesters ' deaths . " Canada urges Bahrain to respect its citizens ' rights to freedom of expression and assembly , and to engage in peaceful dialogue with its people to address their concerns " , he added . 
 Human Rights Watch condemned the attack . " The Bahraini army has done what the Egyptian army did not do and exactly what the United States and its other partners urged it not to do -- it has opened fire on its own people , " its Washington director said . Fareed Zakaria , CNN 's international affairs analyst , said that the crackdown on protesters was a " rash move that will enrage many of its people and cost the regime international prestige " . " This is a terrible mistake and they will pay a heavy price for it . The regime in Bahrain is doing something very rash and unwise ; it is trying to respond by using force and punitive measures . This is not going to work in the end " , he added . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Buhmaid was the first person named a " field commander " by February 14 Youth Coalition , which also named their attempt to reoccupy Pearl Roundabout in the first anniversary of the uprising , " operation of the martyr leader Abdulredha Buhmaid " . His death was described by the online opposition newspaper , Bahrain Mirror , as a " legendary scene that will remain forever in the conscience of humanity " . A poster found in two articles of the aforementioned newspaper described Buhmaid as " the martyr who brought down an army with his peacefulness " . 
 Speaking to participants of a sit @-@ in front of United Nations building in Manama on 22 February 2012 , <unk> al @-@ Khuza 'e of Al Wefaq said that shooting scene of Buhmaid was " the top manifestation of peacefulness " . On 29 February , opposition parties organized a gathering in Malkiya to honor Buhmaid . Thousands participated in the gathering including Isa Qassim , Bahrain Shias ' top religious figure . 
 = South India = 
 South India is the area encompassing the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Kerala , Tamil Nadu and Telangana as well as the union territories of Andaman and Nicobar , Lakshadweep and Puducherry , occupying 19 @.@ 31 % of India 's area ( 635 @,@ 780 km2 or 245 @,@ 480 sq mi ) . Covering the southern part of the peninsular Deccan Plateau , South India is bounded by the Bay of Bengal in the east , the Arabian Sea in the west and the Indian Ocean in the south . The geography of the region is diverse with two mountain ranges - the Western and Eastern Ghats , bordering the plateau heartland . Godavari , Krishna , Kaveri , Tungabhadra and Vaigai rivers are important non @-@ perennial sources of water . Bangalore , Chennai , Hyderabad , Coimbatore and Kochi are the largest urban areas . 
 Majority of the people in South India speak one of the four major Dravidian languages : Telugu , Tamil , Kannada and Malayalam . During its history , a number of dynastic kingdoms ruled over parts of South India whose invasions across southern and southeastern Asia impacted the history and culture in those regions . Major dynasties that were established in South India include the Cheras , Cholas , Pandyas , Pallavas , Satavahanas , Chalukyas , Rashtrakutas and Vijayanagara . European countries entered India through Kerala and the region was colonised by Britain and other nations . 
 After experiencing fluctuations in the decades immediately after Indian independence , the economies of South Indian states have registered higher than national average growth over the past three decades . While South Indian states have improved in some socio @-@ economic metrics , poverty continues to affect the region much like the rest of the country , although it has considerably decreased over the years . HDI in southern states is high and the economy has undergone growth at a faster rate than most northern states . Literacy rates in southern states is higher than the national average with approximately 80 % of the population capable of reading and writing . The fertility rate in South India is 1 @.@ 9 , the lowest of all regions in India . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 South India also known as Peninsular India has been known by several other names . The term " Deccan " referring to the area covered by the Deccan Plateau that covers most of peninsular India excluding the coastal areas is an anglicised form of the word Prakrit <unk> derived from the Sanskrit word <unk> meaning south . Carnatic derived from " <unk> " or " <unk> " meaning high country has also been associated with South India . 
