 Prokofiev had been considering making an opera out of Leo Tolstoy 's epic novel War and Peace , when news of the German invasion of Russia on 22 June 1941 made the subject seem all the more timely . Prokofiev took two years to compose his original version of War and Peace . Because of the war he was evacuated together with a large number of other artists , initially to the Caucasus where he composed his Second String Quartet . By this time his relationship with the 25 @-@ year @-@ old writer and librettist Mira Mendelson ( 1915 – 1968 ) had finally led to his separation from his wife Lina , although they were never technically divorced : indeed Prokofiev had tried to persuade Lina and their sons to accompany him as evacuees out of Moscow , but Lina opted to stay . 
 During the war years , restrictions on style and the demand that composers should write in a ' socialist realist ' style were slackened , and Prokofiev was generally able to compose in his own way . The Violin Sonata No. 1 , Op. 80 , The Year 1941 , Op. 90 , and the Ballade for the Boy Who Remained Unknown , Op. 93 all came from this period . In 1943 Prokofiev joined Eisenstein in Alma @-@ Ata , the largest city in Kazakhstan , to compose more film music ( Ivan the Terrible ) , and the ballet Cinderella ( Op. 87 ) , one of his most melodious and celebrated compositions . Early that year he also played excerpts from War and Peace to members of the Bolshoi Theatre collective . However , the Soviet government had opinions about the opera which resulted in many revisions . In 1944 , Prokofiev spent time at a composer 's colony outside Moscow in order to compose his Fifth Symphony ( Op. 100 ) . Prokofiev conducted its first performance on 13 January 1945 , just a fortnight after the triumphant premieres on 30 December 1944 of his Eighth Piano Sonata and , on the same day , the first part of Eisenstein 's Ivan the Terrible . With the premiere of his Fifth Symphony , which was programmed alongside Peter and the Wolf and the Classical Symphony ( these conducted by Nikolai <unk> ) , Prokofiev appeared to reach the peak of his celebrity as a leading composer of the Soviet Union . Shortly afterwards , he suffered a concussion after a fall due to chronic high blood pressure . He never fully recovered from this injury , and was forced on medical advice to restrict his composing activity . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Prokofiev had time to write his postwar Sixth Symphony and his Ninth Piano Sonata ( for Sviatoslav Richter ) before the so @-@ called " Zhdanov Decree " . In early 1948 , following a meeting of Soviet composers convened by Andrei Zhdanov , the Politburo issued a resolution denouncing Prokofiev , Dmitri Shostakovich , Myaskovsky , and Khachaturian of the crime of " formalism " , described as a " renunciation of the basic principles of classical music " in favour of " muddled , nerve @-@ racking " sounds that " turned music into cacophony " . Eight of Prokofiev 's works were banned from performance : The Year 1941 , Ode to the End of the War , Festive Poem , Cantata for the Thirtieth Anniversary of October , Ballad of an Unknown Boy , the 1934 piano cycle Thoughts , and Piano Sonatas Nos 6 and 8 . Such was the perceived threat behind the banning of these works that even works that had avoided censure were no longer programmed : by August 1948 , Prokofiev was in severe financial straits , his personal debt amounting to 180 @,@ 000 rubles . 
 Meanwhile , on 20 February 1948 , Prokofiev 's wife Lina was arrested for ' espionage ' , as she had tried to send money to her mother in Spain . After nine months of interrogation , she was sentenced by a three @-@ member Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the USSR to 20 years of hard labour . She was eventually released after Stalin 's death in 1953 and in 1974 left the Soviet Union . 
 Prokofiev 's latest opera projects , among them his desperate attempt to appease the cultural authorities , The Story of a Real Man , were quickly cancelled by the Kirov Theatre . This snub , in combination with his declining health , caused Prokofiev progressively to withdraw from public life and from various activities , even his beloved chess , and increasingly he devoted himself exclusively to his own work . After a serious relapse in 1949 , his doctors ordered him to limit his activities , limiting him to composing for only an hour a day . 
 In spring 1949 he wrote his Cello Sonata in C , Op. 119 , for the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Mstislav Rostropovich , who gave the first performance in 1950 , with Sviatoslav Richter . For Rostropovich , Prokofiev also extensively recomposed his Cello Concerto , transforming it into a Symphony @-@ Concerto , his last major masterpiece and a landmark in the cello and orchestra repertory today . The last public performance he attended was the première of the Seventh Symphony in 1952 . The music was written for the Children 's Radio Division . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Prokofiev died at the age of 61 on 5 March 1953 , the same day as Joseph Stalin . He had lived near Red Square , and for three days the throngs gathered to mourn Stalin , making it impossible to carry Prokofiev 's body out for the funeral service at the headquarters of the Soviet Composers ' Union . He is buried in the Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow . He was an atheist . 
 The leading Soviet musical periodical reported Prokofiev 's death as a brief item on page 116 . The first 115 pages were devoted to the death of Stalin . Usually Prokofiev 's death is attributed to cerebral hemorrhage . He had been chronically ill for the prior eight years ; the precise nature of Prokofiev 's terminal illness remains uncertain . 
 Lina Prokofiev outlived her estranged husband by many years , dying in London in early 1989 . Royalties from her late husband 's music provided her with a modest income , and she acted as storyteller for a recording of her husband 's Peter and the Wolf ( currently released on CD by Chandos Records ) with <unk> Järvi conducting the Scottish National Orchestra . Their sons Sviatoslav ( 1924 – 2010 ) , an architect , and Oleg ( 1928 – 1998 ) , an artist , painter , sculptor and poet , dedicated a large part of their lives to the promotion of their father 's life and work . 
 = = Posthumous reputation = = 
 Arthur Honegger proclaimed that Prokofiev would " remain for us the greatest figure of contemporary music , " and the American scholar Richard Taruskin has recognised Prokofiev 's " gift , virtually unparalleled among 20th @-@ century composers , for writing distinctively original diatonic melodies . " Yet for some time Prokofiev 's reputation in the West suffered as a result of cold @-@ war antipathies , and his music has never won from Western academics and critics the kind of esteem currently enjoyed by Igor Stravinsky and Arnold Schoenberg , composers purported to have a greater influence on a younger generation of musicians . 
 Today Prokofiev may well be the most popular composer of 20th @-@ century music . His orchestral music alone is played more frequently in the United States than that of any other composer of the last hundred years , save Richard Strauss , while his operas , ballets , chamber works , and piano music appear regularly throughout the major concert halls world @-@ wide . 
 The composer received honours in his native Donetsk Oblast , when the Donetsk International Airport was renamed to be " Donetsk Sergey Prokofiev International Airport , " and when the Donetsk Musical and Pedagogical Institute was renamed in 1988 to " S.S. Prokofiev State Music Academy of Donetsk . " 
 = = Works = = 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Prokofiev was a soloist with the London Symphony Orchestra , conducted by Piero Coppola , in the first recording of his Piano Concerto No. 3 , recorded in London by His Master 's Voice in June 1932 . Prokofiev also recorded some of his solo piano music for HMV in Paris in February 1935 ; these recordings were issued on CD by Pearl and Naxos . In 1938 , he conducted the Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra in a recording of the second suite from his Romeo and Juliet ballet ; this performance was later released on LP and CD . Another reported recording with Prokofiev and the Moscow Philharmonic was of the First Violin Concerto with David Oistrakh as soloist ; Everest Records later released this recording on an LP . Despite the attribution , the conductor was Aleksandr <unk> . A short sound film of Prokofiev playing some of the music from his opera War and Peace and then explaining the music has been discovered . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Six Stalin Prizes : 
 ( 1943 ) , 2nd degree – for Piano Sonata No. 7 
 ( 1946 ) , 1st degree – for Symphony No. 5 and Piano Sonata No. 8 
 ( 1946 ) , 1st degree – for the music for the film " Ivan the Terrible " Part 1 ( 1944 ) 
 ( 1946 ) , 1st degree – for the ballet " Cinderella " ( 1944 ) 
 ( 1947 ) , 1st degree – for Violin Sonata No. 1 
 ( 1951 ) , 2nd degree – for vocal @-@ symphonic suite " Winter bonfire " and the oratorio " On Guard for Peace " on poems by S. Marshak 
 Lenin Prize ( 1957 – posthumous ) – for Symphony No. 7 
 People 's Artist of RSFSR ( 1947 ) 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour 
 = = = Autobiography and diaries = = = 
 = = = Memoirs , essays , etc . = = = 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 = = = Other monographs = = = 
 = = = Dictionary articles = = = 
 = Calakmul = 
 Calakmul ( / <unk> / ; also <unk> and other less frequent variants ) is a Maya archaeological site in the Mexican state of Campeche , deep in the jungles of the greater Petén Basin region . It is 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) from the Guatemalan border . Calakmul was one of the largest and most powerful ancient cities ever uncovered in the Maya lowlands . 
 Calakmul was a major Maya power within the northern Petén Basin region of the Yucatán Peninsula of southern Mexico . Calakmul administered a large domain marked by the extensive distribution of their emblem glyph of the snake head sign , to be read " Kaan " . Calakmul was the seat of what has been dubbed the Kingdom of the Snake or Snake Kingdom . This Snake Kingdom reigned during most of the Classic period . Calakmul itself is estimated to have had a population of 50 @,@ 000 people and had governance , at times , over places as far away as 150 kilometers . There are 6 @,@ 750 ancient structures identified at Calakmul ; the largest of which is the great pyramid at the site . Structure 2 is over 45 metres ( 148 ft ) high , making it one of the tallest of the Maya pyramids . Four tombs have been located within the pyramid . Like many temples or pyramids within Mesoamerica the pyramid at Calakmul increased in size by building upon the existing temple to reach its current size . The size of the central monumental architecture is approximately 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) and the whole of the site , mostly covered with dense residential structures , is about 20 square kilometres ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) . 
 Throughout the Classic Period , Calakmul maintained an intense rivalry with the major city of Tikal to the south , and the political manoeuvrings of these two cities have been likened to a struggle between two Maya superpowers . 
 Rediscovered from the air by biologist Cyrus L. Lundell of the Mexican Exploitation <unk> Company on December 29 , 1931 , the find was reported to Sylvanus G. Morley of the Carnegie Institute at Chichen Itza in March 1932 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Calakmul is a modern name ; according to Cyrus L. Lundell , who named the site , In Maya , ca means " two " , lak means " adjacent " , and mul signifies any artificial mound or pyramid , so Calakmul is the " City of the Two Adjacent Pyramids " . In ancient times the city core was known as Ox Te ' Tuun , meaning " Three Stones " . Another name associated with the site , and perhaps a larger area around it , is <unk> <unk> ' . The lords of Calakmul identified themselves as k 'uhul <unk> ajaw , Divine Lords of the Snake , but the connection of the title to the actual site is ambiguous . 
 = = Location = = 
 Calakmul is located in Campeche state in southeastern Mexico , about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) north of the border with Guatemala and 38 kilometres ( 24 mi ) north of the ruins of El Mirador . The ruins of El Tintal are 68 kilometres ( 42 mi ) to the southwest of Calakmul and were linked to both El Mirador and Calakmul itself by causeway . Calakmul was about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of the contemporary city of Oxpemul and approximately 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) southwest of La Muñeca . The city is located on a rise about 35 metres ( 115 ft ) above a large seasonal swamp lying to the west , known as the El Laberinto bajo ( a Spanish word used in the region to denote a low @-@ lying area of seasonal marshland ) . This swamp measures approximately 34 by 8 kilometres ( 21 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 0 mi ) and was an important source of water during the rainy season . The bajo was linked to a sophisticated water @-@ control system including both natural and artificial features such as gullies and canals that encircled a 22 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 8 @.@ 5 sq mi ) area around the site core , an area considered as Inner Calakmul . The location of Calakmul at the edge of a bajo provided two additional advantages : the fertile soils along the edge of the swamp and access to abundant flint nodules . The city is situated on a promontory formed by a natural 35 @-@ metre ( 115 ft ) high limestone dome rising above the surrounding lowlands . This dome was artificially levelled by the Maya . During the Preclassic and Classic periods settlement was concentrated along the edge of the El Laberinto bajo , during the Classic period structures were also built on high ground and small islands in the swamp where flint was worked . 
 At the beginning of the 21st century the area around Calakmul remained covered by dense forest . During the 1st millennium AD the area received moderate and regular rainfall , although there is less surface water available than further south in Guatemala . <unk> is now located within the 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 7 @,@ 300 km2 ) Calakmul Biosphere Reserve . 
 = = Population and extent = = 
 At its height in the Late Classic period the city is estimated to have had a population of 50 @,@ 000 inhabitants and to have covered an area of over 70 square kilometres ( 27 sq mi ) . The city was the capital of a large regional state with an area of about 13 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . During the Terminal Classic the city 's population declined dramatically and the rural population plummeted to 10 % of its former level . 
 The Late Classic population density of Calakmul has been calculated at 1000 / km ² ( 2564 per square mile ) in the site core and 420 / km ² ( 1076 per square mile ) in the periphery ( an area of 122 square kilometres ( 47 sq mi ) . Calakmul was a true urban city and not just an elite centre surrounded by commoner residences . The site core of Calakmul was known in ancient times as Ox Te ' Tuun ( " Three Stones " ) which may have been because of the triadic pyramid Structure 2 . 
 The Calakmul kingdom included 20 secondary centres , among which were large cities such as La Muñeca , <unk> , <unk> , Oxpemul and <unk> . The total population of these secondary centres has been estimated at 200 @,@ 000 . The kingdom also included a large number of tertiary and quaternary sites , mostly fairly small and consisting of a number of groups arranged around courtyards , although there are also larger rural sites situated on ridges along the edges of the bajos that include temples , palaces and stelae . The total rural population of the kingdom is calculated at 1 @.@ 5 million people . The entire population of the Calakmul kingdom , including the city itself and the rural population in the 13 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 000 sq mi ) area of the regional state , is calculated at 1 @.@ 75 million people in the Late Classic period . 
 The Emblem Glyph of Calakmul has a greater distribution than the Emblem Glyph of any other Maya city . The Glyph is also found in more hieroglyphic texts than any other Emblem Glyph , including that of Tikal . Calakmul administered a large domain marked by the extensive distribution of their emblem glyph of the snake head sign , to be read " Kaan " . Calakmul was the seat of what has been dubbed the Snake Kingdom . At times the city had governance over places as far away as 150 kilometers . 
 = = Known rulers = = 
 The kings of Calakmul were known as k 'uhul kan <unk> ( / k ’ <unk> <unk> <unk> / ) ( " Divine Lords of the Snake Kingdom " ) . This list is not continuous , as the archaeological record is incomplete . All dates AD . 
 = = Emblem Glyph = = 
 At Calakmul 's peak in the 7th century , the polity was known as Kan . Interesting to know is that the title Kan was used at another place before Calakmul became a regional powerhouse . The Preclassic political state in the Mirador Basin also used the title Kan . There is the idea that , after the collapse of the Mirador state , its refugees migrated north towards Calakmul , where they founded a new Kan polity . However , epigraphical studies of the monuments at Calakmul show that prior to the 7th century AD the emblem glyph of Calakmul had nothing to do with a snake , but with a bat . It seems that a different polity ruled there . The Kan emblem glyph , before being associated with Calakmul , is found ( once ) at Dzibanché , a site more towards the east . Perhaps during the late 6th / early 7th century , the polity at Dzibanché moved to Calakmul in order to establish a more strategically placed capital . After Calakmul 's power dwindled in the 8th century , after the rule of Yuknoom Took K 'awiil , it appears that the bat emblem glyph made its resurgence . Still , many uncertainties remain and new epigraphical studies have to be done to fill the gaps . 
 = = History = = 
 Calakmul has a long occupational history and excavations have revealed evidence from the Middle Preclassic right through to the Postclassic . The causeway network that linked Calakmul with the cities of El Mirador , Nakbe and El Tintal suggest strong political links between the four cities that may have begun in the Preclassic , when both Calakmul and El Mirador were important cities , and continued into the Classic period when Calakmul itself was the most powerful city in the region . Calakmul was one of the largest and most powerful ancient cities ever uncovered in the Maya lowlands . 
 = = = Calakmul vs. Tikal = = = 
 The history of the Maya Classic period is dominated by the rivalry between Tikal and Calakmul , likened to a struggle between two Maya " superpowers " . Earlier times tended to be dominated by a single larger city and by the Early Classic Tikal was moving into this position after the dominance of El Mirador in the Late Preclassic and Nakbe in the Middle Preclassic . However Calakmul was a rival city with equivalent resources that challenged the supremacy of Tikal and engaged in a strategy of surrounding it with its own network of allies . From the second half of the 6th century AD through to the late 7th century Calakmul gained the upper hand although it failed to extinguish Tikal 's power completely and Tikal was able to turn the tables on its great rival in a decisive battle that took place in AD 695 . Half a century later Tikal was able to gain major victories over Calakmul 's most important allies . Eventually both cities succumbed to the spreading Classic Maya collapse . 
 The great rivalry between these two cities may have been based on more than competition for resources . Their dynastic histories reveal different origins and the intense competition between the two powers may have had an ideological grounding . Calakmul 's dynasty seems ultimately derived from the great Preclassic city of El Mirador while the dynasty of Tikal was profoundly affected by the intervention of the distant central Mexican metropolis of Teotihuacan . With few exceptions , Tikal 's monuments and those of its allies place great emphasis upon single male rulers while the monuments of Calakmul and its allies gave greater prominence to the female line and often the joint rule of king and queen . 
 = = = Preclassic = = = 
 Calakmul was already a large city in the Preclassic period . The early history of Calakmul is obscure , although a dynastic list has been pieced together that extends back into an ancestral past . This dynasty has been reconstructed in part from Late Classic ceramics from the region of great Preclassic cities of El Mirador and Nakbe . This may mean that Calakmul ultimately inherited its political authority from one of these cities , with its dynasty originating in the Late Preclassic in the Mirador Basin and relocating itself to Calakmul in the Classic period after the collapse of these cities . 
 = = = Early Classic = = = 
 Both Calakmul and Tikal were sizeable Preclassic cities that survived into the Classic Period . Early hieroglyphic texts from stelae found in Structure 2 record the probable enthronement of a king of Calakmul in AD 411 and also records a non @-@ royal site ruler in 514 . After this there is a gap in the hieroglyphic records that lasts over a century , although the Kaan dynasty experienced a major expansion of its power at this time . The lack of inscriptions recording the events of this period may be either due to the fact that the Kaan dynasty was located elsewhere during this time or perhaps that the monuments were later destroyed . 
 The earliest legible texts referring to the kings of the Kaan dynasty come from excavations of the large city of Dzibanche in Quintana Roo , far north of Calakmul . A hieroglyphic stairway depicts bound captives , their names and the dates they were captured together with the name of king Yuknoom Che 'en I , although the exact context of the king 's name is unclear - the captives may have been his vassals captured by an enemy or they may have been rulers captured by the king of Calakmul . The dates are uncertain but two of them may fall within the 5th century AD . The nearby Quintana Roo site of El <unk> has a jumbled hieroglyphic text , including a date in 529 , that indicates that the city was within the control of the Kaan dynasty . 
 By the middle of the 6th century AD Calakmul was assembling a far @-@ reaching political alliance , activity that brought the city into conflict with the great city of Tikal . The influence of Calakmul extended deep into the Petén ; king Tuun K 'ab ' Hix of Calakmul oversaw the enthronement of Aj Wosal to the rulership of Naranjo in 546 . Another vassal of Tuun K 'ab ' Hix was taken captive by Yaxchilan on the banks of the Usumacinta River in 537 . 
 In 561 , the king now known as Sky Witness installed a ruler at the site of Los Alacranes . Sky Witness played a major part in the political events of the Maya region . He became the overlord of the city of Caracol , to the south of Naranjo , which had previously been a vassal of Tikal . In 562 , according to a damaged text at Caracol , Sky Witness defeated Tikal itself and sacrificed its king Wak Chan K 'awiil , thus ending his branch of the royal dynasty at Tikal . This catastrophic defeat began a 130 @-@ year hiatus for Tikal , reflecting an extended period of dominance by Calakmul . This event is used as a marker to divide the Early Classic from the Late Classic . Sky Witness is also mentioned at <unk> , a site much further north in Quintana Roo . The last reference to Sky Witness occurs at Caracol and is dated to AD 572 . The text is damaged but probably records the death of this powerful king . 
 = = = Late Classic = = = 
 = = = = War with Palenque = = = = 
 Sky Witness was quickly succeeded by First Axewielder , who is mentioned in a text from Dzibanche celebrating the K 'atun @-@ ending of 573 . First Axewielder ruled for about six years . In 579 Uneh Chan became king of Calakmul . Uneh Chan engaged in an aggressive campaign in the western Maya region and attacked Palenque on 23 April 599 with his ally Lakam Chak , lord of the small city of Santa Elena 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) east of Palenque , defeating Palenque 's queen Lady Yohl Ik 'nal and sacking the city . The defeat is recorded on a series of hieroglyphic steps at Palenque itself and the event initiated a long @-@ lasting grudge against Calakmul . Lady Yohl Ik 'nal survived the battle and ruled for several more years , although she perhaps paid tribute to Calakmul . 
 Uneh Chan maintained his alliances with cities in the east and he is depicted on Caracol Stela 4 supervising an event involving king Yajaw Te ' K 'inich of that city that occurred before 583 . Calakmul again sacked Palenque on 7 April 611 under the personal direction of Uneh Chan . Palenque was now ruled by king Ajen Yohl Mat who had gained some sort of independence from Calakmul , provoking the new invasion . The immediate aftermath of this second victory over Palenque involved the deaths of the two most important nobles at the city , Ajen Yohl Mat himself and Janab Pakal , a high @-@ ranking member of the royal family and possibly co @-@ ruler . Janab Pakal died in March 612 and Ajen Yohl Mat a few months later . Their deaths so soon after the sacking of the city suggests that their demise was directly linked to Calakmul 's triumph . Palenque suffered a lengthy decline in its fortunes after this date before it was able to recover from its disastrous war with Calakmul . The wars against Palenque may have been undertaken by Uneh Chan in order to seize control of wealthy trade routes that passed through the western Maya region . 
 = = = = Rebellion at Naranjo = = = = 
 King Yuknoom Chan of Calakmul supervised an event at Caracol in 619 . Caracol Stela 22 records the accession of <unk> Uk 'ab ' K 'ak ' to the Calakmul throne in 622 . Two stelae were erected at Calakmul in 623 but their texts are too badly damaged to reveal the names of the royal couple involved . Approximately at this time Naranjo , a vassal of Calakmul , broke away when its king Aj Wosal died relatively soon after the death of Uneh Chan of Calakmul . Naranjo was independent of Calakmul by at least AD 626 , when it was twice defeated by Caracol and Yuknoom Chan may have been attempting to bring Naranjo back under Calakmul control . His attempts were brought to an end by his death in 630 . In 631 Yuknoom Head , the new king of Calakmul , finally regained control of Naranjo . Texts relate that the king of Naranjo was already captive at Calakmul on the day that his city was overrun and his punishment on the very same day is described by the word k <unk> ( / k ’ <unk> / ) meaning either " tortured " or " eaten " . Yuknoom Head conquered another city in March 636 , although the exact site is unknown . 
 = = = = Apogee = = = = 
 The Kaan dynasty was not originally established at Calakmul but rather re @-@ located there in the 7th Century from another city . Calakmul experienced its highest achievements during the reign of king Yuknoom Che 'en II , sometimes called Yuknoom the Great by scholars . Yuknoom Che 'en II was 36 years old when he came to the throne of Calakmul in AD 636 . A significant increase in the production of stelae at the city began with his reign and 18 stelae were commissioned by the king . Yuknoom Che 'en II was probably responsible for the construction of the palace complexes that form a major part of the site core . 
 = = = = = Calakmul and Dos Pilas = = = = = 
 In 629 Tikal had founded Dos Pilas in the Petexbatún region , some 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) to its southwest , as a military outpost in order to control trade along the course of the Pasión River . B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was installed on the throne of the new outpost at the age of four , in 635 , and for many years served as a loyal vassal fighting for his brother , the king of Tikal . In AD 648 Calakmul attacked Dos Pilas and gained an overwhelming victory that included the death of a Tikal lord . B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was captured by Yuknoom Che 'en II but , instead of being sacrificed , he was re @-@ instated on his throne as a vassal of the Calakmul king , and went on to attack Tikal in 657 , forcing Nuun Ujol Chaak , the then king of Tikal , to temporarily abandon the city . The first two rulers of Dos Pilas continued to use the <unk> emblem glyph of Tikal , and they probably felt that they had a legitimate claim to the throne of Tikal itself . For some reason , B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil was not installed as the new ruler of Tikal ; instead he stayed at Dos Pilas . Tikal counterattacked against Dos Pilas in 672 , driving B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil into an exile that lasted five years . Calakmul tried to encircle Tikal within an area dominated by its allies , such as El Peru , Dos Pilas and Caracol . In 677 Calakmul counterattacked against Dos Pilas , driving Tikal out and reinstalled B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil on his throne . In 679 Dos Pilas , probably aided by Calakmul , gained an important victory over Tikal , with a hieroglyphic description of the battle describing pools of blood and piles of heads . 
 Troubles continued in the east , with renewed conflict between Naranjo and Caracol . Naranjo completely defeated Caracol in 680 but Naranjo 's dynasty disappeared within two years and a daughter of B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil founded a new dynasty there in 682 , indicating that Calakmul had probably intervened decisively to place a loyal vassal on the throne . The patronage of Yuknoom Che 'en II as overlord is recorded at a range of important cities , including El Peru where he oversaw the installation of K 'inich B 'alam as king and strengthened the tie with the marriage of a Calakmul princess to that king . The power of Calakmul extended as far as the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá , where Motul de San José is recorded as its vassal in the 7th century , although it was traditionally aligned with Tikal . Yuknoom Che 'en II commanded the loyalty of three generations of kings at <unk> , 245 kilometres ( 152 mi ) to the south , and supervised the enthronement of at least two of them , in 656 and 677 . King Yuknoom Che 'en II was involved , directly or indirectly , in the crowning of a king at Moral to the west in Tabasco and one of Yuknoom 's nobles supervised a ritual at Piedras Negras on the Guatemalan bank of the Usumacinta River . Yuknoom Che 'en II died in his eighties , probably at the beginning of 686 . When he died , Calakmul was the most powerful city in the central Maya lowlands . 
 Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' succeeded Yuknoom Che 'en II , his crowning on 3 April 686 was recorded on monuments at Dos Pilas and El Peru . He was born in 649 and was likely to have been the son of his predecessor . He already held high office before he was named king and may have been responsible for the major successes of the latter part of Yuknoom Che 'en II 's reign . He retained the loyalty of K 'inich B 'alam of El Peru and B 'alaj Chan K 'awiil of Dos Pilas and gained that of K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Chaak in 693 , when he was installed on the throne of Naranjo at the age of five . However , the texts on sculpted monuments do not reveal the full complexity of diplomatic activity , as revealed by a painted ceramic vase from Tikal , which depicts an ambassador of Calakmul 's king kneeling before the enthroned king of Tikal and delivering tribute . Just four years later , in August 695 , the two states were once again at war . Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' led his warriors against Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I in a catastrophic battle that saw the defeat of Calakmul and the capture of the image of a Calakmul deity named Yajaw Maan . It is unknown what happened to Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' ; a stucco sculpture from Tikal shows a captive and the king is mentioned in the accompanying caption but it is not certain if the captive and the king are the same person . This event marked the end of Calakmul 's apogee , with diplomatic activity dropping away and fewer cities recognising Calakmul 's king as overlord . No stelae remain standing in the site core recording Yuknoom Yich <unk> K 'ak , although there are some in the Northeast Group and 2 broken stelae were buried in Structure 2 . 
 = = = = Later kings = = = = 
 The next ruler of Calakmul , Split Earth , is mentioned on a pair of carved bones in the tomb of Tikal king Jasaw Chan K 'awiil I. He was ruling by November 695 but it is not known if he was a legitimate member of the Calakmul dynasty or whether he was a pretender placed on the throne by Tikal . 
 The next known king used a number of name variants , and is referred to by different name segments within and outside of Calakmul . A partial reading of his name is Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . He erected seven stelae to celebrate a calendrical event in 702 and is named at Dos Pilas in that year , presumably demonstrating that Dos Pilas was still a vassal of Calakmul . El Peru also continued as a vassal and Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil installed a new king there at an unknown date . La Corona received a queen from Yuknoom Took ' . Naranjo also remained loyal . Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil commissioned seven more stelae to mark the k 'atun @-@ ending of 731 . A new defeat at the hands of Tikal is evidenced by a sculpted altar at that city , probably dating to sometime between 733 and 736 , depicting a bound lord from Calakmul and possibly names Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . 
 = = = = = Calakmul and Quiriguá = = = = = 
 After this the historical record of Calakmul becomes very vague , due both to the poor state of the heavily eroded monuments at the city itself and also its reduced political presence on the wider Maya stage . Wamaw K 'awiil is named at Quiriguá on the southern periphery of Mesoamerica . Quiriguá traditionally had been a vassal of its southern neighbour Copán , and in 724 Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil , king of Copán , installed K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat upon Quiriguá 's throne as his vassal . By 734 K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat had shown that he was no longer an obedient subordinate of Copán when he started to refer to himself as k 'ul ahaw , holy lord , instead of using the lesser term ahaw , subordinate lord ; at the same time he began to use his own Quiriguá emblem glyph . This local act of rebellion appears to have been part of the larger political struggle between Tikal and Calakmul . In 736 , only two years later , K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat received a visit from Wamaw K 'awiil of Calakmul , while Copán was one of Tikal 's oldest allies . The timing of this visit by the king of Calakmul is highly significant , falling between the accession of K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat to the throne of Quiriguá as a vassal of Copán and the outright rebellion that was to follow . This strongly suggests that Calakmul sponsored Quiriguá 's rebellion in order to weaken Tikal and to gain access to the rich trade route of the Motagua Valley . It is likely that contact with Calakmul had been initiated soon after K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat acceded to the throne . In 738 K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat captured the powerful but elderly king of Copán , Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil . An inscription at Quiriguá , although difficult to interpret , suggests that the capture took place on 27 April 738 , when Quiriguá seized and burned the wooden images of Copán 's patron deities . The captured lord was taken back to Quiriguá and on 3 May 738 he was decapitated in a public ritual . 
 In the Late Classic , alliance with Calakmul was frequently associated with the promise of military support . The fact that Copán , a much more powerful city than Quiriguá , failed to retaliate against its former vassal implies that it feared the military intervention of Calakmul . Calakmul itself was far enough away from Quiriguá that K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat was not afraid of falling directly under its power as a full vassal state , even though it is likely that Calakmul sent warriors to help in the defeat of Copán . The alliance instead seems to have been one of mutual advantage : Calakmul managed to weaken a powerful ally of Tikal while Quiriguá gained its independence . 
 = = = = Collapse = = = = 
 Five large stelae were raised in 741 , although the name of the king responsible is illegible on all of them and he has been labelled as Ruler Y. Calakmul 's presence in the wider Maya area continued to wane , with two of the city 's major allies suffering defeats at the hands of Tikal . El Peru was defeated in 743 and Naranjo a year later and this resulted in the final collapse of Calakmul 's once powerful alliance network , while Tikal underwent a resurgence in its power . 
 In 751 Ruler Z erected a stela that was never finished , paired with another with the portrait of a queen . A hieroglyphic stairway mentions someone called B 'olon K 'awiil at about the same time . B 'olon K 'awiil was king by 771 when he raised two stelae and he was mentioned at Toniná in 789 . Sites to the north of Calakmul showed a reduction in its influence at this time , with new architectural styles influenced by sites further north in the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 A monument was raised in 790 although the name of the ruler responsible is not preserved . Two more were raised in 800 and three in 810 . No monument was erected to commemorate the important Bak 'tun @-@ ending of 830 and it is probable that political authority had alreadly collapsed at this time . Important cities such as Oxpemul , <unk> and La Muñeca that were Calakmul 's vassals at one time now erected their own monuments , where before they had raised very few ; some continued producing new monuments until as late as 889 . This was a process that paralleled events at Tikal . However , there is strong evidence of an elite presence at the city continuing until AD 900 , possibly even later . 
 In 849 , Calakmul was mentioned at Seibal where a ruler named as Chan Pet attended the K 'atun @-@ ending ceremony ; his name may also be recorded on a broken ceramic at Calakmul itself . However , it is unlikely that Calakmul still existed as a state in any meaningful way at this late date . A final flurry of activity took place at the end of the 9th century or the beginning of the 10th . A new stela was erected , although the date records only the day , not the full date . The recorded day may fall either in 899 or 909 with the latter date the most likely . A few monuments appear to be even later although their style is crude , representing the efforts of a remnant population to maintain the Classic Maya tradition . Even the inscriptions on these late monuments are meaningless imitations of writing . 
 Ceramics dating to the Terminal Classic period are uncommon outside of the site core , suggesting that the population of the city was concentrated in the city centre in the final phase of Calakmul 's occupation . The majority of the surviving population probably consisted of commoners who had occupied the elite architecture of the site core but the continued erection of stelae into the early 10th century and the presence of high status imported goods such as metal , obsidian , jade and shell , indicate a continued occupation by royalty until the final abandonment of the city . The Yucatec @-@ speaking Kejache Maya who lived in the region at the time of Spanish contact in the early 16th century may have been the descendants of the inhabitants of Calakmul . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Calakmul was first reported by Cyrus Lundell in 1931 . A year later he informed Sylvanus Morley of the site 's existence and the presence of more than 60 stelae . Morley visited the ruins himself on behalf of the Carnegie Institution of Washington in 1932 . In the 1930s surveys mapped the site core and recorded 103 stelae . Investigations stopped in 1938 and archaeologists did not return to the site until 1982 when William J. Folan directed a project on behalf of the Universidad Autónoma de Campeche , working at Calakmul until 1994 . Calakmul is now the subject of a large @-@ scale project of the National Institute of Anthropology and History ( INAH ) under the direction of Ramón Carrasco . 
 = = Site description = = 
 The site core of Calakmul covers an area of approximately 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , an area that contains the remains of roughly 1000 structures . The periphery occupied by smaller residential structures beyond the site core covers an area of more than 20 square kilometres ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) within which archaeologists have mapped approximately 6250 structures . Calakmul matches the great city of Tikal in size and estimated population , although the density of the city appears to have been greater than that city . 
 The stone used in construction at the site is a soft limestone . This has resulted in severe erosion of the site 's sculpture . The city of Calakmul was built in a strongly concentric fashion and can be divided into zones as one moves outwards from the centre of the site . The innermost zone covers an area of approximately 1 @.@ 75 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 68 sq mi ) It contains most of the monumental architecture and has 975 mapped structures , about 300 of which are built from vaulted stone masonry . About 92 structures were built on large pyramids laid out around plazas and courtyards . The city 's core was bordered on the north side by a 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) high wall that controlled access from the north and may also have had a defensive function . 
 Many commoners residences were built along the edge of El Laberinto swamp to the west of the site core , although some high @-@ status residences and public buildings were interspersed among these . The area between the residences was used for horticulture . 
 = = = Water control = = = 
 The site is surrounded by an extensive network of canals and reservoirs . There are five major reservoirs , including the largest example in the Maya world , measuring 242 by 212 metres ( 794 by 696 ft ) . This reservoir is filled by a small seasonal river during the rainy season and continues to hold enough water for it to be used by archaeologists in modern times . 
 Thirteen reservoirs have been identified at Calakmul . The combined capacity of all the reservoirs is estimated at over 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 litres ( 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imp gal ) . This quantity of water could have supported 50 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 people ; there is no evidence that the reservoirs were used to irrigate crops . 
 Aguada 1 is the largest of the reservoirs and has a surface area of 5 hectares ( 540 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Causeways = = = 
 Eight sacbe ( causeways ) have been located around Calakmul . Two of these have been mapped , three have been identified visually on the ground and three more identified with remote sensing . They have been numbered as Sacbe 1 through to Sacbe 7 . The causeway network not only linked Calakmul with local satellite sites but also with more distant allies and rivals , such as the great cities of El Mirador , El Tintal and Nakbe . Those causeways that cross swampy land are elevated above the surrounding wetland and they now tend to support denser vegetation than the surrounding forest . 
 Sacbe 1 is 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) long and is lined and filled with stone . It is located within the mapped urban area of the site core . Sacbe 1 was first mapped in the 1930s by the Carnegie Institution of Washington . 
 Sacbe 2 is 70 metres ( 230 ft ) long . It has been mapped within the urban area of the site core . Sacbe 2 is built of packed earth and was discovered during the archaeological excavation of a nearby quarry . This causeway may have been built to transport stone from the quarry in order to build Structures 1 and 3 . 
 Sacbe 3 extends 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) northeast from the site core and is visible from the summit of Structure 1 . It was first discovered in 1982 . 
 Sacbe 4 runs 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) southeast from the site core , it is also visible from the summit of Structure 1 and was discovered in 1982 . 
 Sacbe 5 runs westwards from the main watering hole , across El Laberinto seasonal swamp and carries on for a total distance of 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) or more towards <unk> . 
 Sacbe 6 runs southwest across El Laberinto bajo and links Calakmul with El Mirador ( 38 @.@ 25 kilometres ( 23 @.@ 77 mi ) to the southwest ) and , beyond it , El Tintal ( an additional 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) . 
 Sacbe 7 is located south of Sacbe 6 . It is at least 5 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 2 mi ) long and runs across El Laberinto swamp . 
 Sacbe 8 is on the west side of the swamp and does not appear to cross it to the site core . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Structure 1 ( or Structure I ) is a 50 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 160 ft ) pyramid to the east of the site core . A number of stelae were erected at its base by Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil in 731 . Because it was built on a low hill , Structure 1 appears to be higher than Structure 2 , although this is not the case . 
 Structure 2 ( or Structure II ) is a massive north @-@ facing pyramid temple , one of the largest in the Maya world . Its base measures 120 metres ( 390 ft ) square and it stands over 45 metres ( 148 ft ) high . In common with many temple pyramids in the Mesoamerican cultural region , the pyramid at Calakmul increased in size by building upon the pre @-@ existing temple in order to increase its bulk . The core of the building ( Structure 2A ) is a triadic pyramid dating to the Late Preclassic period , with this ancient building still forming the highest point of the structure . In the Early Classic a massive extension was added to the front of the pyramid , covering an earlier stucco @-@ covered building on the north side . Three new shrines were built upon this extension ( Structures 2B , 2C and 2D ) , each of these shrines had its own access stairway . Structure 2B was the central shrine , 2C was to the east and 2D to the west . The facade possessed six large masks set between these stairways , three arranged vertically on each side of the central stairway . Structure 2 is similar in date , size and design to the El Tigre pyramid at El Mirador , and associated ceramics are also similar . At a later time buildings were erected along the base of the facade , each of these contained stelae . In the 8th century AD , Structure 2B was entombed under a large pyramid and a stepped facade covered the giant masks . Later another facade was built over this 8th century stepped frontage but it may never have been finished . In the Late Classic a nine @-@ room palace was built on top of the pyramid , supporting a roof comb that had painted stucco bas @-@ relief decoration . The rooms were arranged in three groups of three , each room positioned behind the next . The entire Late Classic palace measured 19 @.@ 4 by 12 metres ( 64 by 39 ft ) . The front two rows of rooms ( Rooms 1 through to 6 ) were used for food preparation , metates and hearths were found in each of them . Room 7 , the southwest room , was a <unk> . 
 Structure 3 ( or Structure III , also known as the Lundell Palace ) is southeast of Structure 4 , on the east side of the Central Plaza . It is a building with multiple rooms . 
 Structure 4 ( or Structure IV ) is a group of three temples on the east side of the Central Plaza . It is divided into three sections , labelled Structures 4a , 4b and 4c . The central Structure 4b is built upon a substructure dating to the Preclassic period . Together with Structure 6 on the opposite side of the plaza , these buildings form an E @-@ Group that may have been used to determine the solstices and the equinoxes . 
 Structure 5 ( or Structure V ) is a large building located on the plaza to the north of Structure 2 . It was surrounded by 10 stelae , many dated to the 7th century AD although the building itself was first erected in the Preclassic period . 
 Structure 6 ( or Structure VI ) is on the west side of the Central Plaza and , together with Structures 4a , 4b and 4c , forms an E @-@ Group astronomical complex . In 1989 observations verified that on March 21 , the vernal equinox , the sun rose behind Structure 4b as seen from Structure 6 . 
 Structure 7 ( or Structure VII ) is a temple pyramid on the north side of the Central Plaza . It faces south and stands 24 metres ( 79 ft ) high . Five plain stelae were erected on the south side of the pyramid . It underwent several construction phases from in the Late to Terminal Classic . The pyramid was topped by a three @-@ room temple that possessed a tall stucco @-@ covered roof comb . A <unk> game board was carved into the floor of the outermost room of the temple . 
 Structure 8 ( or Structure VIII ) is a small building located on the north side of the Central Plaza , to the east of Structure 7 . It is associated with Stela 1 and its altar . 
 = = = Stelae , murals and ceramics = = = 
 Calakmul is one of the most structure @-@ rich sites within the Maya region . The site contains 117 stelae , the largest total in the region . Most are in paired sets representing rulers and their wives . However , because these carved stelae were produced in soft limestone , most of these stelae have been eroded beyond interpretation . Also many elaborate murals were discovered at Calakmul . These murals do not represent activities of the elite class . Rather , they depict elaborate market scenes of people preparing or consuming products such as <unk> , tamales , or tobacco as an ointment . Also items being sold were textiles and needles . These murals also have glyphs within them describing the actions occurring . The most prominent figure in these murals is identified as Lady Nine Stone ; she appears in many scenes . This brings a world of the Maya marketplace to vibrant life for archaeologists . Another highly beneficial resource to Maya archaeological understanding at Calakmul is the ceramic remains . The composition of the ceramic materials identifies the region or more specifically the polity that produced them . Ceramics with the snake emblem glyph found at several sites also give more evidence to identify ties or control over that site by Calakmul . 
 Stela 1 is associated with an altar and located by Structure 8 . 
 Stela 8 records the celebration of an event in AD 593 by Uneh Chan and was erected after his death . 
 Stela 9 is a thin slate monument dated to 662 . Its text describes the birth of king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' and gives him his full royal title . 
 Stela 28 and Stela 29 were erected in 623 and are the earliest monuments to survive from Late Classic Calakmul . They depict a royal couple but the texts are too poorly preserved to reveal their names . 
 Stela 33 was erected by Yuknoom Che 'en II in 657 and records an event in the reign of Uneh Chan , who may have been his father . The event was celebrated in 593 . 
 Stela 38 stands at the base of Structure 2 . 
 Stela 42 is also located at the base of Structure 2 . 
 Stela 43 dates to AD 514 . It was set in a vaulted chamber near the base of Structure 2 . The text is damaged but carries an early spelling of the k 'uhul <unk> <unk> non @-@ royal noble title used in Calakmul and the Mirador Basin . 
 Stela 50 is one of the last monuments erected during the final decline of the city . It bears a crude , clumsily executed portrait . 
 Stela 51 is the best preserved monument at Calakmul . It depicts Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil and dates to AD 731 . 
 Stela 54 dates to 731 and depicts a wife of Yuknoom Took ' K 'awiil . 
 Stela 57 is a tall stela erected in 771 by B 'olon K 'awiil . It is paired with Stela 58 and stands to the east of Structure 13 . 
 Stela 58 is the second of a pair erected by B 'olon K 'awiil in 771 , the other being Stela 57 . It was erected to the east of Structure 13 . 
 Stela 61 is a late monument bearing the name Aj Took ' . It is a stunted stela with a badly eroded portrait and a shortened date form that is equivalent to a date either in 899 or 909 , probably the latter . 
 Stela 62 was unfinished . It was carved to mark the K 'atun @-@ ending ceremony of 751 and bears the damaged name of Ruler Z. 
 Stela 76 and Stela 78 are a pair of monuments dated to AD 633 . They are badly eroded but should date to the reign of king Yuknoom Head . 
 Stela 84 is one of the last monuments erected at Calakmul and bears an inscription that is an illiterate imitation of writing . It probably dates to the early 10th century AD . 
 Stela 88 may have been paired with Stela 62 . The monument has the image of a queen but her name is unknown . B 'olon K 'awiil also appears to be mentioned on the stela . It dates to around 751 and stands on the stairway of Structure 13 . Stela 91 is another very late monument probably dating to the early 10th century . Like Stela 84 , it bears an inscription that is a meaningless imitation of hieroglyphic writing . 
 Stela 114 dates to AD 435 , in the Early Classic . It was moved in antiquity to be reset into the base of Structure 2 . The stela has a long hieroglyphic text that has resisted translation but probably commemorates a royal enthronement in 411 . 
 Stela 115 and Stela 116 date to the reign of Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' . They were broken and buried in Structure 2 and may be associated with the royal burial in Tomb 4 . 
 = = = Royal burial = = = 
 Tomb 4 was set into the floor of Structure 2B in the 8th century AD and is the richest burial known from Calakmul . The tomb contained a male skeleton wrapped in textiles and jaguar pelts that were partially preserved with resin . The tomb contained rich offerings that included jade ear ornaments handed down from the Early Classic , a jade mosaic mask , shell and bone beads , spiny oyster shells , eccentric obsidian blades , fine ceramics and the remains of wooden objects . One of the ceramics was a plate with a hieroglyphic text that specifically named king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' as its owner . The remains and the offering were placed in an arched wooden bier carved with elaborate decoration and hieroglyphs that was painted in a variety of colours . The bier has almost completely decayed but left an impression in the mud packed around it . Due to the plate and the possible association of Stelae 115 and 116 with the burial the tomb is believed to be that of the late 7th @-@ century king Yuknoom Yich 'aak K 'ak ' . 
 = Mateiu Caragiale = 
 Mateiu Ion Caragiale ( Romanian : [ <unk> iˈon <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ; also credited as Matei or <unk> ; <unk> is an antiquated version ; March 25 [ O.S. March 12 ] 1885 – January 17 , 1936 ) was a Romanian poet and prose writer , best known for his novel Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche , which portrays the milieu of boyar descendants before and after World War I. Caragiale 's style , associated with Symbolism , the Decadent movement of the fin de siècle , and early modernism , was an original element in the Romanian literature of the interwar period . In other late contributions , Caragiale pioneered detective fiction locally , but there is disagreement over whether his work in the field produced a complete narrative or just fragments . The scarcity of writings he left is contrasted by their critical acclaim and a large , mostly posthumous , following , commonly known as <unk> . 
 Also known as an amateur heraldist and graphic artist , the young Caragiale published his works sporadically , seeking instead to impose himself in politics and pursuing a career in the civil service . He was associated with the Conservative @-@ Democratic Party , and then the People 's League , and ultimately raised controversy by supporting the Central Powers during their occupation of Romania . He afterwards focused on literature , and , during the late 1920s and early 1930s , published most of his prose texts in the magazine Gândirea . 
 The illegitimate and rebellious child of influential playwright Ion Luca Caragiale , he was the half @-@ brother of Luca Caragiale , an avant @-@ garde poet who died in 1921 , and the posthumous son @-@ in @-@ law of author Gheorghe Sion . Mateiu Caragiale was loosely affiliated with Romanian Symbolism , a figure noted for his dandyism , eccentricity and <unk> , and , for much of his life , a regular presence in the intellectual circle formed around Casa Capșa restaurant . His associates included the controversial political figure Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești , cultural animator <unk> Miller Verghy , and poet Ion Barbu , who was also one of his most dedicated promoters . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 A native of Bucharest , he was born out of wedlock to Ion Luca Caragiale and Maria Constantinescu , an unmarried former Town Hall employee who was 21 at the time . Living his first years at his mother 's house on <unk> Street , near Calea <unk> ( until the building was sold ) , Mateiu had a half @-@ sister , his mother 's daughter from another extra @-@ conjugal affair . In 1889 , almost a year after separating from his concubine , his father married Alexandrina Burelly , bringing Mateiu into his new family . In following years , he was progressively estranged from his father , and , according to Ecaterina , the youngest of Ion Luca Caragiale and Burelly 's children , " Mateiu alone confronted [ his father ] and contradicted him systematically . " 
 The young Caragiale was sent to school at Anghel Demetriescu 's Sfântul Gheorghe College in Bucharest , where he discovered a passion for history and heraldry . At around that time , he was probably introduced to Demetriescu 's circle , which included the doctor Constantin <unk> , the writer Barbu Ștefănescu @-@ Delavrancea , the physicist Ștefan <unk> , the literary critic N. <unk> , and the architect Ion <unk> . During a 1901 summer trip to Sinaia , where he sojourned with the Bibescu family , Mateiu was acquainted with George Valentin and Alexandru Bibescu ( in a letter he wrote at the time , he described the latter as " only too crazy and a frantic maniac " ) . His favorite book at age 17 was L <unk> , by the French novelist Félicien Champsaur , which , as he himself acknowledged , contributed to his vision of social climbing . In 1903 , with Ion Luca , Burelly and their children , he traveled through large portions of Western Europe , visiting Austria – Hungary , Switzerland , Italy and France ; during the trip , he recorded the impressions left on him by the various European art trends . 
 In 1904 , his father moved to Berlin , bringing Mateiu with him — in hopes that he could be persuaded to study law at the Frederick William University — , but Mateiu spent his time reading and exploring the Imperial German capital . He would later refer to this period using a French term , l <unk> <unk> ( " the vagrant school " ) , and stressed that " [ it ] was of great use to me " . Ecaterina Caragiale indicated that one of her brother 's favorite pastimes was " admiring the secular trees in the Tiergarten " , and he is also known to have spent entire days at the National Gallery , especially fond of paintings by Jacob <unk> van Ruisdael . Dissatisfied with Mateiu 's attitude , Ion Luca sent him back to Romania in 1905 , where he enrolled at the University of Bucharest Law School , but quit one year later . For a short while , Caragiale @-@ father even entrusted Ștefănescu @-@ Delavrancea with <unk> his estranged son . 
 = = = Father @-@ son conflict and literary debut = = = 
 The conflict with his father was to prolong itself for as long as the latter was alive . Psychiatrist and essayist Ion Vianu , who explored the relationship with the tools of psychoanalysis , describes Mateiu 's sentiment toward Ion Luca as " antipathy , bordering on hatred " , and proposes that this reflected maternal influences from the brief period when Maria Constantinescu had been left a single parent . 
 The situation most likely degenerated in 1904 , after the death of his aunt <unk> , when Ion Luca took over his son 's inheritance , and aggravated by his father 's decision to cease subsidizing him , which left the latter without a stable source of income . He was thus supposed to provide for his mother and sister , until Ion Luca transferred the inheritance resulting from the death of his other aunt Catinca <unk> , to his former lover . He also indicated that his father had made him attend the Frederick William University without advancing money for tuition . Some time after returning to Romania , he began attending the Symbolist literary circle formed around the poet and leftist political agitator Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești , who provided the young Caragiale with money and often invited him to supper . 
 In spring 1907 , despite the ongoing father @-@ son tensions , Mateiu , who was recovering from a severe form of measles , returned to Berlin , where Ion Luca 's family was still residing . He soon became the lover of a local woman , an affair which reportedly caused his father to declare himself scandalized . During the same year , Mateiu Caragiale was fascinated with rumors of the Romanian Peasants ' Revolt violence , recording various exaggerated news about its character and extent , and describing it as " a fine thing " . In 1909 , he was again enrolled at University , having decided to prepare for a graduation diploma , but again failed to complete his studies . 
 Mateiu Caragiale had his first thoughts on Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche in 1910 . Two years later , during a trip to Iași , he published his first 13 poems in the literary magazine Viața Românească , winning the praise of poet Panait Cerna and the ridicule of writer Tudor Arghezi . Literary critic Șerban Cioculescu stressed that these had been printed following his father 's interventions with the magazine 's staff , and , according to the contemporary account of Luca 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , philosopher Ionel Gherea , Ion Luca admired his son 's contributions , his criticism being minimal , constructive , and welcomed by Mateiu . This led Gherea to conclude that , copying in real life a Symbolist cliché , Caragiale @-@ son fabricated an unfair image of his father . In later years , Mateiu continued to write poetry , published by literary promoter Constantin Banu in his magazine , Flacăra . 
 His father died in June 1912 , which , according to Șerban Cioculescu ( who cited Mateiu 's correspondence ) , left him indifferent . By then , Caragiale @-@ son resented Ion Luca 's alleged exploitation of his popularity for material gains , and , later in the same year , commented that , " for a small fee " , Caragiale @-@ father could be persuaded to read his works at the fair in Obor . In a since @-@ lost piece of his diary that was commented upon by Cioculescu , he also claimed that binge drinking and tobacco abuse had made his father decay physically and mentally . Despite his love for Berlin , he was also dissatisfied with his father 's move to the city , and spread the rumor that , in the eyes of his family and friends , Ion Luca 's departure was interpreted as " insane " ( while alleging that Caragiale @-@ father was planning to author plays in German , with assistance from Mite <unk> , the one @-@ time lover of poet Mihai Eminescu ) . At the funeral ceremony , he reputedly shocked pianist Cella Delavrancea by coldly stating in French : Je suis venu voir feu mon père ( " I came to see my late father " ) . 
 = = = Entry into the civil service = = = 
 Caragiale returned to Bucharest : in summer 1912 , with help from journalist Rudolf Uhrinowsky , the young writer was employed by a French @-@ language gazette , L <unk> Roumaine , informing his readers that he had also become the sole legitimate Caragiale family representative in Romania . In October , he became the chief of staff in the Ministry of Public Works in the second Titu Maiorescu executive , under Minister Alexandru Bădărău . He had manifested a relative interest in politics around 1908 , after his father rallied with Take Ionescu and his Conservative @-@ Democratic Party ; at the time , he criticized Ion Luca 's political choices , but nonetheless noted that it could serve as a means for his own advancement ( " From now on I 'll have political lode [ ... ] , something certain , if there ever was certainty on Earth . " ) Four years after this comment , soon after making his literary debut , he clashed with his father over having considered a cabinet appointment in Ionescu 's executive . 
 As Caragiale senior died , Mateiu initially planned to join the mainstream Conservative Party and demand a post from Grigore Gheorghe Cantacuzino , the Mayor of Bucharest and a close associate of Bogdan @-@ Pitești . Nevertheless , he came to define this position as " a bad solution " , and , as Maiorescu and Ionescu formed an alliance , he successfully requested appointment from Bădărău , eventually obtaining it through the means of a decree signed by King Carol I. Caragiale later commented : " [ Bădărău ] entrusted me with this golden key , which I had wanted for so long , and which , for all of this , I had not been desperate to obtain . " This contradicted another one of his accounts , in which he confessed that , initially received with indifference by Bădărău , he had claimed that him joining the Conservative @-@ Democrats had been Ion Luca 's dying request . Șerban Cioculescu would comment : " There could not have been a more complete distortion of a parent 's last wish ! " 
 He assumed office on November 7 , 1912 , but , as he later confessed , official records were modified to make it seem that he had been a civil servant since October 29 . His time in office is described by critic Barbu Cioculescu as a bland affair , Mateiu having " <unk> his [ political ] fantasy " with his efforts to charm Bădărău . As Caragiale later recounted , he led talks with a delegation from the Kingdom of Serbia involving the initiative to build a bridge over the Danube to link the two states . In 1913 , he became a Knight of the Romanian Order of the Crown ( <unk> României ) , received the Russian Empire 's Order of St. Anna 2nd Class . He was also awarded the Bene <unk> and <unk> și <unk> Romanian medals 1st Class . In 1913 , Caragiale wrote the story Remember , while continuing his contributions to Viața Românească . Although his office was owed to Conservative @-@ Democratic politics , Caragiale was still close to Bogdan @-@ Pitești , whose daily newspaper Seara repeatedly published articles claiming to expose Take Ionescu 's faction and often focused such attacks on Bădărău . His employment eventually ended on January 17 , 1914 , as the National Liberal cabinet of Ion I. C. Brătianu came to power . According to Ion Vianu , Caragiale was right in assuming that his marginal involvement in the political intrigues had made him a target for Bădărău 's adversity . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During the early stages of World War I , as Romania remained a neutral country , Caragiale 's notes record that his friend Bogdan @-@ Pitești was acting as a political agent of the Central Powers , and that money he made available had been provided by German propaganda funds . Nevertheless , the two figures were especially close to one another during and after 1915 , and , in 1916 , even visited Berlin together . At the time , Caragiale also visited the Germanophile literary circle set up by <unk> Miller Verghy , and borrowed a reported 10 @,@ 000 lei from Bogdan @-@ Pitești , which he never returned . Caragiale 's own Germanophile preferences and traditionalist conservatism had by then extinguished his cultural Francophilia , and rumors spread that he himself was a spy for the German Empire . 
 A frequenter of the renowned restaurant Casa Capșa , Mateiu Caragiale was constantly surrounded by a tight group of party @-@ goers , which included Uhrinowsky and the aristocrat Gheorghe <unk> @-@ <unk> . They were later joined by the Russian admiral <unk> , who was allegedly the illegitimate son of Emperor Alexander III . Thanks to Uhrinowsky 's intervention , Caragiale became a press correspondent for the Ottoman press agency <unk> , a job which he held for eight months , until , as he later wrote , " the [ company 's ] ' sweet waters ' dried out " . In mid summer 1916 , Caragiale donated money to a fund whereby the <unk> Cemetery tomb of Ștefan Luchian , a recently deceased painter and protégé of Bogdan @-@ Pitești , was to be decorated with a bust by sculptor Dimitrie Paciurea ( the world conflict and later events prevented this from happening ) . 
 As Romania joined the Allied Powers and the Romanian Campaign began , overlooked by conscription into the Romanian Army , Caragiale drafted the first of Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche 's three sections , titled " <unk> <unk> " ( " Meeting the Rakes " ) . He would later reflect on the importance of 1916 , deeming it " end of the Ancien Régime " . He did not follow the authorities and Take Ionescu 's supporters as they redeployed in Moldavia when southern Romania fell to the Central Powers , and remained in Bucharest . He was still active within the Germanophile circles , including those who opted for collaborationism , and was held in high regard by the occupying forces : his brother Luca was employed by the new administrative apparatus , but Mateiu 's own promotion to the rank of prefect was vetoed by puppet minister Lupu Kostaki . After the government of Alexandru Marghiloman signed the May 1918 capitulation in front of the Central Powers , he made known his support for the more pro @-@ German Conservative Party : on June 29 , 1918 , he and Luca were among the signers of a letter addressed to the aging Petre P. Carp , the former Conservative leader , asking him to take over rule of the country . The political choice was highly controversial , and its exposure later contributed to the end of Caragiale 's political career . In a 1970 biographical essay critical of Mateiu Caragiale , Cioculescu attributed Mateiu authorship of the document , and claimed that Luca had agreed to join in only as a result of his brother 's pressures . 
 In 1919 , as Ionescu gained political influence through his alliance with the People 's League , he became head of the press bureau of the Minister of Internal Affairs , serving until 1921 . Later writings of his show that he was deeply dissatisfied with the office , which he equated with " a demotion " , and that he resented Ionescu not having assigned the diplomatic office of consul . He thus resigned and left the Conservative @-@ Democrats , an action which he later defined as " a grave error " . Caragiale was reputedly living in penury , holding temporary residence in various cheap houses on the outskirts of Bucharest , and being thrown out from at least one such location after failing to pay his rent . Ion Vianu believes that his exclusive focus on writing Craii ... had a " therapeutic effect " , in that it helped the writer deal with the situation . 
 Also in 1921 , a first draft of his Remember saw print in Viața Românească . The second part of Craii ... , " Cele <unk> <unk> " ( " The Three Pilgrimages " ) , was sporadically written between 1918 and 1921 ( according to Caragiale himself : " it was written on restaurant tables , in the gambling den , in the meeting hall at the Justice of the Peace " ) . He married Marica Sion , the daughter of poet and nobleman Gheorghe Sion , in 1923 , thus becoming the owner of a plot of land named <unk> , in Fundulea ( although he resided in downtown Bucharest ) . His wife , whom he had most likely met before 1916 , while attending Miller Verghy 's soirées , was his senior by 25 years . Despite owning land in the country and living a comfortable life in the city , Caragiale confessed a nostalgia towards the houses he had been raised in , and especially for his mother 's Bucharest home . 
 = = = Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche and Italian sojourn = = = 
 Mateiu Caragiale published Remember as a volume the following year ; from 1922 , he began work on " <unk> " ( " Confessions " ) , the third and final section of Craii ... , which , as he recounted , coincided with " the most terrible crisis " of his life . Several of his poems were published in a 1925 collection edited by Perpessicius and Ion Pillat ( <unk> <unk> de <unk> ) , and were accompanied by an ink portrait signed Marcel Janco ; at the time , Caragiale announced that he was going to publish a series of poems under the title Pajere ( it was to be printed only after his death ) . In the 1925 – 1933 period , Caragiale 's notes show that he was seeing his life as marked by existential cycles and crucial moments . 
 In March 1926 @-@ October 1928 , Tudor Vianu 's Gândirea magazine published his novel Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche as a series . He completed the last additions to the text in November 1927 , as its first sections were already in print . As the last episode was featured by Gândirea , to widespread acclaim , he noted : " From the time when the first of its parts saw print , this work was received with unprecedented fervor in Romanian literature . For the work it required , as well as for the tiresome obsession to which it had me submitted I bear it no grudge : it is truly magnificent [ ... ] . " Literary historian Eugen Lovinescu , who criticized Gândirea ' s later moves towards traditionalism and a far right ideology ( a turn which coincided with Vianu 's departure ) , argued that Caragiale had been an important gain for the literary venue . In his belief , Caragiale and other " writers of talent " helped the magazine , which had no " critic of authority " at its helm . 
 By 1926 , he rallied with the People 's League , and unsuccessfully asked Octavian Goga to assign him a candidature for a Parliamentary seat during the elections of that year . In January 1928 , he again became pursuing a career in the diplomatic service , and sought an appointment for himself at the Romanian Consulate in Helsinki , Finland ; he thus visited Foreign Minister Nicolae Titulescu in Italy , at Sanremo . His passage through Lombardy coincided with major floods , an event recorded with interest in his private notes . Titulescu received him at the Miramare Hotel , but talks between them were inconclusive . According to Perpessicius , the failure was generated by the adversity other politicians had towards Caragiale , while Ion Vianu argues that the ambition itself had constituted proof of " perfect utopianism " . The writer was nonetheless pleased with his visit , having been deeply impressed by the Italian landscape , and , as a result , attempted to create an atmosphere of , in his words , " profound Italian rustic quietude " on his property in Fundulea . His diary also perpetuated the rumor according to which Titulescu was a cocaine addict . 
 His political projects were put on hold , and Caragiale instead concentrated his energy on obtaining the French Légion d 'honneur order , eventually becoming one of its Chevaliers in December 1929 . The Romanian author himself noted that this had been made possible by the intercession of François Lebrun , the Bucharest correspondent of Le Matin newspaper , whom he considered a personal friend . 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 Caragiale also began work on the fragmentary writing Soborul țațelor ( " The Council of <unk> " , 1929 ) and the detective story Sub pecetea tainei ( " Under the Seal of Secrecy " , 1930 ) , but they would remain unfinished . In its first draft , Sub pecetea tainei was published by Gândirea in April 1930 @-@ April 1933 , while Soborul țațelor was kept in three different variants . In a 1985 essay later published as a preface for Sub pecetea tainei , literary critic Nicolae Manolescu proposed that , while the story was not given a finishing touch , its plot was meant to seem ambiguous , and thus had led other commentators to wrongly assume that the text ended abruptly . 
 In 1931 , the writer was still hoping for a return to the political stage , this time with the Nationalist Democratic Party , which came to power under Nicolae Iorga . To this goal , he approached Internal Affairs Undersecretary Nicolae <unk> , requesting appointment as prefect , but was refused . During the same period , Caragiale was occasionally involved in events affecting the cultural scene . In May 1930 , he was present at a banquet in honor of Italian author Filippo Tommaso Marinetti , the ideologue of Futurism . Organized by the Romanian Writers ' Society and the Italo @-@ Romanian Cultural Association , it was also attended by many other cultural figures , most of which , including artist Marcel Janco and the writers Ion Vinea , Jacques G. Costin , Ion Minulescu and Camil Petrescu , were associates of the magazine Contimporanul . In January 1934 , linguist and publisher Alexandru Rosetti signed a contract with Caragiale , through which the latter agreed to complete Sub pecetea tainei and have it published by Rosetti 's Editura Fundațiilor Regale . 
 He ceased most literary activities later in the year , and confessed in his diary : " My spiritual state is probably the same as that of people who feel their final hour nearing and lose all hope " . The writer was probably planning to move out of the city and into Fundulea , breaking all connections with his peers . Despite this abrupt change , Caragiale had not entirely abandoned his writing career . In 1931 , the Oradea @-@ based cultural magazine Cele Trei <unk> published his memoir , titled Vechi <unk> de spectator ( " Old Impressions of a Spectator " ) . In it , Caragiale stated having reached " a serene maturity " , and indicated : " I now placidly begin the rhythm of a new life . " He was planning to write a biography of Albrecht Joseph Reichsgraf von <unk> , an extravagant Silesian nobleman of the 18th century , who is briefly mentioned in " Cele <unk> <unk> " , and was also interested in the works of two French classics , Antoine <unk> and Honoré de Balzac . He was preoccupied with death , which he feared greatly . In early 1935 , soon after reading Stefan Zweig 's texts on faith healing , he recorded the effect it had on his life as " the revelation of my intellectual superiority , my intuition and my power of reflection , as well as the latent forces that I feel at the foundation of my being . " He also made a point of renouncing his hectic lifestyle , giving up alcohol and coffee . 
 Mateiu Caragiale died two years later in Bucharest , at the age 51 , after suffering a stroke . Despite his explicit wish and opposition from his widow , speeches were held at his funeral ceremony , including ones by Alexandru Rosetti and Adrian Maniu . Rosetti and Eugen Lovinescu later recounted an unusual incident sparked by the event : Iancu <unk> , a friend of Caragiale 's and frequenter of Casa Capșa , looked intensely upon the dead body as he was paying his respects ; later in the evening , he committed suicide in a hotel room . 
 = = Outlook and personal life = = 
 = = = Views and mannerisms = = = 
 Mateiu Caragiale 's interest in heraldry and genealogy mirrored his tastes and outlook on the world , which have been described as " snobbery " , " aestheticism " , and " dandyism " , as well as the love of history he displayed throughout his career . It was sparked during his college years , when he would fill his notebooks with sketches of <unk> , and as attested by various drawings he produced throughout his life . He also developed an enduring curiosity for astronomy , magic , as well as botany and agronomy , and kept detailed notes recording the deaths of all Romanian aristocrats who were his contemporaries . 
 These skills , as well as his tastes and talents as a <unk> , consolidated his reputation as an erudite in spite of his lack of formal studies . The cultivation of aesthetic goals had seemingly guided the writer throughout his life — the poet and mathematician Ion Barbu , who was one of Caragiale 's greatest admirers , recounted with amazement that the writer would periodically visit the Romanian Academy 's just to look over a certain page in a manual of arithmetics outlining the rule of three ( he reportedly said to Barbu : " Remembering its splendor provides me with a ceaseless drive to reread it " ) . At the same time , he was attracted by esotericism , alchemy and mystical subjects such as numerology , all of which form background elements in his prose . 
 A characteristic of Mateiu Caragiale 's life was his search for noble origins , contrasting his illegitimate status . According to historian Lucian <unk> , it clashed with his father 's <unk> in relation to his Greek ancestors — Ion Luca is known to have described his own origins as uncertain , even though these had been well recorded , and to have later commented that any noble lineage in Romania relied on spurious genealogies . Caragiale @-@ father is also thought to have discouraged his son 's claims , and to have mockingly noted that their own family 's origin could not have been aristocratic . Early in his youth , Mateiu jokingly referred to himself as " Prince <unk> @-@ <unk> " , mixing the title used by the early Basarab Wallachian princes and the <unk> family of Hungarian nobility . Letters he wrote while still a student show that he was envisaging a marriage of convenience as a means to increase his wealth and status . 
 In his permanent search for nobility rights , occasionally ascribed to the inferiority complex of illegitimate children , he indicated that his mother 's origins were in Austria – Hungary : before his marriage to Marica Sion , he claimed that he had lost his birth certificate , and , upon completing a new one , that his mother resided in Vienna , and that he himself had been born in the Transylvanian town of <unk> . In Tudor Vianu 's view , Caragiale 's quest for " an elective heredity " saw him joining a diverse group of writers with similar interests , among whom were Balzac , Arthur de Gobineau , and Stefan George . Commenting that " heredity has , after all , only the value of a psychological fact " , he stressed : " [ Caragiale ] thus had the right to seek his ancestry on the ascents of history and even to be ready to believe , from time to time , that he had found it . " 
 Between 1907 and 1911 , Caragiale studied Romanian heraldry and , to this goal , read Octav @-@ George Lecca 's <unk> <unk> române ( " Romanian Boyar Families " ) . Many of the comments added by him to his copy of the book are polemic , sarcastic , or mysterious , while the sketches he made on the margin include portrayals of boyars being put to death in various ways , as well as caricatures ( such as a blazon displaying a donkey 's head , which he mockingly assigned to Octav @-@ George Lecca himself ) . Several of the heraldic objects he created were destined for his own use . In June 1928 , he raised a green over yellow ensign he created for the Caragiale family at his property in Fundulea . He also hoisted other symbols , including the flag of Hungary , which , he claimed , underlined his foreign origin . 
 Other eccentricities Caragiale adopted included wearing a " princely gown " of his own design , developing unusual speech patterns , as well as a noted love for decorations — official honors which he tried to obtain for himself on several occasions , culminating in the Légion d 'honneur award . He took special pride in noting that , after 14 months of governmental service , he had received the Romanian Order of the Crown and the other medals . His major regret in this respect was not having received Finland 's Order of the White Rose , having earlier claimed that he had refused the Serbian Kingdom 's Order of St. Sava when it was offered to him with a rank lower than he had asked . Ion Vianu argues that , intimately aware of his genealogical claims being questionable , the writer sought to compensate by finding his way into meritocratic environments . 
 = = = Alleged disorders and sexuality = = = 
 Mateiu Caragiale 's personal life has for long attracted interest for the traces it left in his literary work . This is enhanced by his reputation for being a secretive man . In a late interview , Cella Delavrancea described him as " made up of [ ... ] small patches , so well sewn together that one never knew what he had said , what he had meant to say , what he is thinking . " While Ionel Gherea suspected that Caragiale was merely acting , Eugen Lovinescu , who described Caragiale 's personality as " bizarre " , also referred to him as " colorful and sterile . " Despite his hectic lifestyle , Caragiale feared poverty and lashed out at <unk> , stressing that " it kills , and many times not just figuratively " . In tandem , fragments of his writings and private records are thought by cultural historian Andrei <unk> to show intimate familiarity with substance abuse and the drug subculture of his age , in addition to his self admitted binge drinking . During his final years of life , he was harvesting an unspecified wild herb from the hills of Cotroceni neighborhood , and using it as a sedative . By then , essayist Ion Vartic notes , Caragiale 's obsession with death had developed into " neurosis " . 
 Several contemporary accounts focus on Mateiu 's unusual preferences in clothing , pointing to a studied extravagance first adopted during his stay in Berlin , and in support of which he was reportedly spending more than he could afford . Literary historian George Călinescu recalled having seen a middle @-@ aged Caragiale taking walks through downtown Bucharest : amused by the writer 's everyday clothes , which he depicted as of an archaic fashion and slightly deteriorated , compared him to " a butler on Sunday leave " . Călinescu also told that , during winter , Caragiale would only touch metal with his hand while wearing suede gloves . Rosetti and poetess <unk> <unk> both recorded being amused by aspects of Caragiale 's clothing , such as his oversized boots and his using scissors to cut out the worn out extremities of his trouser legs . In 1926 , the writer began wearing a ring bearing the seal of Mercury , which , Vartic supposes , evidenced his trust in the psychopomp god 's powers . 
 Caragiale 's secrecy and eccentricity is credited with having marked his personal life and sexuality , often with dramatic consequences . In support of this , Ion Vianu cites the writer 's alleged disdain for his mother , referencing a claim made by the socialite Grigore " <unk> " Ghica . The latter , familiar with Miller Verghy and her circle , recounted that the poverty @-@ stricken but proud Caragiale had asked their common female friend to allow him use of a stable on her property , explaining that he was going to have furniture moved in . According to Ghica , the owners were shocked to discover that the stable had been used instead to accommodate Maria Constantinescu . Ion Vianu also notes that Caragiale " appears to have been in love for just one moment " , referring to his 1907 pursuit of an upper @-@ class French girl , Fernande de <unk> , who rejected his advances and complained to Caragiale @-@ father . For a while in 1908 , Caragiale had a brief affair with a reportedly unattractive Frenchwoman , Mariette <unk> , who had been a Roman Catholic nun . In letters he sent to his close friend , Nicolae <unk> , Caragiale bragged about his sexual exploits with <unk> , and of having exposed her to " the most terrifying <unk> " ( which included allowing her to be raped by a stranger in the Cișmigiu Gardens ) . 
 Notes in his diaries show that he discreetly resented Alexandru Bogdan @-@ Pitești , although , Ion Vianu stresses , such pronouncements appear to have become a staple of Caragiale 's private records only long after Bogdan @-@ Pitești had died . Aside from claiming to expose his patron 's alleged financing by the Central Powers before and during World War I , Caragiale discussed Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's homosexuality in disparaging terms ( calling him " a <unk> of the anti @-@ natural vice " ) , and even laying out a plan to rob his residence . The violent solution to poverty , Ion Vianu proposes , may have reflected his appreciation for Félicien Champsaur 's L <unk> , in which the protagonist uses murder to affirm himself socially . Despite Caragiale 's relationships with women and his lapses into homophobia , Ion Vianu argues ( partly building on similar comments made by literary historian Matei Călinescu ) that the writer had a preference for homosociality or even homoeroticism , both in line with his narcissism . Caragiale 's diary also dealt with Bogdan @-@ Pitești 's wife , the socialite Domnica , depicting her as an immoral woman . A person known by the initials A.K. , who was probably the same as Domnica , is referred to in such notes as being in a ménage à trois situation with Bogdan @-@ Pitești and Caragiale . He confessed being thankful that the long record of sums he had borrowed from Bogdan @-@ Pitești beginning 1916 had been destroyed , probably by Domnica , at a time when his patron was on his deathbed . 
 Mateiu Caragiale 's final erotic pursuit was the high society lady and amateur singer Eliza " Elise " <unk> . He courted her for a few months in 1932 , despite being married to Marica Sion . His private notes show that he struggled with the lust for <unk> , which he believed was impairing his judgment , and declared himself outraged that the object of his affection had a " scandalous liaison " with another man . He ultimately decided not to persevere , basing himself on the principle that " business is business . " In his final years , Caragiale was weighing in the probability of his still fathering a male son , and , although he concluded that it was not likely , laid out a " Family Law " for his potential descendants to abide by . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Literary style = = = 
 Writing shortly after Caragiale died , Tudor Vianu defined him as " a figure , possibly a delayed one , from that aesthetic generation of around 1880 , who professed a concept of the supremacy of artistic values in life . " This allowed him to draw a parallel between Mateiu Caragiale and Alexandru Macedonski , the doyen of Romanian Symbolism , with the one essential difference provided by their level of involvement in cultural affairs . Unlike his half @-@ brother Luca , Caragiale tended to stay away from the literary movements of his age , and placed his cultural references in the relative past , being inspired by Romantic and Symbolist authors such as Edgar Allan Poe , Auguste Villiers de l 'Isle @-@ Adam , Jules Amédée Barbey d 'Aurevilly , Charles Baudelaire and José María de Heredia . Noting the manifest difference in style between the realist Ion Luca and his two sons , Vianu pointed out that the three shared , as characteristic traits , " The cultivation of fully @-@ developed forms , the view of art as a closed system resistant to the anarchic forces of reality " . According to Cioculescu , Mateiu 's work would be " minor , unless placed alongside that of Ion Luca Caragiale " . Elsewhere , Cioculescu indicated that a letter written by Mateiu Caragiale in his early youth , which featured his first pieces of social commentary , imitated his father 's calligraphy to the point where George Călinescu initially believed they were the work of Ion Luca . Literary critic Paul Cernat proposes that the clashes between father and son evidenced Mateiu 's " maternal attachment and a break with paternal authority " , and , in particular , his " Oedipus complex " , which he also sees manifested in the personality of modern Romanian writers such as the avant @-@ garde founding figure Urmuz and the co @-@ founder of Dadaism , Tristan Tzara . 
 Discussing Mateiu Caragiale 's originality , Călinescu saw in him " a promoter ( maybe the first ) of literary <unk> , that greasy mix of obscene phrases , lascivious impulses , awareness of an adventurous and fuzzy genealogy , everything purified and seen from above by a superior intelligence " . In relation to Romanian literature , he believed to have discovered a common trait of " Balkan " writers of mostly Wallachian origin , citing Mateiu Caragiale in a group that also included Caragiale @-@ father , the early 19th century <unk> and printer Anton Pann , the modern poets Tudor Arghezi , Ion Minulescu and Ion Barbu , and Urmuz . He went on to define this gathering as " the great grimacing sensitive ones , buffoons with just too much plastic intelligence . " In parallel , Lovinescu saw Caragiale as one in a group of modernist prose writers who sought to reshape the genre through the use of lyricism , and were thus paradoxically outdated by 20th century standards . The delayed character of Caragiale 's contribution was also mentioned by literary historian Ovid <unk> , who identified its roots in Art Nouveau and , through it , the subjects of Byzantine art . 
 Among other traits which set Caragiale apart from his fellow Romanian writers was his highly creative vocabulary , partly reliant on archaisms and words occurring rarely in the modern Romanian lexis ( including ones borrowed from Turkish and Greek , or even from Romani ) . In certain cases , he used an inventive spelling — for example , he consistently rendered the word for " charm " , <unk> , as <unk> . Tudor Vianu noted that this habit was similar to experiments presents in Ion Barbu 's cryptic poetry , ascribing both cases to " the intent of underlining the differentiation between the written and the spoken words " , while Ion Vianu defined Caragiale as " an accurate artisan of the language , an extraordinary <unk> of the Romanian language , which , out of snobbery , he sets aside for the plebeian readers . " Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche introduces a large array of words present in early 20th century slang and Romanian profanity , as well as rendering the then @-@ common habit of borrowing whole sentences from French to express oneself ( a trait notably present in Mateiu <unk> 's own day @-@ to @-@ day vocabulary ) . The novel 's tone , often irreverent , and the book 's foray into the mundane have been seem by some as tributary to the informal style cultivated by Bogdan @-@ Pitești . 
 Most of Caragiale 's prose is interconnected through allusions to himself , and , occasionally , the narratives discreetly refer to one another . Although his texts are characterized by precision in defining the moment and location for the plot , the general lines of the narratives are often subject to a calculated fragmentation , an innovative technique which , Vartic writes , attests the author 's familiarity with Antoine <unk> 's vision . Vartic also indicates that Balzac 's La Comédie humaine , in particular its Thirteen cycle — which is known to have been one of the books Caragiale treasured most — , influenced the general structure of his stories . 
 = = = Novel = = = 
 A first @-@ person narrative , Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche traces and satirizes Romanian society in the early decades of the 20th century ( it probably depicts events from ca . 1910 ) . A core group of three persons , all withdrawn , Epicurean and decadent figures , allow the intrusion of Gore Pirgu , a low @-@ class and uncultured self @-@ seeker , whose character comes to embody the new political class of Greater Romania . Researcher Constantin <unk> proposed that there is an intrinsic connection between Pirgu and Mitică , a voluble clerk depicted in several sketch stories by Ion Luca Caragiale , and best remembered as a stereotype of Bucharesters ; according to <unk> , Pirgu is " the eternal and real Mitică of the Romanian world " . According to Matei Călinescu , the story is <unk> shaped by two of Ion Luca 's prose works : one of them , titled <unk> ... ( " Inspection ... " ) , is part of the Mitică cycle , while the other , Grand Hotel " Victoria <unk> " , is one of the earliest depictions of anxiety in the literature of Romania . For Matei Călinescu , Pirgu and the other protagonists stand as allegories for a set of essentially Romanian traits that , he argues , were still observable in the early 21st century . 
 In direct reference to Craii ... , George Călinescu wrote : " Reality is transfigured , it becomes fantastical and a sort of Edgar Poe @-@ like unease <unk> [ the main characters ] , these good @-@ for @-@ nothings of the old Romanian capital . " This , he argued , validated placing Caragiale 's novel among Surrealist writings , and alongside the works of eclectic authors such as Barbu and Ion Vinea . Literary historian Eugen Simion notes that Barbu believed himself thought Caragiale 's prose was equal in value to the poetry of Romania 's national poet Mihai Eminescu , and argues that this perspective was exaggerated . 
 Writing in 2007 , Cernat also noted a similarity between Vinea 's 1930 collection of novellas , <unk> <unk> ( " The Paradise of Sighs " ) , and Caragiale 's Craii ... , defining the two books as " poetic , mannerist and fantastic " , and stressing that they both portray decadent characters . Building on the observations of his older colleague Simion <unk> , Cernat commented that Vinea , Mateiu Caragiale , N. <unk> and Adrian Maniu , all members of the same " post @-@ Symbolist " generation , ultimately traced their inspiration to Alexandru Macedonski and his Symbolist work Thalassa , Le <unk> de feu . He also proposed that , less directly , Macedonski 's themes and style also influenced similar prose works by Arghezi and Urmuz . 
 Several critics and researchers have pointed out that , in Craii ... , Caragiale used characters and dialogues to illustrate his own worldview and historical points of reference . Among the rich cultural references present in the novel , Șerban Cioculescu identified various direct or hidden portrayals of Caragiale 's contemporaries , several of which point to his own family . Thus , Cioculescu argued , the character <unk> <unk> is the writer 's step aunt Catinca <unk> , while an entire passage sheds a negative light on Ion Luca ( the unnamed " leading writer of the nation " who prostitutes his trade ) . Commenting on the brief mention of one of Pirgu 's associates , " the theosophist <unk> <unk> " , the critic concluded that it most likely referred to novelist and traveler <unk> <unk> . 
 Cioculescu identifies several other characters , including Pirgu and two secondary characters , the journalist <unk> and the homosexual diplomat <unk> , were Caragiale 's companions : the latter two were based , respectively , on Uhrinowsky and a member of " an old Oltenian family " . Ion Vianu , who believes the unnamed narrator is a projection of Caragiale 's ego , emphasizes connections between the various characters and other real @-@ life persons , including Ion Luca , Bogdan @-@ Pitești and Anghel Demetriescu . In addition , Barbu Cioculescu believed to have identified other traits shared by the narrator and author , as well as a covert reference to Marica Sion , while researcher Radu <unk> suggests further allusions to real @-@ life eccentric noblemen , from <unk> Ghica to " <unk> " Văcărescu . <unk> noted that , in one of his outbursts , the character <unk> criticizes the <unk> style developed in 17th century Romanian art ( which he contrasts with " the tumultuous flowering of the baroque " ) , only to have the narrator speak out against him ; in the process , the reader is informed about Caragiale 's own tastes . 
 = = = Other prose works = = = 
 Remember is a fantasy novella set in Berlin , depicting dramatic events in the life of dandy Aubrey de Vere . Perpessicius argued that the main protagonist was " taken , apparently , from a short story by Oscar Wilde " , while others noted a direct reference to the 19th century writer Aubrey de Vere , an indirect one to Poe 's Lenore ( the lyric : " And , Guy de Vere , hast thou no tear ? - weep now or nevermore ! " ) , or a partial anagram of the name Barbey d 'Aurevilly . The mysterious events standing at the center of the writing have been interpreted by several critics as an allusion to de Vere 's homosexuality . Probably taking place in 1907 , it contrasts Caragiale 's other , more <unk> , writings of its kind — one of its main traits is the writer 's nostalgia towards the German capital , which serves to give the story an atmospheric rather than narrative quality . Its depiction of hallucinatory visions probably owes inspiration to Gérard de <unk> , while , according to historian Sorin <unk> , the main character is reminiscent of Joris @-@ Karl Huysmans ' Des <unk> ( see À <unk> ) . Lovinescu praises the story for " the gravity of its tone , [ ... ] the cadence of its sumptuous , cultured and noble style . " George Călinescu , who referred to the narrative as " a pastiche " , and to Berlin as portrayed in Caragiale 's story as " a Berlin @-@ Sodom " , concluded that the text allowed readers to form " the direct sensation " of Bucharest as a " Balkan Sodom " to be discerned from the German landscape . 
 Caragiale 's Sub pecetea tainei has been the subject of debates in the literary community . One disagreement refers to its nature : some see it as a standalone novella , while others , including Alexandru George , view it as an unfinished novel . In this context , a singular position was held by Ovid <unk> , who believed that Caragiale was building up to a sequel of his Craii .... The other point of contention involves its artistic value . Ovidiu <unk> saw the story as proof that Mateiu Caragiale was running out of " narrative resourcefulness " and creating " the [ writing ] most detached from his work 's obsessions " , while Șerban Cioculescu deplored Caragiale 's move to abandon work on Soborul țațelor ( which he considered a more promising venture ) in order to " implant a sort of Romanian detective novel " . 
 Written as a frame story , Sub pecetea tainei comprises the recollections of Teodor " <unk> " Ruse , a retired Police officer . Punctuated by willing omissions , for which rows of ellipses are employed , the text is structured into accounts of three unsolved cases : that of a missing person , the clerk <unk> Nicolau , who may or may not have been murdered by his wife ; that of an epileptic minister whom Ruse is supposed to guard and who , after going missing and returning , presents his resignation and dies , leaving the general public clueless as to his fate ; finally , that of a Viennese couple of con artists and presumed murderers ( one of whom may be a transvestite woman ) whose arrival in Bucharest poses a threat on the life of their female host , Lena <unk> . Ruse 's accounts , which oblique references in the text seem to place in 1930 , form part of his conversations with the unnamed narrator , which are set in <unk> cu <unk> restaurant and in the narrator 's Bucharest home ; this , Manolescu notes , echoes scenes in Craii .... A recurring element in the plot is the role played by secretive women , who may be directly or indirectly responsible for the deaths of male characters . Commentators have since attempted to match several of the protagonists with real people in Caragiale 's life . Such theories identify <unk> Ruse himself with <unk> , a policeman whom Caragiale had befriended , the minister with the leading Conservative Party member Alexandru Lahovary , and the female character <unk> with Miller Verghy . 
 According to Manolescu , Mateiu Caragiale took direct inspiration from foreign works of detective fiction when outlining his story , but also mocked their conventions by having Ruse rely on literature and even <unk> for his crime solving techniques . Vartic drew a parallel between Caragiale 's style and that of two 20th century foreign authors of crime fiction — Dashiell Hammett and Giorgio <unk> . The general intent , Manolescu notes , is not in realistically depicting police procedures , but in showing " the human mystery . " Thus , Ion Vartic argues , <unk> Nicolau may be Caragiale 's attempt to see himself from the outside , and his disappearance may be a clue that the writer was planning to sever links with the cultural milieu . The work 's title and its generic meaning are found in Ruse 's final statement : " There are such things meant to always remain — since forever — under the seal of secrecy . " 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Caragiale 's Symbolist poems , including a series of sonnets , also display his profound interest in history . Pajere , which reunited all of the poems Caragiale had published in Viața Românească and Flacăra , was defined by Lovinescu as a series of " archaically @-@ toned tableaux of our ancient existence " , and by Ion Vianu as " a picturesque history of Wallachia " , while George Călinescu remarks their " savant " character . The same critic also noted that Pajere , which drew inspiration from Byzantine settings , were more accomplished versions of a genre first cultivated by Dumitru Constantinescu @-@ <unk> . According to Perpessicius , Caragiale had " a certain outlook [ ... ] , according to which the past [ ... ] should not be sought in books , but in the surrounding landscape " . He illustrated this notion with a stanza from Caragiale 's Clio : 
 Călinescu noted that , in several of his poems , Mateiu Caragiale had infused his search for aristocratic <unk> . He saw this present in the poem Lauda <unk> ( " In Praise of the Conqueror " ) : 
 In various pieces , the poetic language is characterized by pessimism , and , according to Barbu Cioculescu and Ion Vianu , was influenced by Romania 's national poet , Mihai Eminescu . One of them , <unk> ( " The Loneliness " ) , notably expresses , through the voice of its demonic protagonist , misanthropy and a vengeful attitude , believed by Vianu to stand as one of Caragiale 's most personal messages on one 's disappointment with the world : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Early decades = = = 
 Caragiale continued to be hailed as a relevant writer during the ten years following his death , and his <unk> went through new critical editions . Pajere was published in spring 1936 , having been edited by Marica Caragiale @-@ Sion and Alexandru Rosetti . Later in the year , a volume of collected works , Opere , was published by Rosetti and featured prints made by Mateiu Caragiale at various moments during his lifetime . Large portions of the diaries kept by Mateiu Caragiale are lost . The transcript made by Perpessicius was criticized for having selectively discarded much content , while originals kept by Rosetti were mysteriously lost during the Legionnaires ' Rebellion of 1941 . Additional notes , which notably featured Caragiale 's criticism of his father , were preserved for a while by Șerban Cioculescu , before being borrowed to Ecaterina <unk> , Ion Luca 's daughter , and never recovered . A significant number of his drawings and paintings , which Vianu assumed had survived by 1936 , have also been misplaced . 
 Caragiale 's work exercised some influence from early on . Ion Barbu coined the terms mateist and matein , referring , respectively , to supporters of and things connected to Caragiale 's literature . Barbu is also credited with having set up and presided the first mateist circle . In 1947 , Ion Barbu wrote the poem Protocol al unui Club ( " The Protocol of a Club " ) , intended as an homage to his friend 's memory . The traditionalist poet Sandu Tudor took up the genre of Byzantine portraits as cultivated by him and by Constantinescu @-@ <unk> , creating a piece titled <unk> ( roughly , " Cellar " or " Cellar @-@ Keeper " ) . Around the same period , the writer known as <unk> <unk> took inspiration from the style of his novels . 
 = = = <unk> under communism = = = 
 <unk> , growing during the late stages of the interwar period , took the aspect of an underground cultural phenomenon during the communist regime . <unk> Gheorghiu , a Surrealist author whose Bohemian lifestyle was itself described as a reflection of Craii ... , had memorized large sections of the novel and could recite them by heart . According to Eugen Simion , dramatist Aurel <unk> is reputed to have done the same . During communism , Gheorghiu published a translation from Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa 's The Leopard , which literary critic Carmen <unk> believes was marked by the tone of <unk> . Caragiale 's aesthetics contrasted with those of the 1950s Socialist Realist establishment . However , after the death of Soviet leader Joseph Stalin signaled a relative change in cultural tenets , Communist Party affiliate and writer Petru Dumitriu wrote in favor of recovering supposed " realistic sections " of works by both Mateiu Caragiale and Tudor Arghezi . Eugen Simion writes that , late in the same decade , students at the University of Bucharest were investing their time trying to determine the exact location of houses described in Craii .... Also according to Eugen Simion , an attempt by poet Anatol E. <unk> to republish the volume was met with a stiff reaction from the censorship apparatus , and , as a consequence of this episode , the main Communist Party organ , Scînteia , renewed its campaign against Caragiale . Matei Călinescu recalled that , " during the dark 1950 – 60 decade " , he clandestinely read Craii ... and shared his thoughts on it with a group of friends , noting that this was part of a " secret life " which contrasted with the rigors one had to obey in public . 
 With the relative liberalization during the 1960s , which followed the rise of Nicolae Ceaușescu as communist leader , Caragiale 's work enjoyed a more favorable reception . At that stage , nationalism and national communism became standards of official discourse , and intellectuals such as Edgar Papu were allowed to reinterpret Romanian culture on the basis of nationalist tenets : Papu 's controversial theory , known as " <unk> " , claimed that Romanians as a group were at the source of any innovative movement in world culture . Papu thus believed that Caragiale , whom he described as superior to Flaubert , had foreshadowed Lampedusa 's writing techniques . Independent of this approach , Mateiu Caragiale was being rediscovered by new generations of writers . In 1966 , Viața Românească published Radu Albala 's În deal , pe Militari ( " On the Hill , in Militari " ) , which was a sequel and final chapter of Sub pecetea tainei . Albala was significantly influenced by Caragiale throughout his work , as was his contemporary Alexandru George in his series of fiction writings . Other such authors are <unk> Neagu , who was inspired by Craii ... to write his 1976 book The Handsome Lunatics of the Big Cities , and <unk> Stoenescu , whose poetry , according to Barbu Cioculescu , was influenced by " the charm of word <unk> " in Caragiale 's poems . Caragiale 's name was also cited by the writer Geo <unk> , who , in his youth , was a major figure of the Romanian avant @-@ garde movement . In one of his late prose pieces , titled <unk> , " The Borzois " , <unk> , who praised the dog breed for its innate grace , wrote : " I do not know if Mateiu Caragiale , who thought himself so uncommon , ever owned <unk> . But , if he did , I 'm sure he gazed on them with melancholy and with secret envy . " 
 During the final stages of Ceaușescu 's rule , when liberalization was curbed , matein writings were rediscovered and reclaimed by the Optzeciști group of authors , themselves noted for attempting to evade cultural guidelines by adopting fantasy and avant @-@ garde literature . Mircea <unk> , a leading exponent of the Optzeciști and an advocate of Postmodernism , referred to Caragiale as one of his interwar precursors , while Ștefan <unk> acknowledged he pursued Mateiu 's interests in his 1981 novel <unk> de <unk> ( " <unk> de Velvet " ) . According to critic Dumitru <unk> , it was mainly through Radu Albala that the matein model seeped into the work of various Optzeciști — <unk> , Horia Gârbea and Florin <unk> among them . Another Postmodernist author , Fundulea native Mircea Nedelciu , paid tribute to matein prose by basing a character of his 1986 novel <unk> <unk> ( " <unk> Treatment " ) on Caragiale , and again much later , by adopting the same practice in his final novel <unk> <unk> ( " Sign of the Deep @-@ sea Diver " ) . The isolated Postmodernist figure and former Communist Party ideologue Paul Georgescu is also believed to have used elements of Craii ... as inspiration for his novels of the 1980s . In parallel , as an echo of <unk> , more critics grew interested in subjects relating to Caragiale 's work . Various comprehensive monographs were published after 1980 , including a volume edited by the Museum of Romanian Literature and two influential works written by , respectively , Alexandru George and philosopher Vasile Lovinescu . The latter , with its claim to uncover esoteric layers in <unk> texts , remains controversial . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1989 recovery and debates = = = 
 Caragiale was completely recovered in mainstream cultural circles after the Romanian Revolution of 1989 . Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche was chosen " best Romanian novel of the twentieth century " in an early 2001 poll conducted among 102 Romanian literary critics by the literary magazine <unk> Cultural , while its author endures as one of the most @-@ studied Romanian fiction writers . The writer , his prose works , and the manner in which the reader relates to them were the themes for a 2003 book by Matei Călinescu , titled Mateiu I. Caragiale : <unk> ( " Mateiu I. Caragiale : Re @-@ readings " ) . Several other new monographs were dedicated to Caragiale , including a favorable review of his work authored by literary researcher Ion Iovan in 2002 . Iovan is noted for defending Caragiale against the traditional topics of criticism . In contrast to his father Șerban , who was often a vocal critic of Mateiu Caragiale 's literature and lifestyle choices , Barbu Cioculescu is likewise one of the writer 's most noted promoters , and has occasionally been described as a mateist . 
 Reflecting on Mateiu 's growing popularity , Matei Călinescu has argued that Craii ... is to Romanian literature what El Aleph is in the eponymous Jorge Luis Borges story : a place containing all other conceivable places . In his 2008 synthesis , Istoria <unk> a <unk> române ( " The Critical History of Romanian Literature " ) , Nicolae Manolescu revisits George Călinescu 's pronouncements on interwar literature . Manolescu places Mateiu Caragiale , Max <unk> , Anton <unk> and Ion Pillat , all of whom do not take the forefront in Călinescu 's work , among their generation 's " canonical writers " . A diverging opinion was expressed by literary critic and <unk> Mircea <unk> , who suggested that , despite the theoretical potential presented by Mateiu 's lifestyle and background , Craii ... is primarily a poorly written work , characterized by " a disconcerting <unk> " , " kitsch " aesthetics and " embarrassing affectations " . <unk> , who believes that Caragiale 's only valuable writings are Pajere and his private correspondence , further suggests that Caragiale 's various admirers , including exegetes such as Matei Călinescu , Vasile Lovinescu , Ovidiu <unk> and Ion <unk> , are responsible for <unk> their favorite author . 
 In 2001 , Caragiale 's collected writings , edited by Barbu Cioculescu , were republished in a single edition , while his copy of Octav @-@ George Lecca 's <unk> <unk> române , featuring his many comments and sketches , was the basis for a 2002 reprint . In addition to the volumes of recollections by " <unk> " Ghica and Ionel Gherea , Mateiu Caragiale is mentioned in Gheorghe <unk> @-@ <unk> 's book of memoirs , <unk> <unk> . Sub <unk> <unk> ( " The Troika of Recollections . Under Four Kings " ) , published only after the Revolution . The work depicts notable episodes in his Bohemian life , including a scene where the overweight and inebriated Admiral <unk> leaps over tables at Casa Capșa and recites English @-@ language quotes from William Shakespeare to an audience comprising Caragiale and various by @-@ standers . In 2007 , Remember was issued as an audiobook , read by actor Marcel <unk> . 
 In the post @-@ Revolution era , authors continued to take direct inspiration from Caragiale . In 2008 , Ion Iovan published <unk> <unk> ale lui Mateiu Caragiale ( " Mateiu Caragiale 's Final Records " ) , a mock @-@ diary and speculative fiction work covering the final events in Caragiale 's life . In addition to covering the elements of his biography , it invents a character by the name of Jean Mathieu , Caragiale 's secret son . Caragiale 's work was also treasured by Romanian @-@ language writers in newly independent Moldova , formerly part of the Soviet Union . One of them , Anatol <unk> , wrote Craii de <unk> nouă ( " A New Fashion of Rakes " ) , which is both a memoir and a tribute to Craii .... 
 = = = Visual tributes , filmography and landmarks = = = 
 Published within the 1925 anthology compiled by Perpessicius and Pillat , Marcel Janco 's modernist portraits of Caragiale and avant @-@ garde writer Stephan Roll , were described by a number critics as Expressionist in style , based on their " energetic and spontaneous superposition of lines . " One later reprint of Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche was notably illustrated with drawings by graphic artist George <unk> . 
 An eponymous stage version of Craii ... , directed by Alexandru <unk> was performed by the <unk> Theater company , with stage design by <unk> <unk> . Dramatist Radu <unk> also adapted fragments from the novel , alongside texts by Ion Luca and Ion Luca 's uncle Iorgu Caragiale , into the play Un <unk> de <unk> <unk> ? ( " A Friend as Old as Time ? " ) . In 2009 , actor @-@ choreographer Răzvan <unk> adapted Remember into an eponymous musical theater and contemporary ballet piece , set to the music of Richard Wagner . The original cast included <unk> as Aubrey de Vere and Ion <unk> as Mr. M. ( a character loosely based on Caragiale ) , with a set design and videos by <unk> <unk> . 
 In the early 1970s , Mateiu Caragiale 's life inspired a Romanian Television production produced and directed by Stere <unk> . In 1995 , Craii ... was turned into an eponymous cinema production , directed by Mircea <unk> . It starred Mircea <unk> , Marius <unk> , and Gheorghe <unk> . The book and its author were also the subject of one episode in a documentary series produced by journalist and political scientist <unk> <unk> , dealing with the history of Bucharest ; titled București , strict secret ( " Bucharest , Top Secret " ) , it was aired by <unk> TV in 2007 . 
 Mateiu Caragiale 's name was assigned to a street in Bucharest ( and officially spelled Matei Caragiale in this context ) . Formerly known as Strada <unk> ( " Constitution Street " ) , it is located in a low @-@ income area on the outskirts of <unk> <unk> quarter . 
 = Novacane ( song ) = 
 " Novacane " is the debut single by American recording artist Frank Ocean . It was released as the lead single from his mixtape Nostalgia , Ultra . The song was written by Ocean , Tricky Stewart and Victor Alexander , and produced by Stewart . Lyrically , the song narrates a tale of a young female dental student who makes a living doing porn and who recreationally uses local anesthetic drugs that she acquires from her place of study . The song explores themes of isolation , loneliness and a lack of feeling caused by numbness . The song received highly positive reviews from music critics and was listed as one of the best songs of the year by publications such as The New York Times , Spin , Ology , Zimbio and Pitchfork . Reviews praised the dark subject matter of the song , and praised Ocean 's ability to create narratives and the sonic atmosphere of the track . 
 When Nostalgia , Ultra was expected to be released as an EP by Def Jam , " Novacane " was released as the first single , though the EP release was later cancelled . The song peaked at number 82 on the Billboard Hot 100 and entered the top 10 on the Heatseekers Songs chart . The song received a music video directed by Australian director Nabil Elderkin released on June 16 . The highly stylized video shows a long take of Ocean sitting around in a darkly lit room . Ocean performed the song during a show in New York with alternative hip hop group OFWGKTA , and during his seven show tour through North America and Europe . It was also performed during his 14 show Channel Orange tour through North America . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Novacane " was written by Frank Ocean and Victor Alexander with co @-@ writing by Tricky Stewart who also produced the track . The song appears on his debut mixtape Nostalgia , Ultra which was released on February 18 , 2011 . When asked by The Quietus if the song drew from his personal experiences , Ocean commented that " I don 't do cocaine for breakfast ! " , a reference to the lyrics from the song . He continued , " My kitchen is usually pretty clean , you know . But you have fun with the imagery , and for me the whole concept that everything has to be … Like , nobody gets upset with a director when a director 's film isn 't about his life . People think that with a recording artist that shit has to be like a fucking play by play of their whole life , but it 's not . It 's imagery , and a little bit of satire . " When asked if the song was an R & B track , Ocean replied that he disliked how that in the United States , " if you 're a singer and you 're black , you 're an R & B artist . Period . " Ocean stated that the song does contain R & B influences , though he didn 't feel it wasn 't entirely one in nature . The track was released as a digital download on May 31 , 2011 by Def Jam Records . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Novacane " expresses a story through its lyrics , and has been described as " nightmarish " in nature . It has been called a " love song of sorts " , with influence taken from alternative hip hop group The Pharcyde . Lyrically the track explores a narrative in which the singer meets a girl attempting to pay her way through dental school by working in porn , or at least that 's what she told him . Protagonist meets the girl at Coachella , a musical festival which takes place in Indio , California . Ocean serves as the protagonist in the song , in love with a girl " so gone on drugs that Ocean , wanting to be close to her , has no choice but to get gone on those same drugs " . The pair get high using dental local anesthetics . Though Ocean serves as an unreliable narrator , Pitchfork wrote that he was " probably still the most reliable character in the whole song . " The song contains reference to film director Stanley Kubrick and his 1999 drama Eyes Wide Shut . In addition , it also makes a comparison of the numbness that drugs produce with the use of auto @-@ tune in the music business . Summing up the song , Pitchfork also commented that " Novacane " " is a song about personal connection but also about all the stupid numb human shit that gets in the way of personal connection , which means it 's probably the most honest song about personal connection on the radio . " Rappers Joe Budden , Tyga and Prodigy have all released freestyles to " Novacane " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Novacane " received highly positive reviews from music critics , and has been described as the best song on Nostalgia , Ultra . Pitchfork editor Tom <unk> made the song " Best New Track " and commented that the song had a " stripped @-@ back melodic construction with Ocean crooning over a synthetic backing that practically fades into nonexistence " and that " it draws its power from tiny little details , like throwaway observations or catches in Ocean 's voice . Andrew Noz of NPR also praised the details in Ocean 's song writing , stating " in ' Novacane , ' Ocean sings about falling for a porn star who wants to be a dentist , it 's easy to believe that he 's more enticed by her dentistry aspirations than her day job . The New York Times critic Jon Caramanica described the song as a " story of meeting a cute girl at Coachella , tripping hard on intoxicants and getting quickly to love that he may or may not remember the next day " , and called the song " bliss . " Ology writer JT Langley noted that though the song was " massively depressing " and that " Frank makes a foul mouth sound sweeter than your usual R & B through his brand of crooning ... Tricky Stewart 's production adds yet another morose element to provide the more macabre side of the drugs @-@ for @-@ love @-@ lost genre . " 
 The song was listed as one of the best songs of the year by several publications . The New York Times placed the song amongst the best tracks of 2011 . Ology 's JT Langley placed the song amongst the best of the year , writing " Frank makes a foul mouth sound sweeter than your usual R & B through his brand of crooning , and Tricky Stewart 's production adds yet another morose element to provide the more macabre side of the drugs @-@ for @-@ love @-@ lost genre . " Pitchfork named the song the 41st best song of the year , musing that " he might be fronting like the Drakes and post- " 808s " <unk> of the world , but there 's too much self @-@ effacement happening for Ocean not to realize the inherent humor in his own drama . If Ocean really is on that visionary Kubrick shit like he claims , then " Novacane " could very well be his Dr. Strangelove . Zimbio placed the song at number 2 on their best hip @-@ hop songs of the year list , writing " while every track on his mixtape , nostalgia , Ultra , warrants a listen , it 's the radio @-@ friendly " Novacane " that stands out as his most mature and enjoyable song to date . " Spin named the song the fifth best of the year , describing the track as " a fully evolved Drake song , where you 're slyly immersed in youthful , <unk> @-@ shit decadence , while simultaneously watching your dreams of recreational stripper booty and complimentary cocaine breakfasts get methodically dismantled . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 According to Ocean , the music video for " Novacane " was a simple process . Talking about the concept of the video , he stated " I was just trying to connect or articulate visually the feeling of being numb . The feeling of wanting to feel something you can 't feel . A lot of things can cause that numbing , but in the video it was some sort of topical aesthetic and a little bit of special effects . " The video doesn 't last the entirety of the song , which director Nabil Elderkin stated was for artistic reasons . In an interview with Pitchfork , he reasoned " to me , videos don 't always have to be the length of the song . I like the idea of people thinking , ' What was that ? ' " 
 The video is shot as one long take , shot in a mostly dark room . Ocean sits in the room , smoking an unspecified drug . Eventually , he gets up and begins to smear an unknown substance onto his face . Random shots of pandas and rain forest imagery are also spliced into the video , and it ends with Ocean being slapped by the ghostly image of a woman . MTV further summarized the video ; " Ocean is surrounded by ghostly incarnations of beautiful women , tigers and pandas . At one point , Ocean smears what appears to be <unk> — or <unk> — on his solemn @-@ looking face . " Supposedly , it required several takes to achieve the correct angle for the slapping moment , and the spliced images were placed in the video because Ocean asked the director whether or not they " can we put some kind of Asian @-@ rain @-@ forest stuff in there ? " Billboard wrote that the video was " minimalist " and " eerie " . Pitchfork named the video amongst the best of the year . 
 Ocean embarked on a solo tour through North America and Europe to promote both the mixtape and his other musical projects . The set lists to the various shows varied , though " Novacane " was performed at all shows . Ocean performed " Novacane " and " She " with Tyler , The Creator at an OFWGKTA performance in New York . The track was included during Ocean 's setlist at the April 2012 Coachella Musical Festival . Complex magazine stated that he " left his most popular and best for last , wrapping the evening with " Novacane , " which shouts out the festival itself . " Ocean performed the track during his 14 show Channel Orange tour through North America . 
 = = Charts = = 
 The song peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at position 82 . The song also charted at position 6 on the Billboard Heatseekers Songs chart and 17 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 23rd Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Kama ( 2nd Croatian ) = 
 The 23rd Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Kama ( 2nd Croatian ) was a German mountain infantry division of the Waffen @-@ SS , the armed wing of the German Nazi Party that served alongside but was never formally part of the Wehrmacht during World War II . It was composed of German officers and Bosnian Muslim soldiers . Named Kama after a small dagger used by Balkan shepherds , it was one of the thirty @-@ eight divisions fielded by the Waffen @-@ SS during World War II . Formed on 19 June 1944 , it was built around a cadre from the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) but did not reach its full strength and never saw action as a formation . 
 Elements of the division fought briefly against Soviet forces in southern Hungary in early October 1944 alongside the 31st SS Volunteer Grenadier Division . They were soon disengaged from the front line in Hungary and had begun a move to the German puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia , to join the 13th SS Division when the Bosnian Muslim soldiers of the Kama division mutinied on 17 October 1944 . The cadre quickly regained control , but the mutiny resulted in the division being formally dissolved on 31 October 1944 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia by the Axis powers on 6 April 1941 , the extreme Croat nationalist and fascist Ante Pavelić , who had been in exile in Benito Mussolini 's Italy , was appointed Poglavnik ( leader ) of an Ustaše @-@ led Croatian state – the Independent State of Croatia ( often called the NDH , from the Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska ) . The NDH combined almost all of modern @-@ day Croatia , all of modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of modern @-@ day Serbia into an " Italian @-@ German quasi @-@ protectorate " . NDH authorities , led by the Ustaše Militia , immediately launched a campaign of mass killings , expulsions and forced religious conversions to Catholicism targeting the Serbian Orthodox population living within the borders of the new state . 
 Despite Pavelić 's assurances of equality with the predominantly Catholic Croats , many Muslims quickly became dissatisfied with Ustaše rule . An Islamic leader reported that not one Muslim occupied an influential post in the administration . By early 1942 , fierce fighting had broken out between the Ustaše , Chetniks and Partisans in NDH territory . Some Ustaše militia units became convinced that the Muslims were communist sympathizers , and burned their villages and murdered many civilians . The Chetniks accused the Muslims of taking part in the Ustaše violence against Serbs and perpetrated similar atrocities against the Muslim population . The Muslims received little protection from the Croatian Home Guard , the regular army of the NDH , whom the Germans described as " of minimal combat value " . Local militias were raised , but these were also of limited value and only one , the Tuzla @-@ based Home Guard " Hadžiefendić Legion " led by Muhamed Hadžiefendić , was of any significance . 
 The Bosnian Muslims sought protection and independence from the NDH , and saw German support as a means to achieve those aims . Prominent Bosnian Muslims were friendly towards Germany , and Bosnians were generally nostalgic over the former period of Habsburg ( Austro @-@ Hungarian ) rule . This push was strongly opposed by Pavelić as counter to the territorial integrity of the NDH . By November 1942 , these Muslim autonomists were desperate to protect their people and wrote to Adolf Hitler asking that he annex Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Reich . While this idea did not receive Hitler 's approval , possibly because he did not want to create problems for Pavelić , Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler saw this as an opportunity to create a Waffen @-@ SS recruiting zone in the NDH to attract Bosnian Muslims . In early 1943 , Hitler authorised the raising of the first SS division to be recruited from a non @-@ Germanic people , the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) . The division was to be raised primarily from the Muslim population of the NDH . 
 = = History = = 
 The Germans wanted to recruit a second SS division from the Muslims of Bosnia , as part of Himmler 's goal to expand Waffen @-@ SS recruiting in the Balkans . His plan was to form two corps of two divisions , with one corps to operate in the Bosnian region of the Independent State of Croatia and the other in Albania . These corps would then be combined with the Volksdeutsche 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen and together would form a Balkan SS mountain army of five divisions . On 28 May 1944 , Hitler gave his formal approval for the creation of a 23rd SS Division , with its formation to begin on 10 June and training to be complete by the end of 1944 . Himmler followed the advice of the commander of the 13th SS Division Handschar , SS Brigadeführer and Generalmajor of Waffen @-@ SS ( Brigadier ) Karl @-@ Gustav Sauberzweig , and agreed to form the division in the neighbouring Bácska ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Bačka ) region annexed by Hungary instead of Bosnia . Sauberzweig believed that if the division was raised in the NDH , the Ustaše would undermine the morale of the recruits . The new division was named Kama after a small dagger used by Balkan shepherds . 
 Orders were given to the 13th SS Division to provide a cadre for the new division , and SS Standartenführer ( Colonel ) Helmuth Raithel , a regimental commander from the 13th SS Division , was appointed as the new division 's commanding officer . The formation of the division was delayed by Operation Vollmond to which the 13th SS Division was heavily committed , so formation did not begin until 19 June . On 21 June , Himmler promoted Sauberzweig to SS Gruppenführer and Generalleutnant of Waffen @-@ SS ( major general ) and appointed him to command the Bosnian corps , which was given the title IX Waffen Mountain Corps of the SS ( Croatian ) . The corps was to form at <unk> in southern Hungary , where the 18th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division Horst Wessel was deployed . 
 Beginning on 23 June , 54 officers , 187 non @-@ commissioned officers ( NCOs ) and 1 @,@ 137 enlisted men of the 13th SS Division that had been selected for transfer to the 23rd SS Division Kama were assembled in Bošnjaci in Posavina County of the NDH , and they were moved into Bácska on 15 July . They included three NCOs from every company of the 13th SS Division , and one cavalry squadron , one battery from each of its artillery battalions , as well as specialist troops . German officers and NCOs were also provided by Waffen @-@ SS replacement units . The divisional area lay along the Franzen Canal , with garrisons in <unk> ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Srbobran ) and <unk> ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Kula ) and on either side of the line <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Sombor @-@ Vrbas ) . The 10 @,@ 000 men for a full @-@ strength division were to be obtained from volunteers , from Muslim conscripts born in 1926 and 1927 ( with some exceptions ) , and if necessary , from the various Muslim militias in the NDH . The conscripts were subjected to the draft by the NDH government then transferred to German command along with the others , who were then transported to Waffen @-@ SS recruiting depots at <unk> and Bošnjaci . These men were to report by 15 September 1944 , but in mid @-@ August , Waffen @-@ SS recruiting officer SS Obergruppenführer ( Lieutenant General ) Gottlob Berger reported to Himmler that there would be insufficient reliable Muslim men available , and Catholic Croats would also have to be accepted into the 23rd SS Division . During Pavelić 's visit to Hitler in September 1944 , General Đuro Grujić , chief of Pavelić 's Military Office , indicated to the Germans that it would be difficult to recruit another 5 @,@ 000 men to complete the division after 5 @,@ 000 had already been assigned . Many Volksdeutsche from the NDH and a few from Hungary were recruited into the division to act as interpreters between the Bosnian Muslims and the German cadre and to enhance unit cohesion . 
 On 10 September the division reached a strength of 126 officers , 374 non @-@ commissioned officers and 3 @,@ 293 men , composed of German officers and Bosnian Muslim soldiers , a fraction of its prescribed strength of 19 @,@ 000 men . By this time , morale was waning within the new division just as it completed the final phase of its training in Hungary ; the war was not going well , and there were rumours that the Germans were going to abandon the Balkans and leave the Muslims to defend themselves . Faced with high rates of desertion from the 13th SS Division , Sauberzweig proposed a plan to disarm the Bosnians in both divisions , and on 18 September travelled to see Himmler . The Reichsführer @-@ SS instead opted for a plan to transport the 2 @,@ 000 Bosnians of the 23rd SS Division to the area of operations of the 13th SS Division in Bosnia and re @-@ organise both divisions there . Combat arms units from the 13th SS Division were to be brought under the direct control of IX Waffen Mountain Corps of the SS ( Croatian ) , which would also move to Bosnia . Issued on 24 September , the plan cancelled the formation of the 23rd SS Division , and directed SS Oberführer ( Senior Colonel ) Gustav Lombard to form and command a new SS infantry division using the German cadre and equipment of the 23rd SS Division , supplemented by ethnic Germans recruited from Hungary . The Bosnians of the 23rd SS Division were to be transported by rail back to the <unk> @-@ Županja @-@ Bošnjaci area for re @-@ organisation into a " new " Kama division . 
 The staff of IX Waffen Mountain Corps of the SS ( Croatian ) headquarters left Hungary , and on 3 October 1944 they arrived in the village of <unk> , near Vinkovci . The headquarters became partially operational on 7 October . The Bosnians did not leave Bácska immediately , and for a short period were garrisoned alongside Lombard 's new 31st SS Volunteer Grenadier Division . In the meantime , the Red Army continued to advance into Hungary , and on 9 October 1944 a telegram was sent by the commander of Waffen @-@ SS forces in Hungary to IX SS Mountain Corps in Bosnia announcing that " battle ready units from SS Oberführer Lombard 's division and Bosnians from the Division Kama had been thrown into the fighting in <unk> " . The Bosnian elements were deployed along the Tisza ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Tisa ) river for a week or so as part of Kampfgruppe Syr in an attempt to slow the Soviet advance . As a result , the return of the Bosnians to the NDH was delayed . 
 The Bosnians were soon disengaged from the front line in Hungary and had begun the move to Bosnia to join the 13th SS Division when they mutinied on 17 October 1944 . Raithel quickly regained control , but the mutiny meant the re @-@ organisation of a " new " 23rd SS Division was abandoned . A small number of reliable Bosnians from the division were used as replacements in the 13th SS Division , and the 23rd SS Division was formally dissolved on 31 October 1944 . Despite its short existence , the 23rd SS is considered one of the thirty @-@ eight divisions fielded by the Waffen @-@ SS during World War II . After the division was disbanded , the numerical designator " 23rd " was given to the 23rd SS Volunteer Panzer Grenadier Division Nederland , and Raithel went on to command the 11th SS @-@ Gebirgsjäger Regiment " Reinhard Heydrich " of the 6th SS Mountain Division Nord against the United States Army in southern Germany during the final months of World War II . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The division 's final order of battle consisted of : 
 55th Waffen Gebirgsjäger ( Mountain Infantry ) Regiment of the SS ( 3rd Croatian ) 
 56th Waffen Gebirgsjäger Regiment of the SS ( 4th Croatian ) 
 23rd SS Mountain Artillery Regiment ( of four battalions ) 
 23rd SS Reconnaissance Battalion 
 23rd SS Panzerjäger ( Anti @-@ tank ) Battalion 
 23rd SS Pioneer Battalion 
 23rd SS Mountain Signals Battalion 
 23rd SS Division Supply Battalion 
 23rd SS Medical Battalion 
 23rd SS Replacement Battalion 
 The division also included a workshop company , veterinary company and administrative section . 
 = = Uniform = = 
 The divisional insignia was a sun with 16 rays , the ancient symbol of the Macedonian king Alexander the Great . A divisional collar patch bearing the insignia was intended , but it is unlikely it was ever issued . During their formation and training in the Bácska region during the summer of 1944 , the soldiers often dressed in khaki tropical uniforms with shorts . The official headgear of the division was the SS M43 fez : a field gray model to be worn with service uniform and a red model for dress uniform . Members of the division that had previously served in the 13th SS Division often continued to wear the divisional collar patch of that division , which showed an arm holding a scimitar over a swastika . These non @-@ standard uniform items continued to be worn by members of the division after they became part of the 31st SS Division in October 1944 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Documents = = = 
 = Shadows Fall = 
 Shadows Fall is an American heavy metal band from Springfield , Massachusetts , formed in 1995 . Although the band has experienced several line @-@ up changes , for most of its recording career , Shadows Fall has been composed of Brian Fair ( vocals ) , Jonathan Donais ( lead guitar ) , Matt Bachand ( rhythm guitar ) , Paul <unk> ( bass ) , and Jason Bittner ( drums ) . 
 Shadows Fall have released seven studio albums , two compilation albums , and two DVDs . The band 's first album featured Philip Labonte ( of All That Remains ) on vocals , although he was soon replaced by Fair . Shadows Fall 's first two studio albums featured David Germain playing drums , but in 2002 , Bittner joined the band full @-@ time . In February 2008 , the band was a Grammy Award nominee in the category Best Metal Performance for the song " Redemption " off the album Threads of Life . In late 2011 , the band entered the studio to begin recording their latest studio album . The album , Fire From the Sky , was released on May 15 , 2012 , and is the first to be produced by Adam Dutkiewicz since the band 's first studio release . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Somber Eyes to the Sky ( 1995 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Shadows Fall was formed in 1995 by guitarists Jonathan Donais and Matt Bachand , then good friends from the local music scene . Bachand had previously been a founding member of a death metal band and Donais a member of the metalcore band Aftershock . By 1996 the band had found a complete lineup with the addition of Damien McPherson ( vocals ) , Mark Laliberte ( bass ) , and David Germain ( drums ) . Also in 1996 , Adam Dutkiewicz performed live drums to fill in for Germain . By late 1996 , the band recorded and released a demo titled Mourning a Dead World , of which only about 200 copies were produced . It consisted of the songs Lifeless , Suffer the Season , <unk> , Forever Lost , A Souls Salvation , and <unk> . McPherson decided to leave the band , and was replaced by Philip Labonte in 1997 . Around the same time , bass guitarist Paul <unk> , formally of the hardcore band <unk> Warfare , was recruited as a permanent replacement for Laliberte , who had originally joined on a temporary basis . Now with a more solid lineup , the band released its first EP , To Ashes , with Dutkiewicz playing as a session drummer . The band 's name , according to Bachand , comes from the title of a comic book published in the early 1990s . 
 Shadows Fall toured the New England area opening for artists such as Fear Factory and Cannibal Corpse . On November 30 , 1997 , the band released its first studio album Somber Eyes to the Sky , through Bachand 's recording label , Lifeless Records . 
 = = = Of One Blood ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In 1998 , Labonte was asked to leave the band due to personal and artistic differences . He had ideas for a side project while a member of the band , and went on to form All That Remains . The band looked for a replacement vocalist and eventually recruited Milford , MA native Brian Fair of the pioneering metalcore band Overcast . The band had been friends with Fair for years . After a US Summer tour with Shai Hulud , Overcast disbanded and the band asked Fair if he would like to join Shadows Fall . While on tour Shadows Fall was signed to Century Media Records . The band recorded its second studio album Of One Blood with Fair on vocals in 2000 , and the release included re @-@ recorded songs from Somber Eyes to the Sky . In 2001 , David Germain decided to leave the band due to alcoholism , and was replaced by former Stigmata and Burning Human drummer Jason Bittner . 
 = = = The Art of Balance ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Due to repeated comparisons with Gothenburg melodic death metal bands , Shadows Fall decided to change its style to find its own sound . Inspired by more thrash , hard rock and power ballad influences , the band recorded its third studio album , titled The Art of Balance . Released on September 17 , 2002 , the album peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Top Independent albums chart . Shadows Fall released three music videos to promote the album ; " Thoughts Without Words " , " Destroyer of Senses " , and " The Idiot Box " . The Art of Balance featured a cover of the Pink Floyd song " Welcome to the Machine . " Andy Hinds of Allmusic stated the album is " a modern heavy metal album that is both brutal and highly musical , traditional yet forward @-@ thinking " , but criticized the placement of " Welcome to the Machine " , stating the song " is stylishly well @-@ executed , but seems a tad out of place nonetheless . " Shadows Fall supported The Art of Balance by touring on Ozzfest in 2003 . 
 = = = The War Within ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Shadows Fall released its fourth studio album The War Within on September 21 , 2004 . It was the first release to enter the Billboard 200 for the band at number 20 , and peaked at number one on the Top Independent albums chart . In promotion for the album , Shadows Fall released four music videos over the course of one year ; " The Power of I and I " , " What Drives the Weak " , " Inspiration on Demand " , and " Enlightened By the Cold " . The song " What Drives the Weak " received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Metal Performance in 2006 , however the award went to Slipknot for the song " Before I Forget " . " The Light That <unk> " was featured in the video game Guitar Hero II . Wade <unk> of Allmusic praised the album stating the band has " grown beyond the confines of the metal @-@ loving hardcore crowd anyway , with more in common now with the classic thrash of Metallica than the metal @-@ tinged hardcore of Coalesce " . In support of the album the band once again performed on Ozzfest , but this time as a <unk> act . As of 2008 , the album has sold almost 400 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Shadows Fall released its first DVD The Art of Touring in November 2005 . The DVD included a live concert , backstage footage , and six music videos . The band released its final CD on Century Media Records , titled Fallout from the War on June 13 , 2006 . Released as a compilation album , it debuted at number 83 on the Billboard 200 . Fallout from the War included tracks recorded for The War Within that did not make it on to the album , b @-@ sides , re @-@ recordings , and cover songs . David Jeffries of Allmusic claimed the album is " a great informal introduction to the ferocious and melodic witches ' brew Shadows Fall always seems to nail . " 
 = = = Threads of Life ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Shadows Fall signed a deal with Atlantic Records to distribute the band 's albums in the United States , and a deal with Roadrunner Records for international distribution . The band released its fifth studio album Threads of Life on April 3 , 2007 . " Redemption " , the first single from the CD was released on February 20 , 2007 through iTunes with an accompanying music video . " Redemption " received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Metal performance ; the award ceremony as held on February 10 , 2008 . Slayer 's " Eyes of the Insane " won the award . Thom Jurek of Allmusic stated Shadows Fall has " lost none of the fire , attack or attitude " on Threads of Life . Jurek also said the album featured " killer guitar breaks , big fat chugging riffs , power @-@ slam skin work , cattle prod bass , and cool little hooks and melodic touches on top of those bludgeoning riffs make Threads of Life a major label debut of merit , and a metal record worthy of celebrating . " Keith Bergman of Blabbermouth.net stated " Threads of Life is slick as hell . " 
 Shadows Fall toured in support of Threads of Life , including making appearances at the Jägermeister tour with Stone Sour and Lacuna Coil , the Operation Annihilation tour with Static @-@ X , 3 Inches of Blood , and Divine Heresy , and the Black Crusade tour with Trivium , Machine Head , Dragonforce , and Arch Enemy . The band was a part of the Soundwave tour in Australia and in Asia in February 2008 , along with Killswitch Engage , As I Lay Dying , and Bleeding Through . 
 = = = Retribution ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Shadows Fall released their sixth album , Retribution , on September 15 , 2009 , through the band 's own label , <unk> Industries , which was created in conjunction with Warner Music Group 's ILG , Ferret Music and <unk> Entertainment . It is being released in the UK via Spinefarm Records . The album was produced by Chris " <unk> " Harris . Drummer Jason Bittner recently stated about the band 's new material , " The songs are a little more on the darker , angry side ... lots of heaviness , lots of crazy guitar , and <unk> of room for me to have some fun . There is no doubt in my mind that this will be the best performance of my career , so far , and I owe that to my guys for bringing me incredible riffs to write killer drum parts to . " As of the fall of 2009 the band was appearing on the ' Shock & Raw ' tour of North America with 2Cents , Otep & Five Finger Death Punch . After a South American tour , Shadows Fall will be playing on the Jägermeister Stage in the 2010 Rockstar Mayhem Festival in July and August 2010 . The band is also scheduled to support Lamb of God on their Australian tour in December 2009 Shadows Fall is pleased to announce their first and only New York City performance this year , taking place at Santos Party House on December 18 , 2010 with direct support from Thy will be done . 
 Shadows Fall released a live CD / DVD , Madness in Manila : Shadows Fall Live in The Philippines 2009 , on October 26 . 
 = = = Fire From the Sky and final tours ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 In late 2011 , Shadows Fall entered the studio to begin recording their seventh studio album . While in the studio , they held live video streams to discuss the progress of the album and answer questions from fans . This album is the first to be produced by Adam Dutkiewicz since the band 's original studio release , Somber Eyes to the Sky . Fire From the Sky was released on May 15 , 2012 through Razor & Tie . 
 On January 11 , 2013 , it was announced that guitarist Jon Donais would be joining Anthrax on their upcoming Metal Alliance Tour and on August 13 , 2013 Donais was confirmed as a full Anthrax member . 
 On June 28 , 2014 , Shadows Fall performed with the bands Black Fast , Dead by Wednesday , Hallow Point , and Gray 's Divide in St. Louis , Missouri . 
 On August 25 , 2014 , the band announced several final tours to take place in Europe and North America so the band could take a hiatus from future extensive touring . 
 In December 2014 , it was announced drummer Jason Bittner would join Arizona thrash metal band Flotsam and Jetsam , and guitarist Matt Bachand would join Act of Defiance , along with the former members of Megadeth . 
 In August 2015 , the band will take part in a few reunion shows along the US East Coast , while all of its members are able to do so , before heading out with their respective other bands for late 2015 / 2016 touring . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 = = = Video albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Nominations = = = 
 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance – " What Drives the Weak " ( 2006 ) 
 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance – " Redemption " ( 2008 ) 
 Boston Music Awards 
 = Emma Thompson = 
 Emma Thompson ( born 15 April 1959 ) is a British actress , a comedian , and a writer . 
 Thompson is known for her portrayals of reticent women and playing haughty or matronly characters with a sense of irony , often in period dramas and literary adaptations . She is considered one of Britain 's most accomplished actresses . 
 Born in London to English actor , Eric Thompson , and Scottish actress , Phyllida Law , Thompson was educated at Newnham College , University of Cambridge , where she became a member of the Footlights troupe . After appearing in several comedy programmes , she first came to prominence in 1987 , in two BBC TV series , Tutti Frutti and Fortunes of War , winning the BAFTA TV Award for Best Actress for her work in both series . 
 Thompson 's first film role came in the 1989 romantic comedy , The Tall Guy , and in the early 1990s she frequently collaborated with her then husband , actor , and director , Kenneth Branagh . The pair became popular in the British media , and co @-@ starred in several films including : Dead Again ( 1991 ) and Much Ado About Nothing ( 1993 ) . 
 In 1992 , Thompson won multiple acting awards , including an Academy Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress , for her work in the period drama , Howards End . In 1993 , she garnered dual Academy Award nominations for her roles in The Remains of the Day as a stately housekeeper , and In the Name of the Father as a lawyer . 
 Thompson scripted and starred in Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) , which earned her ( among other awards ) an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay , and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress . Other notable film and television credits include : the Harry Potter film series , Wit ( 2001 ) , Love Actually ( 2003 ) , Angels in America ( 2003 ) , Nanny McPhee ( 2005 ) , Stranger than Fiction ( 2006 ) , Last Chance Harvey ( 2008 ) , Men in Black 3 ( 2012 ) , and Brave ( 2012 ) . In 2013 , she received acclaim and several award nominations for her portrayal of P. L. Travers in Saving Mr. Banks . 
 Thompson is married to actor Greg Wise , with whom she lives in London . They have one daughter and an adopted son . She is an activist in the areas of human rights and environmentalism , and has received criticism for her outspoken nature . She has authored two books adapted from The Tale of Peter Rabbit . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thompson was born in Paddington , London , on 15 April 1959 . A member of a show business family , her mother is the Scottish actress Phyllida Law , while her English father , Eric Thompson , was involved in theatre and the writer – narrator of the popular children 's television series The Magic Roundabout . Her godfather was the director and writer Ronald Eyre . She has one sister , Sophie Thompson , who also works as an actress . The family lived in West Hampstead in north London , and Thompson was educated at Camden School for Girls . She spent much time in Scotland during her childhood , and often visited <unk> where her grandparents and uncle lived . 
 In her youth , Thompson was intrigued by language and literature , a trait which she attributes to her father who shared her love of words . In 1977 , she began studying for an English degree at Newnham College , University of Cambridge . Thompson believes that it was inevitable that she would become an actress , commenting that she was " surrounded by creative people and I don ’ t think it would ever have gone any other way , really " . While there , she had a " seminal moment " that turned her to feminism and inspired her to take up performing . She explained in an interview in 2007 how she discovered the book The Madwoman in the Attic , " which is about Victorian female writers and the disguises they took on in order to express what they wanted to express . That completely changed my life . " She became a self @-@ professed " punk rocker " , with short red hair and a motorbike , and aspired to be a comedian like Lily Tomlin . 
 At Cambridge , Thompson was invited into Footlights , the university 's prestigious sketch comedy troupe , by its president , Martin Bergman , becoming its first female member . Also in the troupe were fellow actors Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie , and she had a romantic relationship with the latter . Fry recalled that " there was no doubt that Emma was going the distance . Our nickname for her was Emma Talented . " In 1980 , Thompson served as the Vice President of Footlights , and co @-@ directed the troupe 's first all @-@ female revue , Women 's Hour . The following year , Thompson and her Footlights team won the Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe for their sketch show The Cellar Tapes . 
 In 1982 , Thompson 's father died as a result of circulatory problems at the age of 52 . The actress has commented that this " tore [ the family ] to pieces " , and " I can 't begin to tell you how much I regret his not being around " . She added , " At the same time , it 's possible that were he still alive I might never have had the space or courage to do what I 've done ... I have a definite feeling of inheriting space . And power . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1980s : Breaking through = = = 
 Thompson had her first professional role in 1982 , touring in a stage version of Not the Nine O 'Clock News . She then turned to television , where much of her early work came with her Footlights co @-@ stars Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry . The regional ITV comedy series There 's Nothing To Worry About ! ( 1982 ) was their first outing , followed by the one @-@ off BBC show The Crystal Cube ( 1983 ) . There 's Nothing to Worry About ! later returned as the networked sketch show <unk> ( 1983 – 84 ) , which ran for two series with Thompson , Fry , Laurie , Ben Elton , and Robbie Coltrane . She later collaborated again with Fry and Laurie on the acclaimed BBC Radio 4 series Saturday Night Fry ( 1988 ) . 
 In 1985 , Thompson was cast in the West End revival of the musical Me and My Girl , co @-@ starring Robert Lindsay . It provided a breakthrough in her career , as the production earned rave reviews . She played the role of Sally Smith for 15 months , which exhausted the actress ; she later remarked " I thought if I did the fucking " Lambeth Walk " one more time I was going to fucking throw up . " At the end of 1985 , she wrote and starred in her own one @-@ off special for Channel 4 , Emma Thompson : Up for Grabs . 
 Thompson achieved another breakthrough in 1987 , when she had leading roles in two television miniseries : Fortunes of War , a World War II drama co @-@ starring Kenneth Branagh , and Tutti Frutti , a dark @-@ comedy about a Scottish rock band with Robbie Coltrane . For these performances , Thompson won the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress . The following year , she wrote and starred in her own sketch comedy series for BBC , Thompson , but this was poorly received . In 1989 , she and Branagh — who had formed a romantic relationship — starred in a stage revival of Look Back in Anger , directed by Judi Dench and produced by Branagh 's Renaissance Theatre Company . Later that year , the pair starred in a televised version of the play . 
 Thompson 's first cinema appearance came in the romantic comedy The Tall Guy ( 1989 ) , the feature @-@ film debut from screenwriter Richard Curtis . It starred Jeff Goldblum as a West End actor , and Thompson played the nurse with whom he falls in love . The film was not widely seen , but Thompson 's performance was praised in The New York Times , where Caryn James called her " an exceptionally versatile comic actress " . She next turned to Shakespeare , appearing as Princess Katherine in Branagh 's screen adaptation of Henry V ( 1989 ) . The film was released to great critical acclaim . 
 = = = 1990 – 93 : A leading British actress = = = 
 Thompson and Branagh are considered by American writer and critic James Monaco to have led the " British cinematic onslaught " in the 1990s . She continued to experiment with Shakespeare in the new decade , appearing with Branagh in his stage productions of A Midsummer Night 's Dream and King Lear . Reviewing the latter , the Chicago Tribune praised her " extraordinary " performance of the " hobbling , stooped hunchback Fool " . Thompson returned to cinema in 1991 , playing a " frivolous aristocrat " in Impromptu , a period drama about the life of George Sand that starred Judy Davis and Hugh Grant . The film received positive reviews , and Thompson was nominated for Best Supporting Female at the Independent Spirit Awards . Her second release of 1991 was another pairing with Branagh , who also directed , in the Los Angeles @-@ based noir Dead Again . She played a woman who has forgotten her identity , and the thriller was number one at the US box office for two weeks . Early in 1992 , Thompson had a guest role in an episode of the American comedy series Cheers as Frasier Crane 's first wife . 
 A turning point in Thompson 's career came when she was cast opposite Anthony Hopkins and Vanessa Redgrave in the Merchant Ivory period drama Howards End ( 1992 ) , based on the novel by E. M. Forster . The film explored the social class system in Edwardian England , with Thompson playing an idealistic , intellectual , forward @-@ looking woman who comes into association with a privileged and deeply conservative family . She actively pursued the role by writing to director James Ivory , who agreed to an audition and then gave her the part . According to the critic Vincent Canby , the film allowed Thompson to " [ come ] into her own " , away from Branagh . Upon release , Roger Ebert wrote that she was " superb in the central role : quiet , ironic , observant , with steel inside . " Howards End was widely praised , a " surprise hit " , and received nine Academy Award nominations . Among its three wins was the Best Actress trophy for Thompson , who was also awarded a Golden Globe and BAFTA for her performance . Reflecting on the role , The New York Times writes that the actress " found herself an international success almost overnight . " 
 For her next two films , Thompson returned to working with Branagh . In Peter 's Friends ( 1992 ) , the pair starred with Stephen Fry , Hugh Laurie , Imelda Staunton , and Tony Slattery as a group of Cambridge alumni who are reunited ten years after graduating . The comedy was positively reviewed , and Desson Howe of The Washington Post wrote that Thompson was its highlight : " Even as a rather one @-@ dimensional character , she exudes grace and an adroit sense of comic tragedy . " She followed this with Branagh 's screen version of Much Ado About Nothing ( 1993 ) . The couple starred as Beatrice and Benedick , alongside a cast that also included Denzel Washington , Keanu Reeves , and Michael Keaton . Thompson was widely praised for the on @-@ screen chemistry with Branagh and the natural ease with which she played the role marking another critical success for Thompson . Her performance earned a nomination for Best Female Lead at the Independent Spirit Awards . 
 Thompson reunited with Merchant – Ivory and Anthony Hopkins to film The Remains of the Day ( 1993 ) , a film which has been described as a " classic " and the production team 's definitive film . Based on Kazuo Ishiguro 's novel about a housekeeper and butler in interwar Britain , the story is acclaimed for its study of loneliness and repression , though Thompson was particularly interested in looking at " the deformity that servitude inflicts upon people " , since her grandmother had worked as a servant and made many sacrifices . She has named the film as one of the greatest experiences of her career , considering it to be a " masterpiece of withheld emotion " . The Remains of the Day was a critical and commercial success , receiving eight Oscar nominations , including Best Picture and a second Best Actress nod for Thompson . 
 Along with her Best Actress nomination at the 66th Academy Awards , Thompson was also nominated in the Best Supporting Actress category , making her the eighth performer in history to be nominated for two Oscars in the same year . It came for her role as the lawyer Gareth Peirce in In the Name of the Father ( 1993 ) , a drama about the Guildford Four starring Daniel Day @-@ Lewis . The film was her second hit of the year , earning $ 65 million and critical praise , and was nominated for Best Picture along with The Remains of the Day . 
 = = = 1994 – 98 : Sense and Sensibility and Hollywood roles = = = 
 In 1994 , Thompson made her Hollywood debut playing a goofy doctor alongside Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito in the blockbuster Junior . Although the male pregnancy storyline was poorly received by most critics , Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle praised the lead trio . She returned to independent cinema for a lead role in Carrington , which studied the platonic relationship between artist Dora Carrington and writer Lytton Strachey ( played by Jonathan Price ) . Roger Ebert remarked that Thompson had " developed a specialty in unrequited love " , and the TV Guide Film & Video Companion commented that her " <unk> mannerisms , which usually drive us batty , are appropriate here " . 
 Thompson 's Academy success continued with Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) , generally considered to be the most popular and authentic of the numerous film adaptions of Jane Austen 's novels made in the 1990s . Thompson — a lifelong lover of Austen 's work — was hired to write the film based on the period sketches in her series Thompson . She spent five years developing the screenplay , and took the role of the spinster sister Elinor Dashwood despite , at 35 , being 16 years older than the literary character . Directed by Ang Lee and co @-@ starring Kate Winslet , Sense and Sensibility received widespread critical praise and is one of the highest @-@ grossing films of Thompson 's career . Shelly Frome remarked that she displayed a " great affinity for Jane Austen 's style and wit " , and Graham Fuller of Sight and Sound saw her as the film 's auteur . Thompson received a third nomination for Best Actress and won the award for Best Adapted Screenplay , making her the only person in history to win an Oscar for both acting and writing . She also earned a second BAFTA Award for Best Actress and a Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay . 
 Thompson was absent from screens in 1996 , but returned the following year with Alan Rickman 's directorial debut , The Winter Guest . Set over one day in a Scottish seaside village , the drama allowed Thompson and her mother ( Phyllida Law ) to play mother and daughter on screen . She then returned to America to appear in an episode of Ellen , and her self @-@ parodying performance received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series . 
 For her second Hollywood role , Thompson starred with John Travolta in Mike Nichols 's Primary Colors ( 1998 ) , playing a couple based on Bill and Hillary Clinton . Thompson 's character , Susan , is described as that of an " ambitious , long @-@ suffering wife " who has to deal with her husband 's infidelity . The film was critically well received but lost money at the box office . According to Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Daily Mirror , Americans were " blown away " by her performance and accent , and top Hollywood producers became increasingly interested in casting her . Thompson rejected many of the offers , expressing concerns about living in Los Angeles behind walls with bodyguards , and stated " LA is lovely as long as you know you can leave " . She also admitted to feeling tired and jaded with the industry at this point , which influenced her decision to leave film for a year . Thompson followed Primary Colors by playing an FBI agent opposite Rickman in the poorly received thriller Judas Kiss ( 1998 ) . 
 = = = 2000s : Smaller roles = = = 
 When she became a mother in 1999 , Thompson made a conscious decision to reduce her workload , and in the following years many of her appearances were supporting roles . She was not seen on screen again until 2000 , with only a small part in the British comedy Maybe Baby , which she appeared in as a favour to its director , her friend Ben Elton . 
 For the HBO television film Wit ( 2001 ) , however , Thompson happily took the lead role in what she felt was " one of the best scripts to have come out of America " . Adapted from Margaret Edson 's Pulitzer Prize winning play , it focusses on a self @-@ sufficient Harvard University professor who finds her values challenged when she is diagnosed with ovarian cancer . Thompson was instrumental in bringing Mike Nichols to direct the project , and the pair spent months in rehearsal to get the complex character right . She was greatly drawn to the " daredevil " role , for which she had no qualms about shaving her head . Reviewing the performance , Roger Ebert was touched by " the way she struggles with every ounce of her humanity to keep her self @-@ respect " , and in 2008 he called it Thompson 's finest work . Caryn James of The New York Times also described it as " one of her most brilliant performances " , adding " we seem to be peering into a soul as embattled as its body . " The film earned Thompson nominations at the Golden Globes , Emmys and Screen Actors Guild Awards . 
 Thompson 's only credit of 2002 was a vocal performance in Disney 's Treasure Planet , an adaptation of Treasure Island , where she voiced Captain Amelia . The animation earned far less than its large budget and was considered a " box office disaster " . This failure was countered the following year by one of Thompson 's biggest commercial successes , Richard Curtis 's romantic comedy Love Actually . As part of an ensemble cast that included Liam Neeson , Keira Knightley , and Colin Firth , she played a middle @-@ class wife who suspects her husband ( played by Alan Rickman ) of infidelity . The scene in which her stalwart character breaks down was described by one critic as " the best crying on screen ever " , and in 2013 , Thompson mentioned that she gets commended for this role more than any other . She explained , " I 've had so much bloody practice at crying in a bedroom then having to go out and be cheerful , gathering up the pieces of my heart and putting them in a drawer . " Her performance received a BAFTA nomination for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Thompson continued with supporting roles in the 2003 drama Imagining Argentina , where she played a dissident @-@ journalist abducted by the country 's 1970s dictatorial regime . Antonio Banderas played the husband who tries to find her , in a film that most critics disliked . The film was booed and jeered at when it was screened at the Venice Film Festival and received a scathing article in The Guardian . Thompson had greater success that year when she worked with HBO for a second time in the acclaimed miniseries Angels in America ( 2003 ) . The show , also featuring Al Pacino and Meryl Streep , dealt with the AIDS epidemic in Reagan @-@ era America . Thompson played three small roles – a nurse , a homeless woman , and an angel – and was again nominated for an Emmy Award . In 2004 , she played the eccentric Divination teacher Sybill Trelawney in the third Harry Potter film , the Prisoner of Azkaban , her character described as a " hippy chick professor who teaches fortune @-@ telling " . She later reprised her role in the Order of the Phoenix ( 2007 ) and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( 2011 ) , and has called her time on the popular franchise " great fun " . 
 The year 2005 saw the release of a project Thompson had been working on for nine years . Loosely based on the Nurse Matilda stories that she read as a child , Thompson wrote the screenplay for the children 's film Nanny McPhee – which centres on a mysterious , unsightly nanny who must discipline a group of children . She also took the lead role , alongside Colin Firth and Angela Lansbury , in what was a highly personal project . The film was a success , taking number one at the UK box office and earning $ 122 million worldwide . Commenting on Thompson 's screenplay , film critic Claudia Puig wrote that its " well @-@ worn storybook features are woven effectively into an appealing tale of youthful empowerment " . The following year , Thompson appeared in the surreal American comedy – drama Stranger than Fiction , playing a novelist whose latest character ( played by Will Ferrell ) is a real person who hears her narration in his head . Reviews for the film were generally favourable . 
 Following a brief , uncredited role in the post @-@ apocalyptic blockbuster I Am Legend ( 2007 ) , Thompson played the devoutly Catholic Lady Marchmain in a 2008 film adaptation of Brideshead Revisited . Critics were unenthusiastic about the film , but several picked Thompson out as its highlight . Mark Kermode said " Emma Thompson is to some extent becoming the new Judi Dench , as the person who kind of comes in for 15 minutes and is brilliant ... [ but then ] when she goes away , the rest of the movie has a real problem living up to the wattage of her presence " . Thompson was further acclaimed for her work in the London @-@ based romance Last Chance Harvey ( 2008 ) , where she and Dustin Hoffman played a lonely , middle @-@ aged pair who cautiously begin a relationship . Critics praised the chemistry between the two leads , and both received Golden Globe nominations for their performances . Thompson 's two 2009 films were both set in 1960s England , and in both she made cameo appearances : as a headmistress in the critically praised drama An Education and as a " <unk> mother " in Richard Curtis 's The Boat that Rocked . 
 = = = 2010s : Veteran performer = = = 
 Five years after the original , Thompson returned to Nanny McPhee with 2010 's Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang . Her screenplay transported the story to Britain during the Second World War , and incorporated a new cast including Maggie Gyllenhaal . Building on the first film 's success , it was another UK box office number one and the sequel was widely seen as an improvement . The same year , Thompson reunited with Alan Rickman for the BBC television film The Song of Lunch , which focused on two unnamed characters meeting at a restaurant 15 years after ending their relationship . Thompson 's performance earned her a fourth Emmy Award nomination . 
 In 2012 , Thompson made a rare appearance in a big @-@ budget Hollywood film when she played the head Agent in Men in Black 3 – a continuation of the popular sci @-@ fi comedy franchise starring Will Smith . With a worldwide gross of $ 624 million , <unk> is Thompson 's biggest commercial hit outside of the Harry Potter films . This mainstream success continued with the Pixar film Brave , in which Thompson voiced Elinor – the Scottish queen despairing at her daughter 's defiance against tradition . It was her second consecutive blockbuster release , and critics were generally kind to the film . Also in 2012 , Thompson played Queen Elizabeth II in an episode of Playhouse Presents , which dramatised an incident in 1982 when an intruder broke into the Queen 's bedroom . Her first film of 2013 was the fantasy romance Beautiful Creatures , in which she played an evil mother . The film aimed to capitalise on the success of The Twilight Saga , but was poorly reviewed and a box office disappointment . Film critic Peter Travers was critical of Thompson 's performance and " outrageously awful Southern accent " , and feared " the damage this crock may do to [ her ] reputation " . 
 Conversely , her next appearance was so successful that it led one journalist to write " Emma Thompson is back , firing on all cylinders . " Saving Mr. Banks depicted the making of Mary Poppins , and starred Thompson as P. L. Travers , curmudgeonly author of the source novel , and Tom Hanks as Walt Disney . The actress considered it the best screenplay she had read in years and was delighted to be offered the role . She considered it to be the most challenging of her career because she had " never really played anyone quite so contradictory or difficult before " , but found the inconsistent and complicated character " a blissful joy to embody " . The film was well @-@ received , grossed $ 112 million worldwide , and critics were unanimous in their praise for Thompson 's performance . The review in The Independent expressed thanks that her " playing of Travers is so deft that we instantly warm to her , and forgive her her snobbery " , while Total Film 's critic felt that Thompson brought depth to the " predictable " film with " her best performance in years " . Thompson was nominated for Best Actress at the BAFTAs , <unk> and Golden Globes , and received the Lead Actress trophy from the National Board of Review . Meryl Streep stated that she was " shocked " to see that Thompson did not receive an Academy Award nomination for the film . 
 The romantic @-@ comedy The Love Punch ( 2013 ) gave Thompson her second consecutive leading role , where she and Pierce Brosnan played a divorced couple who reunite to steal his ex @-@ boss 's jewellery . In March 2014 , she made her first stage appearance in 24 years – and her New York debut – in a Lincoln Center production of Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street . She appeared in the musical for five nights , and her " playful " performance of Mrs Lovett was highly praised ; the critic Kayla Epstein wrote that she " not only held her own against more experienced vocalists , but wound up running off with the show . " She received her sixth Emmy nomination for the televised version of the show . 
 In 2014 , Thompson provided the narration for Jason Reitman 's film Men , Women & Children , before seeing the release of a project she had been working on for many years . The drama Effie Gray , based on the true @-@ life story of art critic John Ruskin 's marriage , was written by Thompson but was subject to a copyright case before being cleared for cinemas . The American playwright Gregory Murphy claimed Effie Gray infringed on his play and screenplay The Countess , which deals with the same story and which Murphy says he submitted to Thompson and her husband Greg Wise to play the roles they subsequently played in Thompson 's film . In March 2013 a judge , after allowing Thompson to submit a second revised screenplay into evidence , ruled that the works were " quite dissimilar in their two approaches to fictionalising the same historical events , " but noted twelve significant similarities between Murphy 's play and screenplay and Thompson 's screenplay that could not be accounted for even after taking into consideration their " shared historical backgrounds . " Effie Gray was finally released in October 2014 , to a modest reception . Thompson appeared in the film , alongside her husband Greg Wise and actress Dakota Fanning , but declined to promote it , as did Mr. Wise . 
 Thompson 's first film of 2015 was A Walk in the Woods , a comedy adapted from the book by Bill Bryson , where she appeared opposite Robert Redford and Nick Nolte . She next starred with Robert Carlyle in his directoral debut The Legend of Barney Thomson . Her role was his 77 @-@ year @-@ old mother , a Glaswegian foul @-@ mouthed , chain @-@ smoking former prostitute . Neither film was a critical success , although the latter received some positive reviews and Empire magazine wrote that Thomson was " unforgettable " . Later that year , she had a supporting role in John Wells ' restaurant @-@ based film Burnt , alongside Bradley Cooper . In 2016 , she starred with Brendan Gleeson in the World War II @-@ drama Alone in Berlin , based on the story of Otto and Elise Hampel . 
 As of April 2016 , Thompson has three upcoming roles . In Bridget Jones 's Baby , for which she also co @-@ wrote the screenplay , she will play a doctor . The film is released in September . She will also appear as Mrs Potts in Disney 's upcoming live action film Beauty and the Beast , and has a supporting role as a hippy in Noah Baumbach 's dramedy Yeh Din Ka <unk> , both scheduled for 2017 . 
 = = Reception and acting style = = 
 Thompson is widely considered to be one of the finest actresses of her generation and one of Britain 's best @-@ known actresses , accepted in Hollywood . Early in her career , when she was closely associated with her first husband Kenneth Branagh , she was somewhat unpopular and considered a " <unk> " . The public warmed to her after the separation , and she became one of the key actresses of the 1990s . Her status has continued to grow ; in 2008 , journalist Sarah Sands stated that Thompson has improved with age and experience , and Mark Kermode and said of her performances , " There is something about her which is - you just trust her . You just think ' I 'm in proper hands here . ' ... She 's up there with the great , I mean really great , British female performers " . 
 Thompson is particularly known for playing reticent women , and Sands describes her as " the best actress of our times on suffering borne with poignant dignity " . According to Kate Kellaway of The Guardian , she specialises in playing " a good woman in a frock " . She also plays many haughty characters , with a " bracing , nanny @-@ like demeanour " , but she is noted for her ability to win the empathy of audiences . Thompson belongs to a group of highly decorated British actresses including Judi Dench , Kate Winslet and Helena Bonham Carter who are known for appearing in " heritage films " and typically showing " restraint , rendering emotions through intellect rather than feelings , and a sense of irony , which demonstrates the heroine 's superior understanding " . Projecting a typically " British image " , Thompson 's often dogmatic and tight @-@ jawed manner has also been compared to Maggie Smith . 
 With a background in comedy , Thompson 's performances are typically delivered with an ironic touch . Ang Lee , director of Sense and Sensibility stated that Thompson 's comedic approach may be her greatest asset as an actress , remarking , " Emma is an extremely funny lady . Like Austen , she 's laughing at her own culture while she 's a part of it . " Thompson has stated that the " most moving things are often also funny , in life and in art " which is present in her film work . She often brings her real personality to her roles , and Kellaway believes that her lack of conventional beauty contributes to her likeability as an actress . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Thompson , although born in London , has confessed to feeling Scottish : " not only because I am half Scottish but also because I 've spent half my life here " . She frequently returns to Scotland and visits Dunoon in Argyll and Bute , where she owns a home . 
 Thompson 's first husband was the actor and director Kenneth Branagh , whom she met in 1987 while filming the television series Fortunes of War . The couple married in 1989 and proceeded to appear in several films together , with Branagh often casting her in his own productions . Dubbed a " golden couple " by the British media , the relationship received considerable press interest . The pair attempted to keep their relationship private , refusing to be interviewed or photographed together . In September 1995 , Thompson and Branagh announced that they had separated ; their statement to the press blamed their work schedules , but it later emerged that he had fallen in love with actress Helena Bonham Carter . 
 Thompson was living alone as the relationship with Branagh deteriorated , and entered into clinical depression . While filming Sense and Sensibility in 1995 , she began a relationship with her co @-@ star Greg Wise . Commenting on how she was able to overcome her depression , she told BBC Radio Four , " Work saved me and Greg saved me . He picked up the pieces and put them together again . " In 1999 , the couple had a daughter , Gaia , born when Thompson was 39 . The pregnancy was achieved through IVF treatment ; afterwards Wise and Thompson attempted to have another child using the same method . Three years of further IVF treatment were unsuccessful . 
 In 2003 , Thompson and Wise were married in Dunoon . The family 's permanent residence is in West Hampstead , London , on the same road where she lived in her youth . Also in 2003 , Thompson and her husband informally adopted a Rwandan orphan and former child soldier named <unk> <unk> . They met at a Refugee Council event when he was 16 , and she invited him to spend Christmas at their home . " Slowly , " Thompson has commented , " he became a sort of permanent fixture , came on holiday to Scotland with us , became part of the family . " <unk> became a British citizen in 2009 . 
 = = = Views and activism = = = 
 Thompson has said of her religious views : " I 'm an atheist ... I regard religion with fear and suspicion . It 's not enough to say that I don 't believe in God . I actually regard the system as distressing : I am offended by some of the things said in the Bible and the Qur 'an and I refute them . " Despite this , she has said that she approves of the " guiding moral principles " of the Christian tradition " if applied properly " , and that she observes Christmas . She is politically liberal and a supporter of the Labour Party ; she told the BBC Andrew Marr Show in 2010 that she had been a member of the party " all my life . " She supports the socialist Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn . 
 Thompson has been a campaigner since her youth . Since becoming a public figure she has regularly voiced her views and been involved in many issues , prompting criticism that she is overly outspoken . In 2010 , The Daily Telegraph asked : " Emma Thompson : a national treasure or Britain 's most annoying woman ? " She has justified her assertiveness by saying , " what I feel is that we all need to speak up and a woman who has got a louder voice needs to shout very loudly indeed . " 
 She is particularly active in human rights work . As an ambassador for the charity ActionAid she has travelled to Uganda , Mozambique , Ethiopia , Liberia , and Burma . She is chair of the Helen Bamber Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture , a patron of the Refugee Council , and has a therapy room in her office for traumatised refugees . Thompson is also an activist for Palestinians , having been a member of the British @-@ based <unk> ! coalition that seeks to end the " Israeli occupation of the Gaza Strip and West Bank . " She is a patron of the Elton John AIDS Foundation , and in 2009 Time named her a " European Hero " in recognition of " her work to highlight the plight of Aids sufferers in Africa . " 
 Aside from humanitarian work , Thompson is also an active environmentalist . She is a supporter of Greenpeace , and in January 2009 , as part of her campaign against climate change , she and three other members of the organisation bought land near the village of <unk> to deter the building of a third runway for Heathrow Airport . In August 2014 , Thompson and her daughter , Gaia , went on a Greenpeace " Save the Arctic " expedition to raise awareness of the dangers of drilling for oil . She is also an ambassador for the Galapagos Conservation Trust . 
 In May 2016 Thompson announced that she would be supporting the Women 's Equality Party in the 2016 London mayoral election . Writing in The Guardian she said , " I am backing the Women ’ s Equality party because I really do not want to die before closing the pay gap , which stands , in our great and supposedly modern capital city , at 23 % . " 
 = = Books = = 
 In 2012 , Thompson wrote The Further Tale of Peter Rabbit as an addition to the Peter Rabbit series by Beatrix Potter to commemorate the 110th anniversary of the publication of The Tale of Peter Rabbit . She was approached by the publishers to write it , the first authorised Peter story since 1930 and the only one not written by Potter . The book falls in the middle of the earlier series , rather than at the end , and takes Peter Rabbit outside of Mr. McGregor 's garden and into Scotland . It was a New York Times Best Seller . In 2013 , Thompson wrote a second book in the series titled The Christmas Tale of Peter Rabbit . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 As of December 2015 Thompson has appeared in 40 films , 20 television programmes and eight stage productions . She has won and been nominated for many awards during her career , including five Academy Award nominations ( winning two ) , nine Golden Globe Award nominations ( winning two ) , seven BAFTA Award nominations ( winning three ) , and six Emmy Award nominations ( winning one ) . 
 = Duane Courtney = 
 Duane Jerome Courtney ( born 7 January 1985 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a defender for National League North club Corby Town . 
 Courtney started his career in the youth system of Derby County as a schoolboy and later played for Birmingham City as a trainee . He played for AFC Telford United in the 2004 – 05 season and after being named their Player of the Season he joined Burnley in the Football League . After making eight appearances for them in one season he was released and joined Welsh Premier League champions The New Saints in 2006 . He played for them for three seasons before returning to England with Conference Premier team Kidderminster Harriers in 2009 . He left Kidderminster after one season to sign for York City , who released him in 2011 . He then played for Tamworth but left after their relegation to the Conference North to join Alfreton Town in 2014 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Courtney joined the Derby County youth system as a schoolboy in 1999 before joining Birmingham City as a trainee in 2001 . He was also a reserve team player for Birmingham . He went on trial with Second Division team Colchester United in April 2004 after being recommended to the club by former Birmingham player Craig Fagan . Released by Birmingham in the summer of 2004 after not being offered professional terms , Courtney considered giving up football before joining Northern Premier League First Division team AFC Telford United in August following a trial . He scored for Telford in a 4 – 2 defeat to Kidsgrove Athletic in the FA Trophy preliminary round in October , which was the team 's first game in the competition . Courtney played in the 2 – 1 win over Kendal Town in the 2005 Northern Premier League First Division play @-@ off Final , seeing the club promoted to the Northern Premier League Premier Division . He received Telford 's Supporters ' Player of the Season , Manager 's Player of the Season and Players ' Player of the Season awards for the 2004 – 05 season and he signed a new one @-@ year contract in the summer of 2005 . 
 = = = Burnley = = = 
 He drew attention from Football League clubs and on 31 August 2005 he signed for Championship team Burnley on a two @-@ year contract for an initial fee of £ 25 @,@ 000 with a sell @-@ on clause after having a trial with the club , having opted not to join Wolverhampton Wanderers . He made his first team debut as a substitute in the 89th minute of a 1 – 0 victory at Leicester City on 18 October , which was followed by a stoppage time appearance in a 1 – 0 defeat at Aston Villa in the League Cup on 25 October . His first and only start for Burnley came in a 3 – 2 victory at Luton Town on 5 November , in which he gave a solid performance . Having struggled to break into the team Courtney finished the season with eight appearances , seven coming from the substitutes ' bench , and was placed on the transfer list in May 2006 . He rejected an offer from Conference National team Kidderminster Harriers in July 2006 on the advice of his agent and was eventually released by Burnley on 17 August after having his contract cancelled . 
 = = = The New Saints = = = 
 Following a trial with League Two team Bury , Courtney signed for Welsh Premier League champions The New Saints ( TNS ) on a free transfer on 20 September 2006 and he believed playing in this league was an " ideal shop window in which to develop his career and showcase his talent " . He finished the 2006 – 07 season with 29 appearances and three goals in all competitions and he was named in the Welsh Premier League Team of the Year for the season , having been a key member of the team that won the League and the FAW Premier Cup . Courtney played for TNS in both legs of their 4 – 4 draw on aggregate with FK Ventspils in the 2007 – 08 UEFA Champions League first qualifying round , a result that ended the team 's involvement in the tournament due to the away goal rule . He finished the 2007 – 08 season with 29 appearances and one goal in all competitions . Two further European appearances came in the 2008 – 09 season , playing in both legs of the 2 – 0 defeat on aggregate to FK Sūduva in the 2008 – 09 UEFA Cup first qualifying round . Courtney came on as a 90th @-@ minute substitute for TNS in the 2009 Welsh League Cup Final , which the side won with a 2 – 0 victory over Bangor City . He made 40 appearances and scored one goal in all competitions and the club announced in April 2009 that he would be released when his contract expired on 30 June , having made 98 appearances and scored five goals in all competitions for the club . 
 = = = Kidderminster Harriers = = = 
 After " composed performances " on trial in pre @-@ season , Courtney signed a one @-@ year contract with Conference Premier club Kidderminster Harriers on 20 July 2009 . He made his debut as a substitute in the 66th minute of a 1 – 0 victory over Hayes & Yeading United on 8 August 2009 , which was followed by his first start in a 1 – 0 defeat to Salisbury City on 11 August due to Liam Dolman not being fit . He played against Tamworth on 31 August 2009 despite an injury and although he was still suffering this injury he was able to play in the next game , a 2 – 0 defeat to Eastbourne Borough . Courtney commented in September 2009 that Kidderminster 's defence was taking time to gel , saying " We 've all played at a high standard , individually and collectively we are good , but there 's something missing . I think it 's communication between us , which is why we 're making mistakes . " His first and only goal for Kidderminster came with a low shot at Kettering Town in a 2 – 0 victory on 21 November 2009 and manager Mark Yates said " It was a good finish by Duane , he does it in training quite often " . He missed a game against AFC Wimbledon on 28 November 2009 due to illness and he returned to the team in a 0 – 0 draw with Tamworth on 1 December . He played for Kidderminster in their run to the FA Trophy semi @-@ final , in which they were beaten 5 – 1 on aggregate by Stevenage Borough . Courtney suffered an ankle injury against Cambridge United on 30 March 2010 and returned in the following game against Altrincham on 3 April , in which he was forced to be substituted due to his ankle . He did not miss any further playing time as he featured in the following game , a 1 – 1 draw with Rushden & Diamonds on 5 April 2010 . He finished the 2009 – 10 season with 49 appearances and one goal for Kidderminster . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Following the signing of Lee Vaughan in the summer of 2010 , Courtney 's position at Kidderminster looked tenuous and the club stalled on a new contract as they were finalising their budget for the forthcoming season . He joined Conference Premier rivals York City on a one @-@ year contract on 24 May 2010 . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to former club Kidderminster as a 76th @-@ minute substitute on 14 August , the opening day of the 2010 – 11 season , and he conceded a penalty kick in the 89th minute that was scored by the opposition . His first start for the club came in a 1 – 1 draw at Wrexham on 11 September 2010 . Having made seven appearances for York , Courtney was made available for loan on 28 October 2010 . He went on trial with League Two club Cheltenham Town in January 2011 , who were managed by Yates , Courtney 's manager at Kidderminster . He impressed playing in central defence in Cheltenham 's reserve game against Coventry City . Courtney was released by York after his contract was cancelled on 21 January 2011 , after which he agreed to train with Cheltenham for one week . However , Cheltenham decided to not offer him a contract . 
 = = = Tamworth = = = 
 Courtney signed with Conference Premier club Tamworth on 3 February 2011 and he made his debut as a 75th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat to Histon two days later . He finished the season with 18 appearances for Tamworth . 
 Courtney signed a new two @-@ year contract with Tamworth on 22 June 2011 , keeping him at the club until the summer of 2013 . On 1 January 2012 , he scored his first goal for the club with a shot into the bottom corner in a 2 – 2 draw with Alfreton Town . Courtney made 44 appearances and scored one goal in 2012 – 13 and won the club 's Players ' Player of the Year , Manager 's Player of the Year and Supporter 's Player of the Year awards . He made 23 appearances and scored two goals for Tamworth in the 2013 – 14 season , which finished with the club 's relegation to the Conference North , and he missed a number of matches due to hamstring problems . 
 = = = Alfreton Town = = = 
 Courtney signed for Conference Premier club Alfreton Town on 4 June 2014 and made his debut in a 2 – 0 away defeat to Forest Green Rovers on 16 August . He made 18 appearances in the 2014 – 15 season as the club was relegated after finishing 21st in the Conference Premier . 
 = = = Corby Town = = = 
 Courtney signed for newly promoted National League North club Corby Town on 14 June 2015 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Courtney primarily plays as a right @-@ back and is a versatile player , also being able to play at left back and centre @-@ back . He is an attacking player and has pace and athleticism . Courtney said of his play " I can run for 90 minutes up and down and get forward quite well , as well as getting back . I 'm strong , quick and quite good in the air for my height " in 2010 . York manager Martin Foyle described him as " exciting " and said " He 's got the energy to get forward " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in Oldbury , West Midlands , Courtney lived in nearby Birmingham with his partner and two children up until 2010 when he moved to York following his transfer to York City . However , he failed to settle in York and after leaving the club in 2011 he returned to live in Birmingham . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 28 March 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 AFC Telford United 
 Northern Premier League First Division play @-@ offs : 2004 – 05 
 The New Saints 
 Welsh Premier League : 2006 – 07 
 Welsh League Cup : 2008 – 09 
 FAW Premier Cup : 2006 – 07 
 Individual 
 AFC Telford United Player of the Year : 2004 – 05 
 Tamworth Player of the Year : 2012 – 13 
 = Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace = 
 Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace is a 1999 American epic space opera film written and directed by George Lucas , produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox . It is the first installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy and stars Liam Neeson , Ewan McGregor , Natalie Portman , Jake Lloyd , Ian McDiarmid , Anthony Daniels , Kenny Baker , Pernilla August and Frank Oz . 
 The film is set thirty @-@ two years before the original film , and follows Jedi Master Qui @-@ Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi as they protect Queen Amidala , in hopes of securing a peaceful end to a large @-@ scale interplanetary trade dispute . Joined by Anakin Skywalker — a young slave with unusually strong natural powers of the Force — they simultaneously contend with the mysterious return of the Sith . 
 Lucas began production of this film after he determined that film special effects had advanced to the level he wanted for the fourth film in the saga . Filming started on June 26 , 1997 , at locations including Leavesden Film Studios and the Tunisian desert . Its visual effects included extensive use of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) ; many of its characters and settings were completely computerized . The film was Lucas 's first directorial effort after a 22 @-@ year hiatus following Star Wars in 1977 . 
 The Phantom Menace was released to theaters on May 19 , 1999 , sixteen years after the premiere of the previous Star Wars film , Return of the Jedi . The film 's premiere was extensively covered by media and was greatly anticipated because of the large cultural following the Star Wars saga had cultivated . Despite mixed reviews from critics , who tended to praise the visuals , action sequences , John Williams ' musical score , and the performances of Liam Neeson , Ewan McGregor , Pernilla August , Ray Park , and Ian McDiarmid , but criticize the writing , characterization and the majority of the acting ( particularly from Ahmed Best and Jake Lloyd ) , it grossed more than US $ 924 @.@ 3 million worldwide during its initial theatrical run , making it the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film worldwide at the time — behind Titanic . It became the highest @-@ grossing film of 1999 , the highest @-@ grossing Star Wars film ( until the release of Star Wars : The Force Awakens in 2015 ) , and is currently the seventeenth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film in North America unadjusted for inflation . A 3D reissue , which has earned an additional US $ 102 @.@ 7 million at the box office and brought the film 's overall worldwide takings to over US $ 1 billion , was released in February 2012 . The film was followed by two sequels , Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones in 2002 and Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith in 2005 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Liam Neeson as Qui @-@ Gon Jinn , a Jedi Master and mentor to Obi @-@ Wan . When he discovers Anakin he insists that the boy be trained as a Jedi despite the Jedi Council 's protests . Lucas originally wanted to cast an American actor in the role , but cast Irishman Neeson because he considered that Neeson had great skills and presence . Lucas said Neeson was a " master actor , who the other actors will look up to , who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands " . 
 Ewan McGregor as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , Qui @-@ Gon 's young Jedi apprentice . He holds Qui @-@ Gon in high regard but questions his motives at times . McGregor was cast from a shortlist of fifty actors , all of whom had to be compared to pictures of young Alec Guinness , who portrayed the elderly Obi @-@ Wan , to make a believable younger version . McGregor had a vocal coach to help his voice sound closer to Guinness ' . He also studied several of Guinness ' performances , from his early work and the Star Wars movies . 
 Natalie Portman as Queen Padmé Amidala : Amidala , the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Queen of Naboo , hopes to protect her planet from a blockade by the Trade Federation . Over 200 actors auditioned for the role . The Production notes stated ; " The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet , but at the same time be vulnerable and open " . Portman was chosen especially for her performances in Léon : The Professional ( 1994 ) and Beautiful Girls ( 1996 ) , which impressed Lucas . He stated , " I was looking for someone who was young , strong , along the lines of Leia [ and ] Natalie embodied all those traits and more " . Portman was unfamiliar with Star Wars before being cast , but was enthusiastic about being cast as a character she expected to become a role model . Portman said , " It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power . I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader . " 
 Jake Lloyd as Anakin Skywalker , a 9 @-@ year @-@ old slave boy and a skilled pilot who dreams of becoming a Jedi . Hundreds of actors were tested before the producers settled on Lloyd who Lucas considered met his requirements of " a good actor , enthusiastic and very energetic " . Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was " smart , mischievous and loves anything mechanical — just like Anakin . " 
 Ian McDiarmid as Senator Palpatine / Darth Sidious , a Senator of Naboo who is eventually elected Chancellor of the Republic . McDiarmid was surprised when Lucas approached him 16 years after Return of the Jedi to reprise the role of Palpatine because he had assumed that a younger actor would play the part in the prequel films . 
 Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker , Anakin 's mother who is concerned for her son 's future and allows him leave with the Jedi . August , a veteran of Swedish cinema , was chosen after auditioning with Liam Neeson . She was afraid of being rejected because of her accent . 
 Frank Oz voices Yoda , the centuries @-@ old leader of the Jedi Council who is apprehensive about allowing Anakin to be trained . Yoda was mostly portrayed as a puppet designed by Nick Dudman based on Stuart Freeborn 's original design . Oz controlled the puppet 's mouth and other parts were controlled by puppeteers using remote controls . Lucas fitted Yoda 's filming around Oz 's schedule as he finished and promoted In & Out . A computer @-@ generated Yoda is featured in two distant shots . Warwick Davis portrays him in the scene in which Obi @-@ Wan becomes a Jedi Knight . Lucas said he originally wanted to use a full @-@ time digital Yoda , but the attempts did not work well enough . On the Blu @-@ ray release of The Phantom Menace , which was also used for the 3D reissue , a CG Yoda similar to the one from the other prequels is used instead . 
 Oliver Ford Davies as Sio Bibble , the governor of Naboo . 
 Hugh Quarshie as Captain Panaka , Queen Amidala 's chief of security at Theed Palace . 
 Ahmed Best as Jar Jar Binks , a clumsy Gungan exiled from his home and taken in by Qui @-@ Gon and Obi @-@ Wan . Best was hired after Gurland saw him on a Stomp performance in San Francisco . Best was originally intended to provide motion capture data but his offer to voice the character was accepted . On the set , to provide references for the actors , Best was clothed in a suit made of foam and latex and a headpiece . Best 's filmed performance was later replaced with the computer @-@ generated character . Best frequently improvised movements to make Jar Jar look as clumsy and comedic as possible . 
 Anthony Daniels voices C @-@ 3PO , a protocol droid built by Anakin . He lacks a metal covering in this film ; R2 @-@ D2 refers to it as being " naked " . A puppeteer dressed in a color closely matching the background — in a manner similar to the Japanese puppet theater Bunraku — manipulated a skeletal C @-@ 3PO figure attached to his front while Daniels read his lines off @-@ camera . The puppeteer was erased from the film during post @-@ production . 
 Kenny Baker as R2 @-@ D2 , an astromech droid that saves Queen Amidala 's ship when other droids fail . Before the film 's production started , fans campaigned on the Internet to retain Baker as R2 @-@ D2 ; Lucas replied that the actor would remain . Baker is used for scenes where R2 @-@ D2 bends forwards and backwards and wobbles from side to side . Robots and a digital model were used in other shots . 
 Terence Stamp as Supreme Chancellor Valorum , the current Chancellor who commissions Obi @-@ Wan and Qui @-@ Gon to negotiate with the Trade Federation Viceroy . Lucas described the character as a " good man but he 's beleaguered — a bit like [ Bill ] Clinton " . 
 Additionally , Samuel L. Jackson appears as Mace Windu , a high @-@ ranking member of the Jedi Council who also opposes the training of Anakin . Ray Park portrays Darth Maul , a <unk> warrior and Darth Sidious ' Sith apprentice who uses a double @-@ bladed lightsaber , while Peter Serafinowicz provides Maul 's voice . Keira Knightley plays <unk> , one of Queen Amidala 's handmaidens who serves as her decoy throughout the majority of the film . Silas Carson portrays Nute Gunray , the Viceroy of the Trade Federation who leads Naboo 's invasion and tries to force Queen Amidala to sign a treaty to legitimize the occupation . Carson also portrays three minor characters : Jedi Master Ki @-@ Adi @-@ Mundi , Trade Federation Senator Lott Dod , and an ill @-@ fated pilot ( the role for which Carson originally auditioned ) . Brian Blessed , Andy Secombe , and Lewis MacLeod voice , respectively , Boss Nass , the leader of the Gungan tribe who allies with the Naboo , Watto , a junk dealer on Tatooine who owns Anakin and his mother as slaves , and <unk> , an aggressive , scheming <unk> who is Anakin 's rival . In addition , Greg Proops and Scott Capurro voice Fode and Beed , the two @-@ headed announcer of the <unk> Eve Race . Dominic West plays a Naboo guard . Also , Sofia Coppola appears as Saché , one of Amidala 's handmaidens , and Ralph Brown appears as Ric <unk> , the Queen 's starship pilot . Christian Simpson appears as Lieutenant Gavyn Sykes . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 While writing the original Star Wars , Lucas realized the story was too vast in scope to be covered in one film . The original film was written to introduce a wider story arc that could be told in sequels on the chance that it became successful , so Star Wars evolved from the first film in the series to the first episode of the saga 's second trilogy . Lucas eventually negotiated a contract that allowed him to make two sequels , and over time had created an elaborate backstory to aid his writing process . While writing The Empire Strikes Back , Lucas considered directions in which to take the story . In the original trilogy , Darth Vader was revealed to have been Anakin Skywalker , a once @-@ powerful Jedi Knight , and the traitor to the Jedi Legion . With this backstory in place , Lucas decided the movies would work best as a trilogy . In the final act of the trilogy 's final episode , Return of the Jedi , Vader is ultimately redeemed through an act of sacrifice for Luke . This was in 1983 , more than six years since the release of Star Wars . Lucas admitted to being " burned out " and announced he would take a break from working on the saga . 
 Throughout the 80s , George Lucas remarked he had no desire to return to Star Wars and had unofficially canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi . Because Lucas had developed most of the backstory , the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him . In the early 1990s , Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse 's comic line and Timothy Zahn 's trilogy of novels . Lucas saw there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy and with the development of special effects generated with computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) , Lucas considered returning to his saga and directing the film . In 1993 , it was announced in Variety and other sources that he would be making the prequels . Lucas began outlining the story ; Anakin Skywalker rather than Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi would be the main protagonist and the series would be a tragedy examining Darth Vader 's origins . Lucas also began to change the prequels ' timeline relative to the original series , " filling @-@ in " the history , backstory , existing parallel or tangential to the originals and beginning a long story that started with Anakin 's childhood and ended with his death . This was the final step toward turning the franchise into a saga . 
 George Lucas began writing the new Star Wars trilogy on November 1 , 1994 . The screenplay of Star Wars was adapted from Lucas ' 15 @-@ page outline that was written in 1976 , which he designed to help him keep track of the characters ' backstories and events that occurred before the original trilogy . Anakin was first written as a twelve @-@ year @-@ old , but Lucas reduced his age to nine because he felt the lower age would better fit the plot point of Anakin being affected by his mother 's separation from him . Eventually , Anakin 's younger age led Lucas to rewrite his participation in the movie 's major scenes . The film 's working title was The Beginning ; Lucas later revealed that its true title was The Phantom Menace ; a reference to Palpatine hiding his true identity as an evil Sith Lord behind the facade of a well @-@ intentioned public servant . 
 The larger budget and possibilities opened up by the use of digital effects made Lucas " think about a much grander , more epic scale — " which is what I wanted Star Wars to be " . The story ended with five simultaneous , ongoing plots , one leading to another . The central plot is Palpatine 's intent to become Chancellor , which leads to the Trade Federation 's attack on Naboo , the Jedi being sent there , Anakin being met along the way , and the rise of the Sith Lords . As with the original trilogy , Lucas intended The Phantom Menace to illustrate several themes throughout the narrative . Duality is a frequent theme ; Amidala is a queen who passes as a handmaiden , Palpatine plays on both sides of the war , among others . " Balance " is frequently suggested ; Anakin is supposedly " the one " chosen to bring balance to the Force — Lucas said , " Anakin needed to have a mother , Obi @-@ Wan needed a Master , Darth Sidious needed an apprentice " as without interaction and dialogue " you wouldn 't have drama " . 
 In November 2015 , Ron Howard confirmed that he , Robert Zemeckis and Steven Spielberg were approached by Lucas to direct the film . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production and design = = = 
 Before Lucas had started writing , his producing partner Rick McCallum was preparing for the film . McCallum stated that his experience with The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles led to many of his decisions on The Phantom Menace , such as long @-@ term deals with actors and soundstages , the employment of recent graduates with no film experience , and the creation of sets and landscapes with digital technology . In April 1994 , McCallum started searching for artists in art , architecture and design schools , and in mid @-@ year he began location scouting with production designer Gavin Bocquet . Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) art director Doug Chiang impressed McCallum the most and was hired as the design director . 
 Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process , Chiang and his design team started a two @-@ year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film . Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be stylistically different from the other Star Wars films ; it would be " richer and more like a period piece , since it was the history leading up to A New Hope " . The three planets on which the story takes place — some with varied environments such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three buildings in Coruscant . With the exception of the Gungan city , which had an art nouveau @-@ inspired visual , these locations would be given distinctive looks with some basis in the real world . The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa — which was also inspired by old Tunisian hotels and buildings and had touches such as a market place to differentiate it from A New Hope 's Mos Eisley — and Coruscant , in particular a metropolis design which became the basis for the Senate . Bocquet would later develop the work of Chiang 's team and design the interiors , translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality " to give the audience something to key into " . Some elements were directly inspired by the original trilogy ; Lucas described the battle droids as predecessors to the Stormtroopers . Chiang uses that orientation to base the droids on the Imperial soldiers , only in the same style of stylized and elongated features seen in tribal African art . 
 <unk> <unk> , who had a background on zoology and anatomy , was in charge of creature design . Many of the aliens are hybrids , combining features of real animals . At times entire food chains were developed even though only a small percentage of them would appear in the film . <unk> also designed detailed skeletons for the major characters and facial muscles on Jar Jar Binks as a reference for ILM 's animators . Each creature would reflect its environment ; those on Naboo were more beautiful because the planet is " lush and more animal @-@ friendly " , Tatooine has rough @-@ looking creatures " with weather @-@ beaten leathery skin to protect them from the harsh desert elements " , and Coruscant has bipedal , human @-@ looking aliens . 
 Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy . Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game " with every move being a check " . Because of their short @-@ range weapons , Gillard thought the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every <unk> style , such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles , with other swinging techniques , such as tennis swings and tree @-@ chopping . While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor , Gillard wrote a sequence which lasted around 60 seconds and intended to be around five or six sequences per fight . Lucas later referred to the Jedi as " negotiators " rather than high @-@ casualty soldiers . The preference of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat was intended to give a spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi . Because Gillard thought the stunt jumps with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires did not look realistic , air rams were used to propel them into the air instead . 
 Lucas decided to make elaborate costumes because the film 's society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy . Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over 1 @,@ 000 costumes that were inspired by various cultures . Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig to create a color palette for the inhabitants of each world : Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun @-@ bleached sand colors , Coruscant had grays , browns and blacks , and Naboo had green and gold for humans while <unk> wore " a leathery look , like their skin " . The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original film ; Obi @-@ Wan 's costume was inspired by the costume that was worn by Guinness . Lucas said he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to " <unk> [ e ] all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly " . Biggar also consulted Gillard to ensure the costumes would accommodate action scenes , and consulted the creature department to find which fabrics " wouldn 't wear too heavily " on the alien skins . A huge wardrobe department was set up at Leavesden Film Studios to create over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5 @,@ 000 for the background ones . 
 Nute Gunray 's Thai accent was chosen after Lucas and McCallum listened to various languages to decide how the <unk> would speak . The character design of Watto was an amalgam of rejected ideas ; his expressions were based on video footage of Secombe 's voice acting , photographs of animation supervisor Rob Coleman imitating the character , and modeler Steve Alpin saying Watto 's lines to a mirror . Lucas described <unk> 's design as " a spider crossed with an orangutan crossed with a sloth " , with a camel @-@ like face , and clothing inspired by medieval armor . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 After Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in appearing in a Star Wars film , he was approached by casting director Robin Gurland to play Windu . Ray Park , a martial arts champion with experience in gymnastics and sword fighting , was originally a member of the stunt crew . Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard filmed Park to demonstrate his conception of the lightsaber battles . Lucas and McCallum were so impressed with the test tape that they gave Park the role of Maul . His voice was considered " too squeaky " and was dubbed over in post @-@ production by Peter Serafinowicz . Keira Knightley 's parents tried to convince her not to audition , but the teenage actress still sought a role given she was a Star Wars fan . The casting was influenced by Knightley 's remarkable similarity to Natalie Portman , with the actress admitting their mothers could not tell each other apart . Knightley reported to have " cried every single day " due to finding the wardrobe uncomfortable . 
 Silas Carson was cast as Nute Gunray because another actor was uncomfortable with the costumes used by the Trade Federation characters , which were hot , exerted a lot of pressure on the bearer , and took about 15 minutes to apply . Hugh Quarshie considered the part of Panaka as " a good career move " and a production that would be fun to make . Brian Blessed originally auditioned for the role of Sio Bibble , the Governor of Naboo , for which he was considered " too loud " . Casting director Robin Gurland approached him to play Nass because it was a " bigger than life " character with " a kind of bravado " . Blessed described Nass as a " reluctant hero " , and a fun role to play . Sofia Coppola , daughter of Lucas ' long @-@ time friend and creative partner Francis Ford Coppola , considers Lucas as " like an uncle to me " . As she prepared the script for her directorial debut The Virgin Suicides , Sofia heard Lucas would make a new Star Wars film and asked him if she could accompany him during filming . Lucas offered Coppola a role in the royal entourage , which she accepted because it " seemed like a good vantage point to watch without getting in the way " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on June 26 , 1997 , and ended on September 30 of that year , primarily taking place at Leavesden Film Studios in England . Leavesden was leased for a two and a half years so the production company could leave the sets intact and return after principal photography had been completed . The forest scenes on Naboo were filmed at Cassiobury Park in Watford , Hertfordshire . Pick @-@ ups were shot between August 1998 and February 1999 after Lucas screened a rough cut of the film for friends and colleagues in May 1998 . Most of the action and stunts were filmed by Roger Christian 's second unit , which worked alongside the main unit instead of afterwards because of the high number of shots to be completed daily . 
 The Tunisian desert was again used for the Tatooine scenes ; Mos Espa was built outside the city of Tozeur . On the night following the third day of shooting in Tozeur , an unexpected sandstorm destroyed many of the sets and props . The production was quickly rescheduled to allow for repairs and was able to leave Tunisia on the date originally planned . The Italian Caserta Palace was used as the interior of the Theed City Naboo Palace ; it was used as a location for four days after it had been closed to visitors . Scenes with explosions were filmed on replica sets in Leavesden . 
 A binder with the film 's storyboards served as a reference for live @-@ action filming , shots that would be filmed in front of a chroma key blue screen , and shots that would be composed using CGI . The sets were often built with the parts that would be required on screen ; often they were built only up to the heights of the actors . Chroma key was extensively used for digital set extensions , backgrounds or scenes that required cinematographer David Tattersall to seek powerful lamps to light the sets and visual effects supervisor John Knoll to develop software that would remove the blue reflection from shiny floors . Knoll , who remained on set through most of the production , worked closely with <unk> to ensure that the shots were suitable to add effects later . The cameras were fitted with data capture models to provide technical data for the CGI artists . 
 The Phantom Menace was the final Star Wars film to be shot on 35mm film until Episode VII ( Star Wars : The Force Awakens ) . Some scenes , mostly of elements filmed by the special effects team , were shot on high definition , digital video tapes to test the performance of digital recordings , which Lucas and McCallum considered the next logical step because of the amount of digitizing — an expensive process compared to recording directly on digital media — for the compositing of computer @-@ generated effects . All future films would be shot using Sony CineAlta high @-@ definition video cameras . Greg Proops and Scott Capurro were filmed wearing makeup and blue bodysuits so their heads could be joined in a computer @-@ generated body . The visual effects crew did not like the original results and crafted Fode and Beed as an entirely computer generated alien . 
 Editing took two years ; Paul Martin Smith started the process in England and focused on dialogue @-@ heavy scenes . Ben Burtt — who was also the film 's sound editor — was responsible for action sequences under Lucas ' supervision . Non @-@ linear editing systems played a large part in translating Lucas ' vision ; he constantly tweaked , revised and reworked shots and scenes . The final sound mix was added in March 1999 and the following month the film was completed after the delivery of the remaining visual effects shots . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The film saw breakthrough in computer generated effects . About 1 @,@ 950 of the shots in The Phantom Menace have visual effects . The scene in which toxic gas is released on the Jedi is the only sequence with no digital alteration . The work was so extensive that three visual effects supervisors divided the workload among themselves — John Knoll supervised the on @-@ set production and the podrace and space battle sequences , Dennis Muren supervised the underwater sequence and the ground battle , and Scott Squires , alongside teams assigned for miniature effects and character animation , worked on the lightsaber effects . 
 Until the film 's production , many special effects in the film industry were achieved using miniature models , matte paintings , and on @-@ set visual effects — although other films had made extensive use of CGI . Knoll previewed 3 @,@ 500 storyboards for the film ; Lucas accompanied him to explain factors of the shots that would be practical and those which would be created through visual effects . Knoll later said that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards , he did not know how to accomplish what he had seen . The result was a mixture of original techniques and the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used . Knoll and his visual effects team wrote new computer software , including cloth simulators to allow a realistic depiction of the digital characters ' clothing , to create certain shots . Another goal was to create computer @-@ generated characters that could act seamlessly with live @-@ action actors . While filming scenes with CGI characters , Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actors on @-@ set . The voice actors were then removed and the live @-@ action actors would perform the same scene alone . A CGI character would later be added into the shot to complete the conversation . Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes . Practical models were used when their visuals helped with miniature <unk> for backgrounds , set extensions , and model vehicles that would be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and <unk> . 
 Lucas , who had previously confronted problems with the props used to depict R2 @-@ D2 , allowed ILM and the production 's British special effects department to create their own versions of the robot . Nine R2 @-@ D2 models were created ; one was for actor Kenny Baker to be dropped into , seven were built by ILM and featured two wheelchair motors capable of moving 440 pounds ( 200 kg ) , enabling it to run and be mostly used in stage sets , and the British studio produced a pneumatic R2 @-@ D2 that could shift from two to three legs and was mostly used in Tunisia because its motor drive system allowed it to drive over sand . 
 Lucas originally planned to create many of the aliens with computer graphics , but those that would be more cost @-@ effectively realized with masks and animatronics were created by Nick Dudman 's creature effects team . These included the <unk> , background characters in Mos Espa , the Jedi Council , and the Galactic Senate . Dudman 's team was told where the creatures would be required six months before principal photography begun , and they rushed the production . The <unk> suits , which were originally intended as digital characters , were delivered one day before they would be required on set . Dudman traveled to Skywalker Ranch to see the original creatures that could be reused , and read the script for a breakdown of scenes with practical creatures , leaving only the more outlandish designs to be created using CGI . 
 To research for the podrace vehicles , the visual effects crew visited a jet aircraft junkyard outside Phoenix , Arizona and scavenged four Boeing 747 engines . Life @-@ sized replicas of the engines were built and sent to Tunisia to provide reference in the film . Except for Jake Lloyd inside a hydraulically controlled cockpit and a few practical <unk> models , the entire <unk> scene — which the effects crew designed to be as " out of this world " as possible — is computer @-@ generated . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As with previous Star Wars films , Star Wars Episode I : The Phantom Menace 's score was composed and conducted by John Williams . He started composing the score in October 1998 and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10 , 1999 . Williams decided to use electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound and choral pieces to " capture the magical , mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide " , and create an atmosphere that was " more mysterious and mystical and less military " than those of the original trilogy . One of the most notable tracks is " Duel of the Fates " , which uses the chorus to give a religious , temple @-@ like feel to the epic lightsaber duel . The track was made into a music video . While composing Anakin 's theme , Williams tried to reflect the innocence of his childhood and to foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by using slight suggestions of " The Imperial March " in the melody . 
 The film 's soundtrack was released by Sony Classical Records on May 4 , 1999 . This album featured the score , which Williams restructured as a listening experience ; it is not presented in film order and omits many notable cues from the film because of the space restriction of the compact disc . A two @-@ disc " Ultimate Edition " was released on November 14 , 2000 . The set features almost the entire score as it is heard in the film , including all of the edits and loops that were made for the sound mix . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Like previous Star Wars films , The Phantom Menace makes several references to historical events and films that George Lucas watched in his youth . The Star Wars films typically mix several concepts from different mythologies together . 
 The Jedi practice Zen @-@ like meditation and martial arts , as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors . The name " Qui @-@ Gon " adapts the term Qigong , which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivation of the flow of the vital energy called " Chi " or " Qi " for healing , health and combat . The words Ch 'i ( Chinese ) , gi ( Korean ) , ki ( Japanese ) and the Indian term " Prana " all refer to the energy that is thought to flow through all living things , from the source of all chi ( or power ) which is " The Way " or " The Tao " in Chinese philosophy . In Taoist philosophy , from The Way , yin and yang — the opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature — are born . Unlike Chinese philosophy , in which yin and yang are not moral qualities , the ancient Persian philosophy of <unk> taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in an eternal battle while being two sides ( or <unk> ) of the same " Force " , the force of time itself ( Zurvan ) — the prime mover . These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths . 
 There are many references to Christian beliefs in the film , such as the appearance of Darth Maul , whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the Christian devil , complete with red skin and horns . Maul 's facial tattoos were inspired by the indigenous peoples of Brazil . The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker ; he is the " chosen one " — the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force — who was conceived of a virgin birth and is tempted to join the Sith . Anakin 's fall from grace seemingly prevents him from fulfilling his destiny as the " chosen one " . The inspiration behind the story of the virgin birth parallels a concept developed by Joseph Campbell and his work on The Hero with a Thousand Faces , which heavily influenced Lucas ' writing of the original Star Wars trilogy 's outline . 
 Japanese films such as Akira Kurosawa 's The Hidden Fortress influenced the original Star Wars film ; scholars say that The Phantom Menace was likewise influenced by Korean and Japanese culture . Film historians Geoff King and Tanya Krzywinska write , " The costume and make @-@ up designs ... favour a mixture of the gothic and the oriental [ sic ] over anything very futuristic . The gothic is most strongly apparent in Darth Maul 's demonic horns and the red and black make @-@ up mask that borrows from the facial designs found in depictions of Japanese demons " . King and Krzywinska say that " Qui @-@ Gon 's pony tail and Obi @-@ Wan 's position of apprentice further encourage a reading in terms of the Samurai tradition " . They also say " Amidala , in keeping with her status and character , has a number of highly formal outfits ... to go with hair sculpted into a curve that frames make @-@ up of a Japanese cast " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The release on May 19 , 1999 of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention . Few film studios released films during the same week as the release of The Phantom Menace ; DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28 , respectively . The Love Letter was a commercial failure but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place . Employment consultant firm Challenger , Gray & Christmas estimated that 2 @.@ 2 million full @-@ time employees missed work to attend the film , resulting in a US $ 293 million loss of productivity . According to The Wall Street Journal , many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day . Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began . 
 More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release . This was because of a fear that family theater @-@ goers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them . Instead , tickets were to be sold on a first @-@ come @-@ first @-@ served basis . However , after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners , Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12 , 1999 , provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer . As a result , some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US $ 100 apiece , which a distribution chief called " horrible " and said it was exactly what they wanted to avoid . Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema 's largest auditorium for the first 8 – 12 weeks , no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks , and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days . 
 Despite worries about the film being finished on time , two weeks before its theatrical release Lucasfilm preponed the release date from May 21 to 19 , 1999 . At the ShoWest Convention , Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a " head start " by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends . Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography , Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18 , 1999 . Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16 , 1999 ; receipts from the Los Angeles event , where corporate packages were available for between US $ 5 @,@ 000 and US $ 25 @,@ 000 ; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation . Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children 's Medical Center , the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan @-@ Kettering Hospital in New York , the Big Brother / Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere , and the Children 's National Medical Center in Washington , D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US $ 500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Lucasfilm spent US $ 20 million on the film 's advertising campaign and made promotional licensing deals with Hasbro , Lego , Tricon Global Restaurants , and PepsiCo . Lucasfilm also helped the Star Wars fan club to organize an event called Star Wars Celebration , which was held in Denver , Colorado between April 30 and May 2 , 1999 . 
 The teaser trailer was released on selected screens accompanying Meet Joe Black on November 13 , 1998 , and media reported that people were paying full admission at theaters to see the trailer . To keep fans from leaving before the movie was over , some theaters played the teaser an additional time after the film finished . A second trailer was released on March 12 , 1999 , with the film Wing Commander . Again , many fans paid full theater admission to watch the new trailer . A bootlegged version of the preview was leaked to the Internet the same day . The next morning , the trailer was released on the film 's official website and shortly afterwards the servers became overloaded . The theatrical trailer caused even more media attention because it was premiered in theaters and screened at the | ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas , and was aired on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood . 
 The teaser poster , featuring Anakin with his shadow forming Darth Vader 's silhouette , was released on November 10 , 1998 . After Lucas opted for a drawn theatrical poster , Drew Struzan , the artist responsible for the Special Edition posters , was commissioned to illustrate , and the poster was unveiled on March 11 , 1999 . Lucasfilm dictated that , contractually , Struzan 's illustration was the only art the foreign distributors could use , and other than the text , it could not be modified in any way . 
 Many tie @-@ in adaptations , such as a LucasArts video game for the PlayStation and PC , a pinball machine by Williams , a four @-@ part comic book adaptation by Dark Horse Comics , and a junior novelization by Scholastic were released . The film 's official novelization was written by Terry Brooks , who met with Lucas before writing the book and receiving his approval and guidance . It included information about pending developments in the following two installments of the series . 
 General Mills and Brisk were promotional partners in North America for the 2012 3D re @-@ release but promotion was limited . The film was extensively promoted in Japan ; promotional products were sold by 7 @-@ Eleven , Domino 's Pizza , Pepsi and Gari @-@ Gari Kun . Kellogg 's promoted the film internationally , and French restaurant Quick launched three Star Wars @-@ themed burgers . Lucasfilm also partnered with Variety , the Children 's Charity to raise funds for children through the sale of a special edition badge . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released worldwide on VHS between April 3 and 8 , 2000 . Two versions were released in North America on April 4 — a standard pan and scan version and a widescreen Collector 's Edition version . In its first two days of availability , the regular version sold 4 @.@ 5 million copies and the limited edition sold 500 @,@ 000 . It was the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD , on October 16 , 2001 . The special features included seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD , a commentary track featuring Lucas and producer Rick McCallum , and several documentaries — including a full @-@ length documentary entitled " The Beginning : Making Episode I " . The Phantom Menace became the fastest selling DVD ever in the U.S. ; 2 @.@ 2 million copies were sold in its first week after release . 
 The DVD version was re @-@ released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4 , 2008 . A Laserdisc version of The Phantom Menace was released in Japan several months before it was available on DVD in the U.S. The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 16 , 2011 ; The Phantom Menace was restored to improve the picture quality and remove the magnification present on the previous DVD release , restoring approximately 8 percent of the picture to the frame . In the Blu @-@ ray release of The Phantom Menace , the Yoda puppet was replaced with a CGI model , making it consistent with the other films of the prequel trilogy . 
 On April 7 , 2015 , Walt Disney Studios , 20th Century Fox , and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films . Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released The Phantom Menace through the iTunes Store , Amazon Video , Vudu , Google Play , and Disney Movies Anywhere on April 10 , 2015 . 
 = = = 3D re @-@ release = = = 
 On September 28 , 2010 , it was announced that all six films in the series would be stereo @-@ converted to 3D . These would be re @-@ released in episode order , beginning with The Phantom Menace , which was released to cinemas in February 2012 . Prime Focus Limited did the conversion under close supervision by ILM . However , the 3D re @-@ releases of Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith were postponed after Lucasfilm was bought by The Walt Disney Company , which decided to focus on the development of Star Wars : The Force Awakens . 
 Lucas stated the 3D re @-@ release was " just a conversion " of the film 's 2011 Blu @-@ ray release and no additional changes were made . Only a change to Anakin 's magnetic wand during the podrace scene — its tip was sharpened to more accurately fit the original 2D photography to the new 3D image — was confirmed . 
 = = = Novelization = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 56 % " rotten " approval rating with an average score of 6 / 10 based on 212 reviews . The site 's critical consensus reads " Burdened by exposition and populated with stock characters , The Phantom Menace gets the Star Wars prequels off to a bumpy – albeit visually dazzling – start . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 51 out of 100 based on 36 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . On both sites , it is the lowest @-@ rated film in the Star Wars film series , excluding the animated feature The Clone Wars . 
 Many aspects of the scripting were criticized , especially that of the character Jar Jar Binks , who was regarded by many members of the older fan community as toyetic — a merchandising opportunity rather than a serious character . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described Binks as " a major miscue , a comic @-@ relief character who 's frankly not funny . " Drew Grant of Salon.com wrote " Perhaps the absolute creative freedom director George Lucas enjoyed while dreaming up the flick 's ' comic ' relief — with no studio execs and not many an independently minded actor involved — is a path to the dark side . " 
 Red Letter Media produced a highly critical 70 minute video review narrated by a fictional " Harry S. <unk> " , which went into great detail on the perceived flaws of the film that went viral and received over 5 million views . Among the many criticisms was the assertion that the film lacked basic structure , such as having a protagonist . 
 Conversely , Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and called it " an astonishing achievement in imaginative filmmaking " and said " Lucas tells a good story . " Ebert also wrote that " If some of the characters are less than compelling , perhaps that 's inevitable " because it is the opening film in the new trilogy . He concluded his review by saying that rather than Star Trek films , filmmakers could " [ g ] <unk> me transparent underwater cities and vast hollow senatorial spheres any day . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " B " <unk> complimented Liam Neeson 's performance and the action scenes . In an Entertainment Weekly review for the DVD release , Marc Bernardin gave the film a " C- " , calling it " <unk> plotted , horribly written , and juvenile " . ReelViews ' James Berardinelli wrote : 
 Looking at the big picture , in spite of all its flaws , The Phantom Menace is still among the best " bang for a buck " fun that can be had in a movie theater . It isn 't as fresh as the original Star Wars nor does it have the thematic richness and narrative complexity of The Empire Strikes Back , but it is a distinct improvement over Return of the Jedi . In fact , after Return of the Jedi , I didn 't have a burning desire to return to this galaxy ' far , far away ' , but , with The Phantom Menace , Lucas has revived my interest . Now , it 's with genuine regret that I realize the next segment of the series is three long years away . 
 Andrew Johnston of Time Out New York wrote " Let 's face it : no film could ever match the expectations some have for Episode I – The Phantom Menace . Which isn 't to say it 's a disappointment : on the contrary , it 's awesomely entertaining , provided you accept it on its own terms ... Like the original film , it 's a Boy 's Own adventure yarn with a corny but irresistible spiritual subtext . The effects and production design are stunning , but they always serve the story , not the other way around . " Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today said the film did " plenty right " and praised the characters Darth Maul and Watto . David Cornelius of <unk> said the film 's better moments " don 't merely balance out the weaker ones — they topple them . " Colin Kennedy of Empire magazine said that despite problems with pacing and writing , " there is still much pleasure to be had watching our full @-@ blown Jedi guides in action . " He praised the visuals and Liam Neeson 's performance , and said the duel between Darth Maul and the Jedi was " the saga 's very best lightsaber battle " . 
 Empire magazine ranked The Phantom Menace on its list of " 500 Greatest Movies Of All Time " , while Entertainment Weekly and Comcast included the film on their lists of the worst movie sequels . James Berardinelli wrote " The Phantom Menace was probably the most overhyped motion picture of the last decade ( if not longer ) , and its reputation suffered as a result of its inability to satisfy unreasonable expectations . " William Arnold of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer agreed that the film 's massive hype caused many of the negative reactions , saying " it built expectations that can 't possibly be matched and scuttled [ the ] element of storytelling surprise . " He also said the film was " well made and entertaining " and was much better than similar box office fare released around that year , such as The Mummy and The Matrix . 
 The introduction of midi @-@ chlorians — microscopic organisms that mediate use of the Force — in the film has been controversial among fans . Some viewed it as a concept that negates the Force 's spiritual quality , although the film still portrays the Force as a mysterious entity using the midi @-@ chlorians to communicate with living beings . Film historian Daniel Dinello says " Anathema to Star Wars fanatics who thought they reduced the Force to a kind of viral infection , midi @-@ chlorians provide a biological interface , the link between physical bodies and spiritual energy . " Religion expert John D. Caputo writes " In the ' Gospel according to Lucas ' , a world is conjured up in which the intractable oppositions that have tormented religious thinkers for centuries are reconciled ... The gifts that the Jedi masters enjoy have a perfectly plausible scientific basis , even if its ways are mysterious : their bodily cells have a heavier than usual concentration of ' midi @-@ chlorians ' . " 
 After the film 's release , there was controversy over whether several alien characters reflect racial stereotypes . For example , the oafish , slow @-@ witted Jar Jar Binks had long droopy ears reminiscent of dreadlocks and spoke with what many perceived as a Caribbean patois reminiscent of Jamaican Creole . The greedy and corrupt <unk> of the Trade Federation spoke with East Asian accents and the unprincipled trader Watto has been interpreted as a Jewish stereotype reminiscent of Charles Dickens ' character Fagin . Lucas has denied all of these implications , instead criticizing the American media for using opinions from the Internet as a reliable source for news stories . Lucas added that it reflected more the racism of the commenters than it does the movie ; however , animator Rob Coleman said he viewed footage of Alec Guinness as Fagin in Oliver Twist to inspire his animators in the creation of Watto . One critic described Jar Jar Binks as " [ s ] <unk> and cowardly ... a black minstrel @-@ ish stereotype on par with <unk> <unk> . " Michael Eric Dyson , professor of African @-@ American studies at Georgetown University , said the entire Gungan people seem oddly suggestive of a primitive African tribe . Dyson said " The leader of Jar Jar 's tribe is a fat , bumbling buffoon with a rumbling voice , and he seems to be a caricature of a stereotypical African tribal chieftain . " 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Despite its mixed critical reception , The Phantom Menace was a financial success , breaking many box office records in its debut . It broke The Lost World : Jurassic Park 's records for the largest single @-@ day gross for taking more than US $ 28 million in the opening day and fastest to gross US $ 100 million in five days . It also became the quickest film to reach the US $ 200 million and US $ 300 million marks , surpassing Independence Day ( 1996 ) and Titanic ( 1997 ) respectively . The Phantom Menace was 1999 's most successful film , earning US $ 431 @,@ 088 @,@ 295 in North America and US $ 493 @,@ 229 @,@ 263 in other territories , taking US $ 924 @,@ 317 @,@ 558 worldwide . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 84 @.@ 8 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . At that time , the film was the third highest @-@ grossing film in North America behind Titanic and Star Wars ( 1977 ) , and the second highest @-@ grossing film worldwide behind Titanic without adjusting for inflation of ticket prices . When adjusted for ticket price inflation , it ranked as the 19th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film domestically , making it the fourth Star Wars film to be in the Inflation @-@ Adjusted Top 20 . Outside North America , the film grossed over US $ 10 million in Australia ( US $ 25 @.@ 9 million ) , Brazil ( US $ 10 @.@ 4 million ) , France and Algeria ( US $ 43 million ) , Germany ( US $ 53 @.@ 9 million ) , Italy ( US $ 12 @.@ 9 million ) , Japan ( US $ 109 @.@ 9 million ) , Mexico ( US $ 12 million ) , Spain ( US $ 25 million ) , and the United Kingdom and Ireland ( US $ 81 @.@ 9 million ) . 
 After its 3D re @-@ release in 2012 , the worldwide box office gross exceeded US $ 1 billion . Although in the intervening years , the film had lost some of its rankings in the lists of highest @-@ grossing films , the 3D re @-@ release returned it to the worldwide all @-@ time Top 10 for several months . In North America , its revenues overtook those of the original Star Wars as the saga 's highest @-@ grossing film when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices , and is currently the fifth highest @-@ grossing film in North America . In North America , its ranking on the Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation list climbed to 16th place — one place behind Return of the Jedi . The 3D re @-@ release , which premiered in February 2012 , earned US $ 43 million — US $ $ 22 @.@ 5 million of which was in North America — worldwide . As of June 2014 , the 3D re @-@ release has earned US $ 102 @,@ 727 @,@ 119 worldwide — including $ 43 @.@ 5 million in North America — and has increased the film 's overall box office takings to US $ 474 @.@ 5 million domestically , and US $ 552 @.@ 5 million in other territories . The film 's earnings exceeded US $ 1 billion worldwide on February 22 , 2012 , making it the first Star Wars film and the 11th film in history — excluding inflation — to do so . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Phantom Menace was nominated for three Academy Awards : Best Sound Editing , Best Visual Effects , and Best Sound Mixing ( Gary Rydstrom , Tom Johnson , Shawn Murphy , and John Midgley ) ; all of which went to The Matrix . The film won Saturn Awards for Best Costumes and Best Special Effects , the MTV Movie Award for Best Action Scene , and a Young Artist Award for Jake Lloyd 's performance . It was also nominated for — among others — the BAFTAs for Visual Effects and Sound , and the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media . The film did however received seven Golden Raspberry Award ( Razzie ) nominations for Worst Picture , Worst Director , Worst Screenplay , Worst Supporting Actor ( Jake Lloyd as Anakin ) , Worst Supporting Actress ( Sofia Coppola as Saché ) , Worst Screen Couple ( Jake Lloyd and Natalie Portman ) , and Jar Jar Binks actor Ahmed Best won the Worst Supporting Actor category . 
 = Golden Gate Highlands National Park = 
 Golden Gate Highlands National Park is located in Free State , South Africa , near the Lesotho border . It covers an area of 340 km2 ( 130 sq mi ) . The park 's most notable features are its golden , ochre , and orange @-@ hued deeply eroded sandstone cliffs and outcrops , especially the Brandwag rock . Another feature of the area is the numerous caves and shelters displaying San rock paintings . Wildlife featured at the park includes mongooses , eland , zebras , and over 100 bird species . It is the Free State 's only national park , and is more famous for the beauty of its landscape than for its wildlife . Numerous paleontology finds have been made in the park including dinosaur eggs and skeletons . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 " Golden Gate " refers to the sandstone cliffs that are found on either side of the valley at the Golden Gate dam . In 1875 , a farmer called <unk> van Reenen and his wife stopped here as they travelled to their new farm in <unk> . He named the location " Golden Gate " when he saw the last rays of the setting sun fall on the cliffs . 
 In 1963 , 47 @.@ 92 square kilometres ( 11 @,@ 840 acres ) were proclaimed as a national park , specifically to preserve the scenic beauty of the area . In 1981 the park was enlarged to 62 @.@ 41 km2 ( 15 @,@ 420 acres ) and in 1988 it was enlarged to 116 @.@ 33 km2 ( 28 @,@ 750 acres ) . In 2004 it was announced that the park would be joined with the neighbouring <unk> National Park . The amalgamation of <unk> National Park was completed in 2007 , increasing the park 's area to 340 km2 ( 84 @,@ 000 acres ) . 
 The park is 320 km ( 200 mi ) from Johannesburg and is close to the villages of Clarens and <unk> , in the upper regions of the Little Caledon River . The park is situated in the <unk> of the eastern Free State , in the foothills of the <unk> Mountains . The Caledon River forms the southern boundary of the park as well as the border between the Free State and Lesotho . The highest peak in the park ( and also in the Free State ) is <unk> at 2 @,@ 829 m ( 9 @,@ 281 ft ) . 
 The park is located in the eastern highveld region of South Africa , and experiences a dry sunny climate from June to August . It has showers , hails and thunderstorms between October and April . It has thick snowfalls in the winter . The park has a relatively high rainfall of 800 mm ( 31 in ) per year . 
 = = Vegetation = = 
 The park is an area of rich highveld and montane grassland flora . It has more than sixty grass species and a large variety of bulbs and herbs . Each of these species has its own flowering time , meaning that veld flowers can be seen throughout the summer . The park also has <unk> forests and high @-@ altitude Austro @-@ Afro alpine grassland , which is scarce in South Africa . The <unk> ( <unk> sericea ) , an evergreen species , is the most common tree in the park . <unk> is a favourite habitat of beetles and 117 species occur on these trees in the park . The Lombardi poplars and weeping willows in the park are introduced species , but are kept because of their cultural and historic connection with the eastern Free State . Other exotic species in the park , for example wattle and <unk> , are systematically eradicated . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Instead of reintroducing one of the " big five " into the park , the <unk> lizard and water mongoose were reintroduced . Twelve species of mice , ten species of carnivores and ten antelope species have been recorded in the park . The grey <unk> and the mountain reedbuck were present when the park was established . 
 = = = Mammals = = = 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 Over 210 bird species have been observed in the park , including the rare bearded vulture and the endangered Cape vulture and bald ibis . 
 = = = Snakes and fishes = = = 
 Seven snake species , including the puff adder , mountain adder , and <unk> are found in the park . 
 = = Geology and palaeontology = = 
 The geology of the park provides very visual " textbook " examples of Southern Africa 's geological history . The sandstone formations in the park form the upper part of the Karoo Supergroup . These formations were deposited during a period of aeolian deposition towards the end of the Triassic Period . At the time of deposition the climate of the area the park covers was becoming progressively drier until arid desert conditions set in , resulting in a land of dunes and sandy desert , with occasional scattered oases . The deposition of the sandstones ended when lava flowed out over the desert 190 million years ago . 
 The following sequence of geological formations are visible in the park ( starting from the bottom ) : the Molteno Formation , Elliott Formation , Clarens Formation , and the Drakensberg Formation . The yellow @-@ brown Golden Gate and Brandwag cliffs are made up of the Clarens formation . The layers in this formation are 140 to 160 metres ( 460 to 520 ft ) thick . The Drakensberg formation comprises the basaltic lava that flowed over the desert . It forms the mountain summits in the park . On <unk> it is 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 feet ) thick . The Elliot Formation is a red mudstone where many dinosaur fossils have been found . 
 The oldest dinosaur embryos ever discovered were found in the park in 1978 . The eggs were from the Triassic Period ( 220 to 195 million years ago ) and had fossilised foetal skeletons of Massospondylus , a prosauropod dinosaur . More examples of these eggs have since been found in the park . Other fossils found in the park include those of advanced <unk> ( canine toothed animals ) , small <unk> ( animals with teeth set firmly in the jaw ) , bird @-@ like and crocodile @-@ like dinosaurs . 
 = = Accommodation = = 
 Accommodation in the park is available at Glen Reenen and Brandwag Rest camps . <unk> and camping sites with all amenities are available at Glen Reenen camp . The hotel was formerly part of Brandwag camp , but since its recent refurbishment it is managed separately by <unk> as Golden Gate Hotel . The nearest town to Golden Gate Highlands National Park is Clarens ( 17 km to the west ) , but <unk> is also easily reached via a good tar road , driving through the access gate to the east of the park . 
 = Agent Carter ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American television series Agent Carter , which is inspired by the 2011 film Captain America : The First Avenger and the 2013 Marvel One @-@ Shot short film of the same name , features the Marvel Comics character Peggy Carter as she moves to Los Angeles to deal with the threats of the new atomic age in the wake of World War II , gaining new friends , a new home , and potential new love . It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films of the franchise . The season , which aired on ABC from January 19 to March 1 , 2016 , over 10 episodes , was produced by ABC Studios , Marvel Television , and F & B Fazekas & Butters , with Tara Butters , Michele Fazekas , and Chris Dingess serving as showrunners . 
 In May 2015 , a second season of Agent Carter was ordered , with Hayley Atwell , who reprises her role from the film series and One @-@ Shot as Carter , returning to star . Alongside her , James D 'Arcy , Chad Michael Murray , and Enver Gjokaj also return from the first season . Filming took place in Los Angeles in late 2015 , with the season contrasting the lives of Carter and the Hedy Lamarr @-@ inspired Whitney Frost , portrayed by recurring guest star Wynn Everett . Visual and practical effects were mixed to realize the setting and more fantastical elements of the series , while David Zippel and Louis van Amstel provided a musical dream sequence for the season . Other characters from previous MCU media also appear , as well as elements shared with the films and the television series Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. 
 The season aired during the season three mid @-@ season break of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , receiving generally positive reviews , with critics praising the performances , particularly those of Atwell and D 'Arcy , as well as the setting and the character development of Whitney Frost . However , some elements , such as the season 's ending and humor , were criticized , and viewership for the season was low . ABC canceled Agent Carter on May 12 , 2016 . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In January 2015 , showrunners Michele Fazekas and Tara Butters confirmed that Agent Carter was not intended to be a miniseries , and that a possible second season would not necessarily be limited to eight episodes like the first . The series was renewed for a second season on May 7 , 2015 , intended to debut in 2016 of the 2015 – 16 season during the midseason break of the third season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Later in May , Hayley Atwell stated the season would consist of 10 episodes . Butters explained that this would probably not allow for any standalone episodes , " but I definitely think it allows for more character , because we can have more personal stories built into the framework of the overall arching mystery " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Before the second season was announced , Fazekas said that " We 've certainly been talking about what a second season would look like ... what 's great about the structure of this show is , you can tell so many different stories and go so many different directions . " Thus , Butters said of the first season storyline featuring Leviathan , " we wrapped up that story " already , with Toby Jones ' cameo as Arnim Zola in the first season finale just " a fun tie @-@ in " rather than something that would be followed up on in the second season . Series creators Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely revealed they " had a really nice story about who Peggy is and where she came from " that did not make it into the first season , but they hoped could be explored in a second , while Fazekas and Butters also revealed that there had been a story about Carter having " a night out with the girls " to explore her personal life , as well as more material for the character Angie , that they felt would both be easier to tell in a second season . 
 Season two is set in 1947 , approximately six months to a year following the events of the first , with the time jump made to show " people are in a little bit different positions , and things have happened between these seasons that we maybe don 't know about . " Fazekas noted that " the challenge " for the season was to find a way to reunite Carter with Edwin Jarvis since he is " not an agent .... that 's a really important relationship , how do we keep them together ? ... The nice thing about Peggy this season is she 's not having to hide her agenda from the SSR . [ Jarvis ] is helping her out , just in a different way . " Elaborating on the SSR 's role in the season , Fazekas explained that when Markus and McFeely created the organisation for Captain America : The First Avenger it was inspired by the Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) , which was " somewhat disbanded after the war , because it was created because of World War II . So now that the war is over , things are changing . And in real history , the OSS sort of became the CIA and some of its other functions went under other departments . There 's a little bit of change going on within SSR and so Thompson [ is now the New York SSR chief , but he ] has a boss [ in Vernon Masters ] that 's going to be saying , " Look , things are changing , and you need to look out for yourself . " " The season also sees Daniel Sousa promoted to the chief of the Los Angeles SSR office . 
 The fictional company Isodyne Energy , who is involved with nuclear testing in the desert , was influenced by the real life 1940s companies such as <unk> , General Atomic or the beginnings of the Jet Propulsion Lab , " all of which were in L.A. in the ' 40s , and were developing the space program and were developing <unk> . " Additionally , the season avoids depicting real life Hollywood stars from the 1940s because " the focus would shift from story to : does that person look or sound like an actor ? " Instead , the character Whitney Frost is depicted as an actress " who will have a part to play in our larger storyline . " The season introduces the Council of Nine , based on the Secret Empire , who " meet at the Arena Club , which is like this social club of white guys . They 're just the guys who sort of run the world . They have orchestrated assassinations . We insinuate that they orchestrated the 1929 Stock Market crash . " Members of the Council include powerful businessmen Calvin Chadwick and Hugh Jones , and their influence extends to " high levels of the government " as seen with War Department veteran Vernon Masters . Despite close similarities between the ' A ' symbol of the Arena Club and a Hydra symbol introduced in the third season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , Fazekas stated that she " would not say " there was a connection between the Council and Hydra . 
 With the introduction of Jason Wilkes and Frost , both considered " outsiders " as Carter was in the first season , co @-@ showrunner Chris Dingess noted how their arcs in the season would be similar , yet different to Carter 's , saying " I think everyone , to get to that place of getting respect , has a different road to get there . Everyone makes different choices along the way that define that road and I think with these three characters , everyone has a distinct , separate path . " Atwell spoke specifically about the season 's approach to diversity and prejudice , and noted that the series ' crew had expanded to include African American and Asian writers as well as a female director . " Since the first season heavily focused on a woman in a man 's world , " Atwell said , " we 're now going into more diversity and we 're investigating different prejudices within this time and one of them absolutely would have been race , as we all know .... if you have a staunchly white male cast then it might be more accurate of the time , but it becomes less relatable to our audiences , especially when the Marvel world 's so diverse . " On the racism issue , Butters stated , " We didn 't want to just have an African @-@ American character and not talk about that . That would have been very inauthentic . " As for the sexism Frost faces , Gina <unk> and Andrea Towers of Entertainment Weekly saw similarities with Marvel 's Jessica Jones when Frost is asked to smile by two different men in her flashbacks in " Smoke & Mirrors " . Towers said , " The talent agent [ who asks Frost to smile ] may not be the Purple Man , but Whitney is certainly being ushered into a brainwashed mindset that will set her on a path she can 't deviate from easily . " 
 At the conclusion of the season , Fazekas recalled the potential story revolving around Carter having a girls night out , saying that they realized that " once Peggy is on the mission , it starts to become difficult for her to have a social life ... we kept sort of punting that scene because every time we tried to do it , it was like , ' She 's not going to stop to go out to dinner . She has the world to save . ' " Also , they felt they were not properly servicing Angie 's character , instead " just sticking her in scenes just to be there , " resulting in the decision to ultimately not bring Angie back for the season as planned . In her place , the characters of Ana Jarvis and Rose Roberts are featured as confidante 's for Carter , " both people who are 100 % in on Peggy 's secret . Angie sort of figures it out at the end of the first season but Ana and Rose — there is no need to hide the truth from them . So it makes it a lot easier for her to confide in them . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Atwell , James D 'Arcy , Chad Michael Murray , and Enver Gjokaj return from the first season to star as Peggy Carter , Edwin Jarvis , Jack Thompson , and Daniel Sousa , respectively . By July 2015 , Bridget Regan ( Dottie Underwood ) and Lyndsy Fonseca ( Angie Martinelli ) were negotiating contracts to also return for the season . At Fan Expo Canada the next month , Atwell confirmed that Regan would return for the season , with Dominic Cooper and Lesley Boone later also confirmed to be reprising their roles , respectively as Howard Stark and Rose Roberts . In December 2015 , Fonseca was confirmed to return for a dream sequence in " A Little Song and Dance " . Also returning for the second season is Ray Wise as Hugh Jones . 
 In August 2015 , it was revealed that the character Whitney Frost would appear in the season , and Currie Graham was cast as her husband , Calvin Chadwick , the owner of Isodyne Energy . In October , Wynn Everett was revealed to be cast as Frost ; Reggie Austin was cast as physicist Jason Wilkes ; Lotte Verbeek was cast in the role of Ana Jarvis , the wife of Edwin Jarvis ; and Kurtwood Smith was revealed to be recurring as Vernon Masters , a veteran of the War Department . The next month , Ken Marino was cast as Joseph Manfredi , leader of the <unk> crime syndicate . Additionally , Matt <unk> was cast as SSR lab tech Aloysius <unk> , and Rey Valentin was cast as SSR Agent Vega . 
 The dream sequence in " A Little Song and Dance " , dubbed an informal crossover with Dancing with the Stars , features many of the professional dancers from that series , including Louis van Amstel , Dmitry Chaplin , Karina Smirnoff , Anna <unk> , Sasha Farber , and Damian Whitewood . Dancers Robert <unk> , Malene <unk> , Amanda Balen , Serge <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Lacey <unk> , Alla <unk> , and Paul Kirkland are also featured in the sequence . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Series costume designer Giovanna Ottobre @-@ Melton took inspiration from the films LA Confidential , Chinatown , and Who Framed Roger Rabbit to " represent the West Coast " , and the " sunshine noir " feel of the era for the season . The then @-@ just introduced " Dior New Look " is also referenced " with longer hemlines on supporting players . " The dream sequence at the beginning of " A Little Song and Dance " was choreographed by van Amstel and begins in black and white , before transitioning to color . Head of make @-@ up Debra <unk> <unk> explained that for the Zero Matter " wound " on Frost 's face , the " guidelines were for it to be like a cracked porcelain doll and then the black matter would come from inside out . From there , Jay [ <unk> , makeup artist ] designed the prosthetics that we use and Robin [ <unk> , key makeup artist ] created all the different avenues the dark matter takes . " Using reference photographs and pre @-@ made prosthetics , the make @-@ up team were ultimately able to apply the effect to Everett in 30 minutes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for the season began on August 31 , and ended on December 19 , 2015 , with Edward J. Pei serving as director of photography . Unlike the first season , episodes were filmed concurrently , two at a time . Discussing the series ' location move , Head of Marvel Television Jeph Loeb explained that " Agent Carter season one took place in New York in 1946 . It wasn 't like we could go to New York and find 1946 , so we shot in L.A. But that 's part of the reason that when we talked about it , we said , ' You know what ? This season let 's stay in L.A. ' Because so much of L.A. still looks like it did in 1946 . " Butters expanded by saying the move to L.A. " was something we had talked about in the middle of the first season ... [ and ] we realized that not only was it a good idea for the storytelling , but also ... it 's much easier for us to shoot L.A. for L.A. than try to shoot L.A. for New York . " She added the season hoped to film at Musso & Frank Grill , the Formosa Cafe , the Griffith Observatory , racetracks , piers , and other locations in Downtown Los Angeles . 
 The Universal Studios backlot serves as the backlot for the film studio Stark starts , Stark Pictures , with filming also taking place at the Los Angeles River . The Dunbar Hotel , a famous jazz club where both African @-@ Americans and Caucasians would attend , is portrayed in the season . The showrunners looked to the films LA Confidential , Chinatown , The Big Heat , and The Lady from Shanghai when shaping the visuals for the season , with additional research provided by Pei . Butters said , " it doesn 't feel like a different show . It just feels like an evolution of the show . " 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 DNeg TV provided the visual effects for the season , with Sheena Duggal returning as visual effects supervisor . Effects created for the season included the Zero Matter and its related properties , such as people being frozen and shattered by it , the dimensional rifts and the levitated objects that get sucked into them , and Wilkes becoming intangible . Frost 's Zero Matter " crack " on her face was also augmented with visual effects , to add depth , sentience , and an " infinite black " by color @-@ correcting the image , with the effects animators studying " cracking glass to better capture the animation effect . " 20 cast members were digitally scanned and modeled for interaction with Zero Matter , while many other instances required facial tracking markers on actors . For the Zero Matter itself , the design was described as a cross between " liquid spiders " and magnetic <unk> , the latter being used as an on set reference for the actors by Duggal . The main dimensional rifts were designed as black holes , based on the work of theoretical physicist Kip Thorne , which also inspired Double Negative 's visual effects for Interstellar ; the software developed for the film was reused for the series . DNeg TV also worked on Howard Stark 's Hover car , using the original computer asset for the version seen in Captain America : The First Avenger . Despite the original car from the film being only a shell and destroyed after the picture , an identical Cadillac was found for DNeg to laser scan and incorporate into the episode along with the real car when it is parked on the ground . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The dance number used in the dream sequence from " A Little Song and Dance " was an original song from lyricist David Zippel and series composer Christopher Lennertz , in conjunction with Butters and Fazekas . Titled " Whatcha Gonna Do ( It 's Up to You ) " , the single was performed by Atwell and Gjokaj along with the Hollywood Studio Symphony , and was released on iTunes on March 18 , 2016 . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 In July 2015 , Butters revealed that the season would feature the Darkforce , which ties to the characters Doctor Strange and Marcus Daniels , the latter having appeared in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. In January 2016 , Fazekas elaborated , saying that the Darkforce , known as Zero Matter in the series , is the result of a nuclear test gone wrong by Isodyne Energy . Looking to the history of the Darkforce in the comics , Fazekas and Butters " were able to select what we liked and sort of make our own rules as to what it does , how it operates , and who it affects in our world . " The producers tried to take a scientific approach to the explanation of the Zero Matter , consulting with theoretical physicist Clifford Johnson to help ground it in science . Johnson provided the science equations seen on blackboards throughout the season , as well as real world reference for the Zero Matter containment systems . The showrunners also conversed with Eric Carroll at Marvel Studios to ensure anything they were doing with the Darkforce would not contradict the Doctor Strange script , and to see if they could destroy Howard Stark 's hover car , which was originally seen as a prototype in Captain America : The First Avenger . The mention in the season finale of the land Stark owns in Malibu is a reference to what will become the location for the home of his son , Tony , in the MCU films . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Season two of Agent Carter premiered on January 19 , 2016 on ABC with a two @-@ hour premiere , during the midseason break of the third season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. It was originally scheduled to premiere on January 5 , 2016 , but was delayed due to an " earlier than usual " 2016 State of the Union Address . The season aired until March 1 , 2016 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Footage from the first episode was screened at New York Comic Con in October 2015 , while the first trailer for the season was released in November . Alice Walker of Screen Rant felt that " this promo highlights the best parts of the show . Fast paced and slick , Atwell is still incredibly charming .... There is a long way to go before we see if they can build on the momentum from the previous season , but so far it looks like a fun adventure . " Conversely , Kaitlin Thomas at TV.com called the promo " weird " , asking , " Why is ABC marketing Agent Carter like it 's one of the network 's casually daft melodramas instead of a well @-@ written drama [ ? ] ... From a tonal and thematic standpoint , the series depicted in that trailer feels like the polar opposite of what it actually is .... cutting together a bunch of scenes of Peggy punching people or holding a gun does not make her a badass when its framed in this way , and frankly , it 's no wonder people aren 't tuning in if that 's the type of show they think this is . " In March 2016 , Maureen Ryan , writing for Variety , described the season 's promotion as " lackluster " , and blamed it , as well as other factors that included " the botched rollout of Season 2 " , on the season 's ultimately poor viewership . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 80 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 9 / 10 based on 15 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " A move from New York to Hollywood gives Agent Carter new territory to explore , as the series continues to search for a storyline as dynamic as its heroine . " Mitchell Broussard at We Got This Covered graded the season premiere 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , calling it " Fantastic " and positively comparing it to Marvel 's Ant @-@ Man by saying " Agent Carter finds a way to make the smaller stakes of Peggy 's noir sandbox as tense , credible , and addictively watchable as any other addition to the MCU . " Broussard highlighted the performances of Atwell and D 'Arcy as well as the new casting additions , and called the season 's pacing , due to the small episode order , " exciting " . He noted that " some may be disappointed in the more restrained <unk> of the show releasing so soon after Jessica Jones , but I think that ’ s the greatest thing about this world : each show feels different and its own thing , despite their close proximity . " Variety 's Brian Lowry was less positive , praising the casting and performances but saying , " Agent Carter feels too slavishly locked into the S.H.I.E.L.D. formula ... it 's sort of a shame Agent Carter isn ’ t more compelling , since the impeccable period trappings and costumes make the series a nice change of pace , at least visually . " 
 Eric Goldman of IGN gave the season an 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 , praising Atwell 's performance , as well as the return of Dottie in the season and the additions of Ana Jarvis and Whitney Frost . Conversely , he felt Reggie Austin as Jason Wilkes was likable , but ultimately the " character felt a bit bland " and that the humor in the season was pushed " a bit too far " . He concluded , " I don 't think [ the season ] was quite as tightly @-@ constructed as Season 1 and tonally , it sometimes wrestled with finding the right balance between the cool spy @-@ action elements and the likable comedic aspect ... But overall , it was another fun season filled with compelling characters — including a strong villain — and 1940s , Marvel @-@ flavored spy heroics , which benefitted from the new visuals the Los Angeles setting gave it . " Molly Freeman , reviewing the season finale for Screen Rant , called the season as a whole " Excellent " , particularly praising the character development given to the character of Whitney Frost , but criticized the way that the season ended that character 's storyline , stating that the finale " does a disservice to all the character development of Whitney throughout season 2 .... for the sake of sweeping her aside as easily as possible and giving the other cast members more development and screen time . After watching Agent Carter develop Whitney as such a powerful and sympathetic villain earlier this season , the way the show wrapped up her storyline is a disappointment . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 For the season , the series was nominated for Best Superhero Adaptation Series at the 42nd Saturn Awards . 
 = The Sea Urchin ( 1913 film ) = 
 The Sea Urchin is a 1913 American silent short romantic drama film directed by Edwin August and starring Jeanie MacPherson and Lon Chaney . The film was the earliest known character role by Lon Chaney and the first screenplay by MacPherson . The story follows a hunchback fisherman , who finds a young girl and raised her into womanhood with the intention of marrying her . A handsome boy soon gains her affections and the hunchback threatens him with a knife . The next day , the boat tips over during an argument and the hunchback saves the girl . As the young lovers reunite , he sees how happy they are together and he takes his leave . The film was released on August 22 , 1913 and was played across the United States . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A hunchback fisherman finds a young girl tied to a mast , the sole survivor of a shipwreck , and raises her into womanhood with the intention of making her his wife . Ten years pass and the woman , out of gratitude , promises to marry him . The hunchback hires a handsome stranger , the boy . The boy and the girl fall in love , but the girl refuses to marry him . The hunchback sees the two embrace and threatens the boy with a knife . The next day , the three go fishing in the boat and an argument breaks out . During the argument the boat tips over and the girl is washed away . The hunchback and the boy search for her , until the boy becomes exhausted and collapses on the shore . The hunchback finds the girl on a rock and brings her ashore . As the two reunite , he sees how happy they are together and takes his leave . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jeanie MacPherson as The Girl 
 Lon Chaney as Barnacle Bill / Barnacle Ben 
 Robert Z. Leonard as The Boy / Bob 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was a Powers Picture Plays directed by Edwin August and distributed by the Universal Film Manufacturing Company . The film 's production number was 0101 . The screen play was written by Jeanie MacPherson who also played the role of The Girl . Simon Louvish , author of Cecil B. DeMille : A Life in Art , states this uncredited screenplay was the first one to be authored by MacPherson . Louvish also refers to this film as a two @-@ reeler . Lon Chaney and Robert Z. Leonard had previously worked together for the Ferris Hartman Troupe . Three years prior to the release of the film , the two were involved in the production of musical comedies for the Troupe . In 1918 , Leonard would later direct his wife , Mae Murry , and Lon Chaney in Danger , Go Slow . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 The film was released on August 22 , 1913 . The Moving Picture World said the film was a memorable offering that contained vivid scenes along a picturesque coast . In an advertisement in Rushville , Indiana the film as billed as the " story of a Hunchback 's Love and Renunciation " . The film was also advertised , perhaps alternatively or erroneously , as Sea <unk> . Advertisements for the film included theaters in Pennsylvania , Texas , Kansas , Louisiana , Indiana , Utah , and New York . 
 The film is important as the first known character role by Lon Chaney . Martin F. Norden , author of The Cinema of Isolation : A History of Physical Disability in the Movies , describes the plot as following the prevailing industry standards of disabled characters , where the figure " nobly " withdraws from the relationship after plotting revenge and then saving his beloved . Norden cites a quote from Chaney , saying this film made Chaney realize that " the screen was more interesting than the stage " . The film is now considered lost . It is unknown when the film was lost , but if it was in Universal 's vaults it would have been deliberately destroyed along with the remaining copies of Universal 's silent era films in 1948 . 
 = Mujaddid Ahmed Ijaz = 
 Mujaddid Ahmed Ijaz , Ph.D. ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; June 12 , 1937 — July 9 , 1992 ) , was a Pakistani @-@ American experimental physicist noted for his role in discovering new isotopes that expanded the neutron @-@ deficient side of the atomic chart . Some of the isotopes he discovered enabled significant advances in medical research , particularly in the treatment of cancer , and further advanced the experimental understanding of nuclear structures . Ijaz conducted his research work at Oak Ridge National Laboratories ( ORNL ) . He and his ORNL colleagues published more than 60 papers in physics journals announcing isotope discoveries and other results of their accelerator experiments from 1968 until 1983 . 
 Ijaz participated in the U.S. Atoms for Peace initiative during the 1970s . The program provided a number of third @-@ world countries , including Pakistan , with civilian nuclear reactor technology to develop energy for peaceful purposes . As a tenured professor of Physics at Virginia Tech , he acted as thesis adviser to graduate students from around the world in experimental physics disciplines . Ijaz made extensive trips abroad during his career , including sabbaticals as a visiting professor at Saudi Arabia 's King Fahd University of Petroleum and <unk> in the early 1980s and as a visiting faculty member at the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste , Italy in 1985 . He retired Professor Emeritus of Physics from Virginia Tech in December 1991 after a 27 @-@ year career in teaching and research . Ijaz and his wife emigrated to the United States and settled in Virginia , where had five children . He died in 1992 after a battle with cancer . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Mujaddid Ijaz was born on June 12 , 1937 in <unk> , British Indian Empire . His father was a medical student who died in his mid @-@ 20s of brain cancer . His mother , a homemaker , remarried . He was the third of ten children in his family . Ijaz 's early education was made at rural village schools near <unk> . He attended Islamia High School in Lahore . His early interest in science and physics was attributed to his step @-@ father 's work in the local meteorology department . 
 After graduating from high school and finishing college entrance exam requirements , Ijaz was admitted to Government College in Lahore . There , he majored in physics and graduated with a B.Sc. in 1957 . He continued advanced studies under the tutelage of Prof. Rafi Muhammad Chaudhry , widely considered a pioneer in Pakistani experimental physics , until 1959 when he met Razia Begum Nazir . They later married and emigrated to the United States in 1960 . 
 Ijaz and his wife arrived in Tallahassee , Florida in August 1960 , where they settled as incoming graduate students at Florida State University . He developed an early interest in particle physics and accelerator experiments while at Florida State , from where he graduated in June 1962 with a master 's degree in Physics . His thesis was titled Study of Angular Distributions of <unk> Scattered 8 to 19 <unk> Alpha Particles from <unk> and from Ohio University in May 1964 with a Ph.D. in Nuclear Physics with a thesis titled Proton @-@ Proton Collisions at 2 @.@ 0 <unk> . 
 = = Academic and scientific research career = = 
 = = = Virginia Polytechnic Institute = = = 
 Mujaddid Ijaz joined the faculty of the Virginia Tech Physics department in September 1964 as an Assistant Professor of Physics . In his early years as a faculty member , Ijaz devoted much of his time to his teaching responsibilities , including acting as adviser to the university 's roster of graduate students and doctoral candidates . He conducted his early research at the Physics department 's newly installed nuclear reactor , which at the time was equipped with a neutron activation analysis laboratory . Ijaz 's early experimental results earned him an appointment as research collaborator at the Oak Ridge National Laboratories in 1966 under a University Isotope Separator at Oak Ridge ( UNISOR ) grant funded by the U.S. Energy Department . 
 In 1974 , Ijaz launched a Distinguished Visitors Colloquium Series under the Physics department 's sponsorship that brought world @-@ renowned physicists to the Blacksburg campus for nearly a decade . Visiting scholars included Salam , Sheldon Glashow , and Nobel physics laureates Hans Bethe , Robert Hofstadter , Eugene Wigner and Richard Feynman . Noted Chinese physicist Luke W. Mo ( whose group at the Stanford Linear Accelerator had won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1990 ) also lectured at Virginia Tech . 
 Ijaz attained the rank of Full Professor of Physics in 1977 , and during the same year served as acting head of the Physics department . After several foreign sabbaticals in the 1980s , the first at <unk> in Dhahran , Saudi Arabia from 1979 until 1981 and another at <unk> in 1985 , he continued his teaching duties at Virginia Tech until retirement in December 1991 as Professor Emeritus of Physics . During the latter part of his career , Ijaz published papers that focused on methods and results in teaching , religion and science and other aspects of physics that did not form part of his technical research in earlier years . Also a physicist and teaching researcher at Virginia Tech , Lubna Razia Ijaz established a scholarship in 1996 that is awarded to students involved in physics education . 
 = = = Oak Ridge National Laboratories = = = 
 Mujaddid Ijaz began his research work at the Oak Ridge National Laboratories ( ORNL ) in 1966 under Virginia Tech funding contributed to the UNISOR program . UNISOR was a consortium at that time of 13 institutions whose research scientists were collaborating at Oak Ridge supported by U.S. Energy Department grants together with Oak Ridge Associated Universities , of which Virginia Tech was one . Ijaz 's research focused on the discovery of new isotopes using ORNL 's High Flux Isotope Reactor . The reactor was built in 1965 with the highest neutron flux of any reactor at the time . It produced more medical isotopes while allowing higher fidelity of materials research than any other reactor available in the U.S. Energy Department 's science and energy laboratory system during the 1970s . Ijaz and his colleagues at Oak Ridge , led by Kenneth S. Toth , used the High Flux Reactor to discover new isotopes and map characteristics of existing isotopes , including isotopes of <unk> , Ytterbium , Thulium , Osmium , Hafnium , Tungsten , Mercury , Titanium , and Lead . In December 1982 , physicists at the University of Arizona used the mercury isotopes discovered by Toth , Ijaz et al. to successfully model behavior expected of heavier particles than traditional accelerator experiments could produce at the time due to energy limitations . 
 During the 1970s , Ijaz participated in the Atoms for Peace initiative created by President Eisenhower in 1953 to help the post @-@ World War II international community cope with nuclear power . Pakistan 's first facility , a 5 MW PARR @-@ I pool @-@ type facility , was provided by the United States in 1965 . The reactor began operations on December 21 , 1965 under the supervision of Pakistani scientists led by Abdus Salam . 
 = = = Notable collaborations = = = 
 Mujaddid Ijaz collaborated with notable physicists and mathematicians throughout his 27 @-@ year career . Most notable among these were his collaborations with Abdus Salam whose groundbreaking work in electroweak interactions together with American physicists Steven Weinberg and Sheldon Glashow earned them the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1979 . 
 In 1976 , Salam recommended creating an international forum for the advancement of science and technology to be hosted by Pakistan in the Hazara region while serving as Science Advisor to the Prime Minister of Pakistan . Since then , the <unk> Physics Conferences has gathered notable scientists from around the world during summer breaks to break the intellectual isolation faced by Pakistani scientists . Ijaz participated in these conferences several times during the mid @-@ 1970s under National Science Foundation grants . He was also a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a fellow of the American Physical Society . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mujaddid Ijaz married Razia Begum ( nee Nazir ) in June 1960 prior to emigrating to the United States . Razia later took her husband 's chosen name , Lubna , when they both became naturalized American citizens on January 5 , 1970 . They had five children : Mansoor , Farouk , Atif and Mujeeb . Neelam , their only daughter , was born in Pakistan . 
 The <unk> initially settled in Blacksburg , where Virginia Tech was situated , and lived there from 1964 until 1969 . After several years of living in the rural community of Floyd , Virginia , they returned to <unk> , a township near Virginia Tech , in 1973 , building a home in the Appalachian Mountains that today remains the family 's homestead . 
 Mujaddid Ijaz died on July 9 , 1992 at his home in Shawsville , Virginia of complications arising from a protracted battle with brain and lung cancer . He was buried in traditional Muslim rituals at the site of his most favored farm in Alum Ridge , surrounded by a large gathering of his family from around the United States and his physics colleagues and friends from southwestern Virginia . President George H. W. Bush consoled Ijaz 's widow in a letter dated July 24 , 1992 . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 J. E. Campbell ; M. A. Ijaz ( 1969 ) . " A study of resonance production in six @-@ pronged Pi @-@ P interactions at 7 @.@ 0 GeV / c " . Nuclear Physics B , vol . 12 , pp. 549 @-@ 560 . 
 M. A. Ijaz ; J. E. Campbell ( 1969 ) . " Distribution of transverse and longitudinal momentum in π − p interactions at 7 @.@ 0 GeV / c " . Nuovo Cimento Della Societa Italiana Di <unk> A , vol . 61 , no . 2 , pp. 307 @-@ 319 . 
 M. A. Ijaz ; J. E. Campbell ; A. Naeem ( 1968 ) . " Transverse momentum distribution of pions in two and six prong events from <unk> collisions at 7 @.@ 0 GeV / c " . Canadian Journal of Physics , vol . 46 . 
 M. A. Ijaz ; J. Campbell ( 1968 ) . " Some characteristic features of six prong pi @-@ p interactions at 7 @.@ 0 GeV / c " . Nuclear Physics B , vol . 7 , pp. 175 @-@ 182 . 
 = Princes Street , Dunedin = 
 Princes Street ( often misspelt as " Princess Street " ) is a major street in Dunedin , the second largest city in the South Island of New Zealand . It runs south @-@ southwest for two kilometres from The Octagon in the city centre to the Oval sports ground , close to the city 's Southern Cemetery . North of The Octagon , George Street continues the line of Princes Street north @-@ northeast for two and a half kilometres . Princes Street is straight and undulates as it skirts the edge of the City Rise to its northwest . The part of the street immediately below The Octagon is the steepest section , as the road traverses an old cutting through Bell Hill . 
 Princes Street was developed during Dunedin 's 1860s boom from the Central Otago gold rush , and consequently is one of New Zealand 's most historic streets , with about 70 buildings in close proximity listed on the New Zealand Historic Places Trust Register . Originally the site of the city 's wharf , a substantial area of land to the east of the street was formerly part of Otago Harbour , much of it reclaimed via rock removed during the lowering of Bell Hill which separated Princes Street from northern Dunedin in the early years of settlement . In the years following the gold rush , Princes Street was the heart of Dunedin 's central business district , but much of the city 's main retail area has now shifted north to George Street . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early years of Dunedin 's settlement , much of the city 's growth was on two areas of reasonably flat land close to the harbour , separated by the large Bell Hill and an area of low swampy land . The northern of these two flat areas surrounded the floodplain of the Water of Leith , a small river that runs through Dunedin . As the city grew the swamp was drained to become the new city 's centre , and the hill was lowered by excavation to allow access between the two areas of settlement . A street grid was set up with the main road split in two by the city centre ( now The Octagon ) - Princes Street to the south and George Street to the north . As with many of the city 's other place names , both these names and that of the Water of Leith reflect the names of places in Edinburgh . 
 In the settlement 's early days , Bell Hill proved a major obstacle to travel south of the city centre , and major excavation work was carried out to provide access to the south . A cutting was made in the hill in 1858 , and during the 1860s the hill was lowered by some 14 metres ( 46 ft ) . The cutting allowed for the passage of transport between the two parts of the town . The southern flank of the hill was also completely removed ( that area now being occupied by Queen 's Gardens ) . The stone removed from the hill was used as construction material for many of the city 's first permanent buildings , and also as fill to reclaim the northern end of the Southern Endowment along the edge of the harbour . This reclamation work added a considerable area to the central city ; the original docks , close to the Exchange area of Princes Street , are now several hundred metres inland . 
 The area of Princes Street between the Exchange and Market Reserve was a frequent source of dispute in the early years of European settlement . This area , at that time on the foreshore of Otago Harbour was a traditional landing site for Māori waka . Captain Cargill , the founder of the new city , wished to follow the British practice of keeping the foreshore as public land . As the town spread , the area around the landing site became populated by settlers , and visiting Maori relied on the coastal strip as a place to set up their encampments . The southern Commissioner for Crown Lands , Walter Mantell noted the problem and proposed to his superiors in Wellington that a site be found at which the Māori could erect permanent structures , naming the Princes Street foreshore as the preferred site . Mantell and Cargill , who had been bitter political opponents for the control of the early settlement , quickly found themselves at loggerheads over the proposal , and disputes over the ownership and allocation of the land dragged on for over two decades , finally being settled in the courts in 1877 . 
 In the years following the Central Otago Gold Rush of the 1860s Dunedin grew rapidly , with much of the growth being centred on Princes Street . In the city 's early years this road was notorious for its unformed rough nature , a consequence of the work on Bell Hill , and led to Dunedin 's early nickname of " Mud @-@ <unk> " . The prosperity brought by the gold rush led to a boom in construction , and within a handful of years , the area around lower Princes Street became the most prosperous in the country . Many of the prominent grand buildings of this part of Dunedin date from this period , and numerous structures in the area have New Zealand Historic Places Trust classification as a result . 
 There is a considerable photographic record of early Princes Street , largely thanks to the presence in the street of the studios of the Burton Brothers , pioneering New Zealand photographers . Many of their images , and those of other early Dunedin photographers , were collated and published in a series of books by photographic historian Hardwicke Knight , one of which — a collection of photographic works by Daniel Louis Mundy — was entitled Princes Street by gaslight ( 1977 ) . 
 Several notable companies have either been founded or had their headquarters in Princes Street . Notable among these were The <unk> and General Importing Company of New Zealand , later simply known as The <unk> , <unk> 's , and H.E. Shacklock . The first New Zealand headquarters of Briscoes were also located on Princes Street . 
 = = Route = = 
 = = = The " Top 100 " = = = 
