 From the Octagon , Princes Street initially rises as it passes through a commercial district formerly commonly known as the Top 100 , crossing the outer Octagon of Moray Place before descending through the original cutting of Bell Hill towards the Exchange . The Top 100 theoretically takes its name from the 100 retail businesses which line Princes Street from the Octagon to the Exchange , although the actual number of businesses is not one hundred . This part of the city is sometimes seen as the creative heart of Dunedin , with numerous art galleries , video production companies , and the city 's professional theatre ( the Fortune Theatre ) all being based in the area from Moray Place to Rattray Street . 
 Some parts of the Bell Hill cutting are still visible from Princes Street , though the most obvious escarpment of the hill is found between Moray Place and Queen 's Gardens , close to First Church . From Princes Street , the most notable part of the cutting is at Dowling Street , 300 metres south of the Octagon . Dowling Street narrows significantly above this intersection . The Dowling Street Steps , a 1926 structure listed by the New Zealand Historic Places Trust , rise from close to the Princes Street @-@ Dowling Street intersection , ascending a cliff that was formed as a result of the original work on Bell Hill . 
 = = = The Exchange = = = 
 The Exchange , on Princes Street 400 metres south of The Octagon , was the original financial heart of the city , but the CBD has drifted north to its current location on George Street . Princes Street still contains many of the city 's older and more stately business properties , particularly in the few blocks from The Exchange south . This area is also the lowest part of the street , as it descends from the remains of Bell Hill . This area , now several hundred metres inland from the edge of the Otago Harbour , was the site of the original landing place of settlers from the two ships which brought the Otago Association 's settlers to Dunedin . The two ships , the John Wickliffe and the Philip Laing , arrived in early 1848 . As they could not negotiate the harbour , they set anchor at the Otago Heads . Settlers from the ships travelled by smaller rowing boat from there to Dunedin . Massive reclamation of the area led to the creation of a wide strip of land , since occupied by commercial premises , warehousing , and the main rail line . The original nature of the site is reflected in the names of Jetty Street and Water Street , both of which cross Princes Street close to the Exchange . This part of Princes Street was at one point the location of a bridge across a small stream , the <unk> Stream , now diverted underground . A spring which fed the stream is still used as the source of water for Speight 's Brewery , which is located 200 metres to the northwest on Rattray Street . 
 The former Exchange Building , from which The Exchange takes its name , was an impressive structure , designed by William Mason as a Post Office and later occupied by the University of Otago and the Otago Museum . Next to this was the 1863 Customhouse building , and outside the two was an open space known as Customhouse Square . The Exchange building was pulled down in 1969 , and it was largely the destruction of this building that led to changes in attitudes by <unk> regarding the change of their cityscape . Since this time , changes to the city 's old buildings have been met with vociferous protests . The Customhouse building is also long since gone . Today , the site of the buildings is the location of Dunedin 's biggest office block , John Wickliffe House , and the nearby John Wickliffe Plaza . Both are named for the John Wickliffe , the first of the two ships which brought the Otago Association 's settlers to Dunedin ( a nearby building , Philip Laing House , is named for the other of these two ships ) . Despite this , the area is the site of several prominent Victorian buildings , notably former bank buildings at the northern end of the area . Other imposing buildings in the area include the Chief Post Office building , the proposed site of a hotel , and - one block to the east - Consultancy House , a seven @-@ storey 1908 building regarded ( by dint of its construction methods ) as Dunedin 's first skyscraper . John Wickliffe Plaza is also the site of one of Dunedin 's more notable public monuments , dedicated to city founder Captain William Cargill . This monument , designed by Charles Robert <unk> and built in 1863 @-@ 4 , was originally sited in the Octagon , but was moved to the Exchange in 1872 . 
 The Exchange was at one time a complex intersection with two busy streets , Rattray Street and High Street . These lead from State Highway 1 at Queen 's Gardens ( an open park containing the city 's main war memorial , Dunedin Cenotaph , close to which lies the Otago Settlers ' Museum and the Dunedin Chinese Garden ) 200 metres to the east of Princes Street , to the older hill suburbs to the west . Though these streets originally both crossed Princes Street , civic planning has reduced High Street at the intersection to a minor road , and John Wickliffe Plaza now covers part of the original intersection . Apart from the Cargill Monument , the Plaza contains several other items of public sculpture , notably a series of three small brass penguins called " We are not alone " , sculpted by Parry Jones and unveiled in 1999 . A Historic Places Trust blue plaque at the foot of the Cargill Monument marks the location of the first Salvation Army meeting in New Zealand , held at the site in April 1883 . 
 = = = Below the Exchange = = = 
 The lower Exchange and area immediately to the south of it contains some other notable buildings , including several of Dunedin 's more notable former and current public houses . Among these are Wain 's Hotel , the Provincial Hotel ( at the foot of Stafford Street ) , the Empire Tavern , and the former Prince of Wales Hotel . Wain 's Hotel , immediately opposite the former Post Office building , is an imposing Italianate structure built in 1878 from designs by Mason and Wales . The Empire Tavern also has a long history , and claims to be Dunedin 's oldest pub , having been continuously licensed since 1858 . Its recent past is closely tied with the Dunedin Sound music scene of the 1980s , of which it was a principal venue . Prior to its gutting by fire in the 1980s , the Prince of Wales Hotel , a block further down Princes Street , was noted for an unusual gimmick , in that the upstairs restaurant facilities were extensively themed on old railway carriages , and included in their decor several original vintage pieces of rolling stock . The Prince of Wales was later ( 1992 – 2010 ) the location of one of the city 's top restaurants , Bell Pepper Blues . 
 Lower Princes Street rises slightly from the Exchange before dropping down , becoming flat for the final kilometre of its length . Here , there is a mix of commercial , wholesale , and light industrial properties , with only occasional retail shops . The street itself widens from thee crest below the Exchange , becoming a dual carriageway from this point south to the major junction at the southern end of the Oval . Several notable buildings are still found in the lower Princes Street area , among them the former H.E. Shacklock building and the Crown Roller Mills Building ; the latter in particular is a notable landmark . 
 The Crown Roller Mills building is not in Princes Street itself , but rather lies at the foot of Manor Place , close to its intersection with Princes Street . It stands at the edge of a small area of parkland called the Market Reserve , at the opposite edge of which is the city 's main bus depot . This area was swampland when the first European settlers arrived in Dunedin , but was reclaimed and did host a regular market for a few years from the 1870s . The market was not well @-@ supported , however , and eventually folded . The bus depot is located on the site of the city 's 1902 Tram workshops . The Market Reserve also contains a children 's playground and , at the edge closes to the Crown Roller Mills Building , a small monument dedicated to Otago workers who have lost their lives while at work . This simple bluestone memorial was erected in 2003 by the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions on a site donated by the Dunedin City Council . 
 At the bottom end of Princes Street is the former Dunedin Metropolitan Club building , now home to Natural History New Zealand , one of the country 's leading television production companies . Opposite this lies a large recreation reserve , which — despite its roughly triangular shape — is called the Oval , or more correctly , Kensington Oval . Kensington Oval contains mainly cricket and association football pitches , and also caters for rugby , hockey , and softball . The Oval also contains one of the city 's main war memorials , dedicated to the fallen of the Boer War campaign . This lies close to the Oval 's northernmost point . Close to the Oval are two major road junctions . At the north end , a link road connects Princes Street with the city 's one @-@ way street system ( part of State Highway 1 ) and with Anderson 's Bay Road , a major arterial route to South Dunedin and Otago Peninsula . The part of Princes Street close to the Oval , as well as several other nearby streets , is used annually as part of the Dunedin Street Circuit , a temporary inner city motor @-@ racing circuit used during the week @-@ long Southern Festival of Speed . 
 At the southern end of the Oval is a further junction , with Princes Street terminating in a link road to South Dunedin 's main street , King Edward Street , and a further road skirting the edge of a hilly spur to join South Road at the northern end of the suburb of Caversham . This latter road passes Dunedin 's Southern Cemetery , the oldest and arguably most historic of the city 's main cemeteries . The Southern Cemetery 's earliest graves are from 1858 , and it contains the remains of many of the city 's founding fathers , including Captain William Cargill , Thomas Burns , and Johnny Jones . The cemetery is notable for its large Chinese and Jewish sections . 
 = = Transport links = = 
 The top section of Princes Street , from the Octagon to the Exchange , has long been the hub of Dunedin 's public transport system . Buses from the north of the city largely pass along George Street and into the Octagon , those from the south pass into the southern end of Princes Street , and those from the hill suburbs arrive at the Octagon via Stuart Street or at the Exchange via High and Rattray Streets . Almost all of these use upper Princes Street between the Exchange and the Octagon as part of their route . 
 In the city 's early years trams followed many of these same routes . Until the demise of the system in the 1950s , this area was also at the heart of the Dunedin cable tramway system , with the longer lines running up the slopes of City Rise via High , Rattray , or Stuart Streets . 
 = = Heritage New Zealand listed buildings = = 
 Few , if any , streets in New Zealand contain as many New Zealand Historic Places Trust Category I or Category II protected buildings as Princes Street . These buildings include the following : 
 The Haynes ' Building , 42 @-@ 72 Princes St ( cnr . Princes St and Moray Place ) ( Category I ) . Often now known as the Savoy Building after the restaurant which is its main tenant , this four @-@ storey building was designed by Edmund Anscombe and completed in 1914 . The building , with its distinctive cupola , is a major landmark of upper Princes Street , lying one block south of the Octagon . 
 The Queen 's Building , 109 Princes St ( Category II ) . An early , if small , skyscraper , the five @-@ storey Queen 's Building was completed in 1929 on the site of the former Queen 's Theatre , to a design of J. Louis Salmond . 
 Excelsior Apartments , 33 Dowling Street ( <unk> of Dowling and Princes Sts ) ( Category II ) . Standing at the heart of Dunedin 's 19th century Central Business District , the Excelsior Apartments are an 1888 structure originally built as a tavern and hotel . The building was designed by Robert Forrest . 
 The National Bank Building , 193 Princes St ( Category I ) . Designed by William Dunning , an Australian architect , and Charles Fleming MacDonald , this building is reminiscent of many of the grander buildings in Melbourne and Sydney . Constructed in a neo @-@ Baroque style , it uses Tasmanian sandstone and trachyte as a major feature in its façade , and was completed in 1913 . Continuing the history of the building be tenanted by financial institutions , the building was for many years home to MTF , a vehicle finance company . 
 The Façade of the old Woolworth 's Building , 194 Princes St ( Category II ) . 
 The Bank of New Zealand Building , 205 Princes St ( cnr . Princes and High Sts ) ( Category I ) . Designed in Venetian Renaissance styling , the 1882 <unk> building stands just two doors along from the National Bank building . The William <unk> @-@ designed building is notable for the richly carved exterior work by Louis Godfrey and moulded ceilings in its interior . The façade combines Doric , Ionic and Corinthian styles , and makes good use of Port Chalmers bluestone and Oamaru stone , a compact , cream @-@ coloured limestone . 
 The Southern Cross Hotel , 118 High St ( cnr . High and Princes Sts ) ( Category I ) . One of Dunedin 's principal hotels , the Southern Cross is housed in an impressive 1883 building designed by Louis <unk> . It occupies a prominent corner site in the heart of the Exchange . Formerly the Grand Hotel , the building has been extended considerably on several occasions in its history , and was considerably renovated in the 1980s , though most of its original features remain . The Southern Cross Hotel Building is home to Dunedin Casino . 
 The Clarion Building , 282 @-@ 292 Princes St ( Category II ) . This 1878 William Mason building was originally a major drapery store in the heart of what was then Dunedin 's retail district . The exterior is of Venetian Gothic style , though the interior has been largely redeveloped in recent years . 
 The Chief Post Office Building , 283 Princes St ( Category II ) . The Chief Post Office Building has not had an easy history . Designed by John Mair and the Governments Architects Office , construction was severely delayed by the Great Depression . Originally intended to be built in the early 1930s , it was not completed until 1937 . A sturdy and impressive structure , possibly modelled on some of the government architecture in vogue in the United Kingdom during this era , the building held Dunedin 's main post office branch until the late 1980s . Since this time it has lain largely empty ; many plans had been put forward for its use , including a hotel , a new site for the city 's public library , and offices for either the Dunedin City Council or Otago Regional Council . In 2013 , an extensive renovation of the lower few floors began , with Silver Fern Farms moving in on the ground and first floors as anchor tenant in February 2014 . Subsequently , other tenancies have been taken up by a gym and dance studio , and long @-@ term executive and hotel accommodation is planned for the remaining floors . 
 Wain 's Hotel , 310 Princes St ( Category I ) . Built in 1879 to a design by Mason & Wales , Wain 's Hotel remains Dunedin 's grandest hotel building , and reflects the opulence which followed the Central Otago Gold Rush of the 1860s . The interior has been substantially remodelled , but the exterior 's Italianate Renaissance façade remains largely intact . This latter features much intricate work by mason George Munro , notably the figures found carved within the panelled spandrels and supporting the façade 's oriel windows . 
 The ANZ Bank Building , Dunedin , 319 Princes St ( Category II ) . Robert Lawson 's 1874 Union Bank of Australasia building is the only classical temple form structure in Dunedin . It is a partner to the architect 's work on bank buildings in Oamaru , and features carved Corinthian columns by Godfrey . The building continued to be used as a bank until 1992 , and now houses a night club . 
 The H.E. Shacklock Building , 595 @-@ 625 Princes St ( Category II ) . The only listed manufacturing building in Princes Street , the Shacklock building covers a large site at the southern end of Princes Street opposite the Market Reserve . 
 The Cargill Monument at John Wickliffe Plaza is also listed ( Category I ) , as are numerous buildings and structures which lie close to the intersection of side roads with Princes Street ( e.g. , the Category I Crown Roller Mills Building in Manor Place and the Category II Dowling Street Steps ) . 
 = Tropical Depression Nine ( 2001 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Nine caused minor flooding in Central America in September 2001 . The ninth tropical cyclone of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season , the depression developed from a tropical wave in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on September 19 . Without significant intensification , the depression made landfall in Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua early on September 20 , which was about six hours after becoming a tropical cyclone . Once inland over Central America , the depression significant deteriorated and dissipated later that day , after lasting for less than 24 hours . The remnants emerged into the Pacific Ocean and later developed into Hurricane Juliette . Impact from the depression was rather minor . Although sustained winds on land did not exceed 30 mph ( 55 km / h ) , a fallen tree injured three children in El Salvador . In addition , heavy rainfall flooded at least 200 homes in San Salvador and inundated 15 farms . The depression did not result in fatalities and damage caused by it is unknown . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean on September 11 . After tracking westward for five days , the wave entered the Caribbean Sea on September 16 . Convection steadily increased in both coverage and intensity , and by September 19 , the system reached the southwestern Caribbean Sea . Satellite imagery and surface observations indicated that Tropical Depression Nine formed at 1800 UTC on September 19 , while located 50 miles ( 80 km ) north @-@ northwest of San Andres Island . 
 Initially , the depression had two centers of circulation , one east of Costa Rica and one east of Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua . Because the thunderstorm activity was more intense and persistent at the northern circulation , advisories were initiated using the latter . Computer forecast models predicted that the depression would make landfall in Nicaragua and then enter the eastern Pacific Ocean within 36 hours . Other computer forecast models separated it into two systems , with the northern center going into the Bay of Campeche and the southern center going westward through Costa Rica and into the Pacific while strengthening into a " significant tropical cyclone " . Although only a tropical depression , upper level outflow was circular and was indicative of a more " mature " tropical cyclone . 
 At 0000 UTC on September 20 , the depression made landfall near Punta Cabezas , Nicaragua with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and weakening was immediately forecast . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center issued its final advisory , as the lower level center became poorly defined because of interaction with the mountains of Central America and deep thunderstorm activity had significantly diminished . The National Hurricane Center noted the possibility of regeneration , if the circulation entered into the Pacific Ocean within a few days . Although the depression never redeveloped , the remnant tropical wave emerged into the Pacific Ocean and contributed to the development of Hurricane Juliette on September 21 . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Upon development of the tropical depression , a tropical storm watch was issued from Bluefields , Nicaragua to Dangriga , Belize . When the depression made landfall , this warning was discontinued . Residents in El Salvador were advised to avoid rivers due to possible flooding but no mandatory evacuations were put in place . A green alert was issued in Nicaragua due to the threat of heavy rains and high winds . This alert remained in effect until September 21 . Three children were injured by a fallen tree in the country . The highest sustained winds on land from the depression were reported at Punta Cabezas , Nicaragua with winds of 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . A total of 1 @.@ 8 inches ( 46 mm ) of rain was recorded in Bluefields while up to 5 @.@ 9 inches ( 150 mm ) was estimated to have fallen in mountainous areas . 
 In El Salvador , heavy rains from the depression helped alleviate drought conditions ; however , flooding also inundated 200 homes in San Salvador along the <unk> River . Fifteen farms were inundated by flooding , five of which were destroyed . Seventy people evacuated to shelters set up after the storm by the local Red Cross and armed forces . Military crews were quickly deployed to help clean up the damages on September 22 . Although it passed over Central America , there are no reports of damage or deaths in the region due to the tropical depression . 
 = Madonna ( entertainer ) = 
 Madonna Louise Ciccone ( / <unk> / ) ( born August 16 , 1958 ) is an American singer , songwriter , dancer , actress , and businesswoman . She achieved popularity by pushing the boundaries of lyrical content in mainstream popular music and imagery in her music videos , which became a fixture on MTV . Madonna is known for reinventing both her music and image , and for maintaining her autonomy within the recording industry . Music critics have acclaimed her musical productions , which have generated some controversy . Referred to as the " Queen of Pop " , Madonna is often cited as an influence by other artists . 
 Born in Bay City , Michigan , Madonna moved to New York City in 1977 to pursue a career in modern dance . After performing in the music groups Breakfast Club and Emmy , she signed with Sire Records ( an auxiliary label of Warner Bros. Records ) in 1982 and released her self @-@ titled debut album the following year . She followed it with a series of commercially and critically successful albums , including the Grammy Award winners Ray of Light ( 1998 ) and Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) . Throughout her career , Madonna has written and produced most of her songs , with many of them reaching number one on the record charts , including " Like a Virgin " , " Papa Don 't Preach " , " Like a Prayer " , " Vogue " , " Take a Bow " , " Frozen " , " Music " , " Hung Up " , and " 4 Minutes " . 
 Madonna 's popularity was further enhanced by her film roles , including Desperately Seeking Susan ( 1985 ) , Dick Tracy ( 1990 ) , and Evita ( 1996 ) ; the latter earned her a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress . However , most of her other films have been panned by critics . Her other ventures include fashion design , writing children 's books , and filmmaking . She has been acclaimed as a businesswoman , particularly after she founded entertainment company Maverick ( including the label Maverick Records ) . In 2007 she signed an unprecedented US $ 120 million 360 deal with Live Nation , which led to a record deal with Interscope Records . 
 Having sold more than 300 million records worldwide , Madonna is recognized as the best @-@ selling female recording artist of all time by Guinness World Records . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) listed her as the best @-@ selling female rock artist of the 20th century and the second highest @-@ certified female artist in the United States , with 64 @.@ 5 million album units . Madonna is the highest @-@ grossing solo touring artist of all time , earning US $ 1 @.@ 31 billion from her concerts since 1990 . Madonna became one of the five founding members of the UK Music Hall of Fame and was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in her first year of eligibility . She was ranked at number one on VH1 's list of 100 Greatest Women in Music and number two ( behind only The Beatles ) on Billboard 's list of Greatest Hot 100 Artists of All Time . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1958 – 81 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Madonna was born to Catholic parents Silvio Anthony " Tony " Ciccone ( b . 1931 ) and Madonna Louise Fortin ( c . 1933 – December 1 , 1963 ) in Bay City , Michigan , on August 16 , 1958 . Her father 's parents were immigrants from Pacentro , Italy , while her mother was of French @-@ Canadian ancestry . Tony worked as an engineer designer for Chrysler and General Motors . Since Madonna had the same name as her mother , family members called her " Little <unk> " . She has two elder brothers , Anthony ( born 1956 ) and Martin ( born 1957 ) , and three younger siblings , Paula ( born 1959 ) , Christopher ( born 1960 ) , and Melanie ( born 1962 ) . 
 Upon being confirmed in 1966 , she adopted Veronica as a confirmation name . She was raised in the Detroit suburbs of Pontiac and Avon Township ( now Rochester Hills ) . Months before her mother died of breast cancer , Madonna noticed changes in her behavior and personality , although she did not understand the reason . Her mother was at a loss to explain her medical condition , and often began to cry when Madonna questioned her about it . Madonna later acknowledged that she had not grasped the concept of her mother dying . 
 Madonna turned to her paternal grandmother for solace . The Ciccone siblings resented housekeepers and invariably rebelled against anyone brought into their home ostensibly to take the place of their beloved mother . Madonna later told Vanity Fair that she saw herself in her youth as a " lonely girl who was searching for something . I wasn 't rebellious in a certain way . I cared about being good at something . I didn 't shave my underarms and I didn 't wear make @-@ up like normal girls do . But I studied and I got good grades .... I wanted to be somebody . " Terrified that her father Tony could be taken from her as well , Madonna was often unable to sleep unless she was near him . 
 In 1966 , Tony married the family 's housekeeper Joan Gustafson ; they had two children , Jennifer ( born 1967 ) and Mario ( born 1968 ) . At this point , Madonna started to resent him for decades , and developed a rebellious attitude . She attended St. Frederick 's and St. Andrew 's Catholic Elementary Schools , and West Middle School . Madonna was known for her high grade point average , and achieved notoriety for her unconventional behavior . She would perform cartwheels and handstands in the hallways between classes , dangle by her knees from the monkey bars during recess , and pull up her skirt during class — all so that the boys could see her underwear . 
 Madonna later attended Rochester Adams High School where she became a straight @-@ A student and a member of the cheerleading squad . After graduating , she received a dance scholarship to the University of Michigan School of Music , Theatre & Dance , and attended the American Dance Festival over the summer . She convinced her father to allow her to take ballet lessons and was persuaded by Christopher Flynn , her ballet teacher , to pursue a career in dance . 
 In 1978 , she dropped out of college and relocated to New York City . She had little money and worked as a waitress at Dunkin ' Donuts and with modern dance troupes , taking classes at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and eventually performing with Pear Lang Dance Theater . Madonna said of her move to New York , " It was the first time I 'd ever taken a plane , the first time I 'd ever gotten a taxi cab . I came here with $ 35 in my pocket . It was the bravest thing I 'd ever done . " She started to work as a backup dancer for other established artists . Madonna claimed that during a late night she was returning from a rehearsal , when a pair of men held her at knifepoint and forced her to perform fellatio . Madonna later commented that " the episode was a taste of my weakness , it showed me that I still could not save myself in spite of all the strong @-@ girl show . I could never forget it . " 
 While performing as a backup singer and dancer for the French disco artist Patrick Hernandez on his 1979 world tour , Madonna became romantically involved with musician Dan Gilroy . Together , they formed her first rock band , the Breakfast Club , for which Madonna sang and played drums and guitar . In 1980 or 1981 she left Breakfast Club and , with her former boyfriend Stephen Bray as drummer , formed the band Emmy . The two began writing songs together , and Madonna later decided to market herself as a solo act . Their music impressed DJ and record producer Mark Kamins who arranged a meeting between Madonna and Sire Records founder Seymour Stein . 
 = = = 1982 – 85 : Career breakthrough and first marriage = = = 
 After Madonna signed a singles deal with Sire , her debut single , " Everybody " , was released in October 1982 , and the second , " Burning Up " , in March 1983 . Both became big club hits in the United States , reaching number three on Hot Dance Club Songs chart compiled by Billboard magazine . After this success , she started developing her debut album , Madonna , which was primarily produced by Reggie Lucas of Warner Bros. However , she was not happy with the completed tracks and disagreed with Lucas ' production techniques , so decided to seek additional help . 
 Madonna moved in with boyfriend John " Jellybean " Benitez , asking his help for finishing the album 's production . Benitez remixed most of the tracks and produced " Holiday " , which was her third single and her first international top @-@ ten hit . The overall sound of Madonna was dissonant and in the form of upbeat synthetic disco , using some of the new technology of the time , like the Linn drum machine , Moog bass and the OB @-@ X synthesizer . The album was released in July 1983 and peaked at number eight on the Billboard 200 six months later , in 1984 . It yielded two more top @-@ ten singles on the Billboard Hot 100 , " Borderline " and " Lucky Star " . 
 Madonna 's look and style of dressing , her performances , and her music videos influenced young girls and women . Her style became one of the female fashion trends of the 1980s . Created by stylist and jewelry designer Maripol , the look consisted of lace tops , skirts over capri pants , fishnet stockings , jewelry bearing the crucifix , bracelets , and bleached hair . Madonna achieved global recognition after the release of her second studio album , Like a Virgin , in November 1984 . It topped the charts in several countries and became her first number @-@ one album on the Billboard 200 . The title track , " Like a Virgin " , topped the Hot 100 chart for six consecutive weeks . It attracted the attention of organizations who complained that the song and its accompanying video promoted premarital sex and undermined family values , and moralists sought to have the song and video banned . 
 Madonna was criticized for her performance of " Like a Virgin " at the first 1984 MTV Video Music Awards ( VMA ) . She appeared on stage atop a giant wedding cake , wearing a wedding dress and white gloves . The performance is noted by MTV as an iconic moment in VMA history . In later years , Madonna commented that she was terrified of the performance . The next hit was " Material Girl " promoted by her video , a mimicry of Marilyn Monroe 's performance of the song " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " from the 1953 film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . While filming this video , Madonna started dating actor Sean Penn . They married on her birthday in 1985 . Like a Virgin was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America and sold more than 21 million copies worldwide . In February 1984 , according to the film director Sir Richard Attenborough , Madonna auditioned at the Royale Theatre on Broadway for a dance role in his movie version of A Chorus Line using her birth @-@ name of Ciccone , but he rejected her . 
 Madonna entered mainstream films in February 1985 , beginning with a brief appearance as a club singer in Vision Quest , a romantic drama film . Its soundtrack contained two new singles , her U.S. number @-@ one single , " Crazy for You " and " Gambler " . She also played the title role in the 1985 comedy Desperately Seeking Susan , a film which introduced the song " Into the Groove " , her first number @-@ one single in the UK . Although Madonna was not the lead actress for the film , her profile was such that the movie widely became considered ( and marketed ) as a Madonna vehicle . The New York Times film critic Vincent Canby named it one of the ten best films of 1985 . 
 Beginning in April 1985 , Madonna embarked on her first concert tour in North America , The Virgin Tour , with the Beastie Boys as her opening act . She progressed from playing CBGB and the Mudd Club to playing large sporting arenas . At that time she released two more hit singles from the album , " Angel " and " Dress You Up " . In July , Penthouse and Playboy magazines published a number of nude photos of Madonna , taken in New York in 1978 . She had posed for the photographs as she needed money at the time , and was paid as little as $ 25 a session . The publication of the photos caused a media uproar , but Madonna remained " unapologetic and defiant " . The photographs were ultimately sold for up to $ 100 @,@ 000 . She referred to these events at the 1985 outdoor Live Aid charity concert , saying that she would not take her jacket off because " [ the media ] might hold it against me ten years from now . " 
 = = = 1986 – 91 : True Blue , Who 's That Girl , and Like a Prayer = = = 
 In June 1986 , Madonna released her third studio album , True Blue , which was inspired by and dedicated to Sean Penn . Rolling Stone magazine was generally impressed with the effort , writing that the album " sound [ s ] as if it comes from the heart " . It resulted in three singles making it to number @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Live to Tell " , " Papa Don 't Preach " and " Open Your Heart " , and two more top @-@ five singles : " True Blue " and " La Isla Bonita " . The album topped the charts in over 28 countries worldwide , an unprecedented achievement at the time , and became her best @-@ selling studio album of her career to this date with sales of 25 million . In the same year , Madonna starred in the critically panned film Shanghai Surprise , for which she received her first Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress . She made her theatrical debut in a production of David Rabe 's Goose and Tom @-@ Tom ; the film and play both co @-@ starred Penn . The next year , Madonna was featured in the film Who 's That Girl . She contributed four songs to its soundtrack , including the title track and " Causing a Commotion " . 
 Madonna embarked on the Who 's That Girl World Tour in July 1987 , which continued until September . It broke several attendance records , including over 130 @,@ 000 audience in a concert near Paris , which remains her biggest concert attendance ever . Later that year , she released a remix album of past hits , titled You Can Dance , which reached number 14 on the Billboard 200 . After an annulment in December 1987 , Madonna filed for divorce from Penn in January 1989 , citing irreconcilable differences . 
 In January 1989 , Madonna signed an endorsement deal with soft @-@ drink manufacturer , Pepsi . In one of her Pepsi commercials , she debuted her song " Like a Prayer " . The corresponding music video featured many Catholic symbols such as stigmata and cross burning , and a dream of making love to a saint , leading the Vatican to condemn the video . Religious groups sought to ban the commercial and boycott Pepsi products . Pepsi revoked the commercial and canceled her sponsorship contract . The song was included on Madonna 's fourth studio album , Like a Prayer , which was co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray . Madonna received positive feedback for the album , with Rolling Stone writing that it was " as close to art as pop music gets " . Like a Prayer peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 15 million copies worldwide , with 4 million copies sold in the U.S. alone . Six singles were released from the album , including " Like a Prayer " , which reached number one , and " Express Yourself " and " Cherish " , both peaking at number two . By the end of the 1980s , Madonna was named as the " Artist of the Decade " by MTV , Billboard and Musician magazine . 
 Madonna starred as Breathless Mahoney in the film Dick Tracy ( 1990 ) , with Warren Beatty playing the title role . Her performance led to a Saturn Award nomination for Best Actress . To accompany the film , she released the soundtrack album , I 'm Breathless , which included songs inspired by the film 's 1930s setting . It also featured the US number @-@ one hit " Vogue " and " Sooner or Later " , which earned songwriter Stephen Sondheim an Academy Award for Best Original Song in 1991 . While shooting the film , Madonna began a relationship with Beatty , which dissolved by the end of 1990 . In April 1990 , Madonna began her Blond Ambition World Tour , which was held until August . Rolling Stone called it an " elaborately choreographed , sexually provocative extravaganza " and proclaimed it " the best tour of 1990 " . The tour generated strong negative reaction from religious groups for her performance of " Like a Virgin " , during which two male dancers caressed her body before she simulated masturbation . In response , Madonna said , " The tour in no way hurts anybody 's sentiments . It 's for open minds and gets them to see sexuality in a different way . Their own and others " . The Laserdisc release of the tour won Madonna a Grammy Award in 1992 for Best Long Form Music Video . 
 The Immaculate Collection , Madonna 's first greatest @-@ hits compilation album , was released in November 1990 . It included two new songs , " Justify My Love " and " Rescue Me " . The album was certified diamond by RIAA and sold over 30 million copies worldwide , becoming the best @-@ selling compilation album by a solo artist in history . " Justify My Love " reached number one in the U.S. and top ten worldwide . Its music video featured scenes of sadomasochism , bondage , same @-@ sex kissing , and brief nudity . The video was deemed too sexually explicit for MTV and was banned from the network . Madonna responded to the banning : " Why is it that people are willing to go and watch a movie about someone getting blown to bits for no reason at all , and nobody wants to see two girls kissing and two men <unk> ? " 
 In December 1990 Madonna decided to leave Jennifer Lynch 's film , Boxing Helena , which she had previously agreed to star in , without any explanation to the producers . Around this time , Madonna had an eight @-@ month relationship with rapper Vanilla Ice ; he ended their relationship because of Madonna 's Sex book . Her first documentary film Truth or Dare ( known as In Bed with Madonna outside North America ) was released in May 1991 . The documentary chronicled her Blond Ambition World Tour . 
 = = = 1992 – 97 : Maverick , Erotica , Sex , Evita , and motherhood = = = 
 In 1992 , Madonna had a role in A League of Their Own as Mae <unk> , a baseball player on an all @-@ women 's team . She recorded the film 's theme song , " This Used to Be My Playground " , which became a Hot 100 number @-@ one hit . The same year , she founded her own entertainment company , Maverick , consisting of a record company ( Maverick Records ) , a film production company ( Maverick Films ) , and associated music publishing , television broadcasting , book publishing and merchandising divisions . The deal was a joint venture with Time Warner and paid Madonna an advance of $ 60 million . It gave her 20 % royalties from the music proceedings , the highest rate in the industry at the time , equaled only by Michael Jackson 's royalty rate established a year earlier with Sony . The first release from the venture was Madonna 's book , titled Sex . It consisted of sexually provocative and explicit images , photographed by Steven Meisel . The book received strong negative reaction from the media and the general public , but sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies at $ 50 each in a matter of days . At the same time she released her fifth studio album , Erotica , which debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 . Its title track peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . Erotica also produced five singles : " Deeper and Deeper " , " Bad Girl " , " Fever " , " Rain " and " Bye Bye Baby " . 
 Madonna had provocative imagery featured in the 1993 erotic thriller , Body of Evidence , a film which contained scenes of sadomasochism and bondage . It was poorly received by critics . She also starred in the film Dangerous Game , which was released straight to video in North America . The New York Times described the film as " angry and painful , and the pain feels real . " In September 1993 , Madonna embarked on The Girlie Show World Tour , in which she dressed as a whip @-@ cracking dominatrix surrounded by topless dancers . In Puerto Rico she rubbed the island 's flag between her legs on stage , resulting in outrage among the audience . In March 1994 , she appeared as a guest on the Late Show with David Letterman , using profanity that required censorship on television , and handing Letterman a pair of her panties and asking him to smell it . The releases of her sexually explicit films , albums and book , and the aggressive appearance on Letterman all made critics question Madonna as a sexual renegade . Critics and fans reacted negatively , who commented that " she had gone too far " and that her career was over . 
 Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli described her ballad " I 'll Remember " ( 1994 ) as an attempt to tone down her provocative image . The song was recorded for Alek Keshishian 's film With Honors . She made a subdued appearance with Letterman at an awards show and appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno after realizing that she needed to change her musical direction in order to sustain her popularity . With her sixth studio album , Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) , Madonna employed a softer image to try to improve the public perception . The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 and generated two U.S. top @-@ five hits , " Secret " and " Take a Bow " , the latter topping the Hot 100 for seven weeks , the longest period of any Madonna single . At the same time , she became romantically involved with fitness trainer Carlos Leon . Something to Remember , a collection of ballads , was released in November 1995 . The album featured three new songs : " You 'll See " , " One More Chance " , and a cover of Marvin Gaye 's " I Want You " . 
 In Evita ( 1996 ) , Madonna played the title role of Eva Perón . For a long time , Madonna had desired to play Perón and wrote to director Alan Parker to explain why she would be perfect for the part . She said later , " This is the role I was born to play . I put everything of me into this because it was much more than a role in a movie . It was exhilarating and intimidating at the same time ..... And I am prouder of Evita than anything else I have done . " After securing the role , she had vocal training and learned about the history of Argentina and Perón . During shooting she became ill several times due to the intense emotional effort required . However , as she told Oprah , she was also pregnant during the filming : " I was winded after every take . I had to lie on the couch every ten minutes so I could recover from dizzy spells , I was worried that I was shaking the baby around too much and that would injure it in some way . " Madonna wrote in her personal diary at the time : " Ironically , this feeling of vulnerability and weakness is helping me in the movie . I 'm sure Evita felt this way every day of her life once she discovered she was ill . " 
 After its release , Evita garnered critical appreciation . Zach Conner from Time magazine commented , " It 's a relief to say that Evita is pretty damn fine , well cast and handsomely visualized . Madonna once again confounds our expectations . She plays Evita with a poignant weariness and has more than just a bit of star quality . Love or hate Madonna @-@ Eva , she is a magnet for all eyes . " Madonna won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for the role . She released three singles from the Evita soundtrack album , including " You Must Love Me " ( which won an Academy Award for Best Original Song in 1997 ) and " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " . Madonna was later presented with the Artist Achievement Award by Tony Bennett at the 1996 Billboard Music Awards . On October 14 , 1996 , Madonna gave birth to Lourdes Maria Ciccone Leon , her daughter with Leon . Biographer Mary Cross writes that although Madonna was often ill during the filming and worried that her pregnancy would harm the film , she reached some important personal goals : " Now 38 years old , Madonna had at last triumphed on screen and achieved her dream of having a child , both in the same year . She had reached another turning point in her career , reinventing herself and her image with the public . " Her relationship with Carlos Leon ended in May 1997 ; she declared that they were " better off as best friends . " After Lourdes 's birth , Madonna became involved in Eastern mysticism and Kabbalah . She was introduced to Jewish mysticism by actress Sandra Bernhard in 1997 . 
 = = = 1998 – 2002 : Ray of Light , Music , and second marriage = = = 
 Madonna 's seventh studio album , Ray of Light , ( 1998 ) reflected a change in her image . She collaborated with electronica producer William Orbit and wanted to create a sound that could blend dance music with pop and British rock . American music critic Ann Powers explained that what Madonna searched for with Orbit " was a kind of a lushness that she wanted for this record . Techno and rave was happening in the 90 's and had a lot of different forms . There was very experimental , more hard stuff like Aphex Twin . There was party stuff like Fatboy Slim . That 's not what Madonna wanted for this . She wanted something more like a singer @-@ songwriter , really . And William Orbit provided her with that . " 
 The album garnered critical acclaim , with Slant Magazine calling it " one of the great pop masterpieces of the ' 90s " Ray of Light was honored with four Grammy Awards — including Best Pop Album and Best Dance Recording — and was nominated for both Album of the Year and Record of the Year . Rolling Stone listed it among " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . Commercially , the album peaked at number @-@ one in numerous countries and sold more than 16 million copies worldwide . The album 's first single , " Frozen " , became Madonna 's first single to debut at number one in the UK , while in the U.S. it became her sixth number @-@ two single , setting another record for Madonna as the artist with the most number two hits . The second single , " Ray of Light " , debuted at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 . The 1998 edition of Guinness Book of World Records documented that " no female artist has sold more records than Madonna around the world " . 
 In 1999 , Madonna signed to play a violin teacher in the film Music of the Heart but left the project , citing " creative differences " with director Wes Craven . She recorded the single " Beautiful Stranger " for the 1999 film Austin Powers : The Spy Who Shagged Me , which earned her a Grammy Award for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media . Madonna starred in the 2000 film The Next Best Thing , and contributed two songs to the film 's soundtrack ; " Time Stood Still " and a cover of Don McLean 's 1971 song " American Pie " . 
 Madonna released her eighth studio album , Music , in September 2000 . It featured elements from the electronica @-@ inspired Ray of Light era , and like its predecessor , received acclaim from critics . Collaborating with French producer Mirwais Ahmadzaï , Madonna commented : " I love to work with the weirdos that no one knows about — the people who have raw talent and who are making music unlike anyone else out there . Music is the future of sound . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic felt that " Music blows by in a kaleidoscopic rush of color , technique , style and substance . It has so many depth and layers that it 's easily as self @-@ aware and earnest as Ray of Light . " The album took the number @-@ one position in more than 20 countries worldwide and sold four million copies in the first ten days . In the U.S. , Music debuted at the top , and became her first number @-@ one album in eleven years since Like a Prayer . It produced three singles : the Hot 100 number @-@ one " Music " , " Don 't Tell Me " , and " What It Feels Like for a Girl " . The music video of " What It Feels Like for a Girl " depicted Madonna committing acts of crime and vandalism , and was banned by MTV and VH1 . 
 She met director Guy Ritchie , who would become her second husband , in November 1998 and gave birth to their son Rocco John Ritchie on August 11 , 2000 in Los Angeles . Rocco and Madonna suffered complications from the birth due to her experiencing placenta <unk> . He was christened at Dornoch Cathedral in Dornoch , Scotland , on December 21 , 2000 . Madonna married Ritchie the following day at nearby Skibo Castle . Her fifth concert tour , titled Drowned World Tour , started in June 2001 . The tour visited cities in the U.S. and Europe and was the highest @-@ grossing concert tour of the year by a solo artist , earning $ 75 million from 47 sold @-@ out shows . She also released her second greatest @-@ hits collection , titled GHV2 , to coincide with the home video release of the tour . GHV2 debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200 . 
 Madonna starred in the film Swept Away , directed by Ritchie . Released direct @-@ to @-@ video in the UK , the film was a commercial and critical failure . In May 2002 she appeared in London in the West End play Up For Grabs at the <unk> Theatre ( billed as ' Madonna Ritchie ' ) , to universally bad reviews and was described as " the evening 's biggest disappointment " by one . That October , she released " Die Another Day " , the title song of the James Bond film Die Another Day , in which she had a cameo role , described by The Guardian film reviewer as " incredibly wooden " . The song reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and was nominated for both a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song and a Golden Raspberry for Worst Song . 
 = = = 2003 – 06 : American Life and Confessions on a Dance Floor = = = 
 Following Die Another Day , Madonna collaborated with fashion photographer Steven Klein in 2003 for an exhibition installation named X @-@ STaTIC Pro = CeSS . It included photography from a photo shoot in W magazine , and seven video segments . The installation ran from March to May in New York 's Deitch Projects gallery . It traveled the world in an edited form . The same year , Madonna released her ninth studio album , American Life , which was based on her observations of American society ; it received mixed reviews . She commented , " [ American Life ] was like a trip down memory lane , looking back at everything I 've accomplished and all the things I once valued and all the things that were important to me . " Larry Flick from The Advocate felt that " American Life is an album that is among her most adventurous and lyrically intelligent " while condemning it as " a lazy , half @-@ <unk> effort to sound and take her seriously . " The title song peaked at number 37 on the Hot 100 . Its original music video was canceled as Madonna thought that the video , featuring violence and war imagery , would be deemed unpatriotic since America was then at war with Iraq . With four million copies sold worldwide , American Life was the lowest @-@ selling album of her career at that point . 
 Madonna gave another provocative performance later that year at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , while singing " Hollywood " with Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , and Missy Elliott . Madonna sparked controversy for kissing Spears and Aguilera suggestively during the performance . In October 2003 , Madonna provided guest vocals on Spears ' single " Me Against the Music " . It was followed with the release of Remixed & Revisited . The EP contained remixed versions of songs from American Life and included " Your Honesty " , a previously unreleased track from the Bedtime Stories recording sessions . Madonna also signed a contract with Callaway Arts & Entertainment to be the author of five children 's books . The first of these books , titled The English Roses , was published in September 2003 . The story was about four English schoolgirls and their envy and jealousy of each other . Kate <unk> from The Guardian commented , " [ Madonna ] is an actress playing at what she can never be — a JK Rowling , an English rose . " The book debuted at the top of The New York Times Best Seller list and became the fastest @-@ selling children 's picture book of all time . 
 The next year Madonna and Maverick sued Warner Music Group and its former parent company Time Warner , claiming that mismanagement of resources and poor bookkeeping had cost the company millions of dollars . In return , Warner filed a countersuit alleging that Maverick had lost tens of millions of dollars on its own . The dispute was resolved when the Maverick shares , owned by Madonna and Ronnie <unk> , were purchased by Warner . Madonna and <unk> 's company became a wholly owned subsidiary of Warner Music , but Madonna was still signed to Warner under a separate recording contract . 
 In mid @-@ 2004 Madonna embarked on the Re @-@ Invention World Tour in the U.S. , Canada , and Europe . It became the highest @-@ grossing tour of 2004 , earning around $ 120 million and became the subject of her documentary I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret . In November 2004 , she was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame as one of its five founding members , along with The Beatles , Elvis Presley , Bob Marley , and U2 . In January 2005 , Madonna performed a cover version of the John Lennon song " Imagine " at Tsunami Aid . She also performed at the Live 8 benefit concert in London in July 2005 . 
 Her tenth studio album , Confessions on a Dance Floor , was released in November 2005 . Musically the album was structured like a club set composed by a DJ . It was acclaimed by critics , with Keith Caulfield from Billboard commenting that the album was a " welcome return to form for the Queen of Pop . " The album won a Grammy Award for Best Electronic / Dance Album . Confessions on a Dance Floor and its lead single , " Hung Up " , went on to reach number one in 40 and 41 countries respectively , earning a place in Guinness World Records . The song contained a sample of ABBA 's " Gimme ! Gimme ! Gimme ! ( A Man After Midnight ) " , only the second time that ABBA has allowed their work to be used . ABBA songwriter Björn Ulvaeus remarked " It is a wonderful track — 100 per cent solid pop music . " " Sorry " , the second single , became Madonna 's twelfth number @-@ one single in the UK . 
 Madonna embarked on the Confessions Tour in May 2006 , which had a global audience of 1 @.@ 2 million and grossed over $ 193 @.@ 7 million , becoming the highest @-@ grossing tour to that date for a female artist . Madonna used religious symbols , such as the crucifix and Crown of Thorns , in the performance of " Live to Tell " . It caused the Russian Orthodox Church and the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia to urge all their members to boycott her concert . At the same time , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) announced officially that Madonna had sold over 200 million copies for her albums alone worldwide . 
 While on tour Madonna participated in the Raising Malawi initiative by partially funding an orphanage in and traveling to that country . While there , she decided to adopt a boy named David Banda in October 2006 . The adoption raised strong public reaction , because Malawian law requires would @-@ be parents to reside in Malawi for one year before adopting , which Madonna did not do . She addressed this on The Oprah Winfrey Show , saying that there were no written adoption laws in Malawi that regulated foreign adoption . She described how Banda had been suffering from pneumonia after surviving malaria and tuberculosis when she first met him . Banda 's biological father , <unk> , commented , " These so @-@ called human rights activists are harassing me every day , threatening me that I am not aware of what I am doing ..... They want me to support their court case , a thing I cannot do for I know what I agreed with Madonna and her husband . " The adoption was finalized in May 2008 . 
 A clothing line titled M by Madonna , in collaboration with Swedish clothing retailer H & M , was launched internationally in 2006 . The collection consisted of leather trench coats , sequined shift dresses , cream @-@ colored calf @-@ length pants , and matching cropped jackets . H & M said the collection reflected Madonna 's " timeless , unique and always glamorous style . " 
 = = = 2007 – 10 : Filmmaking , Hard Candy and business venture = = = 
 Madonna released the song " Hey You " for the Live Earth series of concerts . The song was available as a free download during its first week of release . She also performed it at the London Live Earth concert . Madonna announced her departure from Warner Bros. Records , and a new $ 120 million , ten @-@ year 360 deal with Live Nation . She produced and wrote I Am Because We Are , a documentary on the problems faced by Malawians . The documentary was directed by Nathan Rissman , who worked as Madonna 's gardener . She also directed her first film Filth and Wisdom . The plot of the film revolved around three friends and their aspirations . The Times said she had " done herself proud " while The Daily Telegraph described the film as " not an entirely unpromising first effort [ but ] Madonna would do well to hang on to her day job . " On March 10 , 2008 , Madonna was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in her first year of eligibility . Madonna did not sing at the ceremony but asked fellow Hall of Fame inductees and Michigan natives The Stooges to perform her songs " Burning Up " and " Ray of Light " . She thanked Christopher Flynn , her dance teacher from 35 years earlier , for his encouragement to follow her dreams . 
 Madonna released her eleventh studio album , Hard Candy , in April 2008 . Containing R & B and urban pop influences , the songs on Hard Candy were autobiographical in nature and saw Madonna collaborating with Justin Timberlake , Timbaland , Pharrell Williams and Nate " Danja " Hills . The album debuted at number one in 37 countries and on the Billboard 200 . Don Shewey from Rolling Stone complimented it as an " impressive taste of her upcoming tour . " It received generally positive reviews worldwide though some critics panned it as " an attempt to harness the urban market " . 
 " 4 Minutes " was released as the album 's lead single and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was Madonna 's 37th top @-@ ten hit on the chart — it pushed Madonna past Elvis Presley as the artist with the most top @-@ ten hits . In the UK she retained her record for the most number @-@ one singles for a female artist ; " 4 Minutes " becoming her thirteenth . At the 23rd Japan Gold Disc Awards , Madonna received her fifth Artist of the Year trophy from Recording Industry Association of Japan , the most for any artist . To further promote the album , Madonna embarked on the Sticky & Sweet Tour ; her first major venture with Live Nation . With a gross of $ 280 million , it became the highest @-@ grossing tour by a solo artist then , surpassing the previous record Madonna set with the Confessions Tour ; it was later surpassed by Roger Waters ' The Wall Live . It was extended to the next year , adding new European dates , and after it ended , the total gross was $ 408 million . 
 Life with My Sister Madonna , a book by Madonna 's brother Christopher , debuted at number two on The New York Times bestseller list . The book caused some friction between Madonna and her brother , because of the unsolicited publication . Problems also arose between Madonna and Ritchie , with the media reporting that they were on the verge of separation . Ultimately , Madonna filed for divorce from Ritchie , citing irreconcilable differences , which was finalized in December 2008 . She decided to adopt from Malawi . The country 's High Court initially approved the adoption of <unk> " Mercy " James ; however , the application was rejected because Madonna was not a resident of the country . Madonna appealed , and on June 12 , 2009 , the Supreme Court of Malawi granted Madonna the right to adopt Mercy James . 
 Madonna concluded her contract with Warner by releasing her third greatest @-@ hits album , Celebration , in September 2009 . It contained the new songs " Celebration " and " Revolver " along with 34 hits spanning her career with the label . Celebration reached number one in several countries , including Canada , Germany , Italy , and the United Kingdom . She appeared at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 , 2009 , to speak in tribute to deceased pop star Michael Jackson . Madonna ended the 2000s as the best @-@ selling single artist of the decade in the U.S. and the most @-@ played artist of the decade in the UK . Billboard also announced her as the third top @-@ touring artist of the decade — behind only The Rolling Stones and U2 — with a gross of over $ 801 million , 6 @.@ 3 million attendance and 244 sell @-@ outs of 248 shows . 
 Madonna performed at the Hope for Haiti Now : A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief concert in January 2010 . Her third live album , Sticky & Sweet Tour , was released in April , debuting at number ten on the Billboard 200 . It also became her 20th top @-@ ten album on the Oricon Albums Chart , breaking The Beatles ' record for the most top @-@ ten album by an international act in Japan . Madonna granted American TV show Glee the rights to her entire catalogue of music , and the producers planned an episode featuring Madonna songs exclusively . Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna , an EP containing eight cover versions of Madonna songs featured in the episode , was released afterward and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . Madonna released the Material Girl clothing line , which she designed with her daughter , Lourdes . The 1980s inspired clothing line , borrowed from Madonna 's punk @-@ girl style when she rose to fame in the 1980s , was released under the Macy 's label . In October , Madonna opened a series of fitness centers around the world named Hard Candy Fitness . Madonna and MG Icon also released the second fashion brand called Truth or Dare by Madonna to include footwear , underclothing , and accessories . 
 = = = 2011 – 13 : W.E. , Super Bowl XLVI and MDNA = = = 
 Madonna directed her second feature film , W.E. , a biographic about the affair between King Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson . Co @-@ written with Alek Keshishian , the film was premiered at the 68th Venice International Film Festival in September 2011 . Critical and commercial response to the film was negative . Madonna contributed the ballad " Masterpiece " for the film 's soundtrack , which won her a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song . In February 2012 , Madonna performed at Super Bowl XLVI halftime show , visualized by Cirque Du Soleil and Jamie King and featured special guests LMFAO , Nicki Minaj , M.I.A. and Cee Lo Green . It became the then most @-@ watched Super Bowl halftime show in history with 114 million viewers , higher than the game itself . Following her 360 deal with Live Nation , Madonna signed a three @-@ album deal with Interscope Records , since Live Nation was not a record company . 
 Her twelfth studio album , MDNA , was released in March 2012 and saw collaboration with various producers , most notably with William Orbit again and Martin Solveig . The album was well received by music critics , with Priya Elan from NME calling it " a ridiculously enjoyable romp " , citing its " psychotic , soul @-@ bearing stuff " as " some of the most visceral stuff she 's ever done . " MDNA became Madonna 's fifth consecutive studio album to debut at the top of the Billboard 200 . She also became the solo artist with the most number @-@ one albums in the UK and Australia , breaking the record previously held by Elvis Presley in the UK and Jimmy Barnes in Australia . The lead single " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " , featuring guest vocals from Minaj and M.I.A. , became Madonna 's record @-@ extending 38th top @-@ ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The MDNA Tour , which further promoted the album , began in May 2012 in Tel Aviv , Israel . The tour has received positive critical reception , but featured controversial subjects such as violence , firearms , human rights , nudity and politics . Lawsuits threatened against Madonna have also been engaged from the tour . It was a box office success with a gross of $ 305 @.@ 2 million from 88 sold @-@ out shows , and became the highest @-@ grossing tour of 2012 and the tenth highest @-@ grossing tour of all time . At the 2013 Billboard Music Awards , Madonna won three trophies for Top Touring Artist , Top Dance Artist and Top Dance Album . Madonna was named the top @-@ earning celebrity of the year by Forbes , earning an estimated $ 125 million , due to the success of the tour . Madonna 's fourth live album , MDNA World Tour , was released in September 2013 . It debuted at number one on the US Top Music Videos chart , becoming her tenth release to top the chart — the most for any artist . 
 By 2013 , Madonna 's Raising Malawi organization built ten schools to educate 4 @,@ 000 children in Malawi at a value of $ 400 @,@ 000 . When Madonna visited the schools in April 2013 , President of Malawi Joyce Banda expressed criticism of the star and her charity , accusing her of exaggerating her charity 's contribution . Madonna responded by releasing a statement saying she was saddened that Banda had chosen to act negatively about her endeavors . " I have no intention of being distracted by these ridiculous allegations , " she added . Later , it was confirmed that Banda had not approved the statement released written by her press team and was " incandescent with anger " over the mix @-@ up . 
 Working with photographer Steven Klein , Madonna completed a 17 @-@ minute film called secretprojectrevolution . The BitTorrent company was selected by Madonna to release the film as part of a Madonna bundle . It was released on September 24 , 2013 , and consisted of the 17 @-@ minute film , its stills , a Vice interview , and a message from Madonna . With the film she launched the Art for Freedom initiative , which helped to promote " art and free speech as a means to address persecution and injustice across the globe " . The website for the project has had over 3 @,@ 000 art related submissions since its inception , with Madonna regularly monitoring and enlisting the help of other artists like David Blaine and Katy Perry as guest curators . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Rebel Heart = = = 
 Madonna extended her business ventures and in February 2014 the singer premiered MDNA Skin , a range of skin care products , in Tokyo , Japan . After visiting her hometown of Detroit during May 2014 , Madonna decided to contribute funds to three of the city 's organizations , to help eliminate poverty from there . The singer released a statement saying that she was inspired by their work , adding that " it was obvious to me that I had to get involved and be part of the solution to help Detroit recover " . Madonna began work on her thirteenth studio album , with collaborators including Avicii , Diplo and Kanye West . In December 2014 , thirteen demos recorded for the album leaked onto the Internet . She posted in response that half of the tracks would not be used on the final release , while the other half had " changed and evolved " . Titled Rebel Heart , the album was released in March 2015 . Music critics responded positively towards the album , calling it her best effort in a decade . Rebel Heart became Madonna 's first album to miss the top position of the Billboard 200 since 1998 , but it reached number one in other major music markets , including Australia , Canada , Germany and Italy . 
 From September 2015 , she embarked on the Rebel Heart Tour to promote the album ; the tour ended in March 2016 and traveled throughout North America , Europe and Asia and was the singer 's first visit to Australia in 23 years , where she also performed a one @-@ off show for her fans . It grossed a total of $ 169 @.@ 8 million from the 82 shows , with over 1 @.@ 045 million ticket sales . While on tour Madonna became embroiled in a legal battle with Ritchie , over the custody of her son Rocco . The dispute started when Rocco decided to continue living in England with Ritchie when the Rebel Heart Tour had visited there , while Madonna wanted him to return with her . Court hearings took place in both New York and London , and after multiple deliberations , Madonna decided to withdraw her application for custody , and appealed for a mutual discussion between herself and Ritchie about Rocco . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style and songwriting = = = 
 Madonna 's music has been the subject of much analysis and scrutiny . Robert M. Grant , author of Contemporary Strategy Analysis ( 2005 ) , commented that what has brought Madonna success is " certainly not outstanding natural talent . As a vocalist , musician , dancer , songwriter , or actress , Madonna 's talents seem modest . " He asserts Madonna 's success is in relying on the talents of others , and that her personal relationships have served as cornerstones to the numerous reinventions in the longevity of her career . Madonna 's approach was far from the music industry wisdom of " Find a winning formula and stick to it . " Her musical career has been a continuous experimentation with new musical ideas and new images and a constant quest for new heights of fame and acclaim . Grant concluded that " having established herself as the queen of popular music , Madonna did not stop there , but continued re @-@ inventing . " Musicologist Susan McClary wrote that " Madonna 's art itself repeatedly deconstructs the traditional notion of the unified subject with finite ego boundaries . Her pieces explore various ways of constituting identities that refuse stability , that remain fluid , that resist definition . " Critics noted that Madonna has " pushed the boundaries " in her music and image . 
 Throughout her career Madonna has been involved in writing and producing most of her own music . Madonna 's early songwriting skill was developed during her time with the Breakfast Club in 1979 . According to author Carol <unk> , her first attempts at songwriting are perceived as an important self @-@ revelation , as Madonna said : " I don 't know where [ the songs ] came from . It was like magic . I 'd write a song every day . I said ' Wow , I was meant to do this ' . " Madonna later became the sole writer of five songs on her debut album , including " Lucky Star " which she composed on synthesizer . Rolling Stone has named her " an exemplary songwriter with a gift for hooks and indelible lyrics . " According to Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens , Madonna 's talent for developing " incredible " hooks for her songs allows the lyrics to capture the attention of the audience , even without the influence of the music . As an example , Jarman @-@ Ivens cites the 1985 single " Into the Groove " and its line " Live out your fantasy here with me , just let the music set you free ; Touch my body , and move in time , now I know you 're mine . " Though Madonna has worked with producers across many genres , her songs have been consistently stamped with her own sensibility and inflected with autobiographical detail . Some of her lyrics contain innuendos and double entendre , which led to multiple interpretations among music critics and scholars . Madonna has been nominated for being inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame twice , for 2014 and 2016 ceremony . Rolling Stone listed Madonna at number 56 on the " 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time " . 
 Before emerging as a pop star , Madonna has spent her early years in rock music alongside her bands , Breakfast Club and Emmy . While performing with Emmy , Madonna recorded about 12 @-@ 14 songs which resemble the punk rock of that period . Her early rock roots also can be found on the demo album Pre @-@ Madonna . Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that with her self @-@ titled debut album , Madonna began her career as a disco diva , in an era that did not have any such divas to speak of . In the beginning of the ' 80 's , disco was an anathema to the mainstream pop , and according to Erlewine , Madonna had a huge role in popularizing dance music as mainstream music . The album 's songs reveal several key trends that have continued to define her success , including a strong dance @-@ based idiom , catchy hooks , highly polished arrangements and Madonna 's own vocal style . Her second album , Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) , foreshadowed several trends in her later works . It contained references to classical works ( pizzicato synthesizer line that opens " Angel " ) ; potential negative reaction from social groups ( " Dress You Up " was blacklisted by the Parents Music Resource Center ) ; and retro styles ( " Shoo @-@ Bee @-@ Doo " , Madonna 's homage to Motown ) . 
 Her mature artistic statement was visible in True Blue ( 1986 ) and Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . In True Blue , she incorporated classical music in order to engage an older audience who had been skeptical of her music . Like a Prayer introduced live recorded songs and incorporated different genres of music , including dance , funk , R & B and gospel music . Her versatility was further shown on I 'm Breathless , which consists predominantly of the 1940s Broadway showtune @-@ flavoured jazz , swing and big band tracks . Madonna continued to compose ballads and uptempo dance songs for Erotica ( 1992 ) and Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) . Both albums explored element of new jack swing , with Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly saying that " she could actually be viewed as new jack swing 's godmother . " She tried to remain contemporary by incorporating samples , drum loops and hip hop into her music . With Ray of Light , Madonna brought electronic music from its underground status into massive popularity in mainstream music scene . 
 Madonna experimented with more folk and acoustic music in Music ( 2000 ) and American Life ( 2003 ) . A change was noted in the content of the songs in Music , with most of them being simple love songs , but with an underlying tone of melancholy . According to Q magazine , American Life was characterized by " a thumping techno rhythm , liquid keyboard lines , an acoustic chorus and a bizarre Madonna rap . " The " conventional rock songs " of the album were suffused with dramatic lyrics about patriotism and composition , including the appearance of a gospel choir in the song " Nothing Fails " . Madonna returned to pure dance songs with Confessions on a Dance Floor , infusing club beats and retro music with the lyrics about paradoxical metaphors and reference to her earlier works . Madonna moved to urban direction with Hard Candy ( 2008 ) , mixing R & B and hip hop music with dance tunes . MDNA ( 2012 ) largely focused in electronic dance music , which she has embraced since Ray of Light . 
 = = = Voice and instruments = = = 
 Possessing a mezzo @-@ soprano vocal range , Madonna has always been self @-@ conscious about her voice , especially in comparison to her vocal idols such as Ella Fitzgerald , Prince , and Chaka Khan . Mark Bego , author of Madonna : Blonde Ambition , called her " the perfect vocalist for lighter @-@ than @-@ air songs " , despite not being a " heavyweight talent . " According to MSNBC critic Tony Sclafani , " Madonna 's vocals are the key to her rock roots . Pop vocalists usually sing songs " straight , " but Madonna employs subtext , irony , aggression and all sorts of vocal idiosyncrasies in the ways John Lennon and Bob Dylan did . " Madonna used a bright , girlish vocal timbre in her early albums which became passé in her later works . The change was deliberate since she was constantly reminded of how the critics had once labelled her as " Minnie Mouse on helium " . During the filming of Evita , Madonna had to take vocal lessons , which increased her range further . Of this experience she commented , " I studied with a vocal coach for Evita and I realized there was a whole piece of my voice I wasn 't using . Before , I just believed I had a really limited range and was going to make the most of it . " 
 Besides singing Madonna has the ability to play several musical instruments . She learned to play drum and guitar from her then @-@ boyfriend Dan Gilroy in the late 1970s before joining the Breakfast Club line @-@ up as the drummer . This helped her to form the band Emmy , where she performed as the guitarist and lead vocalist . Madonna later played guitar on her demo recordings . On the liner notes of Pre @-@ Madonna , Stephen Bray wrote : " I 've always thought she passed up a brilliant career as a rhythm guitarist . " After her career breakthrough , Madonna focused mainly in singing but was also credited for playing cowbell on Madonna ( 1983 ) and synthesizer on Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . In 1999 , Madonna had studied for three months to play the violin for the role as a violin teacher in the film Music of the Heart , before eventually leaving the project . After two decades , Madonna decided to perform with guitar again during the promotion of Music ( 2000 ) . She took further lessons from guitarist Monte Pittman to improve her guitar skill . Since then Madonna has played guitar on every tour , as well as her studio albums . At the 2002 Orville H. Gibson Guitar Awards , she received nomination for Les Paul Horizon Award , which honors the most promising up @-@ and @-@ coming guitarist . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 According to Taraborrelli , the defining moment of Madonna 's childhood was the tragic and untimely death of her beloved mother . Psychiatrist Keith Ablow suggests her mother 's death would have had an immeasurable impact on the young Madonna at a time when her personality was still forming . According to Ablow , the younger a child is at the time of a serious loss , the more profound the influence and the longer lasting the impact . He concludes that " some people never reconcile themselves to such a loss at an early age , Madonna is not different than them . " Conversely , author Lucy O 'Brien feels the impact of the rape she suffered is , in fact , the motivating factor behind everything Madonna has done , more important even than the death of her mother : " It 's not so much grief at her mother 's death that drives her , as the sense of abandonment that left her unprotected . She encountered her own worst possible scenario , becoming a victim of male violence , and thereafter turned that full @-@ tilt into her work , reversing the equation at every opportunity . " 
 As they grew older Madonna and her sisters would feel deep sadness as the vivid memory of their mother began drifting farther from them . They would study pictures of her and come to think that she resembled poet Anne Sexton and Hollywood actresses . This would later raise Madonna 's interest in poetry , with Sylvia Plath being her favourite . Later , Madonna commented : " We were all wounded in one way or another by [ her death ] , and then we spent the rest of our lives reacting to it or dealing with it or trying to turn into something else . The anguish of losing my mom left me with a certain kind of loneliness and an incredible longing for something . If I hadn 't had that emptiness , I wouldn 't have been so driven . Her death had a lot to do with me saying — after I got over my heartache — I 'm going to be really strong if I can 't have my mother . I 'm going to take care of myself . " Taraborrelli felt that in time , no doubt because of the devastation she felt , Madonna would never again allow herself , or even her daughter , to feel as abandoned as she had felt when her mother died . " Her death had taught [ Madonna ] a valuable lesson , that she would have to remain strong for herself because , she feared weakness — particularly her own — and wanted to be the queen of her own castle . " 
 In 1985 , Madonna commented that the first song to ever make a strong impression on her was " These Boots Are Made for Walkin ' " by Nancy Sinatra ; she said it summed up her own " take @-@ charge attitude " . As a young woman , she attempted to broaden her taste in literature , art , and music , and during this time became interested in classical music . She noted that her favorite style was baroque , and loved Mozart and Chopin because she liked their " feminine quality " . Madonna 's major influences include Karen Carpenter , The Supremes and Led Zeppelin , as well as dancers Martha Graham and Rudolf Nureyev . She also grew up listening to David Bowie , whose show was the first rock concert she ever attended . 
 Madonna 's Italian @-@ Catholic background and her relationship with her parents are reflected in the album Like a Prayer . It was an evocation of the impact religion had on her career . Her video for the title track contains Catholic symbolism , such as the stigmata . During The Virgin Tour , she wore a rosary and prayed with it in the music video for " La Isla Bonita " . The " Open Your Heart " video sees her boss scolding her in the Italian language . On the Who 's That Girl World Tour , she dedicated the song " Papa Don 't Preach " to Pope John Paul II . 
 During her childhood , Madonna was inspired by actors , later saying , " I loved Carole Lombard and Judy Holliday and Marilyn Monroe . They were all incredibly funny ... and I saw myself in them ... my <unk> , my knowingness and my innocence . " Her " Material Girl " music video recreated Monroe 's look in the song " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " , from the film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes ( 1953 ) . She studied the screwball comedies of the 1930s , particularly those of Lombard , in preparation for the film Who 's That Girl . The video for " Express Yourself " ( 1989 ) was inspired by Fritz Lang 's silent film Metropolis ( 1927 ) . The video for " Vogue " recreated the style of Hollywood glamour photographs , in particular those by Horst P. Horst , and imitated the poses of Marlene Dietrich , Carole Lombard , and Rita Hayworth , while the lyrics referred to many of the stars who had inspired her , including Bette Davis , described by Madonna as an idol . However , Madonna 's film career has been largely received negatively by the film critic community . Stephanie Zacharek , critic for Time magazine , stated that , " [ Madonna ] seems wooden and unnatural as an actress , and it 's tough to watch , because she 's clearly trying her damnedest . " According to biographer Andrew Morton , " Madonna puts a brave face on the criticism , but privately she is deeply hurt . " After the box office bomb Swept Away ( 2002 ) , Madonna vowed that she would never again act in a film , hoping her repertoire as a bad actress would never be discussed again . 
 Influences also came to her from the art world , most notably through the works of Mexican artist Frida Kahlo . The music video of the song " Bedtime Story " featured images inspired by the paintings of Kahlo and Remedios Varo . Madonna is also a collector of Tamara de Lempicka 's Art Deco paintings and has included them in her music videos and tours . Her video for " Hollywood " ( 2003 ) was an homage to the work of photographer Guy Bourdin ; Bourdin 's son subsequently filed a lawsuit for unauthorised use of his father 's work . Pop artist Andy Warhol 's use of sadomasochistic imagery in his underground films were reflected in the music videos for " Erotica " and " Deeper and Deeper " . 
 Madonna is dedicated to Kabbalah , and in 2004 she adopted the name Esther which in Persian means " star " . She has donated millions of dollars to New York and London schools teaching the subject . She faced opposition from rabbis who felt Madonna 's adoption of the Kabbalah was sacrilegious and a case of celebrity dilettantism . Madonna defended her studies , saying : " It would be less controversial if I joined the Nazi Party " , and that her involvement with the Kabbalah is " not hurting anybody " . The influence of the Kabbalah was subsequently observed in Madonna 's music , especially albums like Ray of Light and Music . During the Re @-@ Invention World Tour , at one point in the show , Madonna and her dancers wore T @-@ shirts that read " Kabbalists Do It Better " . Her 2012 MDNA album has also drawn many influences from her Catholic upbringing , and since 2011 she has been attending meetings and services at an Opus Dei center , a Catholic institution that encourages spirituality through every day life . 
 = = = Music videos and performances = = = 
 In The Madonna Companion biographers Allen Metz and Carol Benson noted that more than any other recent pop artist , Madonna had used MTV and music videos to establish her popularity and enhance her recorded work . According to them , many of her songs have the imagery of the music video in strong context , while referring to the music . Cultural critic Mark C. Taylor in his book Nots ( 1993 ) felt that the postmodern art form par excellence is video and the reigning " queen of video " is Madonna . He further asserted that " the most remarkable creation of MTV is Madonna . The responses to Madonna 's excessively provocative videos have been predictably contradictory . " The media and public reaction towards her most @-@ discussed songs such as " Papa Don 't Preach " , " Like a Prayer " , or " Justify My Love " had to do with the music videos created to promote the songs and their impact , rather than the songs themselves . Morton felt that " artistically , Madonna 's songwriting is often overshadowed by her striking pop videos . " 
 Madonna 's initial music videos reflected her American and Hispanic mixed street style combined with a flamboyant glamor . She was able to transmit her avant @-@ garde downtown New York fashion sense to the American audience . The imagery and incorporation of Hispanic culture and Catholic symbolism continued with the music videos from the True Blue era . Author Douglas Kellner noted , " such ' multiculturalism ' and her culturally transgressive moves turned out to be highly successful moves that endeared her to large and varied youth audiences . " Madonna 's Spanish look in the videos became the fashion trend of that time , in the form of boleros and layered skirts , accessorizing with rosary beads and a crucifix as in the video of " La Isla Bonita " . 
 Academics noted that with her videos , Madonna was subtly reversing the usual role of male as the dominant sex . This symbolism and imagery was probably the most prevalent in the music video for " Like a Prayer " . The video included scenes of an African @-@ American church choir , Madonna being attracted to a statue of a black saint , and singing in front of burning crosses . This mix of the sacred and the profane upset the Vatican and resulted in the Pepsi commercial withdrawal . In 2003 , MTV named her " The Greatest Music Video Star Ever " and said that " Madonna 's innovation , creativity and contribution to the music video art form is what won her the award . " 
 Madonna 's emergence occurred during the advent of MTV ; Chris Nelson from The New York Times spoke of pop artists like Madonna saying , " MTV , with its almost exclusively lip @-@ synched videos , ushered in an era in which average music fans might happily spend hours a day , every day , watching singers just mouth the words . " The symbiotic relationship between the music video and lip @-@ syncing led to a desire for the spectacle and imagery of the music video to be transferred to live stage shows . He added , " Artists like Madonna and Janet Jackson set new standards for showmanship , with concerts that included not only elaborate costumes and precision @-@ timed pyrotechnics but also highly athletic dancing . These effects came at the expense of live singing . " Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News commented that while Madonna earned a reputation for lip @-@ syncing during her 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour , she has subsequently reorganized her performances by " stay [ ing ] mostly still during her toughest singing parts and [ leaves ] the dance routines to her backup troupe ... [ r ] ather than try to croon and dance up a storm at the same time . " 
 To allow for greater movement while dancing and singing , Madonna was one of the earliest adopters of hands @-@ free radio @-@ frequency headset microphones , with the headset fastened over the ears or the top of the head , and the microphone capsule on a boom arm that extended to the mouth . Because of her prominent usage , the microphone design came to be known as the " Madonna mic " . Metz noted that Madonna represents a paradox as she is often perceived as living her whole life as a performance . While her big @-@ screen performances are panned , her live performances are critical successes . Madonna was the first artist to have her concert tours as reenactment of her music videos . Author Elin Diamond explained that reciprocally , the fact that images from Madonna 's videos can be recreated in a live setting enhances the realism of the original videos . Thus her live performances have become the means by which mediatized representations are naturalized . Taraborrelli said that encompassing multimedia , latest technology and sound systems , Madonna 's concerts and live performances are deemed as " extravagant show piece , a walking art show . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Various music journalists , critical theorists , and authors have deemed Madonna the most influential female recording artist of all time . Author Carol Clerk wrote that " during her career , Madonna has transcended the term ' pop star ' to become a global cultural icon . " Rolling Stone of Spain wrote that " She became the first viral Master of Pop in history , years before the Internet was massively used . Madonna was everywhere ; in the almighty music television channels , ' radio formulas ' , magazine covers and even in bookshops . A pop dialectic , never seen since The Beatles 's reign , which allowed her to keep on the edge of tendency and <unk> . " Laura Barcella in her book Madonna and Me : Women Writers on the Queen of Pop ( 2012 ) wrote that " really , Madonna changed everything the musical landscape , the ' 80s look du jour , and most significantly , what a mainstream female pop star could ( and couldn 't ) say , do , or accomplish in the public eye . " William Langley from The Daily Telegraph felt that " Madonna has changed the world 's social history , has done more things as more different people than anyone else is ever likely to . " Alan McGee from The Guardian felt that Madonna is a post @-@ modern art , the likes of which we will never see again . He further asserted that Madonna and Michael Jackson invented the terms Queen and King of Pop . 
 According to Tony Sclafani from MSNBC , " It 's worth noting that before Madonna , most music mega @-@ stars were guy rockers ; after her , almost all would be female singers ... When The Beatles hit America , they changed the paradigm of performer from solo act to band . Madonna changed it back — with an emphasis on the female . " Howard Kramer , curatorial director of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum , asserted that " Madonna and the career she carved out for herself made possible virtually every other female pop singer to follow ... She certainly raised the standards of all of them ... She redefined what the parameters were for female performers . " According to Fouz @-@ Hernández , subsequent female singers such as Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , Kylie Minogue , the Spice Girls , Destiny 's Child , Jennifer Lopez , and Pink were like her " daughters in the very direct sense that they grew up listening to and admiring Madonna , and decided they wanted to be like her . " Time magazine included her in the list of the " 25 Most Powerful Women of the Past Century " , where she became one of only two singers to be included , alongside Aretha Franklin . She also topped VH1 's lists of " 100 Greatest Women in Music " and " 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era " . 
 Madonna 's use of sexual imagery has benefited her career and catalyzed public discourse on sexuality and feminism . As Roger Chapman documents in Culture Wars : An Encyclopedia of Issues , Viewpoints , and Voices , Volume 1 ( 2010 ) , she has drawn frequent condemnation from religious organizations , social conservatives and parental watchdog groups for her use of explicit , sexual imagery and lyrics , religious symbolism , and otherwise " irreverent " behavior in her live performances . The Times wrote that she had " started a revolution amongst women in music ... Her attitudes and opinions on sex , nudity , style and sexuality forced the public to sit up and take notice . " Professor John Fiske noted that the sense of empowerment that Madonna offers is inextricably connected with the pleasure of exerting some control over the meanings of self , of sexuality , and of one 's social relations . In Doing Gender in Media , Art and Culture ( 2009 ) , the authors noted that Madonna , as a female celebrity , performer , and pop icon , is able to unsettle standing feminist reflections and debates . According to lesbian feminist Sheila Jeffreys , Madonna represents woman 's occupancy of what Monique Wittig calls the category of sex , as powerful , and appears to gleefully embrace the performance of the sexual corvée allotted to women . Professor Sut <unk> has referred to Madonna as " an almost sacred feminist icon . " 
 Madonna has received acclaim as a role model for businesswomen in her industry , " achieving the kind of financial control that women had long fought for within the industry " , and generating over $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in sales within the first decade of her career . Professor Colin Barrow from Cranfield School of Management described Madonna as " America 's smartest businesswoman ... who has moved to the top of her industry and stayed there by constantly reinventing herself . " London Business School academics called her a " dynamic entrepreneur " worth copying ; they identified her vision of success , her understanding of the music industry , her ability to recognize her own performance limits ( and thus bring in help ) , her willingness to work hard and her ability to adapt as the keys to her commercial success . Morton wrote that " Madonna is opportunistic , manipulative , and ruthless — somebody who won 't stop until she gets what she wants — and that 's something you can get at the expense of maybe losing your close ones . But that hardly mattered to her . " Hazel Blackmore and Rafael Fernández de Castro in the book ¿ Qué es Estados Unidos ? from the Fondo de Cultura Económica , noted : " Madonna has been undoubtedly the most important woman in the history of popular music and a great businesswoman in herself ; creating fashion , breaking taboos and provoking controversies . " According to Forbes , Madonna is the wealthiest woman in the music business . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 Madonna has sold more than 300 million records worldwide . The Guinness World Records acknowledged her as the best @-@ selling female recording artist and the fourth best @-@ selling act of all time , behind The Beatles , Elvis Presley , and Michael Jackson . According to the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , she is the best @-@ selling female rock artist of the 20th century and the second top @-@ selling female albums artist in the United States , with 64 @.@ 5 million certified albums . Madonna is the most certified artist of all time in United Kingdom , with 45 awards from the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) as of April 2013 . Billboard named Madonna as the top touring female artist of all time . She is also the highest grossing solo touring artist , with over $ 1 @.@ 31 billion in concert gross , starting from the Blond Ambition World Tour ; she first crossed a billion gross with The MDNA Tour . Overall , Madonna ranks third on all @-@ time top @-@ grossing Billboard Boxscore list , with just The Rolling Stones ( $ 1 @.@ 84 billion ) and U2 ( $ 1 @.@ 67 billion ) ahead of her . Madonna has been honored with 20 MTV Video Music Awards — the most for any artist — including the lifetime achievement Video Vanguard Award in 1986 . 
 Madonna holds the record for the most number @-@ ones on all combined Billboard charts , including twelve number @-@ one songs on the Billboard Hot 100 and eight number @-@ one albums on the Billboard 200 . With 45 songs topping the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , Madonna became the artist with the most number @-@ one songs on an active Billboard chart , pulling ahead of George Strait with 44 number @-@ one songs on the Hot Country Songs chart . She has also scored 38 top @-@ ten singles on the Hot 100 , more than any other artist in history . In 2008 , Billboard magazine ranked her at number two , behind The Beatles , on the Billboard Hot 100 All @-@ Time Top Artists , making her the most successful solo artist in the history of American singles chart . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Madonna ( 1983 ) 
 Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) 
 True Blue ( 1986 ) 
 Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) 
 Erotica ( 1992 ) 
 Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) 
 Ray of Light ( 1998 ) 
 Music ( 2000 ) 
 American Life ( 2003 ) 
 Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) 
 Hard Candy ( 2008 ) 
 MDNA ( 2012 ) 
 Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 The Virgin Tour ( 1985 ) 
 Who 's That Girl World Tour ( 1987 ) 
 Blond Ambition World Tour ( 1990 ) 
 The Girlie Show World Tour ( 1993 ) 
 Drowned World Tour ( 2001 ) 
 Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) 
 Confessions Tour ( 2006 ) 
 Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) 
 The MDNA Tour ( 2012 ) 
 Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) 
 = = Enterprises = = 
 Boy Toy , Inc 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc ( 1992 ) 
 Maverick ( 1992 ) 
 Semtex Girls ( 2006 ) 
 Hard Candy Fitness ( 2010 ) 
 Truth or Dare by Madonna ( 2011 ) 
 = 2008 – 09 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season = 
 The 2008 – 09 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season marked the continuation of the annual tradition of competitive basketball among Big Ten Conference members that began in 1904 . It was the 104th season of Big Ten Conference basketball play . Although during the 2008 @-@ 09 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season there were no Big Ten players named to any All @-@ American teams , no coaches given any national coaching honors , and no teams that won any major preconference tournament , the season was successful for other reasons . The conference had an overall 14 – 8 record in postseason play with one team reaching for the 2009 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament championship game and another winning the championship of the 2009 National Invitation Tournament ( NIT ) . 
 The season marked the second year that all regular season and Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament games were nationally televised . It was the first season that eight member teams achieved 20 wins . During the season , the conference achieved a <unk> winning percentage against non @-@ conference opponents , which is the highest percentage since 1998 – 99 . 
 Michigan State was the regular season champion winning the league four games . Purdue and Illinois tied for second place . Michigan State 's Kalin Lucas was named Big Ten Player of the Year . Michigan State 's Tom Izzo was named Coach of the Year by the coaches while Penn State 's Ed <unk> was named Coach of the Year by the media . 
 Purdue won the Big Ten Tournament by defeating Ohio State in the championship . As a result of its win , Purdue received the conference 's automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament . In total , seven teams received bids to the NCAA Tournament : Michigan State , Purdue , Illinois , Ohio State , Michigan , Minnesota , and Wisconsin . By placing 7 of its 11 teams in the tournament , it had 64 % of its teams in the tournament , which outpaced all other conferences . Both Michigan State and Purdue advanced to the second weekend 's Sweet Sixteen round , where Purdue lost to Connecticut . Michigan State advanced to the championship game where it lost to North Carolina 89 – 72 . 
 The Big Ten also had two entrants in the 2009 NIT : Penn State and Northwestern with Penn State winning the tournament . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 = = = All @-@ Big Ten players = = = 
 On October 26 , the Big Ten media selected Purdue as the preseason top team . It selected Michigan State and Wisconsin as second and third respectively . However , the November 10 national AP Poll and Coaches ' Poll ranked Michigan State as the highest among Big Ten teams with Purdue second and Wisconsin third in their respective preseason 2008 – 09 NCAA Division I men 's basketball rankings . 
 The media also made preseason All @-@ Big Ten player selections : Manny Harris , sophomore guard from Michigan , <unk> Morgan , junior forward from Michigan State , Marcus Landry , senior forward from Wisconsin , E 'Twaun Moore , sophomore guard from Purdue , and Robbie Hummel , sophomore forward from Purdue , who was named Preseason Player of the Year . 
 The Los Angeles Athletic Club released its annual preseason John R. Wooden Award watch list on November 13 . The list was composed of 50 student athletes who , based on 2007 – 08 's individual performance and team records , were the early frontrunners for college basketball 's most coveted trophy . These top 50 candidates were returning players . Transfers , freshmen , and medical red @-@ shirts were not eligible for this preseason list , but were evaluated and considered for both the Midseason Top 30 list and the National Ballot . The Big Ten was represented by Purdue 's Hummel , Wisconsin 's Landry and Michigan State 's Morgan . 
 On December 18 , the Atlanta Tipoff Club released its annual early season Naismith College Player of the Year award watch list . The top @-@ 50 list included Hummel , Moore and Morgan . The watch list does not include incoming freshmen , although those student @-@ athletes were considered in the February 2009 mid season vote . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 November 
 The Big Ten began the season anticipating competitive schedules since the conference had scheduled appearances against thirteen of the teams appearing in both of the major pre @-@ season rankings . The conference opened its first week with a 14 – 0 record , while holding all 14 opponents to 65 points or less . By the end of the second week of the season the Big Ten found itself with the best non @-@ conference record in the nation at 35 – 1 . They became the first power conference ( ACC , Big 12 , Big East , Big Ten , Pac @-@ 10 or SEC ) to have a road win against another of the conferences when Illinois bested Vanderbilt on November 20 . On the same date , Michigan achieved the conference 's first victory against a top five opponent since Michigan State upended Texas on December 22 , 2007 . Big Ten teams did not win any of the larger preconference tournaments : Purdue lost in overtime of the November 28 championship game of the 16 @-@ team 2008 NIT Season Tip @-@ Off tournament , Michigan placed second in the 16 @-@ team 2K Sports Classic benefiting Coaches vs. Cancer tournament on November 21 , and Wisconsin was runner up in the 8 @-@ team Paradise Jam Tournament on November 24 . Minnesota , was successful in the 4 @-@ team National Association of Basketball Coaches Classic with a win over Georgia State Panthers in the championship game . 
 December 
 On Wednesday , December 3 , The Big Ten lost to the Atlantic Coast Conference for the 10th consecutive year in the ACC – Big Ten Challenge . The final margin was 6 – 5 . By the end of the fourth week of the season in early December , the Big Ten had the highest percentage of teams receiving votes in the Associated Press National Rankings and had the highest non @-@ conference strength of schedule in the Ratings Percentage Index ( RPI ) . Minnesota 's 8 – 0 start was Tubby Smith 's first . After five weeks , the Big Ten had the maintained its AP rankings leadership , but also took over the overall leadership in the RPI ratings . The conference 's 82 – 19 record included only losses to teams that had advanced to the post @-@ season the year before . Michigan State 's win against Texas gave the Big Ten half of the nation 's first six victories over top five teams . National Invitation Tournament defending champion , Ohio State 's eighth victory gave them the nation 's longest win streak at thirteen . Entering conference play , at 12 – 0 Minnesota remained one of the nine unbeaten teams in the nation , which was its best start since 1948 – 49 . The conference had one of three winning conference records on the road against non @-@ conference opponents at 10 – 8 and with 5 of its 11 teams ranked in the AP poll , it had the highest percentage of its teams ranked . 
 January 
 For the first time since freshmen became eligible in 1974 , Indiana started four freshmen in a conference opener on January 3 against Iowa . On January 11 , Minnesota tied a NCAA record and set a conference record by making all nine of its three @-@ point field goals . Illinois ' January 14 victory over Michigan made it the thirteenth team in NCAA Division I history and second ( after Indiana ) in the Big Ten to achieve 1600 wins . On January 21 , Northwestern snapped the third @-@ longest home @-@ court winning streak in the nation when it stopped Michigan State from earning its 29th straight home victory . John Beilein recorded his 500th win as head coach of a four @-@ year school and 575th win overall on January 24 against Northwestern . As January ended , the conference enjoyed its fourth consecutive week as the leader in the RPI strength of schedule . On January 31 , Matt Roth became the first Indiana Hoosier , first Big Ten freshman and third Big Ten player to record nine three @-@ point shots in a single game . 
 February 
 At the midpoint of the conference schedule at the beginning of February , the Big Ten had the highest Sagarin Rating central mean score . Previously , Michigan State had never won its first five conference road games since joining the Big Ten for the 1950 – 51 season , but during the season , they were one of the last two teams to be undefeated on the road at 7 – 0 . Tubby Smith became the third coach in NCAA history to record 20 wins during 16 consecutive seasons . Through its 166th contest , the Big Ten , which had led the nation in average attendance for the prior 32 years , surpassed two million in attendance for the sixteenth consecutive season and eighteenth overall . 
 = = = Attendance = = = 
 The big ten concluded the season with the highest attendance in the nation for the 33rd straight season with an average attendance of 12 @,@ 519 fans per game / session , including regular @-@ season games and conference tournament sessions . This surpassed the SEC , which was second with an 11 @,@ 625 average . The Big Ten held seven of the top 25 places among individual institutions , while no other conference had more than four individual schools among the top 25 . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 ^ Final Poll = ESPN / USA Today Coaches Poll 
 = = = Preconference schedules = = = 
 = = = = Tournaments = = = = 
 No Big Ten teams won any major early conference tournaments . 
 = = = = ACC – Big Ten Challenge = = = = 
 = = = In @-@ season honors = = = 
 Players of the week 
 Throughout the conference regular season , the Big Ten offices named a player of the week each Monday . 
 Midseason watch lists 
 On February 5 , the Big Ten became one of six conferences to have multiple players selected as John R. Wooden Award 2008 – 09 Midseason Top 30 Candidates . Both Manny Harris and Kalin Lucas were chosen . On February 24 , Hummel became the only Big Ten player included in the Naismith midseason Top 30 . On February 26 , Turner became the only Big Ten player selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association as a Top 15 finalist for the Oscar Robertson Trophy . 
 = = = Conference honors = = = 
 Two sets of conference award winners were recognized by the Big Ten - one selected by league coaches and one selected by the media . 
 = = = All @-@ Big Ten Academic team = = = 
 The Big Ten Conference had 40 men 's basketball letterwinners who were in at least their second academic year at their institution and who maintained a cumulative grade point average ( GPA ) of 3 @.@ 0 or higher during the winter semester to earn Big Ten Academic All @-@ Conference honors . Northwestern ’ s Sterling Williams who was a graduate student with a Communication Studies major had a perfect Winter GPA . These student @-@ athletes were eligible to be named Distinguished Scholar <unk> if they maintained a 3 @.@ 7 GPA for the entire academic year . 
 = = National awards & honors = = 
 = = = National awards = = = 
 On March 22 , the Big Ten had no players among the four finalists named for the Naismith award to be announced on April 5 . On March 12 , Lucas was among the 25 finalists for the Wooden Award to be named on April 10 . 
 = = = NABC = = = 
 The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced their Division I All ‐ District teams on March 5 , recognizing the nation ’ s best men ’ s collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , 240 student @-@ athletes , from 24 districts were chosen . The selection on this list were then eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America teams announced at the 2009 NABC Convention in Detroit . The following list represented the Big Ten players chosen to the list . All Big Ten schools are within District 7 for the 2008 – 09 season . 
 = = = USBWA = = = 
 On March 10 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association released its 2008 – 09 Men 's All @-@ District Teams , based on voting from its national membership . There were nine regions from coast to coast and a player and coach of the year were selected in each . The following enumerates all the Big Ten players selected within their respective regions . 
 = = = Academic honors = = = 
 = = = = CoSIDA = = = = 
 On February 5 , 2009 , the College Sports Information Directors of America ( CoSIDA ) and ESPN the Magazine selected their Academic All @-@ Americans from throughout college basketball . CoSIDA has selected Academic All American teams since 1952 . To be nominated , a student @-@ athlete must be a starter or important reserve with at least a 3 @.@ 30 cumulative grade point average ( on a 4 @.@ 0 scale ) at his / her current institution . Nominated athletes must have participated in at least 50 percent of the team ’ s games at the position listed on the nomination form ( where applicable ) . No student @-@ athlete is eligible until he has completed one full calendar year at his current institution and has reached sophomore athletic eligibility . In the cases of transfers , graduate students and two @-@ year college graduates , the student @-@ athlete must have completed one full calendar year at the nominating institution to be eligible . Nominees in graduate school must have a cumulative GPA of 3 @.@ 30 or better both as an undergrad and in grad school . Penn State 's Danny Morrissey was a District 2 first @-@ team 2009 Academic All @-@ District Men ’ s Basketball Team selection . On February 25 , 2009 , the Big Ten had no Academic All America Men 's Basketball Team selections . 
 = = = = Big Ten Distinguished Scholar Award = = = = 
 At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 academic year , the inaugural class of Big Ten Distinguished Scholars were recognized for having attained a 3 @.@ 7 GPA for the academic year while earning varsity letters . Brett <unk> , IND , Jamal Abu @-@ <unk> , <unk> , Sterling Williams , NU , and Mark Wohlford , PUR represented men 's basketball as awardees . 
 = = = All @-@ American = = = 
 Lucas and Turner were Associated Press All @-@ American honorable mentions . 
 = = = Summer play = = = 
 Battle , Hummel , and Turner were selected to represent the United States in the 2009 World University Games July 2 – 11 in Belgrade , Serbia . John Shurna was named to the United States ' team for the 2009 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship held July 2 – 12 in Auckland , New Zealand . 
 = = = NBA Draft = = = 
 During the 2009 NBA Draft , Mullens was chosen in the first round with the 24th overall selection by the Dallas Mavericks and Suton was selected by the Utah Jazz in the second round with the 50th overall selection . 
 = = = Coaching honors = = = 
 Wisconsin head basketball coach , Bo Ryan , was chosen to be the head coach for the 2009 World University Games Team by USA Basketball . Purdue head basketball coach , Matt Painter , was chosen to be one of two assistant coaches for the 2009 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship Team by USA Basketball . Painter was one of ten finalists for the 2009 Henry Iba Award as named by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association . Forbes named Ryan and Tom Izzo as two of the top ten coaches . 
 = = Statistical leaders = = 
 Eight of the eleven member Big Ten institutions will return at least 75 percent of their offensive production during the 2009 – 10 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season , unless underclassmen declare for the 2009 NBA Draft . Indiana , Iowa , Michigan , Minnesota and Ohio State will return 90 percent of their total offensive production . The Buckeyes could return 100 percent of their scoring contingent next season . All five first @-@ team All @-@ Conference honorees were sophomores and are all projected to return as juniors . Overall , the Big Ten could return 80 @.@ 5 percent of its offensive production from 2008 to 2009 , and no team should lose more than half of its total scoring unit next year . 
 Players must have played in 75 % of team 's games to be eligible . ( NCAA @-@ wide ranking ) in parenthesis for top 40 performers 
 = = = Team statistics = = = 
 Source : Fox Sports 
 = = Postseason = = 
 = = = Big Ten Tournament = = = 
 # 3 Purdue defeated # 5 Ohio State in the 2009 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament championship game by a 65 – 61 margin . The All @-@ Big Ten Tournament team honorees were Boilermakers Robbie Hummel ( Most Outstanding Player ) , JaJuan Johnson and E 'Twaun Moore , Buckeye Evan Turner and Mike Davis of Illinois . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = NCAA Tournament = = = 
 Goran Suton was the Midwest regional most outstanding player . He was joined by teammates Kalin Lucas and Travis Walton on the NCAA Tournament All @-@ Midwest Regional team . Michigan State became the first team to play in the Final Four in their home state since Duke in 1994 and the first Big Ten team since Purdue in 1980 . They were also the team with the second shortest trip ( 92 miles ( 148 km ) ) to the Final Four since it was bracketed in 1985 . 
 = = = National Invitation Tournament = = = 
 <unk> <unk> was the most outstanding player of the tournament . 
 = = = Other tournaments = = = 
 The Big Ten did not have any entrants in the other post season tournaments . 
 = = = 2009 NBA Draft = = = 
 Several All Big Ten players who completed their eligibility were not drafted . Among those , Marcus Landry made it to the NBA the following season nonetheless . The following players were selected in the 2009 NBA Draft 
 ^ a : Goran Suton was born in Bosnia and Herzegovina and became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 2006 . 
 = = = = Pre @-@ draft trades = = = = 
 1 On June 24 , 2009 , Portland acquired the 22nd pick from Dallas in exchange for the 24th pick , 56th pick and a 2010 second @-@ round draft pick . Portland used the 22nd pick to draft Víctor Claver and Dallas used the 24th and 56th pick to draft Byron Mullens and Ahmad <unk> respectively . 
 = = = = Draft @-@ day trades = = = = 
 The following trades involving drafted players were made on the day of the draft . 
 A 1 2 Oklahoma City acquired the draft rights to 24th pick Byron Mullens from Dallas in exchange for the draft rights to 25th pick Rodrigue <unk> and a future second @-@ round draft pick . 
 = Richard Hakluyt = 
 Richard Hakluyt ( / <unk> / , / <unk> / , or / <unk> / ; 1553 – 23 November 1616 ) was an English writer . He is known for promoting the British colonisation of North America by the English through his works , notably Divers Voyages Touching the Discoverie of America ( 1582 ) and The Principal Navigations , Voiages , Traffiques and Discoueries of the English Nation ( 1589 – 1600 ) . 
 Hakluyt was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church , Oxford . Between 1583 and 1588 he was chaplain and secretary to Sir Edward Stafford , English ambassador at the French court . An ordained priest , Hakluyt held important positions at Bristol Cathedral and Westminster Abbey and was personal chaplain to Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , principal Secretary of State to Elizabeth I and James I. He was the chief promoter of a petition to James I for letters patent to colonize Virginia , which were granted to the London Company and Plymouth Company ( referred to collectively as the Virginia Company ) in 1606 . The Hakluyt Society publishes scholarly editions of primary records of voyages and travels . 
 = = Family , early life and education = = 
 Hakluyt 's patrilineal ancestors were of Welsh extraction , rather than Dutch as is often suggested ; they appear to have settled in Herefordshire in England around the 13th century , and , according to antiquary John Leland , took their surname from the " Forest of <unk> in <unk> " . Some of Hakluyt 's ancestors established themselves at Yatton , and must have ranked amongst the principal landowners of the county . A person named Hugo <unk> , who may have been an ancestor or relative of Richard Hakluyt , was elected Member of Parliament for the borough of Yatton in 1304 or 1305 , and between the 14th and 16th centuries five individuals surnamed " de <unk> " or " <unk> " were sheriffs of Herefordshire . A man named Walter <unk> was knighted in the 34th year of Edward I ( 1305 ) and later killed at the Battle of Bannockburn , and in 1349 Thomas <unk> was chancellor of the diocese of Hereford . Records also show that a Thomas <unk> was in the wardship of Henry VIII ( reigned 1509 – 1547 ) and Edward VI ( reigned 1547 – 1553 ) . 
 Richard Hakluyt , the second of four sons , was born in Eyton in Herefordshire in 1553 . Hakluyt 's father , also named Richard Hakluyt , was a member of the Worshipful Company of Skinners whose members dealt in skins and furs . He died in 1557 when his son was aged about five years , and his wife Margery followed soon after . Hakluyt 's cousin , also named Richard Hakluyt , of the Middle Temple , became his guardian . 
 While a Queen 's Scholar at Westminster School , Hakluyt visited his guardian , whose conversation , illustrated by " certain bookes of <unk> , an <unk> <unk> , and the Bible " , made Hakluyt resolve to " prosecute that knowledge , and kind of literature " . Entering Christ Church , Oxford , in 1570 with financial support from the Skinners ' Company , " his exercises of duty first performed " , he set out to read all the printed or written voyages and discoveries that he could find . He took his Bachelor of Arts ( B.A. ) on 19 February 1574 , and shortly after taking his Master of Arts ( M.A. ) on 27 June 1577 , began giving public lectures in geography . He was the first to show " both the old imperfectly composed and the new lately reformed <unk> , globes , <unk> , and other instruments of this art " . Hakluyt held on to his studentship at Christ Church between 1577 and 1586 , although after 1583 he was no longer resident in Oxford . 
 Hakluyt was ordained in 1578 , the same year he began to receive a " pension " from the Worshipful Company of <unk> to study divinity . The pension would have lapsed in 1583 , but William Cecil , 1st Baron Burghley , intervened to have it extended until 1586 to aid Hakluyt 's geographical research . 
 = = At the English Embassy in Paris = = 
 Hakluyt 's first publication was one that he wrote himself , Divers Voyages Touching the Discoverie of America and the <unk> Adjacent unto the Same , Made First of all by our Englishmen and Afterwards by the Frenchmen and Britons ( 1582 ) . 
 Hakluyt 's Voyages brought him to the notice of Lord Howard of Effingham , and Sir Edward Stafford , Lord Howard 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . At the age of 30 , being acquainted with " the chiefest <unk> at sea , the greatest merchants , and the best mariners of our nation " , he was selected as chaplain and secretary to accompany Stafford , now English ambassador at the French court , to Paris in 1583 . In accordance with the instructions of Secretary Francis Walsingham , he occupied himself chiefly in collecting information of the Spanish and French movements , and " making diligent <unk> of such things as might yield any light unto our <unk> <unk> in America " . Although this was his only visit to Continental Europe in his life , he was angered to hear the limitations of the English in terms of travel being discussed in Paris . 
 The first fruits of Hakluyt 's labours in Paris were embodied in his important work entitled A Particuler Discourse Concerninge the Greate Necessitie and Manifolde Commodyties That Are Like to Growe to This Realme of Englande by the Westerne Discoueries Lately Attempted , Written in the Yere 1584 , which Sir Walter Raleigh commissioned him to prepare . The manuscript , lost for almost 300 years , was published for the first time in 1877 . Hakluyt revisited England in 1584 , and laid a copy of the Discourse before Elizabeth I ( to whom it had been dedicated ) together with his analysis in Latin of Aristotle 's <unk> . His objective was to recommend the enterprise of planting the English race in the unsettled parts of North America , and thus gain the Queen 's support for Raleigh 's expedition . In May 1585 when Hakluyt was in Paris with the English Embassy , the Queen granted to him the next prebendary at Bristol Cathedral that should become vacant , to which he was admitted in 1585 or 1586 and held with other <unk> till his death . 
 Hakluyt 's other works during his time in Paris consisted mainly of translations and compilations , with his own dedications and prefaces . These latter writings , together with a few letters , are the only extant material out of which a biography of him can be framed . Hakluyt interested himself in the publication of the manuscript journal of René <unk> de Laudonnière , the <unk> 'histoire notable de la Floride <unk> ès Indes Occidentales in Paris in 1586 . The attention that the book excited in Paris encouraged Hakluyt to prepare an English translation and publish it in London under the title A Notable Historie Containing Foure Voyages Made by <unk> French <unk> unto Florida ( 1587 ) . The same year , his edition of Peter Martyr d <unk> 's De Orbe <unk> Decades Octo saw the light at Paris . This work contains an exceedingly @-@ rare copperplate map dedicated to Hakluyt and signed F.G. ( supposed to be Francis <unk> ) ; it is the first on which the name " Virginia " appears . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 In 1588 Hakluyt finally returned to England with Douglas Sheffield , Baroness Sheffield , after a residence in France of nearly five years . In 1589 he published the first edition of his chief work , The Principall Navigations , Voiages and Discoveries of the English Nation , using eyewitness accounts as far as possible . In the preface to this he announced the intended publication of the first terrestrial globe made in England by Emery Molyneux . 
 Between 1598 and 1600 appeared the final , reconstructed and greatly enlarged edition of The Principal Navigations , Voiages , Traffiques and Discoueries of the English Nation in three volumes . In the dedication of the second volume ( 1599 ) to his patron , Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , Hakluyt strongly urged the minister as to the expediency of colonizing Virginia . A few copies of this monumental work contain a map of great rarity , the first on the Mercator projection made in England according to the true principles laid down by Edward Wright . Hakluyt 's great collection has been called " the Prose Epic of the modern English nation " by historian James Anthony Froude . 
 On 20 April 1590 Hakluyt was instituted to the clergy house of <unk> @-@ cum @-@ <unk> , Suffolk , by Lady Stafford , who was Dowager @-@ Baroness Sheffield . He held this position until his death , and resided in <unk> through the 1590s and frequently thereafter . In 1599 , he became an adviser to the East India Company , and in 1601 he edited a translation from the Portuguese of Antonio Galvão 's The Discoveries of the World . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In the late 1590s Hakluyt became the client and personal chaplain of Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury , Lord Burghley 's son , who was to be Hakluyt 's most fruitful patron . Hakluyt dedicated to Cecil the second ( 1599 ) and third volumes ( 1600 ) of the expanded edition of Principal Navigations and also his edition of Galvão 's Discoveries ( 1601 ) . Cecil , who was the principal Secretary of State to Elizabeth I and James I , rewarded him by installing him as prebendary of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster on 4 May 1602 . In the following year , he was elected archdeacon of the Abbey . These religious occupations have occasioned reconsideration of the role played by spiritual concerns in Hakluyt 's writings on exploration , settlement , and England 's relations with its Catholic rivals . 
 Hakluyt was married twice , once in or about 1594 and again in 1604 . In the licence of Hakluyt 's second marriage dated 30 March 1604 , he is described as one of the chaplains of the Savoy Hospital ; this position was also conferred on him by Cecil . His will refers to chambers occupied by him there up to the time of his death , and in another official document he is styled Doctor of Divinity ( D.D. ) . 
 Hakluyt was also a leading adventurer of the Charter of the Virginia Company of London as a director thereof in 1589 . In 1605 he secured the prospective living of Jamestown , the intended capital of the intended colony of Virginia . When the colony was at last established in 1607 , he supplied this benefice with its chaplain , Robert Hunt . In 1606 he appears as the chief promoter of the petition to James I for letters patent to colonize Virginia , which were granted on 10 April 1606 . His last publication was a translation of Hernando de Soto 's discoveries in Florida , entitled Virginia Richly Valued , by the Description of the Maine Land of Florida , Her Next Neighbour ( 1609 ) . This work was intended to encourage the young colony of Virginia ; Scottish historian William Robertson wrote of Hakluyt , " England is more indebted for its American possessions than to any man of that age . " 
 Hakluyt prepared an English translation of Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius ' Mare Liberum ( 1609 ) , a treatise that sought to demonstrate that the Dutch had the right to trade freely in the East Indies , contrary to Spanish and Portuguese claims of sovereignty over the seas , in the early 17th century . Helen Thornton has suggested that the translation was commissioned by Thomas Smythe who became treasurer of the Virginia Company in 1609 and was also Governor of the East India Company . In that year , Hakluyt was a consultant to the Company when it was renewing its charter . Grotius ' arguments supported England 's right to trade in the Indies . The translation may also have been part of the propaganda encouraging English people to settle in Virginia . In Mare Liberum , Grotius denied that the 1493 donation by Pope Alexander VI that had divided the oceans between Spain and Portugal entitled Spain to make territorial claims to North America . Instead , he stressed the importance of occupation , which was favourable to the English as they and not the Spanish had occupied Virginia . Grotius also argued that the seas should be freely navigable by all , which was useful since the England to Virginia route crossed seas which the Portuguese claimed . However , it is not clear why Hakluyt 's translation was not published in his lifetime . George Bruner Parks has theorized that publication at that time would have been inconvenient to England because after England had successfully helped Holland and Spain to negotiate the Twelve Years ' Truce during the Eighty Years ' War , the work would have supported English claims for free seas against Spain , but not its claims for closed seas against Holland . Hakluyt 's handwritten manuscript , MS <unk> 529 , in Inner Temple Library in London was eventually published as The Free Sea for the first time in 2004 . 
 In 1591 , Hakluyt inherited family property upon the death of his elder brother Thomas ; a year later , upon the death of his youngest brother Edmund , he inherited additional property which derived from his uncle . In 1612 Hakluyt became a charter member of the North @-@ west Passage Company . By the time of his death , he had amassed a small fortune out of his various emoluments and <unk> , of which the last was the clergy house of Gedney , Lincolnshire , presented to him by his younger brother Oliver in 1612 . Unfortunately , his wealth was squandered by his only son . 
 Hakluyt died on 23 November 1616 , probably in London , and was buried on 26 November in Westminster Abbey ; by an error in the abbey register his burial is recorded under the year 1626 . A number of his manuscripts , sufficient to form a fourth volume of his collections of 1598 – 1600 , fell into the hands of Samuel Purchas , who inserted them in an abridged form in his <unk> ( 1625 – 1626 ) . Others , consisting chiefly of notes gathered from contemporary authors , are preserved at the University of Oxford . 
 Hakluyt is principally remembered for his efforts in promoting and supporting the settlement of North America by the English through his writings . These works were a fertile source of material for William Shakespeare and other authors . Hakluyt also encouraged the production of geographical and historical writings by others . It was at Hakluyt 's suggestion that Robert Parke translated Juan González de Mendoza 's The History of the Great and Mighty Kingdom of China and the Situation <unk> ( 1588 – 1590 ) , John Pory made his version of Leo Africanus 's A Geographical Historie of Africa ( 1600 ) , and P. <unk> translated Marc <unk> 's Nova Francia ( 1609 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Hakluyt Society was founded in 1846 for printing rare and unpublished accounts of voyages and travels , and continues to publish volumes each year . 
 In May 2008 , a major interdisciplinary conference called Richard Hakluyt 1552 – 1616 : Life , Times , Legacy , examining the significance of Hakluyt 's work , was jointly organized by the National Maritime Museum , the Centre for Travel Writing Studies , Nottingham Trent University and NUI Galway . A major aim of the conference was to lay the groundwork for and establish a network of scholars to prepare a new edition of Hakluyt 's Principal Navigations . Those leading this group include Nigel Rigby , Will Ryan ( President of the Hakluyt Society ) , and the project 's editors Daniel Carey ( NUI , Galway ) , Andrew Hadfield ( University of Sussex ) and Claire Jowitt ( NTU ) . 
 Westminster School named a house after him as recognition of achievement of an Old Westminster . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Authored = = = 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1582 ) . Divers Voyages Touching the Discoverie of America and the <unk> Adjacent unto the Same , Made First of All by Our Englishmen and Afterwards by the Frenchmen and Britons : With Two <unk> Annexed <unk> . London : [ Thomas Dawson ] for T. <unk> . Quarto . Reprint : 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1850 ) . John Winter Jones , ed . Divers Voyages Touching the Discovery of America and the Islands Adjacent [ Hakluyt Society ; 1st Ser . , no . 7 ] . London : Hakluyt Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 665 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1584 ) . A Particuler Discourse Concerninge the Greate Necessitie and Manifolde Commodyties That Are Like to Growe to This Realme of Englande by the Westerne Discoueries Lately Attempted , Written in the Yere 1584 . [ London ? ] : [ s.n. ] Reprints : 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1831 ) . C [ <unk> ] Deane , ed . A Discourse Concerning Western Planting Written in the Year 1584 ( Maine Historical Society . Collections , etc . ; 2nd Ser . ) . Maine : Maine Historical Society . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1993 ) . David B. Quinn & Alison M. Quinn , eds . A Particuler Discourse Concerninge the Greate Necessitie and Manifolde Commodyties that are Like to Growe to this Realme of Englande by the Westerne Discoueries Lately Attempted ... [ Hakluyt Society ; Extra Ser . , no . 45 ] . London : Hakluyt Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 35 @-@ 0 . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1589 ) . The Principall Navigations , Voiages , and Discoveries of the English Nation : Made by Sea or Over Land to the Most Remote and Farthest Distant Quarters of the Earth at Any Time within the Compasse of These 1500 Years : Divided into Three Several Parts According to the Positions of the Regions Whereunto They Were Directed ; the First Containing the <unk> Travels of the English unto <unk> , Syria , Arabia ... the Second , Comprehending the Worthy Discoveries of the English Towards the North and Northeast by Sea , as of Lapland ... the Third and Last , Including the English Valiant Attempts in Searching Almost all the Corners of the <unk> and New World of America ... Whereunto is Added the Last Most Renowned English Navigation Round About the Whole Globe of the Earth . London : Imprinted by George Bishop and Ralph <unk> , deputies to Christopher Barker , printer to the Queen 's Most Excellent <unk> . Folio . Reprint : 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1965 ) . The Principall Navigations Voiages and Discoveries of the English Nation ... Imprinted at London , 1589 : A Photo @-@ <unk> Facsimile with an Introduction by David Beers Quinn and Raleigh <unk> Skelton and with a New Index by Alison Quinn [ Hakluyt Society ; Extra Ser . , nos . <unk> & <unk> ] . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press for Hakluyt Society & Peabody Museum of Salem . 2 vols . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1598 – 1600 ) . The Principal Navigations , Voiages , Traffiques and Discoueries of the English Nation , Made by Sea or Overland ... at Any Time Within the Compasse of these 1500 [ 1600 ] <unk> , & c . London : G. Bishop , R. <unk> & R. Barker . 3 vols . ; folio . Reprints : 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1884 – 1890 ) . E [ <unk> ] Goldsmid , ed . The Principal Navigations , Voyages , Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation . Edinburgh : E. & G. Goldsmid . 16 vols . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1903 – 1905 ) . The Principal Navigations Voyages Traffiques & Discoveries of the English Nation , etc . [ Hakluyt Society ; Extra Ser . , nos . 1 – 12 ] . Glasgow : James MacLehose & Sons for the Hakluyt Society . 12 vols . 
 = = = Edited and translated = = = 
 [ Cartier , Jacques ( 1580 ) . A <unk> and Briefe Narration of the Two <unk> and Discoueries to the Northwest Partes called <unk> <unk> , first Translated out of French into Italian by ... Gio . <unk> . <unk> , and now Turned into English by John Florio , etc . London : H [ enry ] <unk> <unk> in Thames <unk> , neere vnto <unk> Castell . ] It seems likely that this work was not by Hakluyt : see " At the English Embassy in Paris " above . 
 Laudonnière , René de ; Richard Hakluyt , transl . ( 1587 ) . A Notable Historie Containing Foure Voyages made by Certaine French <unk> unto Florida , wherein the Great Riches and <unk> of the <unk> , with the <unk> of the People , hitherto Concealed , are Brought to Light ... Newly Translated Out of French into English by R. H. ... London : Thomas Dawson . Quarto . 
 <unk> , Petrus Martyr ( 1587 ) . Richard Hakluyt , ed . De Orbe <unk> Petri <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> et Caroli <unk> <unk> Decades Octo , <unk> Temporum <unk> et <unk> <unk> <unk> ... Paris : G. <unk> . Octavo . 
 Galvão , Antonio ( 1601 ) . Richard Hakluyt , ed . The Discoveries of the World from Their First <unk> unto the <unk> ... 1555 ; Written in the Portugall Tongue by A. <unk> . London : G. Bishop . Quarto . Reprint : 
 <unk> , Antonio ( 1862 ) . Vice @-@ Admiral Bethune ( Charles Ramsay Drinkwater Bethune ) , ed . The Discoveries of the World , from Their First Original unto the Year of our Lord , 1555 . [ Edited by F. de Sousa Tavares . ] Corrected ... and published in England , by R. Hakluyt ... [ Hakluyt Society ; 1st Ser . , no . 30 ] . London : Hakluyt Society . 
 de Soto , Ferdinando ; Richard Hakluyt , transl . ( 1609 ) . Virginia Richly Valued , by the Description of the Maine Land of Florida , Her Next Neighbour : Out of the Foure <unk> <unk> and Discoverie ... of Don Ferdinando de Soto and Sixe Hundred Able Men in His Companie ... Written by a Portugall gentleman of Elvas , ... and Translated out of <unk> by Richard Hakluyt . London : F. <unk> for M. Lownes . Quarto . 
 Grotius , Hugo ; William <unk> ; Richard Hakluyt , transl . ( 2004 ) . David Armitage , ed . The Free Sea . Indianapolis , Ind . : Liberty Fund . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 431 @-@ 9 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Burrage , Henry S [ <unk> ] , ed . ( 1906 ) . ... Early English and French Voyages , Chiefly from Hakluyt , 1534 – 1608 : With Maps and a Facsimile Reproduction . New York , N.Y. : Scribner 's . 
 Corbitt , David Leroy , ed . ( 1948 ) . Explorations , descriptions , and attempted settlements of Carolina , 1584 – 1590 . Raleigh : State Department of Archives and History . 
 Gray , Albert ( 1917 ) . An Address on the Occasion of the Tercentenary of the Death of Richard Hakluyt , 23 November 1916 : With a Note on the Hakluyt Family ( <unk> ) . London : Hakluyt Society . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ; Frank Knight ( 1964 ) . They Told Mr. Hakluyt : Being a Selection of Tales and Other Matter Taken from Richard Hakluyt 's " The Principal Navigations , Voyages , <unk> and Discoveries of the English Nation " , with Various Explanatory Notes by Frank Knight . London : Macmillan & Co . 
 Hakluyt , Richard ( 1880s ) . Henry Morley , ed . Voyager 's Tales , from the Collections of Richard Hakluyt . London : Cassell & Co . 
 Lynam , E [ dward ] [ William O 'Flaherty ] , ed . ( 1946 ) . Richard Hakluyt & His Successors : A Volume Issued to <unk> the Centenary of the Hakluyt Society . London : Hakluyt Society . 
 <unk> , Peter C. ( 2007 ) . Hakluyt 's Promise : An Elizabethan 's Obsession for an English America . New Haven , Conn . ; London : Yale University Press . 
 Markham , Clements R [ <unk> ] ( 1896 ) . Richard Hakluyt : His Life and Work : With a Short Account of the Aims and Achievements of the Hakluyt Society : An Address , etc . ( OB1 ) . London : Hakluyt Society . 
 Neville @-@ <unk> , P [ <unk> ] A. ; Anthony Payne ( 1997 ) . Richard Hakluyt and His Books : An Interim Census of Surviving Copies of Hakluyt 's Divers Voyages and Principal Navigations . London : Hakluyt Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 56 @-@ 5 . 
 Quinn , D [ avid ] B [ <unk> ] , ed . ( 1974 ) . The Hakluyt Handbook [ Hakluyt Society ; 2nd ser . , no . 144 ] . London : Hakluyt Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 2 vols . 
 A Reproduction of the Tablet Erected in Bristol Cathedral to the Memory of Richard Hakluyt Born 1522 , Died 1616 ( OB3 ) . London : Hakluyt Society . 1911 . 
 Sir Walter Raleigh and Richard Hakluyt : An Exhibition Held in the King 's Library , British Museum , July – September 1952 . [ London ] : British Museum . 1952 . 
 Watson , Foster ( 1924 ) . Richard Hakluyt . [ S.l. ] : The Sheldon Press . 
 = = = News reports = = = 
 O 'Toole , Fintan ( 10 March 2007 ) . " Virgin territories [ review of Peter C. <unk> 's Hakluyt 's Promise ] " . The Guardian ( Review ) ( London ) . 
 Porter , Henry ( 8 April 2007 ) . " America 's debt to a forgotten hero : As the 400th anniversary of Jamestown nears , its spiritual father is being unjustly ignored " . The Observer ( London ) . 
 Bridges , Roy ( 15 April 2007 ) . " Your letters : Hakluyt has not been forgotten " . The Observer ( London ) . 
 = The Plateau ( Fringe ) = 
 " The Plateau " is the third episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 46th episode overall . As one of the early Season 3 episodes that takes place entirely in the parallel universe , the episode centers on Olivia , conditioned to believe she is a member of the alternate Fringe team , trying to track down a mentally unstable man that can predict the team 's every move . 
 " The Plateau " was co @-@ written by Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker , and directed by Brad Anderson . It featured the only appearance of guest actor Michael Eklund , who played the episode 's antagonist Milo Stanfield . It first aired on October 7 , 2010 to an estimated 5 @.@ 2 million viewers . Reviews of the episode were mostly positive , and many praised the storyline and Eklund 's performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Olivia ( Anna Torv ) , trapped in the parallel universe , has been conditioned with drugs to believe she is her doppelganger , " Fauxlivia " , by Walternate ( John Noble ) , and has been integrated into the alternate Fringe team , though she is haunted by images of Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Walter ( Noble ) from the prime universe . 
 She , Charlie ( Kirk Acevedo ) , and Lincoln ( Seth Gabel ) are called to the scene of an accident where a pedestrian has been run over by a bus , nearly duplicating events of a similar bus accident the day before , a statistical impossibility according to Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) . Olivia finds a ball @-@ point pen at the scene , a rarity in the parallel universe because of the adoption of digital interfaces . Evidence suggests that the discovery of the pen by a bystander created a sequence of reactions that led to the victim 's death . The next day , another pedestrian is wounded in a bus accident . As the Fringe team investigates the scene , finding another pen , a bystander is struck and killed by an ambulance . Olivia spots a suspicious man in the crowds , but he uses a seemingly random series of happenstance events to get away . 
 Olivia discovers ties between the three victims and a medical center . At the center , Dr. Levin ( Malcolm Stewart ) explains they help mentally challenged patients with experimental processes to boost their intelligence ; Olivia observes one set of patients uses pens as they are unable to cope with digital devices . When Olivia and Charlie discuss the victims with Dr. Levin , he is able to identify their culprit as Milo ( Michael Eklund ) , a patient taking an experimental drug to boost his IQ exponentially . Though released to care of his sole remaining family member Madeline ( Kacey Rohl ) , he was scheduled to return to reverse the process for his own health and safety . Dr. Levin identifies all three victims as those charged to return Milo to the center , the last victim only having been selected the day before . They visit Madeline , who worries for the safety of her brother . She explains that Milo is able to predict the outcome of numerous events to the smallest detail , and only by showing him a toy horse , a connection to their deceased parents , can she break Milo 's concentration . She provides Olivia and Charlie the location of the hotel that Milo is staying at . 
 As they return to the city , Olivia and Charlie discuss plans with Astrid on how to capture Milo , but realize that since he can predict their every move , any plan would be futile , and approach the hotel directly . Milo leads Olivia on a chase through a construction area including a marked zone where the air is too thin , expecting to crush her under a load of cement bricks . Olivia , unaware of the warning signs for the zone , races through it instead of stopping to put on a respirator , nearly asphyxiating herself , and dodges the bricks in time to capture Milo . At the center , Dr. Levin notes that Milo 's condition is too far advanced to reverse , and only a computer is able to keep up with his thoughts . Madeline sadly leaves the toy horse at Milo 's side . 
 That evening , Olivia has a vision of Peter ; the vision tries to break Olivia from the conditioning , explaining that her lack of knowledge of the parallel universe saved her life . 
 = = Production = = 
 In late March 2010 , Brothers & Sisters showrunners Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker were hired as co @-@ executive producers for Fringe . The two had previously worked with Fringe co @-@ creators Roberto Orci , J.J. Abrams , and Alex Kurtzman on Alias , and again with Abrams on Lost . " The Plateau " marked the first Fringe episode they co @-@ wrote . Editor Timothy A. Good also joined the series , making " The Plateau " his first Fringe episode . Good called the episode one of two parts – the second half was the season 's eighteenth episode " Bloodline " , which Breen and Schapker also co @-@ wrote . The episode premise was inspired by executive producer J.H. Wyman 's son , who came up with the idea that a man could be smart enough to predict events . " The Plateau " marked the first appearance of a fringe case in the parallel universe . 
 The episode featured the return of guest stars Kirk Acevedo , Ryan McDonald , Seth Gabel , and Philip Winchester . New guest actors included Michael Eklund as the antagonist Milo Stanfield , Malcolm Stewart as Dr. Levin , and Kacey Rohl as Madeline . Eklund and other actors auditioned in Vancouver , and the producers reviewed tapes of their previous work . As executive producer Jeff Pinkner explains , " We got incredibly lucky casting Michael Eklund for this role ... he really created this character . " " The Plateau " was the first episode of the third season to feature " Alt @-@ Astrid " , the prime universe Astrid 's doppelganger . Actress Jasika Nicole depicted her to have autistic characteristics , as Nicole has a sister with the disorder . The producers decided this would be the one doppelganger to have actual genetic differences with their counterpart , with Nicole believing her two characters possessed the greatest contrast among all of the doppelgangers . 
 Former Fringe producer Brad Anderson served as the episodes director . The episode was shot in August 2010 , partly on Hastings Street in Vancouver . Anderson filmed the opening sequence in one day , which Owusu @-@ Bree praised as " unbelievable . " The crew employed a stunt double for some of Eklund 's more physical scenes , such as when he jumps onto a moving bus . Pinkner called the bus scene his favorite stunt on the series thus far . The hospital where Olivia and Charlie interview the drug trial doctor was filmed at the Toronto Public Library . There , the video the doctor showed them was added later by effects supervisor Jay Worth , forcing the actors to fake reactions to the images displayed . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children focusing on the science seen in " The Plateau " , with the intention of having " students learn about chain reactions , where small changes result in additional changes , leading to a self @-@ propagating chain of events . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its first broadcast on October 7 , 2010 , " The Plateau " was watched by an estimated 5 @.@ 2 million viewers , earning a 2 @.@ 0 / 5 ratings share for adults between the ages 18 and 49 . Time shifting viewing increased the episode 's ratings by 39 percent , finishing with a 2 @.@ 8 rating among adults . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker called the episode " at once cool @-@ looking , heart @-@ tugging , and pretty simple " , especially when compared to previous episodes like " White Tulip " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Noel Murray graded the episode with an A , explaining " I can 't really find anything to complain about here . The direction was effectively moody and snappy , the performances were sharp , and the case was cool . " Murray praised the subtle characteristics of the parallel universe , the action scenes , and the use of split @-@ screens to visually show Milo 's predictions . MTV 's Josh Wigler believed that the episode " demonstrated how the mystery @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week format can still be compelling : by taking everything familiar and applying a stark new layer of paint . " Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times wrote " The third season of Fringe continues to get better with each episode . Most importantly , it has momentum . It 's moving forward with a distinct destination , and even though I know Fringe is heading somewhere , I have no idea where that might be , or what 's going to happen when we get there . Boy , if you 're not watching Fringe , you 're missing out . " 
 SFScope contributor Sarah Stegall thought the episode was similar to Flowers for Algernon , but was skeptical of the premise that Milo could predict every event before they happened . She criticized the decision to make Milo " coldly calculating " , writing " This is but another version of the tired cliché of the stoic intellectual , the intelligent person who has no heart or emotions . Why are we so afraid of smart people ? ... It always annoys me when science fiction writers , of all people , diss their own audience with the idea that intellectuals are dangerous . " Stegall was pleased to have the first " standalone " episode of the season , explaining that it was the first where she could " relax and enjoy ... the tying together of a standalone with a mythology theme was absolutely brilliant . " Fearnet contributor Alyse Wax enjoyed the episode , but also thought " the idea that [ drugs ] could turn someone into a cartoonish evil genius is pretty farfetched . " 
 Many critics praised Eklund and his character , with one calling Milo " spindly , intense , and nicely chilling " . In a January 2011 article , The Futon Critic rated " The Plateau " the twenty @-@ first best television episode of 2010 out of a list of fifty . The A.V. Club ranked Fringe the 15th best show of 2010 , in particular citing " The Plateau " as a justification . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " The Plateau " the thirteenth best episode of the series , explaining " The first half of Fringe 's celebrated third season alternated between episodes set in the over here and over there worlds . In a tough call , we say the best of the over there stand @-@ alones was this brainy thriller about a dude with a low I.Q. who got an intelligence boost via <unk> drugs , and found himself becoming smarter and smarter , and more and more humanly detached , and causing chaos and death by concocting intricate chain reaction events . " In a similar list , Den of Geek named it the eighth best episode of the series , explaining that " The Plateau " stood out as " the best of a good crop of episodes " among the parallel universe storylines because of its villain and its use of Lincoln Lee , Charlie , and Olivia in action . " 
 = Hurricane Alex ( 2004 ) = 
 Hurricane Alex was the first named storm , the first hurricane , and the first major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . The first storm of the season , Alex formed unusually late in the season ; the fifth latest since 1954 . It developed from the interaction between an upper @-@ level low and a weak surface trough on July 31 to the east of Jacksonville , Florida . It moved northeastward , and strengthened to attain winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) before passing within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of the Outer Banks coast . Alex strengthened further and reached a peak of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) winds while off the coast of New England , one of only two hurricanes to reach Category 3 status north of 38 ° N. Alex caused a scare of a hurricane @-@ force direct hit in the Outer Banks of North Carolina , which had been devastated by Hurricane Isabel less than a year earlier . 
 The hurricane produced light damage in the Outer Banks , primarily from flooding and high winds . Over 100 houses were damaged , while numerous cars were disabled from the flooding . Damage totaled about $ 7 @.@ 5 million ( 2004 USD ) . Alex produced strong waves and rip tides along the East Coast of the United States , causing one death and several injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak surface trough , located to the west of an upper @-@ level low , developed convection to the east of the Bahamas on July 26 . A tropical wave entered the area two days later , resulting in an increase of convective organization and area . Although conditions were not favorable for tropical cyclone formation , it sped to the northwest and steadily organized , developing a surface area of low pressure on the 30th . On July 31 , the system continued to organize , and developed into Tropical Depression One while located 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the east of Jacksonville , Florida . 
 As the depression drifted erratically , the system remained weak due to its large circulation and lack of deep convection near the center . The center relocated to the south , closer to the center . An approaching upper @-@ level trough lessened the shear over the system , allowing the depression to intensify into Tropical Storm Alex on August 1 . The trough also caused Alex to increase its forward motion to the northeast . Deep convection continued to build over the center due to low shear and warm waters from the Gulf Stream , and Alex intensified into a hurricane on August 3 while located 75 miles ( 120 km ) southeast of Cape Fear , North Carolina . The cyclone continued to strengthen , and attained Category 2 status just hours after becoming a hurricane . The hurricane approached the Outer Banks of North Carolina , coming within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of Cape Hatteras later on the 3rd . The western portion of the eyewall passed over the Outer Banks , though the center remained offshore . 
 Alex turned to the east @-@ northeast after passing the Outer Banks in response to becoming embedded within the west @-@ southwesterly flow . The hurricane briefly weakened to a Category 1 , but restrengthened due to warm waters of the Gulf Stream . Water temperatures remained 3 @.@ 6 ° F ( 2 ° C ) above normal , resulting in Alex intensifying into a 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) major hurricane on August 5 while located 450 miles ( 710 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia . Due to low vertical shear and favorable conditions , Alex remained a Category 3 hurricane until passing over cooler waters late on the 5th while 290 miles ( 465 km ) south of Newfoundland . Alex rapidly weakened , degrading into tropical storm status on August 6 . Later on the 6th , Alex became extratropical while 950 miles ( 1530 km ) east of Cape Race , Newfoundland , and lost its identity shortly thereafter . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Initially , forecasters believed Alex would remain weak , and on the first advisory the storm was predicted to make landfall as a minimal tropical storm . However , when strengthening became evident , the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane warning from Cape Lookout to Oregon Inlet about 20 hours before hurricane conditions were experienced . In addition , a tropical storm warning existed for much of the North Carolina coastline as Alex paralleled the state . 
 Despite Tropical Storm Warnings , 3 @,@ 500 tourists remained on the Outer Banks , though many planned to leave if Alex were to track closer or become stronger . No evacuations were ordered . Officials recommended residents to take precautions for the approaching hurricane . The National Weather Service in Morehead City issued a flash flood watch a day before the hurricane moved past the Outer Banks . The service also issued flash flooding warnings for Craven and Carteret Counties on the day of the hurricane 's closest approach . In preparation for the hurricane , the Cape Lookout National Seashore was closed and evacuated . The National Park Service also closed Cape Point Campground . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While drifting off the coast of Florida , Alex produced rip currents and strong waves along the North Carolina coast resulting in nine lifeguard rescues from the surf . Upon moving by the Outer Banks , a storm surge of up to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) occurred on the Pamlico Sound side of Buxton and Ocracoke Village . The flooding on Ocracoke Island was the worst since Hurricane Gloria nineteen years earlier . Elsewhere on the Outer Banks , waters rose 2 – 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal . Rainfall directly along the coast amounted to over 5 inches ( 127 mm ) , while Ocracoke experienced 7 @.@ 55 inches ( 192 mm ) . Maximum sustained winds peaked at 88 mph ( 124 km / h ) , and gusts peaked at 115 mph ( 169 km / h ) in Morehead City . Beach erosion was minor along much of North Carolina 's coastline , with the exception of Ocracoke Island where erosion was significant . 
 Cape Fear experienced minor beach erosion . The erosion , combined with high waves , washed out a portion of a roadway . The heavy rainfall in the Outer Banks disabled over 200 cars and flooded nearly 500 . Strong wind gusts left around 10 @,@ 000 buildings without power . Many places were not restored for two to three days after the storm . Wind and storm surge damaged over 100 houses and buildings . Damage amounted to about $ 7 @.@ 5 million ( 2004 USD ) . Two days after the storm passed , a man drowned off of Nags Head from strong rip currents and waves . This was the only direct casualty from the storm . 
 Alex 's outer rainbands produced heavy rainfall across Virginia , peaking at over 7 inches ( 178 mm ) in the center of the state . The rainfall caused localized flooding , but there was no reported damage in the state . In Rehoboth Beach , Delaware , rip currents produced by the storm injured three people . A few young children had to be rescued when they were trapped by a jetty . In New Jersey , the strong surf and rip currents hospitalized at least five swimmers . 
 Alex 's extratropical remnants sank the Pink Lady , a rowboat carrying four British rowers attempting to break the record for fastest crossing from St. John 's , Newfoundland to Falmouth , Cornwall . They were rescued by a Danish cargo ship , and injuries were limited to a mild concussion and a case of hypothermia . The rowers were roughly two weeks and 370 miles ( 595 km ) from their destination . The group had been on track to break the 1896 record of 54 days by 10 days . 
 = = Aftermath and records = = 
 On Ocracoke Island , officials ordered for the evacuation of the thousands of tourists who stayed , believing that keeping tourists on the island would hinder cleanup efforts . The tourists were evacuated in school buses to Hatteras Island , where they could rent a car if needed . Tourists were also evacuated by ferry to Swan Quarter , in Hyde County , where they boarded school buses and were taken to nearby Washington NC to rent available cars or find accommodations . The island was re @-@ opened to visitors on August 6 , three days after the storm passed through . Evacuation was ordered again on Friday of the following week when another storm threatened to hit the Outer Banks , but did not do so . Dare County officials requested aid from the National Guard for the cleanup process . The North Carolina Department of Transportation was ready to clear the roads once the storm exited the area . 
 Alex marked the fifth @-@ latest start to a hurricane season since 1954 . The latest start to a hurricane season since 1954 was Hurricane Anita of the 1977 season , forming on August 29 . Alex is only the second hurricane on record to have reached Category 3 strength north of 38 ° N latitude . The other storm was Hurricane Ellen in the 1973 Atlantic hurricane season ; Alex was the stronger of the two . It is also one of only five hurricanes to be at major hurricane ( Category 3 or higher ) status within Canadian waters since 1950 . 
 = Chadian – Libyan conflict = 
 The Chadian – Libyan conflict was a series of sporadic clashes in Chad between 1978 and 1987 between Libyan and Chadian forces . Libya had been involved in Chad 's internal affairs prior to 1978 and before Muammar Gaddafi 's rise to power in Libya in 1969 , beginning with the extension of the Chadian Civil War to northern Chad in 1968 . The conflict was marked by a series of four separate Libyan interventions in Chad , taking place in 1978 , 1979 , 1980 – 1981 and 1983 – 1987 . In all of these occasions Gaddafi had the support of a number of factions participating in the civil war , while Libya 's opponents found the support of the French government , which intervened militarily to save the Chadian government in 1978 , 1983 and 1986 . 
 The pattern of the war delineated itself in 1978 , with the Libyans providing armour , artillery and air support and their Chadian allies the infantry , which assumed the bulk of the scouting and fighting . This pattern was radically changed in 1986 , towards the end of the war , when most Chadian forces united in opposing the Libyan occupation of northern Chad with a degree of unity that had never been seen before in Chad . This deprived the Libyan forces of their habitual infantry , exactly when they found themselves confronting a mobile army , well provided now with anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ air missiles , thus cancelling the Libyan superiority in firepower . What followed was the Toyota War , in which the Libyan forces were routed and expelled from Chad , putting an end to the conflict . 
 Gaddafi initially intended to annex the Aouzou Strip , the northernmost part of Chad , which he claimed as part of Libya on the grounds of an unratified treaty of the colonial period . In 1972 his goals became , in the evaluation of historian Mario Azevedo , the creation of a client state in Libya 's " underbelly " , an Islamic republic modelled after his <unk> , that would maintain close ties with Libya , and secure his control over the Aouzou Strip ; expulsion of the French from the region ; and use of Chad as a base to expand his influence in Central Africa . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = Occupation of the Aouzou Strip = = = 
 Libyan involvement with Chad can be said to have started in 1968 , during the Chadian Civil War , when the insurgent Muslim National Liberation Front of Chad ( FROLINAT ) extended its guerrilla war against the Christian President François Tombalbaye to the northerly Borkou @-@ Ennedi @-@ Tibesti Prefecture ( BET ) . Libya 's king Idris I felt compelled to support the FROLINAT because of long @-@ standing strong links between the two sides of the Chadian @-@ Libyan border . To preserve relations with Chad 's former colonial master and current protector , France , Idris limited himself to granting the rebels sanctuary in Libyan territory and to providing only non @-@ lethal supplies . 
 All this changed with the Libyan coup d 'état of 1 September 1969 that deposed Idris and brought Muammar Gaddafi to power . Gaddafi claimed the Aouzou Strip in northern Chad , referring to an unratified treaty signed in 1935 by Italy and France ( then the colonial powers of Libya and Chad , respectively ) . Such claims had been previously made when in 1954 Idris had tried to occupy Aouzou , but his troops were repelled by the French Colonial Forces . 
 Though initially wary of the FROLINAT , Gaddafi had come to see by 1970 the organization as useful to his needs . With the support of Soviet bloc nations , particularly East Germany , he trained and armed the insurgents , and provided them with weapons and funding . On 27 August 1971 Chad accused Egypt and Libya of backing a coup against then @-@ president Tombalbaye by recently amnestied Chadians . 
 On the day of the failed coup , Tombalbaye cut all diplomatic relations with Libya and Egypt , and invited all Libyan opposition groups to base themselves in Chad , and started laying claims to Fezzan on the grounds of " historical rights " . Gaddafi 's answer was to officially recognize on 17 September the FROLINAT as the sole legitimate government of Chad . In October , Chadian Foreign Minister Baba Hassan denounced Libya 's " expansionist ideas " at the United Nations . 
 Through French pressure on Libya and the mediation of <unk> President <unk> <unk> , the two countries resumed diplomatic relations on 17 April 1972 . Shortly after , Tombalbaye broke diplomatic relations with Israel and is said to have secretly agreed on 28 November to cede the Aouzou Strip to Libya . In exchange , Gaddafi pledged 40 million pounds to the Chadian President and the two countries signed a Treaty of Friendship in December 1972 . Gaddafi withdrew official support to the FROLINAT and forced its leader Abba <unk> to move his headquarters from Tripoli to Algiers . Good relations were confirmed in the following years , with Gaddafi visiting the Chadian capital N 'Djamena in March 1974 ; in the same month a joint bank was created to provide Chad with investment funds . 
 Six months after the signing of the 1972 treaty , Libyan troops moved into the Strip and established an airbase just north of Aouzou , protected by surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . A civil administration was set up , attached to Kufra , and Libyan citizenship was extended to the few thousand inhabitants of the area . From that moment , Libyan maps represented the area as part of Libya . 
 The exact terms by which Libya gained Aouzou remain partly obscure , and are debated . The existence of a secret agreement between Tombalbaye and Gaddafi was revealed only in 1988 , when the Libyan President exhibited an alleged copy of a letter in which Tombalbaye recognizes Libyan claims . Against this , scholars like Bernard <unk> have argued that there never was any sort of formal agreement , and that Tombalbaye had found it expedient not to mention the occupation of a part of his country . Libya was unable to exhibit the original copy of the agreement when the case of the Aouzou Strip was brought before the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) in 1993 . 
 = = = Expansion of the insurgency = = = 
 The rapprochement was not to last long , as on 13 April 1975 a coup d 'état removed Tombalbaye and replaced him with General Félix Malloum . As the coup was partly motivated by opposition to Tombalbaye 's appeasement of Libya , Gaddafi considered it a menace to his influence and resumed supplying the FROLINAT . In April 1976 , there was a Gaddafi @-@ backed attempted assassination of Malloum , and in the same year Libyan troops started making forays into central Chad in company of FROLINAT forces . 
 Libyan activism began generating concerns in the strongest faction into which the FROLINAT had split , the Command Council of the Armed Forces of the North ( <unk> ) . The insurgents split on the issue of Libyan support in October 1976 , with a minority leaving the militia and forming the Armed Forces of the North ( FAN ) , led by the anti @-@ Libyan Hissène Habré . The majority , willing to accept an alliance with Gaddafi , was commanded by Goukouni Oueddei . The latter group soon renamed itself People 's Armed Forces ( FAP ) . 
 In those years , Gaddafi 's support had been mostly moral , with only a limited supply of weapons . All this started changing in February 1977 , when the Libyans provided Goukouni 's men with hundreds of AK @-@ 47 assault rifles , dozens of RPGs , 81 and <unk> mortars and recoilless cannons . Armed with these weapons , the FAP attacked in June the Chadian Armed Forces ' ( FAT ) strongholds of Bardaï and Zouar in Tibesti and of Ounianga Kébir in Borkou . Goukouni assumed with this attack full control of the Tibesti , because Bardaï , besieged since 22 June , surrendered on 4 July , while Zouar was evacuated . The FAT lost 300 men , and piles of military supplies fell into the hands of the rebels . Ounianga was attacked on 20 June , but was saved by the French military advisors present there . 
 As it had become evident that the Aouzou Strip was being used by Libya as a base for deeper involvement in Chad , Malloum decided to bring the issue of the Strip 's occupation before the UN and the Organisation of African Unity . Malloum also decided he needed new allies ; he negotiated a formal alliance with Habré , the Khartoum Accord , in September . This accord was kept secret until 22 January , when a Fundamental Charter was signed , following which a National Union Government was formed on 29 August 1978 with Habré as Prime Minister . The Malloum @-@ Habré accord was actively promoted by Sudan and Saudi Arabia , both of which feared a radical Chad controlled by Gaddafi . The two nations saw in Habré , with his good Muslim and anti @-@ <unk> credentials , the only chance to thwart Gaddafi 's plans . 
 = = = Libyan escalation = = = 
 The Malloum @-@ Habré accord was perceived by Gaddafi as a serious threat to his influence in Chad , and he increased the level of Libyan involvement . For the first time with the active participation of Libyan ground units , Goukouni 's FAP unleashed the Ibrahim <unk> offensive on 29 January 1978 against the last outposts held by the government in northern Chad : Faya @-@ Largeau , Fada and Ounianga Kebir . The attacks were successful , and Goukouni and the Libyans assumed control of the BET Prefecture . 
 The decisive confrontation between the Libyan @-@ FAP forces and the Chadian regular forces took place at Faya @-@ Largeau , the capital of the BET . The city , defended by 5 @,@ 000 Chadian soldiers , fell on 18 February after sharp fighting to a force of 2 @,@ 500 rebels , supported by possibly as many as 4 @,@ 000 Libyan troops . The Libyans do not seem to have directly participated in the fighting ; in a pattern that was to repeat itself in the future , the Libyans provided armor , artillery and air support . The rebels also were much better armed than before , displaying Strela 2 surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . 
 Goukouni captured about 2 @,@ 500 prisoners in 1977 and 1978 ; as a result , the Chadian Armed Forces lost at least 20 % of its manpower . In particular , the National and Nomadic Guard ( <unk> ) was decimated by the fall of Fada and Faya . Goukouni used these victories to strengthen his position in the FROLINAT : during a Libyan @-@ sponsored congress held in March in Faya , the insurgency 's main factions reunited themselves and nominated Goukouni as the secretary @-@ general . 
 Malloum 's reaction to the Goukouni – Gaddafi offensive was to sever diplomatic relations with Libya on 6 February and bring before the UN Security Council the issue of Libyan involvement . He raised again the question of Libya 's occupation of the Aouzou Strip ; on 19 February , however , after the fall of Faya , Malloum was forced to accept a ceasefire and withdraw the protest . Gaddafi halted the advance of Goukouni because of pressure from France , then an important supplier of Libya 's weapons . 
 Malloum and Gaddafi restored diplomatic relations on 24 February in Sabha , Libya , where an international peace conference was held which included as mediators Niger 's President , <unk> <unk> , and Sudan 's Vice @-@ President , Abu al @-@ <unk> Mohamed Ibrahim . Under severe pressure from France , Sudan and Zaire , Malloum was forced to sign the Benghazi Accord , which recognized the FROLINAT and agreed on a new ceasefire , on 27 March . The agreement called for the creation of a joint Libya – Niger military committee tasked with implementation ; through this committee , Chad legitimized Libyan intervention in its territory . The accord also contained a condition dear to Libya : the termination of all French military presence in Chad . The stillborn accord was for Gaddafi nothing more than a strategy to strengthen his protégé Goukouni ; it also weakened considerably Malloum 's prestige among southern Chadians , who saw his concessions as a proof of his weak leadership . 
 On 15 April , only a few days after signing the ceasefire , Goukouni left Faya , leaving there a Libyan garrison of 800 men . Relying on Libyan armor and airpower , Goukouni 's forces conquered a small FAT garrison and pointed towards N 'Djamena . 
 Against Goukouni stood freshly arrived French forces . Already in 1977 , after Goukouni 's first offensives , Malloum had asked for a French military return in Chad , but President Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing was at first reluctant to commit himself before the March 1978 legislative elections ; also , France was afraid of damaging its profitable commercial and diplomatic relations with Libya . However , the rapid deterioration of the situation in Chad resolved the President on 20 February 1978 to start Opération <unk> , which by April brought 2 @,@ 500 troops to Chad to secure the capital from the rebels . 
 The decisive battle took place at Ati , a town 430 kilometres northeast of N 'Djamena . The town 's garrison of 1 @,@ 500 soldiers was attacked on 19 May by the FROLINAT insurgents , equipped with artillery and modern weapons . The garrison was relieved by the arrival of a Chadian task force supported by armor and , more importantly , of the French Foreign Legion and the 3rd Regiment of Marine Infantry . In a two @-@ day battle , the FROLINAT was repelled with heavy losses , a victory that was confirmed in June by another engagement at <unk> . The FROLINAT admitted defeat and fled north , having lost 2 @,@ 000 men and left the " ultramodern equipment " they carried on the ground . Of key importance in these battles was the complete air superiority the French could count on , as the Libyan Air Force pilots refused to fight them . 
 = = = Libyan difficulties = = = 
 Only a few months after the failed offensive against the capital , major dissensions in the FROLINAT shattered all vestiges of unity and badly weakened Libyan power in Chad . On the night of 27 August , Ahmat Acyl , leader of the Volcan Army , attacked Faya @-@ Largeau with the support of Libyan troops in what was apparently an attempt by Gaddafi to remove Goukouni from the leadership of the FROLINAT , replacing him with Acyl . The attempt backfired , as Goukouni reacted by expelling all Libyan military advisors present in Chad , and started searching for a compromise with France . 
 The reasons for the clash between Gaddafi and Goukouni were both ethnic and political . The FROLINAT was divided between Arabs , like Acyl , and <unk> , like Goukouni and Habré . These ethnic divisions also reflected a different attitude towards Gaddafi and his Green Book . In particular , Goukouni and his men had shown themselves reluctant to follow Gaddafi 's solicitations to make The Green Book the official policy of the FROLINAT , and had first tried to take time , postponing the question until the complete reunification of the movement . When the unification was accomplished , and Gaddafi pressed again for the adoption of The Green Book , the dissensions in the Revolution 's Council became manifest , with many proclaiming their loyalty to the movement 's original platform approved in 1966 when Ibrahim <unk> was made first secretary @-@ general , while others , including Acyl , fully embraced the Colonel 's ideas . 
 In N 'Djamena , the simultaneous presence of two armies — Prime Minister Habré 's FAN and President Malloum 's FAT — set the stage for the battle of N 'Djamena , which was to bring about the collapse of the State and the ascent to power of the Northern elite . A minor incident escalated on 12 February 1979 into heavy fighting between Habré and Malloum 's forces , and the battle intensified on 19 February when Goukouni 's men entered in the capital to fight alongside Habré . By 16 March , when the first international peace conference took place , an estimated 2 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 people had been killed and 60 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 forced to flee . The greatly diminished Chadian army left the capital in the rebels ' hands and reorganized itself in the south under the leadership of <unk> Abdelkader Kamougué . During the battle , the French garrison stood passively by , even helping Habré in certain circumstances , as when they demanded that the Chadian Air Force stop its bombings . 
 An international peace conference was held in Kano in Nigeria , in which Chad 's bordering states participated along with Malloum , Habré , and Goukouni . The Kano Accord was signed on 16 March by all those present , and Malloum resigned , replaced by a Council of State under the chairmanship of Goukouni . This was a result of Nigerian and French pressures on Goukouni and Habré to share power ; the French in particular saw this as part of their strategy to cut all ties between Goukouni and Gaddafi . A few weeks later , the same factions formed the Transitional Government of National Unity ( GUNT ) , kept together to a considerable extent by the common desire to see Libya out of Chad . 
 Despite signing the Kano Accord , Libya was incensed that the GUNT did not include any of the leaders of the Volcan Army and had not recognized Libyan claims on the Aouzou Strip . Since 13 April there had been some minor Libyan military activity in northern Chad , and support was provided to the secessionist movement in the south . However , a major response came only after 25 June , when the ultimatum of Chad 's neighbors for the formation of a new , more inclusive coalition government expired . On 26 June , 2 @,@ 500 Libyan troops invaded Chad , heading for Faya @-@ Largeau . The Chadian government appealed for French help . The Libyan forces were first stymied by Goukouni 's militiamen , and then forced to retreat by French reconnaissance planes and bombers . In the same month , the factions excluded by the GUNT founded a counter @-@ government , the Front for Joint Provisional Action ( <unk> ) , in northern Chad with Libyan military support . 
 The fighting with Libya , the imposition by Nigeria of an economic boycott , and international pressure led to a new international peace conference in Lagos in August , to which all eleven factions present in Chad participated . A new accord was signed on 21 August , under which a new GUNT was to be formed , open to all factions . The French troops were to leave Chad and be replaced by a multinational African peace force . The new GUNT took office in November , with Goukouni President , Kamougué Vice @-@ President , Habré Defence Minister and Acyl Foreign Minister . Despite the presence of Habré , the new composition of the GUNT had enough pro @-@ Libyans to satisfy Gaddafi . 
 = = = Libyan intervention = = = 
 From the start , Habré isolated himself from the other members of the GUNT , which he treated with disdain . Habré 's hostility for Libya 's influence in Chad united itself with his ambition and ruthlessness : observers concluded that the warlord would never be content with anything short of the highest office . It was thought that sooner or later an armed confrontation between Habré and the pro @-@ Libyan factions would take place , and more importantly , between Habré and Goukouni . 
 Clashes in the capital between Habré 's FAN and pro @-@ Libyan groups became progressively more serious . On 22 March 1980 , a minor incident , as in 1979 , triggered the second battle of N 'Djamena . In ten days , the clashes between the FAN and Goukouni 's FAP , which both had 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 500 troops in the city , caused thousands of casualties and the flight of about half the capital 's population . The few remaining French troops , who left on 4 May , proclaimed themselves neutral , as did the Zairean peace force . 
 While the FAN was supplied economically and militarily by Sudan and Egypt , Goukouni received the armed support of Kamougué 's FAT and Acyl 's CDR shortly after the beginning of the battle , and was provided with Libyan artillery . On 6 June , the FAN assumed control of the city of Faya . This alarmed Goukouni , and he signed , on 15 June , a Treaty of Friendship with Libya . The treaty gave Libya a free hand in Chad , legitimising its presence in that country ; the treaty 's first article committed the two countries to mutual defence , and a threat against one constituted a threat against the other . 
 Beginning in October , Libyan troops , led by Khalifa <unk> and Ahmed <unk> , airlifted to the Aouzou Strip operated in conjunction with Goukouni 's forces to reoccupy Faya . The city was then used as an assembly point for tanks , artillery and armored vehicles that moved south against the capital of N 'Djamena . 
 An attack started on 6 December , spearheaded by Soviet T @-@ 54 and T @-@ 55 tanks and reportedly coordinated by advisors from the Soviet Union and East Germany , brought the fall of the capital on 16 December . The Libyan force , numbering between 7 @,@ 000 and 9 @,@ 000 men of regular units and the paramilitary Pan @-@ African Islamic Legion , 60 tanks , and other armored vehicles , had been ferried across 1 @,@ 100 kilometers of desert from Libya 's southern border , partly by airlift and tank transporters and partly under its own power . The border itself was 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 100 kilometers from Libya 's main bases on the Mediterranean coast . Wright states that the Libyan intervention demonstrated an impressive logistical ability , and provided Gaddafi with his first military victory and a substantial political achievement . 
 While forced into exile and with his forces confined to the frontier zones of Darfur , Habré remained defiant . On 31 December he announced in Dakar he would resume fighting as a guerrilla against the GUNT . 
 = = = Libyan withdrawal = = = 
 On 6 January 1981 , a joint communiqué was issued in Tripoli by Gaddafi and Goukouni that Libya and Chad had decided " to work to achieve full unity between the two countries " . The merger plan caused strong adverse reaction in Africa , and was immediately condemned by France , which on 11 January offered to strengthen its garrisons in friendly African states and on 15 January placed its Mediterranean fleet on alert . Libya answered by threatening to impose an oil embargo , while France threatened to react if Libya attacked another bordering country . The accord was also opposed by all GUNT ministers present with Goukouni at Tripoli , with the exception of Acyl . 
 Most observers believe that the reasons behind Goukouni 's accepting the accord may be found in a mix of threats , intense pressure and the financial help promised by Gaddafi . Just before his visit to the Libyan capital , Goukouni had sent two of his commanders to Libya for consultations ; at Tripoli , Goukouni learned from Gaddafi that they had been assassinated by " Libyan dissidents " , and that if Goukouni did not want to risk losing Libyan favour and lose power , he should accept the merger plan . 
 The level of opposition caused Gaddafi and Goukouni to downplay the importance of the communiqué , speaking of a " union " of peoples , and not of states , and as a " first step " towards closer collaboration . But the damage had been done , and the joint communiqué badly weakened Goukouni 's prestige as a nationalist and a statesman . 
 In response to the increasing international pressure , Goukouni stated that Libyan forces were in Chad by government request , and that international mediators should accept the decision of Chad 's legitimate government . In a meeting held in May , Goukouni became more accommodating , declaring that while Libyan withdrawal was not a priority , he would accept the decisions of the OAU . Goukouni could not at the time renounce Libyan military support , necessary for dealing with Habré 's FAN , which was supported by Egypt and Sudan and funded through Egypt by the US Central Intelligence Agency . 
 Relations between Goukouni and Gaddafi started deteriorating . Libyan troops were stationed in various points of northern and central Chad , in numbers that had reached about 14 @,@ 000 troops by January – February 1981 . These forces created considerable annoyance in the GUNT by supporting Acyl 's faction in its disputes with the other militias , including the clashes held in late April with Goukouni 's FAP . There were also attempts to <unk> the local population , which made many conclude that " unification " for Libya meant Arabization and the imposition of Libyan political culture , in particular of The Green Book . 
 Amid fighting in October between Gaddafi 's Islamic Legionnaires and Goukouni 's troops , and rumors that Acyl was planning a coup d 'état to assume the leadership of the GUNT , Goukouni demanded on 29 October the complete and unequivocal withdrawal of Libyan forces from Chadian territory , which , beginning with the capital , was to be completed by 31 December . The Libyans were to be replaced by an OAU Inter @-@ African Force ( IAF ) . Gaddafi complied , and by 16 November all Libyan forces had left Chad , redeploying in the Aouzou Strip . 
 Libya 's prompt retreat took many observers by surprise . One reason lay in Gaddafi 's desire to host the OAU 's annual conference in 1982 and assume the organization 's presidency . Another was Libya 's difficult situation in Chad where , without some popular and international acceptance for Libyan presence , it would have been difficult to take the concrete risk of causing a war with Egypt and Sudan , with US support . Gaddafi had not renounced the goals he had set for Chad , but he had to find a new Chadian leader , as Goukouni had proved himself unreliable . 
 = = = Habré takes N 'Djamena = = = 
 The first IAF component to arrive in Chad were the Zairean paratroopers ; they were followed by Nigerian and Senegalese forces , bringing the IAF to 3 @,@ 275 men . Before the peace @-@ keeping force was fully deployed , Habré had already taken advantage of Libya 's withdrawal , and made massive inroads in eastern Chad , including the important city of Abéché , that fell on 19 November . Next to fall was Oum <unk> in early January 1982 , only 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) from Ati , the last major town before the capital . The GUNT was saved for the moment by the IAF , the only credible military force confronting Habré , which prevented the FAN from taking Ati . 
 In the light of Habré 's offensive , the OAU requested that the GUNT open reconciliation talks with Habré , a demand that was angrily refused by Goukouni ; later he was to say : 
 " The OAU has deceived us . Our security was fully ensured by Libyan troops . The OAU put pressure on us to expel the Libyans . Now that they have gone , the organization has abandoned us while imposing on us a negotiated settlement with <unk> <unk> " . 
 In May 1982 , the FAN started a final offensive , passing unhindered by the peacekeepers in Ati and Mongo . Goukouni , increasingly angered with the IAF 's refusal to fight Habré , made an attempt to restore his relations with Libya , and reached Tripoli on 23 May . Gaddafi , however , burned by his experience the previous year , proclaimed Libya neutral in the civil war . 
 The GUNT forces made a last stand at <unk> , 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) north of capital , but were defeated by the FAN on 5 June after a hard battle . Two days later Habré entered N 'Djamena unopposed , making him the de facto leader of Chad , while Goukouni fled the country , seeking sanctuary in Cameroon . 
 After occupying the capital , Habré consolidated power by occupying the rest of the country . In barely six weeks , he conquered southern Chad , destroying the FAT , Kamougué 's militia ; Kamougué 's hopes for Libyan help failed to materialize . The rest of the country was conquered , with the exception of the Tibesti . 
 = = = GUNT offensive = = = 
 Since Gaddafi had kept mostly aloof in the months prior to the fall of N 'Djamena , Habré hoped to reach an understanding with Libya , possibly through an accord with Acyl , who appeared receptive to dialogue . But Acyl died on 19 July , replaced by Acheikh ibn Oumar , and the CDR was antagonized by Habré 's eagerness to unify the country , which led him to overrun the CDR 's domains . 
 Therefore , it was with Libyan support that Goukouni reassembled the GUNT , creating in October a National Peace Government in the Tibesti town of Bardaï and claiming itself the legitimate government by the terms of the Lagos Accord . For the impending fight , Goukouni could count on 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 men taken from several militias , later merged in an Armée Nationale de Libération ( <unk> ) under the command of a Southerner , <unk> <unk> . 
 Before Gaddafi could throw his full weight behind Goukouni , Habré attacked the GUNT in the Tibesti , but was repelled both in December 1982 and in January 1983 . The following months saw the clashes intensify in the North , while talks , including visits in March between Tripoli and N 'Djamena , broke down . On 17 March , Habré brought the conflict before the UN , asking for an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council to consider Libya 's " aggression and occupation " of Chadian territory . 
 Gaddafi was ready now for an offensive . The decisive offensive began in June , when a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong GUNT force invested Faya @-@ Largeau , the main government stronghold in the North , which fell on 25 June . The GUNT force rapidly proceeded towards Koro Toro , Oum <unk> and Abéché , assuming control of the main routes towards N 'Djamena . Libya , while helping with recruiting , training , and providing the GUNT with heavy artillery , only committed a few thousand regular troops to the offensive , and most of these were artillery and logistic units . This may have been due to Gaddafi 's desire that the conflict be read as a Chadian internal affair . 
 The international community , in particular France and the US , reacted adversely to the Libyan @-@ backed offensive . On the same day as the fall of Faya , French Foreign Minister Claude <unk> warned Libya that France would " not remain indifferent " to a new Libyan involvement in Chad , and on 11 July the French government accused again Libya of direct military support to the rebels . French arms shipments were resumed on 27 June , and on 3 July a first contingent of 250 <unk> arrived to strengthen Habré ; the United States announced in July military and food aid for 10 million dollars . Gaddafi suffered also a diplomatic setback from the OAU , that at the meeting held in June officially recognized Habré 's government and asked for all foreign troops to leave Chad . 
 Supplied by Americans , <unk> and the French , Habré rapidly reorganized his forces ( now called Chadian National Armed Forces , or FANT ) . FANT marched north to confront the GUNT and the Libyans , who he met south of Abéché . Habré crushed Goukouni 's forces and started a vast counteroffensive that enabled him to retake in rapid succession Abéché , <unk> , Fada and , on 30 July , Faya @-@ Largeau , threatening to attack the Tibesti and the Aouzou Strip . 
 = = = French intervention = = = 
 Feeling that a complete destruction of the GUNT would be an intolerable blow for his prestige , and fearing that Habré would provide support for all opposition to Gaddafi , the Colonel called for a Libyan intervention in force , as his Chadian allies could not secure a definitive victory without Libyan armor and airpower . 
 Since the day after the fall of the town , Faya @-@ Largeau was subjected to a sustained air bombardment , using Su @-@ 22 and Mirage F @-@ 1s from the Aouzou air base , along with Tu @-@ 22 bombers from Sabha . Within ten days , a large ground force had been assembled east and west of Faya @-@ Largeau by first ferrying men , armor , and artillery by air to Sabha , Kufra and the Aouzou airfield , and then by shorter @-@ range transport planes to the area of conflict . The fresh Libyan forces amounted to 11 @,@ 000 mostly regular troops , and eighty combat aircraft participated in the offensive ; however , the Libyans maintained their traditional role of providing fire support , and occasional tank charges , for the assaults of the GUNT , which could count on 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 men on this occasion . 
 The GUNT @-@ Libyan alliance invested on 10 August the Faya @-@ Largeau oasis , where Habré had entrenched himself with about 5 @,@ 000 troops . Battered by multiple rocket launcher ( MRL ) , artillery and tank fire and continuous airstrikes , the FANT 's defensive line disintegrated when the GUNT launched the final assault , leaving 700 FANT troops on the ground . Habré escaped with the remnants of his army to the capital , without being pursued by the Libyans . 
 This was to prove a tactical blunder , as the new Libyan intervention had alarmed France . Habré issued a fresh plea for French military assistance on 6 August . France , also due to American and African pressures , announced on 6 August the return of French troops in Chad as part of Operation Manta , meant to stop the GUNT @-@ Libyan advance and more generally weaken Gaddafi 's influence in the internal affairs of Chad . Three days later several hundred French troops were dispatched to N 'Djamena from the Central African Republic , later brought to 2 @,@ 700 , with several squadrons of Jaguar fighter @-@ bombers . This made it the largest expeditionary force ever assembled by the French in Africa outside of the Algerian War . 
 The French government then defined a limit ( the so @-@ called Red Line ) , along the 15th parallel , extending from Mao to Abéché , and warned that they would not tolerate any incursion south of this line by Libyan or GUNT forces . Both the Libyans and the French remained on their side of the line , with France showing itself unwilling to help Habré retake the north , while the Libyans avoided starting a conflict with France by attacking the line . This led to a de facto division of the country , with Libya maintaining control of all the territory north of the Red Line . 
 A lull ensued , during which November talks sponsored by the OAU failed to conciliate the opposing Chadian factions . Ethiopian leader Mengistu 's attempt at the beginning of 1984 was also unsuccessful . Mengistu 's failure was followed on 24 January by a GUNT attack , supported by heavy Libyan armor , on the FANT outpost of <unk> , a move mainly meant to persuade France and the African states to reopen negotiations . France reacted to this breach of the Red Line by launching the first significant air counter @-@ attack , bringing new troops into Chad and unilaterally raising the defensive line to the 16th parallel . 
 = = = French withdrawal = = = 
 To put an end to the deadlock , Gaddafi proposed on 30 April a mutual withdrawal of both the French and Libyan forces in Chad . French President François Mitterrand showed himself receptive to the offer , and on 17 September the two leaders publicly announced that the mutual withdrawal would start on 25 September , and be completed by 10 November . The accord was at first hailed by the media as proof of Mitterrand 's diplomatic skill and a decisive progress towards the solution of the Chadian crisis ; it also demonstrated Mitterrand 's intent of following a foreign policy independent from both the US and the Chadian government regarding Libya and Chad . 
 While France respected the deadline , the Libyans limited themselves to retiring some forces , while maintaining at least 3 @,@ 000 men stationed in Northern Chad . When this became evident , it embarrassed the French and caused recriminations between the French and Chadian governments . On 16 November , Mitterrand met with Gaddafi on Crete , under the auspices of the Greek prime minister <unk> . Despite Gaddafi 's declaration that all Libyan forces had been withdrawn , the next day Mitterrand admitted that this was not true . However , he did not order French troops back to Chad . 
 According to <unk> , the 1984 bilateral Franco @-@ Libyan agreement may have provided Gaddafi with an excellent opportunity to find an exit from the Chadian quagmire , while bolstering his international prestige and giving him an opportunity to force Habré into accepting a peace accord which would have included Libya 's proxies . Instead , Gaddafi misread France 's withdrawal as a willingness to accept Libya 's military presence in Chad and the de facto annexation of the whole BET Prefecture by Libya , an action that was certain to meet the opposition of all Chadian factions and of the OAU and UN . Gaddafi 's blunder would eventually bring about his defeat , with the rebellion against him of the GUNT and a new French expedition in 1986 . 
 = = = New French intervention = = = 
 During the period between 1984 and 1986 , in which no major clash took place , Habré greatly strengthened his position thanks to staunch US support and Libya 's failure to respect the Franco @-@ Libyan 1984 agreement . Also decisive was the increasing factional bickering that started plaguing the GUNT since 1984 , centered around the fight between Goukouni and Acheikh ibn Oumar over the organization 's leadership . 
 In this period , Gaddafi expanded his control over northern Chad , building new roads and erecting a major new airbase , Ouadi Doum , meant to better support air and ground operations beyond the Aouzou Strip . He also brought in considerable reinforcements in 1985 , raising Libyan forces in the country to 7 @,@ 000 troops , 300 tanks and 60 combat aircraft . While this build @-@ up took place , significant elements of the GUNT passed over to the Habré government , as part of the latter 's policy of accommodation . 
 These desertions alarmed Gaddafi , as the GUNT provided a cover of legitimacy to Libya 's presence in Chad . To put a halt to these and reunite the GUNT , a major offensive was launched on the Red Line with the goal of taking N 'Djamena . The attack , started on 10 February 1986 , involved 5 @,@ 000 Libyan and 5 @,@ 000 GUNT troops , and concentrated on the FANT outposts of <unk> <unk> , <unk> and Oum <unk> . The campaign ended in disaster for Gaddafi , when a FANT counteroffensive on 13 February using the new equipment obtained from the French forced the attackers to withdraw and reorganize . 
 Most important was French reaction to the attack . Gaddafi had possibly believed that , due to the upcoming French legislative elections , Mitterrand would be reluctant to start a new risky and costly expedition to save Habré ; this evaluation proved wrong , as what the French President could not politically risk was to show weakness towards Libyan aggression . As a result , on 14 February Opération Epervier was started , bringing 1 @,@ 200 French troops and several squadrons of Jaguars to Chad . On 16 February , to send a clear message to Gaddafi , the French Air Force bombed Libya 's Ouadi Doum airbase . Libya retaliated the next day when a Libyan Tu @-@ 22 bombed the N 'Djamena Airport , causing minimal damage . 
 = = = Tibesti War = = = 
 The defeats suffered in February and March accelerated the disintegration of the GUNT . When in March , at a new round of OAU @-@ sponsored talks held in the People 's Republic of Congo , Goukouni failed to appear , many suspected the hand of Libya . These suspicions caused the defection from the GUNT of its vice president , Kamougué , followed by the First Army and the piecemeal FROLINAT <unk> . In August , it was the CDR 's turn to leave the coalition , seizing the town of Fada . When in October Goukouni 's FAP attempted to retake Fada , the Libyan garrison attacked Goukouni 's troops , giving way to a pitched battle that effectively ended the GUNT . In the same month , Goukouni was arrested by the Libyans , while his troops rebelled against Gaddafi , dislodging the Libyans from all their positions in the Tibesti , and on 24 October went over to Habré . 
 To reestablish their supply lines and retake the towns of Bardaï , Zouar and <unk> , the Libyans sent a task @-@ force of 2 @,@ 000 troops with T @-@ 62 tanks and heavy support by the Libyan Air Force into the Tibesti . The offensive started successfully , expelling the GUNT from its key strongholds , also through the use of napalm . This attack ultimately backfired , causing the prompt reaction of Habré , who sent 2 @,@ 000 FANT soldiers to link with the GUNT forces . Also Mitterrand reacted forcefully , ordering a mission which parachuted fuel , food , ammunition and anti @-@ tank missiles to the rebels , and also infiltrated military personnel . Through this action , the French made clear that they no longer felt committed to keep south of the Red Line , and were ready to act whenever they found it necessary . 
 While militarily Habré was only partly successful in his attempt to evict the Libyans from the Tibesti ( the Libyans would fully leave the region in March , when a series of defeats in the north @-@ east had made the area untenable ) , the campaign was a great strategic breakthrough for the FANT , as it transformed a civil war into a national war against a foreign invader , stimulating a sense of national unity that had never been seen before in Chad . 
 = = = Toyota War = = = 
 At the opening of 1987 , the last year of the war , the Libyan expeditionary force was still impressive , numbering 8 @,@ 000 troops and 300 tanks . However , it had lost the key support of its Chadian allies , who had generally provided reconnaissance and acted as assault infantry . Without them the Libyan garrisons resembled isolated and vulnerable islands in the Chadian desert . On the other side , the FANT was greatly strengthened , now having 10 @,@ 000 highly motivated troops , provided with fast @-@ moving and sand @-@ adapted Toyota trucks equipped with MILAN anti @-@ tank missiles . These trucks gave the name " Toyota War " to the last phase of the conflict . 
 Habré started , on 2 January 1987 , his reconquest of northern Chad with a successful attack on the well @-@ defended Libyan communications base of Fada . Against the Libyan army the Chadian commander Hassan Djamous conducted a series of swift pincer movements , enveloping the Libyan positions and crushing them with sudden attacks from all sides . This strategy was repeated by Djamous in March in the battles of B 'ir Kora and Ouadi Doum , inflicting crushing losses and forcing Gaddafi to evacuate northern Chad . 
 This in turn endangered Libyan control over the Aouzou Strip , and Aouzou fell in August to the FANT , only to be repelled by an overwhelming Libyan counter @-@ offensive and the French refusal to provide air cover to the Chadians . Habré readily replied to this setback with the first Chadian incursion in Libyan territory of the Chadian – Libyan conflict , mounting on 5 September a surprise and fully successful raid against the key Libyan air base at Maaten al @-@ Sarra . This attack was part of a plan to remove the threat of Libyan airpower before a renewed offensive on Aouzou . 
 The projected attack on Aouzou never took place , as the dimensions of the victory obtained at Maaten made France fear that the attack on the Libyan base was only the first stage of a general offensive into Libya proper , a possibility that France was not willing to tolerate . As for Gaddafi , being subjected to internal and international pressures , he showed himself more conciliatory , which led to an OAU @-@ brokered ceasefire on 11 September . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While there were many violations of the ceasefire , the incidents were relatively minor . The two governments immediately started complex diplomatic manoeuvres to bring world opinion on their side in case , as was widely expected , the conflict was resumed . However , the two sides were also careful to leave the door open for a peaceful solution . The latter course was promoted by France and most African states , while the Reagan Administration saw a resumption of the conflict as the best chance to unseat Gaddafi . 
 Steadily , relations among the two countries improved , with Gaddafi giving signs that he wanted to normalize relations with the Chadian government , to the point of recognizing that the war had been an error . In May 1988 , the Libyan leader declared he would recognize Habré as the legitimate president of Chad " as a gift to Africa " ; this led on 3 October to the resumption of full diplomatic relations between the two countries . The following year , on 31 August 1989 , Chadian and Libyan representatives met in Algiers to negotiate the Framework Agreement on the Peaceful Settlement of the Territorial Dispute , by which Gaddafi agreed to discuss with Habré the Aouzou Strip and to bring the issue to the ICJ for a binding ruling if bilateral talks failed . After a year of inconclusive talks , the sides submitted the dispute to the ICJ in September 1990 . 
 Chadian @-@ Libyan relations further improved when Libyan @-@ supported Idriss Déby unseated Habré on 2 December . Gaddafi was the first head of state to recognize the new government , and he also signed treaties of friendship and cooperation on various levels . Regarding the Aouzou Strip , however , Déby followed his predecessor , declaring that if necessary he would fight to keep the strip out of Libya 's hands . 
 The Aouzou dispute was concluded for good on 3 February 1994 , when the judges of the ICJ by a majority of 16 to 1 decided that the Aouzou Strip belonged to Chad . The court 's judgement was implemented without delay , the two parties signing an agreement as early as 4 April concerning the practical modalities for the implementation of the judgement . Monitored by international observers , the withdrawal of Libyan troops from the Strip began on 15 April and was completed by 10 May . The formal and final transfer of the Strip from Libya to Chad took place on 30 May , when the sides signed a joint declaration stating that the Libyan withdrawal had been effected . 
 Muammar Gaddafi was angered by the devastating counter @-@ attack on Libya and the ensuing defeat at the Battle of Maaten al @-@ Sarra . Forced to accede to a ceasefire , the defeat ended his expansionist projects toward Chad and his dreams of African and Arab dominance . 
 Given the French intervention on behalf of Chad and U.S. supply of satellite intelligence to FANT during the battle of Maaten al @-@ Sarra , Gaddafi blamed Libya 's defeat on French and U.S. " aggression against Libya " . 
 = Seth MacFarlane = 
 Seth Woodbury MacFarlane ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; born October 26 , 1973 ) is an American television producer , filmmaker , actor , and singer , working primarily in animation and comedy , as well as live @-@ action and other genres . He is the creator of the TV series Family Guy ( 1999 – 2003 , 2005 – present ) , co @-@ creator of the TV series American Dad ! ( 2005 – present ) and The Cleveland Show ( 2009 – 13 ) , and writer @-@ director of the films Ted ( 2012 ) , its sequel Ted 2 ( 2015 ) , and A Million Ways to Die in the West ( 2014 ) . 
 MacFarlane is a graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design , where he studied animation . Recruited to Hollywood , he was an animator and writer for Hanna @-@ Barbera for several television series , including Johnny Bravo , Cow and Chicken , Dexter 's Laboratory , I Am Weasel , and Larry & Steve . As an actor , he has made guest appearances on series , such as Gilmore Girls , The War at Home and FlashForward . In 2008 , he created his own YouTube series titled Seth MacFarlane 's Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy . He won several awards for his work on Family Guy , including two Primetime Emmy Awards and an Annie Award . In 2009 , he won the Webby Award for Film & Video Person of the Year . He occasionally speaks at universities and colleges throughout the United States , and he is a supporter of gay rights . 
 His first feature @-@ length comedy film Ted also features MacFarlane 's voice acting and performance @-@ capture as the titular walking and talking teddy bear , and became the highest @-@ grossing original R @-@ rated comedy . As a singer MacFarlane has performed at several venues , including Carnegie Hall and the Royal Albert Hall . MacFarlane has released three studio albums , in the same vein of his musical idol Frank Sinatra , beginning with Music Is Better Than Words in 2011 . He wrote the lyrics for the Academy Award @-@ nominated song " Everybody Needs a Best Friend " for Ted . 
 MacFarlane served as executive producer of Cosmos : A Spacetime Odyssey , an update of the 1980s Carl Sagan – hosted Cosmos series , hosted by Neil deGrasse Tyson . MacFarlane was instrumental in providing funding for the series , as well as securing studio support for it from other entertainment executives . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Seth Woodbury MacFarlane was born in Kent , Connecticut . His parents , Ronald Milton MacFarlane ( born 1946 ) and Ann Perry ( née Sager ; 1947 – 2010 ) , were born in Newburyport , Massachusetts . His sister is voice actress Rachael Ann MacFarlane ( born 1976 ) . He is of English , Scottish , and Irish descent , with roots in New England going back to the 1600s , including descent from Mayflower passenger William Brewster . MacFarlane 's parents met in 1970 , when they both lived and worked in Boston , Massachusetts , and married later that year . The couple moved to Kent in 1972 , where Ann began working in the Admissions Office at South Kent School . She later worked in the College Guidance and Admissions Offices at the Kent School , a selective college preparatory school where Ronald also was a teacher . During his childhood , MacFarlane developed an interest in illustration and began drawing cartoon characters Fred Flintstone and Woody Woodpecker , as early as two years old . By the age of five , MacFarlane knew that he would want to pursue a career in animation , and began by creating flip books , after his parents found a book on the subject for him . Four years later , aged nine , MacFarlane began publishing a weekly comic strip titled " Walter <unk> " for The Kent Good Times Dispatch , the local newspaper in Kent , Connecticut , which paid him five dollars per week . In one anecdote from the time , MacFarlane said in an October 2011 interview that as a child he was always " weirdly fascinated by the Communion ceremony " . He created a strip with a character kneeling at the altar taking Communion and asking " Can I have fries with that ? " The paper printed it and he got an " angry letter " from the local priest ; it led to " sort of a little mini @-@ controversy " in the town . 
 MacFarlane received his high school diploma in 1991 from the Kent School . While there , he continued experimenting with animation , and his parents gave him an 8 mm camera . MacFarlane went on to study film , video and animation at the Rhode Island School of Design ( RISD ) , where he earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree . As a student , he had originally intended to work for Disney , but changed his mind upon graduating . At RISD MacFarlane created a series of independent films , eventually meeting future Family Guy cast member Mike Henry , whose brother Patrick was MacFarlane 's classmate . During his time at RISD , MacFarlane performed stand @-@ up comedy . In his senior year at RISD MacFarlane created a thesis film titled The Life of Larry , which eventually would become the inspiration for Family Guy . MacFarlane 's professor submitted his film to the animation studio Hanna @-@ Barbera , where he was later hired . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Television career = = = 
 = = = = Hanna @-@ Barbera years = = = = 
 MacFarlane was recruited during the senior film festival by development executive Ellen <unk> and President Fred Seibert . He went to work at Hanna @-@ Barbera ( then Hanna @-@ Barbera Cartoons ) based on the writing content of The Life of Larry , rather than on cartooning ability . He was one of only a few people hired by the company solely based on writing talent . He worked as an animator and writer for Cartoon Network 's Cartoon Cartoons series . He described the atmosphere at Hanna @-@ Barbera as resembling an " old @-@ fashioned Hollywood structure , where you move from one show to another or you jump from a writing job on one show to a storyboard job on another " . MacFarlane worked on four television series during his tenure at the studio : Dexter 's Laboratory , Cow and Chicken , I Am Weasel , and Johnny Bravo . Working as both a writer and storyboard artist , MacFarlane spent the most time on Johnny Bravo . He found it easier to develop his own style at Johnny Bravo through the show 's process of scriptwriting , which Dexter 's Laboratory , Cow and Chicken , and I Am Weasel did not use . As a part of the Johnny Bravo crew , MacFarlane met actors and voiceover artists such as Adam West and Jack Sheldon of Schoolhouse Rock ! fame . Meeting these individuals later became significant to the production and success of his Family Guy series . 
 He also did freelance work for Walt Disney Television Animation , writing for Jungle Cubs , and for Nelvana , where he wrote for Ace Ventura : Pet Detective . Through strict observation of writing elements such as story progression , character stakes and plot points , MacFarlane found the work for Disney was , from a writing standpoint , very valuable in preparation for his career ( particularly on Ace Ventura ) . MacFarlane also created and wrote a short titled <unk> for Frederator Studios ' Oh Yeah ! Cartoons on Nickelodeon . In 1996 , MacFarlane created a sequel to The Life of Larry entitled Larry & Steve , which features a middle @-@ aged character named Larry and an intellectual dog , Steve . The short was broadcast as one of Cartoon Network 's World Premiere Toons . Executives at Fox saw both Larry shorts and negotiations soon began for a prime @-@ time animated series . 
 = = = = Family Guy = = = = 
 Although MacFarlane enjoyed working at Hanna @-@ Barbera , he felt his real calling was for prime @-@ time animation , which would allow a much edgier style of humor . He first pitched Family Guy to Fox during his tenure at Hanna @-@ Barbera . A development executive for Hanna @-@ Barbera , who was trying to get back into the prime @-@ time business at the time , introduced MacFarlane to Leslie <unk> and Mike Darnell , heads of the alternative comedy department at Fox . After the success of King of the Hill in 1997 , MacFarlane called <unk> once more to ask about a possible second pitch for the series . The company offered the young writer a strange deal : Fox gave him a budget of US $ 50 @,@ 000 to produce a pilot that could lead to a series ( most episodes of animated prime @-@ time productions cost at least US $ 1 million ) . Recalling the experience in an interview with The New York Times , MacFarlane stated , " I spent about six months with no sleep and no life , just drawing like crazy in my kitchen and doing this pilot " . 
 After six months , MacFarlane returned to Fox with a " very , very simply , crudely animated film – with just enough to get the tone of the show across " to present to the executives , who loved the pilot and ordered the series immediately . In July 1998 , the Fox Broadcast Company announced the purchase of Family Guy for a January 1999 debut . Family Guy was originally intended to be a series of shorts on MADtv , much in the same way The Simpsons had begun on The Tracey Ullman Show a decade earlier . Negotiations for the show 's MADtv connection fell through early on as a result of budgetary concerns . At age 24 , MacFarlane was television 's youngest executive producer . 
 Family Guy first aired January 31 , 1999 . MacFarlane 's work in animating Family Guy has been influenced by Jackie Gleason and Hanna @-@ Barbera along with examples from The Simpsons and All in the Family . In addition to writing three episodes , " Death Has a Shadow " , " Family Guy Viewer Mail 1 " and " North by North Quahog " , MacFarlane voices Family Guy 's main male characters – Peter Griffin , Stewie Griffin , Brian Griffin , and Glenn Quagmire as well as Tom Tucker , his son Jake Tucker , and additional characters . Bolstered by high DVD sales and established fan loyalty , Family Guy developed into a US $ 1 @-@ billion franchise . On May 4 , 2008 , after approximately two and a half years of negotiations , MacFarlane reached a US $ 100 @-@ million agreement with Fox to keep Family Guy and American Dad ! until 2012 . The agreement makes him the world 's highest paid television writer . 
 MacFarlane 's success with Family Guy has opened doors to other ventures relating to the show . On April 26 , 2005 , he and composer Walter Murphy created Family Guy : Live in Vegas . The soundtrack features a Broadway show tune theme , and MacFarlane voiced Stewie in the track " Stewie 's Sexy Party " . A fan of Broadway musicals , MacFarlane comments on using musicals as a component to Family Guy : 
 I love the lush orchestration and old @-@ fashioned melody writing ... it just gets you excited , that kind of music " , he said . " It 's very optimistic . And it 's fun . The one thing that 's missing for me from popular music today is fun . Guys like [ Bing ] Crosby , or [ Frank ] Sinatra , or Dean Martin , or Mel Tormé [ ... ] these are guys who sounded like they were having a great time . 
 In addition , a Family Guy video game was released in 2006 . Two years later , in August 2007 , he closed a digital content production deal with <unk> . MacFarlane takes cast members on the road to voice characters in front of live audiences . Family Guy Live provides fans with the opportunity to hear future scripts . In mid @-@ 2007 , Chicago fans had the opportunity to hear the then upcoming sixth season premiere " Blue Harvest " . Shows have been played in Montreal , New York City , Chicago , and Los Angeles . 
 On July 22 , 2007 , in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter , MacFarlane announced that he may start working on a feature film , although " nothing 's official " . In September 2007 , Ricky Blitt gave TV.com an interview confirming that he had already started working on the script . Then in TV Week on July 18 , 2008 , MacFarlane confirmed plans to produce a theatrically released Family Guy feature film sometime " within the next year " . He came up with an idea for the story , " something that you could not do on the show , which [ to him ] is the only reason to do a movie " . He later went on to say he imagines the film to be " an old @-@ style musical with dialogue " similar to The Sound of Music , saying that he would " really be trying to capture , musically , that feel " . On October 13 , 2011 , MacFarlane confirmed that a deal for a Family Guy film had been made , and that it would be written by himself and series co @-@ producer Ricky Blitt . On November 30 , 2012 , MacFarlane confirmed plans to produce a Family Guy film . 
 Despite its popularity , Family Guy has often been criticized . The Parents Television Council frequently criticizes the show for its content , once organized a letter @-@ writing campaign aimed at removing it from Fox 's lineup , and has filed complaints with the Federal Communications Commission alleging that some episodes of the show contained indecent content . MacFarlane has responded to the PTC 's criticism by saying , among other things , " That 's like getting hate mail from Hitler . They 're literally terrible human beings . " Family Guy has been cancelled twice , although strong fan support and DVD sales have caused Fox to reconsider . MacFarlane mentioned how these cancellations affected the lineup of writers each time Fox approved the show . " One of the positive aspects of Family Guy constantly being pulled off [ the air ] is that we were always having to <unk> writers " . 
 During the sixth season , episodes of Family Guy and American Dad ! were delayed from regular broadcast due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike ( which MacFarlane participated in to support the writers while Fox aired three Family Guy episodes without MacFarlane 's permission ) . On February 12 , 2008 , the strike ended , and the series resumed airing regularly , beginning with " Back to the Woods " . 
 = = = = American Dad ! = = = = 
 MacFarlane has a second long @-@ running , successful adult animated series in American Dad ! which has been in production since early 2005 . To date , American Dad ! is MacFarlane 's only animated series never to have suffered an official cancellation , though it did undergo a network relocation from Fox to TBS on October 20 , 2014 , following the show 's 11th season . TBS announced on July 16 , 2013 , that they had picked up the series for a 15 @-@ episode 12th season . Reportedly , the purpose of the network relocation was originally to make room for new animated broadcasts on Fox 's now @-@ defunct " Animation Domination " lineup . It was reported that the relocation of American Dad ! allowed room for other shows , such as Mulaney and another animated series from Seth MacFarlane called Bordertown . Bordertown is slated to begin its run in the 2015 – 16 television season . 
 While MacFarlane regularly does extensive voice acting work for American Dad ! , he has left much of the show 's creative direction up to Weitzman and Barker . MacFarlane has credited this move with helping to give the series its own distinct voice and identity . Though , as announced on November 4 , 2013 , Barker departed American Dad ! after 10 seasons of serving as the show 's producer / co @-@ showrunner , resulting from creative differences as production for season 11 on TBS commenced . American Dad ! was first shown after Super Bowl XXXIX , debuting with the episode " Pilot . " This February 6 , 2005 series premiere was somewhat of an early sneak preview as the program would not begin airing regularly as part of Fox 's Animation Domination until May 1 , 2005 . 
 Because of atypical scheduling of the show 's first 7 episodes , American Dad ! has a controversial season number discrepancy in which many are divided as to how many seasons the program has had . Beyond division between media journalists and fans , there has been conflicting reports as to what season the show is in even between American Dad ! creators and the show 's official website — both from its original Fox website and now from TBS website . At Comic @-@ Con 2013 on July 20 , American Dad ! co @-@ creator Mike Barker hinted that an American Dad ! movie — centering on the Roger character and set from his birth planet — is in the works and partially written . What with Barker 's departure from the series however , it is unclear if any of these plans have been scrapped or modified in any way . 
 MacFarlane has described the initial seasons of American Dad ! as being similar to All in the Family , likening title character Stan Smith 's originally bigoted persona to Archie Bunker . MacFarlane has also stated that his inspiration to create American Dad ! derived from his and Weitzman 's exasperation with George W. Bush 's policies as former United States President . After the early couple of seasons however , the series discontinued using these elements of political satire and began to serve up its own very distinguished brand of entertainment and humor . MacFarlane was described as having difficulty understanding the series in its early going ; however , he heavily warmed up to the series after its early seasons once he felt the show truly came into its own . His fellow co @-@ creators have sensed this through MacFarlane 's greatly increased attention to the series after its early seasons . MacFarlane has also revealed to being a huge American Dad ! fan himself . He has taken note of the increasing fondness and excitement over the " Roger " character from fans via his Twitter . 
 The show focuses on the Smith family : Stan Smith , the insanely drastic , endangering , dog @-@ eat @-@ dog , rash and inconsiderate head of the household . He has an exaggeratedly large chin and masculine manner about him . As the family 's breadwinner , he works as a CIA officer and was initially portrayed in the series as an old @-@ fashioned conservative bigot but has since grown out of these traits ( the show known for its story arc elements and other distinguishing plot techniques ) ; Stan 's paradoxically moralistic yet simultaneously inappropriate , corrupt wife , Francine ; and their two children , new @-@ age hippie daughter Hayley and nerdy son Steve . Accompanied with the Smith family are three additional main characters , two of which are non @-@ human species : zany , shocking , blithely cruel and rascally alien Roger , who 's full of disguises / alter egos and has few if any limits on his behaviors . He was rescued by Stan from Area 51 ; Klaus , the man @-@ in @-@ a @-@ fish @-@ body pet . Klaus 's unenviable situation came about from a brain of an East German Olympic skier being shrunk and transplanted into a fish body ; and Jeff Fischer , Hayley 's boyfriend turned " whipped " husband , known for his infatuation with Hayley 's mom , Francine . Together , the Smiths and their three housemates run what is only at a first glance the typical middle @-@ class American lifestyle , but is anything but . 
 Seth MacFarlane provides the voices of Stan and Roger , basing Roger 's voice on Paul Lynde ( who played Uncle Arthur in Bewitched ) . His sister Rachael MacFarlane provides the voice of Hayley . 
 = = = = The Cleveland Show = = = = 
 MacFarlane developed a Family Guy spin @-@ off called The Cleveland Show , which focuses on the character of Cleveland Brown and his family . The idea for the show originated from a suggestion by Family Guy writer and voice of Cleveland , Mike Henry . Fox ordered 22 episodes and the series first aired on September 27 , 2009 . The show , which was picked up to air a first season consisting of 22 episodes , was picked up by Fox for a second season , consisting of 13 episodes , bringing the total number to 35 episodes . The announcement was made on May 3 , 2009 before the first season even premiered . Due to strong ratings , Fox picked up the back nine episodes of season 2 , making a 22 @-@ episode season and bringing the total episode count of the show to 44 . The series ended on May 19 , 2013 , with a total of 4 seasons and 88 episodes , and the character of Cleveland returned to Family Guy in the episode He 's <unk> @-@ ack ! . This is the only animated series created by MacFarlane that does not have him voicing the main character . 
 Seth MacFarlane played Tim the Bear up until season 3 episode 10 . Jess Harnell voices Tim from season 3 episode 11 onwards . 
 = = = = Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy = = = = 
 On September 10 , 2008 , MacFarlane released a series of webisodes known as Seth MacFarlane 's Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy with its animated shorts sponsored by Burger King and released weekly . 
 = = = = Television producing = = = = 
 MacFarlane was the executive producer of a live @-@ action sitcom starring Rob Corddry called The Winner . The show premiered on Fox on March 4 , 2007 . The plot has a man named Glen discussing the time he matured at 32 and has him pursuing his only love after she moves in next door . Glen meets her son and both become good friends . After only six episodes , the show was officially cancelled on May 16 , 2007 . However , at Family Guy Live in Montreal on July 21 , 2007 , Seth MacFarlane stated , " It is looking like there could be a future life for The Winner " . After MacFarlane 's statement , neither Fox nor MacFarlane has released any details of plans for the show to return . The show was mentioned in the Family Guy episode " Family Gay " , where all of the horses at a racing track are named after failed Fox shows , The Winner being one of them . 
 In August 2011 , Fox announced that they had ordered a 13 @-@ part updated series of Cosmos : A Spacetime Odyssey . MacFarlane co @-@ produced the series with Ann Druyan and Steven Soter . The new series is hosted by Neil deGrasse Tyson and began airing on the channel March 9 , 2014 , with repeats airing on the National Geographic Channel on the next night . Besides serving as one of the executive producers , MacFarlane also provided voices for characters during the animation portions of the series . 
 In 2013 , MacFarlane announced that he would be working on a live @-@ action sitcom called Dads . The series , which had been given the go @-@ ahead for a six @-@ episode season , revolves around Eli , played by Seth Green , and Warner , played by Giovanni Ribisi , two successful guys in their 30 's whose world is turned upside down when their dads move in with them . MacFarlane , Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild executive @-@ produced the series , with Sulkin and Wild writing . On May 7 , 2014 , Fox cancelled the series after its first season . 
 In 2014 , Starz announced that they had ordered a two @-@ season , 20 @-@ episode series called Blunt Talk . The series will follow an English newscaster who moves to Los Angeles with his alcoholic manservant and the baggage of several failed marriages to host a sanctimonious talk show . The show was created by Jonathan Ames and will also serve as showrunner . MacFarlane will serve as executive producer . 
 MacFarlane currently executive produces the animated series Bordertown . The series is set in Texas and follows a border patrol agent named Bud <unk> and a Mexican immigrant named Ernesto Gonzales . The show satirizes America 's changing cultural landscape . MacFarlane first began work on the series in 2009 . 
 = = = = Television hosting = = = = 
 MacFarlane often participates as one of the " roasters " in the annual Comedy Central <unk> . MacFarlane is the only person to serve as roastmaster for more than one Comedy Central roast . In 2010 , he filled this role for The Comedy Central Roast of David Hasselhoff . The following year he was roastmaster of Comedy Central roasts of Donald Trump and Charlie Sheen . 
 On October 1 , 2012 , it was announced that MacFarlane would host the 85th Academy Awards on February 24 , 2013 . He also presented the nominees with actress Emma Stone , on January 10 , 2013 . In addition to hosting , MacFarlane was also nominated in the Academy Award for Best Original Song category for co @-@ writing the theme song " Everybody Needs a Best Friend " for his film Ted with Walter Murphy . Critical response to MacFarlane 's performance was mixed . Columnist Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly commented " By calling constant attention to the naughty factor , " MacFarlane created " an echo chamber of outrage , working a little too hard to top himself with faux @-@ scandalous gags about race , Jews in Hollywood , and the killing of Abraham Lincoln . " Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter praised MacFarlane 's performance saying that he did " impressively better than one would have wagered . " He also noted that he added " plenty of niceties with a little bit of the Ricky Gervais bite @-@ the @-@ hand @-@ that @-@ feeds @-@ you thing and worked the juxtaposition rather nicely . " He stirred up controversy in the form of a musical number titled " We Saw Your Boobs " . 
 On October 29 , 2014 , it was announced that MacFarlane would host the Breakthrough Prize ceremony . The event was held on Silicon Valley and televised on November 15 , 2014 on Discovery Channel and Science , and globally on November 22 , 2014 on BBC World News . 
 = = = Film career = = = 
 = = = = Ted = = = = 
 MacFarlane made his directorial live @-@ action film debut with the release of Ted in 2012 . He announced that he was directing it on an episode of Conan that aired on February 10 , 2011 . Along with directing the film , he also wrote the screenplay , served as producer , and starred as the title character . 
 Ted tells the story of John Bennett ( Mark Wahlberg ) and his talking teddy bear ( MacFarlane ) who keeps John and his girlfriend Lori Collins ( Mila Kunis ) from moving on with their lives . The film received generally favorable reviews from both critics and audiences , and was a box office success , opening with the highest weekend gross of all time for an original R @-@ rated comedy . Internationally , the movie is currently the highest @-@ grossing original R @-@ rated comedy of all time , beating The Hangover . A sequel , Ted 2 , was released on June 26 , 2015 . 
 = = = = A Million Ways to Die in the West = = = = 
 MacFarlane co @-@ wrote and starred in his second film , A Million Ways to Die in the West . Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild were also co @-@ writers for the film . The film follows a cowardly sheep farmer ( MacFarlane ) who loses a gunfight and sees his girlfriend leave him for another man . When a mysterious woman rides into town , she helps him find his courage . But when her outlaw husband arrives seeking revenge , the farmer must put his newfound courage to the test . The film was met with mixed to negative reviews from critics . 
 On January 27 , 2014 , MacFarlane announced that he wrote a companion novel based on the film 's script , which was released on March 4 , 2014 . An audio @-@ book version was also made available , narrated by Jonathan Frakes . MacFarlane wrote the book on weekends during shooting for the film , partially due to boredom . 
 = = = Music career = = = 
 = = = = Music Is Better Than Words = = = = 
 He signed a record deal with Universal Republic Records and released a big band / standards album in 2011 . MacFarlane 's debut studio album , Music Is Better Than Words , was released on September 27 , 2011 , drawing on his training in and attraction to " the Great American Songbook and particularly the early- to late- ' 50s era of orchestration " . The singer , asked about his experience with the music , said he did " old Nelson Riddle , Billy May charts [ with ] one of my composers , Ron Jones , [ who ] has a group called the Influence Jazz Orchestra that he performs with throughout L.A. " His album was nominated in the Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album category at the 54th Grammy Awards . Music Is Better Than Words received a score of 52 out of 100 on Metacritic 's compilation of music critic reviews . 
 = = = = Holiday for Swing = = = = 
 MacFarlane was featured on Calabria <unk> 's 2013 single " Let 's Fall in Love " . In September 2013 , it was announced that MacFarlane was working on a Christmas album scheduled for release in 2014 . The album , which contains collaborations with Norah Jones and Sara Bareilles , is titled Holiday for Swing , and was released on September 30 , 2014 . The album was recorded between Christmas Day and New Year 's Eve 2013 in Los Angeles and in studio 2 at Abbey Road Studios in London . The album received mostly positive reviews . 
 = = = = No One Ever Tells You = = = = 
 MacFarlane released his third studio album on October 30 , 2015 . Titled No One Ever Tells You , it received mostly positive reviews , and earned MacFarlane a Grammy Award nomination for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album . Due to the success of his musical endeavors , MacFarlane will be honored by Barbara Sinatra at the 28th annual Frank Sinatra Celebrity Invitational on February 20 . 
 = = = Future projects = = = 
 In 2011 , it was announced that MacFarlane would be reviving The Flintstones for the Fox network , with the first episode airing in 2013 . MacFarlane said that he would provide the voice of Barney Rubble . However , at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in July 2012 , while promoting Ted , MacFarlane revealed that the project had been shelved due to the unimpressed response garnered by Fox . 
 Regarding Broadway , MacFarlane told The Hollywood Reporter , " If I did a Broadway musical , I 'd probably want to do something a little bit more old @-@ fashioned " , and went on saying " I wouldn 't necessarily do something that was as edgy as what they [ Matt Stone and Trey Parker ] have done . The challenge to me would be more along the lines of , gosh , can somebody write Oklahoma ! for 2011 ? " He has also said that , " The good thing about Broadway is that you don 't have to worry about an airdate . It gets done when it gets done . " 
 In late 2011 , it was confirmed that MacFarlane is working on another animated series with Alex Borstein and Gary Janetti . Currently not much is known about the series other than it will be about a family and will have a female lead role . Janetti stated that the series has not yet been greenlit by Fox . 
 On May 4 , 2016 , FOX picked up a sci @-@ fi comedy @-@ drama series to be created , executive @-@ produced by and star MacFarlane set 300 years in the future aboard the Orville , a not @-@ so @-@ top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line exploratory ship in Earth ’ s interstellar fleet . The series will premiere during the 2017 @-@ 2018 season . 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 MacFarlane has appeared in sitcoms , comedy and news programs , independent films , and other animated shows . In 2002 , MacFarlane appeared in the Gilmore Girls episode " Lorelai 's Graduation Day " . Four years later on November 5 , 2006 , MacFarlane guest starred on Fox 's The War at Home as " Hillary 's Date " , an unnamed 33 @-@ year @-@ old man who secretly dates teenaged Hillary in the episode " I Wash My Hands of You " . MacFarlane also appeared as the engineer Ensign Rivers on Star Trek : Enterprise in the third season episode " The Forgotten " and the fourth season episode " Affliction " . During 2006 , MacFarlane had a role in the independent film Life is Short . He portrayed Dr. Ned , a psychologist who advises a short man ( played by Freaks and Geeks star Samm Levine ) to have relationships with taller women . He is a frequent guest on the radio talkshow <unk> , hosted by Dr. Drew Pinsky . 
 MacFarlane appeared on the November 11 , 2006 episode of Fox 's comedy show MADtv and performed a live action re @-@ enactment of a scene from the Family Guy episode " Fast Times at Buddy Cianci Jr . High " . In the scene , Peter and Lois suspect Chris of murdering his teacher 's husband . As a reaction , a terrified Meg jumps out the window . A version with MacFarlane as Peter , Nicole Parker as Kathy Griffin as Lois , Ike Barinholtz as Dane Cook as Chris , Nicole Randall Johnson as Queen Latifah as Meg , and Keegan @-@ Michael Key as Snoop Dogg as Stewie was recorded over the original cartoon . MacFarlane served as a host to the Canadian Awards for the Electronic & Animated Arts 's Second Annual Elan Awards on February 15 , 2008 . 
 MacFarlane has also appeared on news shows and late night television shows such as Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Late Show with David Letterman . On January 19 , 2007 , MacFarlane appeared on Countdown with Keith Olbermann on MSNBC to discuss Stephen Colbert 's appearance on The O 'Reilly Factor and Bill O 'Reilly 's return appearance on The Colbert Report . MacFarlane introduced the segment by saying in Stewie 's voice " Oh , wait Bill . Hold still , allow me to soil myself on you . Victory is mine ! " Three months later on March 24 , 2007 , MacFarlane was interviewed on Fox 's <unk> with Spike Feresten , and closed the show by singing the Frank Sinatra song " You Make Me Feel So Young " . He also provided Stewie 's voice when he appeared as a brain tumor @-@ induced hallucination to Seeley Booth in an episode of Bones , writing his own dialogue for the episode . On May 8 , 2009 , MacFarlane was a guest on Real Time with Bill Maher . 
 Other than Family Guy and American Dad ! , MacFarlane voices characters in other cartoon shows and films . He voiced Wayne " The Brain " McClain in an episode of Aqua Teen Hunger Force . He has also voiced various characters on Adult Swim 's Robot Chicken , including a parody of Lion @-@ O and Emperor Palpatine as well as Peter Griffin in the Season 2 premiere – he even parodied himself in the Season 4 premiere , in which he renewed the show simply by mentioning it in a Family Guy @-@ like cutaway after its fictitious cancellation at the end of Season 3 . He also played the villain " The <unk> " in Bob Boyle 's animated kids series Yin Yang Yo ! . In addition , MacFarlane voiced Johann Kraus in the 2008 film Hellboy II : The Golden Army . He also had a guest appearance in the animated film Futurama : Into the Wild Green Yonder where he sings " That Was Then ( And This is Too ) " , the opening theme . He had also starred in a commercial for Hulu in which he plays an alien presenting Hulu as an " evil plot to destroy the world " , progressively as his famous Family Guy and American Dad ! characters . He also lent his voice to the series finale movie of the Comedy Central series , Drawn Together . 
 MacFarlane also played Ziggy in the 2010 film Tooth Fairy . In August 2010 , he appeared as a guest voice @-@ over in a sci @-@ fi themed episode of Disney 's Phineas and Ferb entitled " Nerds of a Feather " . On September 15 , 2012 , MacFarlane hosted the season premiere of Saturday Night Live , with musical guest Frank Ocean . The episode was MacFarlane 's first appearance on the show . MacFarlane had a cameo in the 2013 film Movie 43 . MacFarlane collaborated with Matt Groening on an episode of The Simpsons and Futurama . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 In 2009 , he appeared as a vocalist at the BBC Proms with the John Wilson Orchestra in Prom 22 A Celebration of Classic MGM Film Musicals . In 2010 , he reappeared at the Proms with the John Wilson Orchestra in a Christmas concert special . In 2012 , it was announced he would again appear at the Proms with the John Wilson Orchestra in a concert celebrating Broadway musicals . Regarding his musical passion , MacFarlane has said , " I love and am fascinated by exciting orchestration — what you can do with a band that size — and I think in many ways it 's a lost art . " MacFarlane 's sound of music is predominantly traditional pop , easy listening , jazz , vocal , vocal jazz , show tunes , swing , and big band He will occasionally use musical comedy for either his shows or movies . 
 In 2015 , MacFarlane again appeared at The Proms as a vocalist with the John Wilson Orchestra , this time in a Sinatra programme . 
 = = = Voice and influences = = = 
 MacFarlane has a baritone voice . He is a pianist and singer who , in his early years , trained with Lee and Sally Sweetland , the vocal coaches of Barbra Streisand and Frank Sinatra . In an interview with NPR , MacFarlane commented on their vocal training , to which he said " They really drill you , " he said . " They teach you the old @-@ style way of singing , back when you had no electronic help . ... [ They teach you to ] show your teeth . If you look at old photos of Sinatra while he 's singing , there 's a lot of very exposed teeth . That was something that Lee Sweetland hit on day in and day out , and correctly so , because it just brightens the whole performance . " His comedy influences include people like Woody Allen , Jackie Gleason , Mel Brooks , and the creators of Monty Python . While his musical influences include people like Frank Sinatra , Dean Martin , Vic Damone , Johnny Mercer , Bing Crosby , Bobby Darin , Gordon MacRae , and the Rat Pack . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 MacFarlane is a supporter of the Democratic Party . He has donated over US $ 200 @,@ 000 to various Democratic congressional committees and to the 2008 presidential campaign of then @-@ U.S. Senator Barack Obama . He has stated that he supports the legalization of cannabis . MacFarlane serves on the board of directors of People for the American Way , a progressive advocacy organization . 
 In 2015 MacFarlane revealed support for Bernie Sanders in the 2016 U.S. presidential election , and he introduced Sanders onstage at a Los Angeles rally . 
 = = = = LGBT issues = = = = 
 MacFarlane is passionate about his support for gay rights . He said it is " infuriating and idiotic " that two gay partners " have to go through this fucking dog and pony act when they stop at a hotel and the guy behind the counter says , ' You want one room or two ? ' " He went on to say , " I 'm incredibly passionate about my support for the gay community and what they 're dealing with at this current point in time " . MacFarlane continued , " Why is it that Johnny Spaghetti Stain in fucking Georgia can knock a woman up , legally be married to her , and then beat the shit out of her , but these two intelligent , sophisticated writers who have been together for 20 years can 't get married ? " 
 MacFarlane , in recognition of " his active , passionate commitment to humanist values , and his fearless support of equal marriage rights and other social justice issues " , was named the Harvard Humanist of the Year in 2011 . 
 However MacFarlane was criticized for his portrayal of transsexualism in the Family Guy episode " Quagmire 's Dad " . Gay novelist Brent Hartinger found the episode 's inclusion of transphobic remarks from Peter and Lois Griffin — as well as a scene of Brian vomiting profusely upon discovering his new girlfriend to be Glenn Quagmire 's father – to be " shockingly insensitive " . Hartinger continued , " Frankly , it 's literally impossible for me to reconcile last night 's episode with MacFarlane 's words , unless I come to the conclusion that the man is pretty much a complete idiot " . The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation , a LGBT media watchdog organization , shared " serious concerns being voiced from members of the community " about the episode . MacFarlane said he was " surprised " by the negative reaction to " Quagmire 's Dad " , saying that " it seemed that [ gay commentators ] were not picking up on the fact that it was a very sympathetic portrayal of a transsexual character " . He further added , " Look , Brian happens to be a heterosexual character , as I am . If I found out that I had slept with a transsexual , I might throw up in the same way that a gay guy looks at a vagina and goes , ' Oh , my God , that 's disgusting . ' " 
 = = = Speaking engagements = = = 
 MacFarlane is a frequent speaking guest on college campuses . On April 16 , 2006 , he was invited by Stanford University 's <unk> Speakers ' Bureau to address an audience of over 1 @,@ 000 at Memorial Auditorium . MacFarlane was invited by Harvard University 's class of 2006 to deliver the " class day " address on June 7 , 2006 . He spoke as himself , and also as Peter Griffin , Stewie Griffin and Glenn Quagmire . He also has delivered speeches at George Washington University , Washington University in St. Louis , the University of Texas , the University of Missouri , University of Toledo , Bowling Green State University , and Loyola Marymount University . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike = = = 
 During the 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike , MacFarlane publicly sided with the Writers Guild , and fully participated in the strike . Official production of Family Guy was halted for most of December 2007 and various periods afterwards . Fox continued producing episodes without MacFarlane 's final approval , and although he refused to work on the show during the strike , his contract with Fox required him to contribute to any episodes it subsequently produced . Rumors of continued production on Family Guy prompted the statement from MacFarlane that " ..... it would just be a colossal dick move if they did that " . During the strike , MacFarlane wrote an inside joke into an episode of Family Guy about Jon Stewart 's choice to return to the air and undermine the writers of The Daily Show , causing Stewart to respond with an hour @-@ long call in which he questioned how MacFarlane could consider himself the " moral arbiter " of Hollywood . The strike ended on February 12 , 2008 . 
 = = = The Seth MacFarlane Collection of the Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan Archive = = = 
 MacFarlane donated money to create The Seth MacFarlane Collection of the Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan Archive at the Library of Congress . MacFarlane said , " The work of Carl Sagan has been a profound influence in my life , and the life of every individual who recognizes the importance of humanity 's ongoing commitment to the exploration of our universe [ ... ] The continuance of our journey outward into space should always occupy some part of our collective attention , regardless of whatever Snooki did last week . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In a 2004 interview with The Daily Princetonian , MacFarlane noted his similarities to Brian Griffin from Family Guy , revealing , " I have some Brian type issues from time to time – looking for the right person – but I date as much as the next guy " . 
 On July 16 , 2010 , MacFarlane 's mother , Ann Perry Sager , died after a long battle with cancer . Her death was reported by Larry King on his show Larry King Live , who acknowledged a conversation he had with her during an interview with her son in May 2010 . 
 = = = September 11 , 2001 experience = = = 
 On the morning of September 11 , 2001 , MacFarlane was scheduled to return to Los Angeles on American Airlines Flight 11 from Boston . Suffering from a hangover after the previous night 's celebrations that followed his speech at his alma mater , the Rhode Island School of Design , and with an incorrect departure time ( 8 : 15 a.m. instead of 7 : 45 a.m. ) from his travel agent , he arrived at Logan International Airport about ten minutes too late to board the flight as the gates had been closed . Fifteen minutes after departure , American Airlines Flight 11 was hijacked , and at 8 : 46 a.m. it was flown into the North Tower of the World Trade Center , killing everyone on board . MacFarlane said , 
 The only reason it hasn 't really affected me as it maybe could have is I didn 't really know that I was in any danger until after it was over , so I never had that panic moment . After the fact , it was sobering , but people have a lot of close calls ; you 're crossing the street and you almost get hit by a car ..... this one just happened to be related to something massive . I really can 't let it affect me because I 'm a comedy writer . I have to put that in the back of my head . 
 = = = Lawsuits = = = 
 On October 3 , 2007 , Bourne Co . Music Publishers filed a lawsuit accusing Family Guy of infringing its copyright on the song " When You Wish upon a Star " , through a parody song entitled " I Need a Jew " appearing in the episode " When You Wish Upon a Weinstein " . Bourne Co . , which holds the copyright , alleged the parody pairs a " thinly veiled " copy of their music with antisemitic lyrics . Named in the suit were MacFarlane , 20th Century Fox Film Corp. , Fox Broadcasting Co . , Cartoon Network , and Walter Murphy ; the suit sought to stop the program 's distribution and asked for unspecified damages . Bourne argued that " I Need a Jew " uses the copyrighted melody of " When You Wish Upon a Star " without commenting on that song , and that it was therefore not a First Amendment @-@ protected parody per the ruling in Campbell v. Acuff @-@ Rose Music , Inc . On March 16 , 2009 , United States District Judge Deborah Batts held that Family Guy did not infringe on Bourne 's copyright when it transformed the song for comical use in an episode . 
 In December 2007 , Family Guy was again accused of copyright infringement when actor Art Metrano filed a lawsuit regarding a scene in Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story , in which Jesus performs Metrano 's signature magic parody act , involving absurd faux magical hand gestures while humming the distinctive tune " Fine and Dandy " . MacFarlane , 20th Century Fox , Steve Callaghan , and Alex Borstein were all named in the suit . In July 2009 , a federal district court judge rejected Fox 's motion to dismiss , saying that the first three fair use factors involved — " purpose and character of the use " , " nature of the infringed work " , and " amount and substantiality of the taking " — counted in Metrano 's favor , while the fourth — " economic impact " — had to await more fact @-@ finding . In denying the dismissal , the court held that the reference in the scene made light of Jesus and his followers — not Metrano or his act . The case was settled out of court in 2010 with undisclosed terms . 
 On July 16 , 2014 , MacFarlane was hit with a lawsuit from the production company of a series of Internet videos called Charlie the <unk> Teddy Bear claiming that Ted infringes on the copyright of its videos due to the Ted bear largely matching the background story , persona , voice tone , attitude , and dialogue of the Charlie bear . The case was settled out of court on March 23 , 2015 , with undisclosed terms . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 MacFarlane has won two Emmy awards for his work on Family Guy and has been nominated seventeen times . He has been nominated for three Grammy awards for his work in Family Guy : Live in Vegas , Music Is Better Than Words , and Family Guy . He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song for co @-@ writing the opening song " Everybody Needs a Best Friend " from his film Ted with the film 's composer Walter Murphy . 
 He has received numerous awards from other organizations , including the Annie Award for Best Voice Acting in an Animated Television Production and the Saturn Award for Best Television Presentation for the Family Guy episode titled " Blue Harvest " , the MTV Movie Award for Best On @-@ Screen Duo and the Empire Award for Best Comedy for Ted . In 2015 , he will receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story ( 2005 ) 
 Hellboy II : The Golden Army ( 2008 ) 
 Futurama : Into the Wild Green Yonder ( 2009 ) 
 The Drawn Together Movie : The Movie ! ( 2010 ) 
 Tooth Fairy ( 2010 ) 
 Trek Nation ( 2011 ) 
 Ted ( 2012 ) 
 Movie 43 ( 2013 ) 
 A Million Ways to Die in the West ( 2014 ) 
 Ted 2 ( 2015 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = = Studio albums = = = = 
 = = = = Soundtrack albums = = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = = As main artist = = = = 
 = = = = As featuring artist = = = = 
 = = Written works = = 
 MacFarlane , Seth ( 2014 ) . A Million Ways to Die in the West . New York : Ballantine Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge = 
 The Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge was a two @-@ lane cantilevered truss bridge carrying U.S. Route 82 / U.S. Route 278 across the Mississippi River between Lake Village , Arkansas and Greenville , Mississippi . It was the first bridge to connect the two towns . The bridge was named for Benjamin G. Humphreys II , a former United States Congressman from Greenville . 
 Hailed as progressive when it opened in 1940 , it became functionally obsolete as vehicle and river traffic increased . Because of its narrow two lanes with no shoulders , the bridge often became blocked by accidents or by the crossing of large vehicles like farm equipment . Due to its location near a sharp bend in the Mississippi River , the bridge became a hazard to river traffic ; barges and towboats frequently collided with it . In 1994 , a study concluded that a new bridge was needed and the old one should be torn down . 
 A new bridge , the Greenville Bridge , was built as a replacement further downriver from the sharp bend . It opened in 2010 . In 2011 , work began to remove the Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge , very modern in its time , was a two lane , steel cantilevered truss bridge that carried US 82 / 278 over the Mississippi River , and connected the towns of Lake Village , Arkansas and Greenville , Mississippi by road for the first time . Prior to the bridge , local vehicles and local freight could only cross the river by ferry . It was named after Benjamin G. Humphreys , a US Congressman from <unk> who co @-@ authored a flood control bill in 1917 establishing a national flood control program on the Mississippi , and promoted the concept of flood control to contain the river . 
 The bridge opened on October 4 , 1940 to great fanfare . Its main span width was 840 feet ( 260 m ) , the highway bridge with the longest span on the Mississippi River . The width of the roadway was 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) — two lanes of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) each — with no shoulders . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1930s , talk started on the construction of a bridge to cross the Mississippi River at Greenville . In 1936 , a group called the Arkansas @-@ Mississippi @-@ Alabama US 82 Association was formed to raise funds for the bridge . In 1937 , Milton C. Smith ( the mayor at that time ) worked with John A. Fox , ( the secretary of the Washington County Chamber of Commerce ) , to get Congress to pass a law authorizing the bridge . The bill authorizing the bridge was signed into law in August 1937 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt . In 1938 , Smith applied for money from the Works Progress Administration to fund the estimated $ 4 @.@ 5 million it would take to build the bridge . The Works Progress Administration agreed to the proposal in September 1938 , and construction started on the bridge a few months later . 
 The Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge was built by the company now known as HNTB and opened to much fanfare in 1940 as the " pathway to progress " for the Mississippi Delta . It was a through @-@ truss design and had a span of 840 feet ( 256 meters ) . Until 1943 , this was the longest bridge for vehicles on the Mississippi River . Over time , the bridge supported increasing volumes of highway traffic and vehicles hitting the bridge . In the 1950s , an Air Force plane crashed into the bridge . Though the bridge remained structurally sound , it was becoming functionally obsolete . It had only two narrow highway lanes and no shoulders . An accident or the crossing of very large vehicles such as a large combine could force the bridge to close . 
 With river traffic increasing , damage from barge collisions increased . By 1972 , the Greenville Bridge was hit more times by barges than any other bridge on the Mississippi . The bridge was located close to a sharp bend in the Mississippi ; towboats and barges had difficulty making the sharp turn and regaining their course in time to avoid a collision with the bridge . Over the years many have not been able to make the turn quickly and have hit it . The bridge had become a danger to river traffic . 
 A 1994 engineering study by the Mississippi Department of Transportation explored alternatives to upgrading the crossing of US 82 and issued a report that explored a four @-@ lane crossing at Greenville . It concluded the best of several alternatives it identified was to build a new bridge 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) downriver from the old one , and to remove the old bridge . Additional studies evaluated the type of bridge to build , and by 1995 the cable @-@ stayed bridge was chosen as the best design to fit the river and soil conditions , as well as providing sufficient clearance for river navigation . Engineering plans were completed in 1999 for the Greenville Bridge , its replacement . 
 = = Destruction = = 
 The new Greenville Bridge opened to traffic on August 4 , 2010 . In 2011 the massive process of removing the old bridge by cutting into small sections to be recycled was begun , and was expected to be completed by September 2012 . At times the river has been closed to traffic to aid the demolition . The job is dangerous and two workers have died . 
 = Special Troops Battalion , 10th Mountain Division ( United States ) = 
 The 10th Mountain Division Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion is a special troops battalion of the United States Army headquartered at Fort Drum , New York . It is the organization for the command elements of the 10th Mountain Division . The Battalion contains the Division 's senior command structure , including its Headquarters and Headquarters Company , as well as communications , intelligence , operational and support elements as well as the Division Band which provide services to any units assigned to the Headquarters at a time . 
 Activated to oversee division elements prior to World War II , the battalion fought in Italy for a year . After the war it served as the command element for the 10th when it was a training unit . Due to reorganizations in the Army , the Special Troops Battalion was not reactivated with the 10th Mountain Division in 1985 , and instead remained inactive while the division served in numerous contingencies throughout the 1990s . Reactivated during another reorganization in 2004 , the Special Troops Battalion supported the 10th Mountain Division command elements when they deployed to both Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq . During this service , it has received several commendations for its multiple deployments . In October 2009 , the Special Troops Battalion was redesignated to Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion , 10th Mountain Division ( Light Infantry ) . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 10th Mountain Division Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion is subordinate to the 10th Mountain Division , and is a permanent formation of the division , as the 10th Mountain Division 's command elements are all contained within <unk> . It is organized under the same uniform structure that all Special Troops Battalions in the United States Army conform to . 
 The battalion consists of five companies ; the division 's Headquarters and Headquarters Company , known as Headquarters Support Company ; Intelligence Sustainment Company , a Military Intelligence company ; Division Signal Company , a Signal company ; Operations Company and the 10th Mountain Division Band . These companies provide services for the other elements under the 10th Mountain Division 's command . As such , all of the formations are mountain warfare qualified . 
 = = History = = 
 The Special Troops Battalion was activated on 6 November 1944 , as an organizational structure for the command elements of the 10th Mountain Division . It was activated at Camp Swift , Texas , while the division was staging in preparation for deployment to Europe during World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The 10th Light Division ( Alpine ) was constituted on 10 July 1943 , and activated two days later at Camp Hale , Colorado . The division was centered around regimental commands ; the 85th Infantry Regiment , 86th Infantry Regiment , and 87th Infantry Regiment . Also assigned to the division were the <unk> , 605th , and <unk> Field Artillery battalions , the 110th Signal Company , the <unk> Ordnance Company , the 10th Quartermaster Company , the 10th Reconnaissance Troop , the 126th Engineer Battalion , the 10th Medical Battalion , and the 10th Counter @-@ Intelligence Detachment . The 10th Light Division was unique in that it was the only division in the Army with three field artillery battalions instead of four . 
 The division trained for one year at the 9 @,@ 200 @-@ foot @-@ high Camp Hale . Soldiers trained to fight and survive under the most brutal mountain conditions , traveling on skis and show shoes , and sleeping in the snow without tents . On 22 June 1944 , the division was shipped to Camp Swift , Texas to prepare for maneuvers in Louisiana , which were later canceled . A period of acclimation to a low altitude and hot climate was necessary to prepare for this training . On 6 November 1944 , the 10th Division was redesignated the 10th Mountain Division . It was at this point that the Special Troops Battalion was activated . That same month the blue and white " Mountain " tab was authorized for the division 's new shoulder sleeve insignia . 
 = = = = Italy = = = = 
 The battalion and its division sailed for Italy in late 1944 , arriving in Italy on 6 January 1945 . It was the last US Army Division to enter combat in World War II . 
 The battalion provided command for the division as it immediately entered combat near <unk> and <unk> . Preliminary defensive actions were followed on 19 February 1945 by Battle of Monte Castello in conjunction with troops of a Brazilian Expeditionary Force . 
 The unit made concerted attacks on the Monte Della <unk> @-@ Mount Belvedere sector , and the peaks were cleared after several days of heavy fighting . In early March the division fought its way north of <unk> and moved to within 15 miles ( 24 km ) of Bologna . Maintaining defensive positions for the next three weeks , the division jumped off again in April , captured <unk> on 20 April , and entered the Po Valley , seizing the strategic points <unk> and <unk> . The 10th crossed the Po River on 23 April , reaching Verona on 25 April , and ran into heavy opposition at <unk> and Nago . After an amphibious crossing of Lake Garda , it secured <unk> and Porto di <unk> on 30 April , as German resistance in Italy ended . After the German surrender in Italy on 2 May 1945 , the division went on security duty , receiving the surrender of various German units and screening the areas of occupation near Trieste , <unk> , <unk> and Log pod <unk> , Slovenia until V @-@ E Day , the end of the war in Europe . 
 = = = = Demobilization = = = = 
 Originally , the battalion and division were to be sent to the Pacific theater to take part in Operation Downfall , the invasion of mainland Japan . However , Japan surrendered in August 1945 following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The division returned to the US two days after the surrender . All of its combat elements , as well as the Special Troops Battalion , were demobilized and deactivated on 30 November 1945 , at Camp Carson , Colorado . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 In June 1948 , the division was rebuilt and activated at Fort Riley , Kansas to serve as a training division . Without its " Mountain " tab , the division served at the 10th Infantry Division for the next ten years . The battalion was also rebuilt and delegated to commanding the training units . The division was charged with processing and training replacements in large numbers . This mission was expanded with the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 . By 1953 , the division had trained 123 @,@ 000 new Army recruits at Fort Riley . 
 In 1954 , the division was converted to a combat division once again , though it did not regain its " Mountain " status . Using equipment from the deactivating 37th Infantry Division , the 10th Infantry Division was deployed to Germany , replacing the 1st Infantry Division at Würzburg , serving as part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization defensive force . The division served in Germany for four years , until it was rotated out and replaced by the 3rd Infantry Division . On 1 July 1957 , the battalion was redesignated as the 10th Administration Company . However , the company moved with the division to Fort Benning , Georgia , and was deactivated on 14 June 1958 . 
 = = = Reactivation = = = 
 In 1985 , when the 10th Mountain Division was reactivated again , the Special Troops Battalion was not made a part of the organizational structure , in accordance with the new format of US Army Divisions per the 1963 Reorganization Objective Army Divisions plan . 
 Upon the return of the division headquarters and 1st Brigade from Afghanistan after supporting Operation Enduring Freedom , the 10th Mountain Division began the process of transformation into a modular division . On 16 September 2004 , the division headquarters finished its transformation , which returned the Special Troops Battalion to active service . The 1st Brigade became the 1st Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division , while the 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division was activated for the first time . In January 2005 , the 4th Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division was activated at Fort Polk , Louisiana . 2nd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division would not be transformed until September 2005 , pending a deployment to Iraq . Around that time , the Special Troops Battalion received its heraldry , including a coat of arms and a distinctive unit insignia . 
 The division headquarters and 3rd Brigade Combat Team redeployed to Afghanistan in 2006 , staying in the country until 2007 . The division and brigade served in the eastern region of the country , along the border with Pakistan , fulfilling a similar role as it did during its previous deployment . During this time , the deployment of the brigade was extended along with that of the 4th Brigade Combat Team , 82nd Airborne Division , however , it was eventually replaced by the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team which was rerouted from Iraq . 
 After a one @-@ year rest , the headquarters of the 10th Mountain Division was deployed to Iraq for the first time in April 2008 , along with the 4th Brigade Combat Team . The division headquarters served as the command element for southern Baghdad , while the 4th BCT operated in North Baghdad . The 10th Mountain participated in larger scale operations such as Operation Phantom Phoenix . The headquarters of the 10th Mountain Division is currently deployed to Afghanistan in support of OEF XV and transitioning to the Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The 10th Mountain Division Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion was awarded two campaign streamers in World War II and four campaign streamers in the War on Terrorism for a total of six campaign streamers and two unit decorations in its operational history . Some of the division 's brigades received more or fewer decorations depending on their individual deployments . 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = A Glorious Way to Die = 
 A Glorious Way to Die : The Kamikaze Mission of the Battleship Yamato , April 1945 is a 1981 military history book by Russell Spurr about the suicide mission of the Japanese battleship Yamato against the American Pacific Fleet during the Battle of Okinawa near the end of World War II . Yamato was the largest battleship in the world , and Japan sacrificed her in a final , desperate attempt to halt the Allied advance on the Japanese archipelago . The book was published in 1981 in the United States by Newmarket Press , and in the United Kingdom by Sidgwick & Jackson . 
 Spurr , a British journalist and editor of the Hong Kong @-@ based Far Eastern Economic Review , interviewed Japanese and Americans involved with Yamato 's last mission , and drew on Japanese naval documents and records to write the book . He tells the story from both the Japanese and American points of view . 
 A Glorious Way to Die was generally well received by critics and historians . American author and journalist Charles Kaiser wrote in The New York Times that the book 's strength is " its ability to re @-@ create the fear the Japanese engendered with their desperation tactics " , which resulted in American perception that they were all prepared to fight to the death . A reviewer in the Canadian journal Pacific Affairs commended Spurr 's " well @-@ balanced treatment of historical evidence and his workmanship in reconstructing the tragic event " , and said that the book " deserves wide reading " . 
 = = Background = = 
 During World War II Russell Spurr was a lieutenant in the Royal Indian Navy fighting the Japanese in Burma . After the war , in February 1946 , Spurr was part of the Commonwealth occupation force stationed in the Japanese naval base of Kure in southern Japan . There he noticed a huge drydock standing empty , and after querying what it had been used for , he learnt that it was where Yamato had been built . Spurr had been isolated in Burma for several years and had never heard of Yamato , but he became interested in her story and started collecting information about the battleship . 
 After returning to England , Spurr worked as a journalist . In 1952 The London Daily Express sent him to Japan as its China and Far East correspondent , but he found that he had little time to resume his pursuit of information on the fate of Yamato . In the mid @-@ 1970s Spurr returned to the Far East again , this time as a writer for the Far Eastern Economic Review . He began conducting interviews about Yamato with former Japanese naval commanders and survivors of the battleship 's last mission . He also gained access to Japanese naval documents and records seized by the United States , plus US interrogation transcripts . For the American side of the story , he interviewed US naval commanders and personnel involved in the sinking of Yamato . Satisfied with what he had , Spurr began writing the book in the late 1970s , over 30 years after he first found out about the battleship . 
 In his introduction to the book , Spurr said that he made no attempt to " gloss over the facts , unpalatable though they may be to either side . " He added , " The result , I trust , presents more than the story of a ship or a sortie , but offers some insight into the agonizing dilemma of a misguided , courageous people who persisted in continuing a hopeless war . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In A Glorious Way to Die , Russell Spurr recounts the final mission of Japanese battleship Yamato . He describes the events that led to the decision by the Japanese at Combined Fleet headquarters to send Yamato , the pride of the Imperial Japanese Navy , on a suicide mission against the American Pacific Fleet during the Battle of Okinawa near the end of World War II . Spurr tells the story of Yamato 's last mission from both the Japanese and the American point of view , dramatised in a third @-@ person narrative . 
 Construction of Yamato began in secrecy at the Kure naval base in 1937 . She was completed soon after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 , but had already been rendered obsolete by the Japanese themselves after their successful carrier @-@ based attacks at Pearl Harbor and elsewhere . Yamato , the largest battleship in the world , with nine 18 @.@ 1 @-@ inch guns with a range of over 22 miles , became , in the words of a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reviewer , a " 70 @,@ 000 @-@ ton white elephant the Japanese did not quite know what to do with " . 
 In March 1945 , after the Americans had invaded Okinawa and all but eliminated the Japanese Navy , a final kamikaze mission called Operation Ten @-@ Go ( Operation Heaven One ) was conceived by Japanese commanders at Combined Fleet to repulse the Allied advance on the Japanese archipelago . The plan was to send Yamato with eight support destroyers and a cruiser to Okinawa . Yamato would only be given enough fuel to reach Okinawa , and would have no air cover as all available airplanes would be used for a series of kamikaze attacks on US aircraft carriers . At Okinawa Yamato and her support craft would beach themselves and assist the island defenders . Without air cover there was little chance of Yamato reaching her destination , but , according to American author and journalist Charles Kaiser , the Japanese high command were " perfectly prepared to sacrifice the remnants of [ their ] fleet to avoid the stigma of surrender " . 
 Not all Japanese naval officers agreed with Combined Fleet 's decision to sacrifice Yamato , and while they had no choice but to comply , some committed one act of defiance by secretly supplying the battleship and the rest of her fleet with enough fuel to return home . Yamato set sail for Okinawa from the Kure naval base on March 29 , 1945 , and on April 7 , 1945 the Americans intercepted the Japanese fleet , 200 miles from Okinawa . Using 280 bombers and torpedo planes in three waves of attacks from nine aircraft carriers , the Americans sank the battleship and five of her support ships within three hours . After Yamato went down , the Americans machine @-@ gunned survivors in the water . Spurr explains the reason for their hatred of the Japanese : 
 The Americans felt no compunction about slaughtering their helpless foes . They had always fought a blatantly racial war in the Pacific – and so had the Japanese . Headline @-@ seeking brass hats openly declared that killing Japs was no worse than killing lice . Reports of Japan 's atrocities against war prisoners and even the unnatural fanaticism of the Kamikaze combined to convince the Americans that these were inhuman freaks , deserving little mercy . The apogee of brutalization was to be reached , four months later , at Hiroshima . 
 After the US planes left the area , the remaining Japanese support ships picked up what survivors they could from the water and returned to Kure . According to Spurr , of Yamato 's total crew of <unk> , only 269 survived . The Americans lost 12 men in their attack on the Japanese fleet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Roger Jaynes , writing in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel described A Glorious Way to Die as " a dramatic absorbing account of Yamato 's last mission " . His only complaint was that the book takes too long to " get into " , and that the first 90 pages , most of which deal with background information , should have been heavily condensed . But once " Yamato finally leaves port " , Jaynes said the book is " a chilling account of how more than 3 @,@ 000 Japanese sailors obediently sailed to their deaths , knowing they had no air cover and that the American planes were waiting " . 
 In a review of the book in The New York Times , Richard F. Shepard called it a " compelling story " . He said that Spurr tells this " naval saga " , which had degenerated into a " racial conflict " , from the point of view of the people involved , " people who had little time for moralizing or <unk> , anything but getting on with the killing " . American author and journalist Charles Kaiser , also writing in The New York Times , said that the book 's strength is " its ability to re @-@ create the fear the Japanese engendered with their desperation tactics " and the resulting American perception that they were all prepared to fight to the death . Kaiser added that younger readers may have a better understanding from this book of what led to US President Truman 's decision to use the atomic bomb against Japan , " even if they [ ... ] question the morality of that decision " . 
 A reviewer at the Internet Bookwatch said the book is not just " a dry historical record " , but is " aptly presented " , well researched and " a worthy addition to World War II history shelves " . Kirkus Reviews called the book " A gripping recreation of the last ten days in the life of <unk> Yamato " . It said that Spurr gives the battleship , which " live [ s ] on as a legend in Japan " , " appropriately big @-@ picture treatment " , and explains Japan 's " predilection for self @-@ immolation " and its kamikaze philosophy . Kearney Smith , recounting his brother 's experiences on a US Landing Craft Support ship in the Battle of Okinawa in Aboard LCS 11 in World War II : A Memoir by Lawrence B. Smith , also said that Spurr 's book " give [ s ] lots of insight into the matter of kamikaze attacks " . 
 In a review in the Canadian journal Pacific Affairs , <unk> Sato noted that the book highlights the Imperial Navy 's " fatal lack of foresight " in recognizing the role air support and aircraft carriers would play in naval warfare , and persisted with the construction of Yamato . It also investigates " the politics and mentality of the Japanese leadership and the morale and spirit of the fighting men and the nation " . He said that Spurr 's hope that his book will help explain why Japan refused to surrender , " is a modest aspiration for his well @-@ balanced treatment of historical evidence and his workmanship in reconstructing the tragic event " . Sato 's opinion of the book was that it " deserves wide reading " . 
 In 1981 , A Glorious Way to Die was selected by the Military Book Club and was a Literary Guild alternate selection . 
 = = Works citing this book = = 
 <unk> , Eugene L. ( 1996 ) . The Southwest Pacific Campaign , 1941 – 1945 : Historiography and Annotated Bibliography . Greenwood Press. p . 233 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Rose , Lisle Abbott ( 2007 ) . Power at Sea Volume 2 : The Breaking Storm , 1919 – 1945 . University of Missouri Press. pp. 438 , 492 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8262 @-@ 1694 @-@ 6 . 
 Rottman , Gordon ( 2002 ) . World War 2 Pacific Island Guide . Greenwood Publishing <unk> p . 467 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ 31395 @-@ 0 . 
 Rottman , Gordon ( 2012 @-@ 09 @-@ 18 ) . Okinawa 1945 : The Last Battle . Osprey Publishing. p . 94 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 78200 @-@ 462 @-@ 2 . 
 Smith , Kearney ( 2011 @-@ 01 @-@ 01 ) . Aboard LCS 11 in World War II : A Memoir by Lawrence B. Smith . Xlibris <unk> p . 96 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy = 
 " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " is the tenth television episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on December 4 , 1994 . In the episode , Homer and Marge 's sex life is struggling , but Grampa perks things up with a homemade revitalizing tonic . He and Homer go on the road to sell their elixir , and Grampa reveals that Homer ’ s conception was unintentional . Homer is upset with his father and decides to spend more time with his children , but his over @-@ parenting does not work that well on them . Homer goes back to the old farmhouse he grew up in for inspiration and meets back up with his father , but their loving reunion is soured when the house goes up in flames . 
 The episode was directed by Wes Archer and written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein . After its initial airing on Fox , the episode was later released as part of a 1999 video collection : The Simpsons – Too Hot For TV , and released again on the 2003 DVD edition of the same collection . The episode features cultural references to songs such as " Foggy Mountain Breakdown " and " Celebration " , as well as a reference to the 1963 film The Nutty Professor . " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " received positive reception from television critics , and acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Homer and Marge 's marriage declines due to their fading sex life , Grampa pieces together a tonic that is guaranteed to put the sparks back into their relationship . The effectiveness of the tonic results in Homer and Abe going into business together , selling " Simpson and Son ’ s Revitalizing Tonic " to the public utilizing a medicine show . They travel from town to town selling the product , but after visiting the farmhouse where Homer grew up , the two get into an argument . Abe yells at Homer in the car , saying that if he had not taken the tonic years ago , Homer would not have been born , finally shouting " You were an accident ! " Homer stops the car and hisses " Get out ! " , not accepting Abe 's apology and saying in an " OUT " . Abe steps out of the car and says he hopes Homer will forgive him , but Homer drives away and leaves his father there , later telling Marge he cannot forgive what his father said and then resolves to be a better father . However , things don 't go well for either Homer or Abe : Homer 's rushed efforts to bond with Bart and Lisa lead them to note that he 's just as " half @-@ assed " at doing too much as he was at being a non @-@ presence for them , while Abe 's attempt to use Barney as the new " Son " fails instantly . 
 Bart attempts to figure out why all of the adults disappear after they buy the " Simpson and Son 's Tonic " . They come up with a few conspiracy theories , all of which are unrelated with the tonic . Lisa , however , sarcastically offers up the possibility of all the adults having to be home before dark due to being reverse vampires , which frightens the rest of the children more than their other ideas . 
 Depressed at having failed to be a good father even when he is trying , Homer goes back to the farmhouse to think . He sees old photographs , including one of himself as a child on Christmas morning , where he thinks his father was not even there on Christmas when he finally got to meet Santa Claus . Homer then realizes that it was really his father in a Santa costume , proving that Abe did actually care for him . Homer quickly reunites with Abe , who by coincidence has also gone to the farmhouse to reflect . Both of them accidentally set fire to different parts of the building , starting with Homer accidentally setting fire to the photo and Abe throwing a bottle of his tonic into a fireplace , and bump into one another on the front porch while fleeing the blaze . They both admit they are screw @-@ ups and they finally reconcile . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was directed by Wes Archer , and was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein . It was originally intended to deal with Homer and Marge 's problematic sex life , but later developed into a story about the relationship between Homer and Grampa . Dan Castellaneta provides the voices for both Homer and Grampa . Castellaneta therefore had to talk to himself when he recorded the voices of the two characters in their interactions for this episode . Castellaneta says that it is hard for him to do Grampa 's voice because it is " wheezy and airy " . 
 Homer and Marge spend the night at an inn , called the Aphrodite Inn , to spice up their sex life . The inn was partly based on the Madonna Inn , which as in the episode features different kinds of sex @-@ oriented rooms with unusual names that are supposed to spice up your love life . The design of the old farmhouse was inspired by the house featured in the 1993 film Flesh and Bone . Bart 's obsession with conspiracy theories was inspired by the writers observation that children around his age go through a stage where they become " addicted " to information about UFOs and paranormal phenomena . Bill Oakley himself had gone through the same thing when he was around 10 years old . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Al Gore , former Vice President of the United States , is shown celebrating Lisa 's purchase of his book , Sane Planning , Sensible Tomorrow , by listening to " Celebration " by Kool & the Gang . " Foggy Mountain Breakdown " is played during a chase scene , reminiscent of a recurring theme of the 1967 landmark film Bonnie and Clyde . A parody of The X @-@ Files ' theme song is played in the background of a scene after Lisa purchases a copy of Gore 's book Sane Planning , Sensible Tomorrow . When Professor Frink takes the tonic , he transforms into a suave man with a deep voice , which is a reference to Jerry Lewis transforming into Buddy Love in The Nutty Professor . Grampa , within proper context , successfully pronounces the word <unk> . Milhouse 's conspiratorial revelation and his line about being through the looking glass is quoted from the movie , JFK . 
