 In 1965 Christian theologian Leslie Weatherhead published The Christian Agnostic , in which he argues : 
 ... many professing agnostics are nearer belief in the true God than are many conventional church @-@ goers who believe in a body that does not exist whom they <unk> God . 
 Although radical and unpalatable to conventional theologians , Weatherhead 's agnosticism falls far short of Huxley 's , and short even of weak agnosticism : 
 Of course , the human soul will always have the power to reject God , for choice is essential to its nature , but I cannot believe that anyone will finally do this . 
 = = = Charles Darwin = = = 
 Raised in a religious environment , Charles Darwin studied to be an Anglican clergyman . While eventually doubting parts of his faith , Darwin continued to help in church affairs , even while avoiding church attendance . Darwin stated that it would be " absurd to doubt that a man might be an ardent theist and an evolutionist " . Although reticent about his religious views , in 1879 he wrote that " I have never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God . – I think that generally ... an agnostic would be the most correct description of my state of mind . " 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Demographic research services normally do not differentiate between various types of non @-@ religious respondents , so agnostics are often classified in the same category as atheists or other non @-@ religious people . 
 A 2010 survey published in Encyclopædia Britannica found that the non @-@ religious people or the agnostics made up about 9 @.@ 6 % of the world 's population . A November – December 2006 poll published in the Financial Times gives rates for the United States and five European countries . The rates of agnosticism in the United States were at 14 % , while the rates of agnosticism in the European countries surveyed were considerably higher : Italy ( 20 % ) , Spain ( 30 % ) , Great Britain ( 35 % ) , Germany ( 25 % ) , and France ( 32 % ) . 
 A study conducted by the Pew Research Center found that about 16 % of the world 's people , the third largest group after Christianity and Islam , have no religious affiliation . According to a 2012 report by the Pew Research Center , agnostics made up 3 @.@ 3 % of the US adult population . In the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey , conducted by the Pew Research Center , 55 % of agnostic respondents expressed " a belief in God or a universal spirit " , whereas 41 % stated that they thought that they felt a tension " being non @-@ religious in a society where most people are religious " . 
 According to the 2011 Australian Bureau of Statistics , 22 % of Australians have " no religion " , a category that includes agnostics . Between 64 % and 65 % of Japanese and up to 81 % of Vietnamese are atheists , agnostics , or do not believe in a god . An official European Union survey reported that 3 % of the EU population is unsure about their belief in a god or spirit . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Agnosticism is criticized from a variety of standpoints . Some religious thinkers see agnosticism as limiting the mind 's capacity to know reality to materialism . Some atheists criticize the use of the term agnosticism as functionally indistinguishable from atheism ; this results in frequent criticisms of those who adopt the term as avoiding the atheist label . 
 = = = Theistic = = = 
 Theistic critics claim that agnosticism is impossible in practice , since a person can live only either as if God did not exist ( <unk> deus non @-@ <unk> ) , or as if God did exist ( <unk> deus <unk> ) . 
 Religious scholars such as Laurence B. Brown criticize the misuse of the word agnosticism , claiming that it has become one of the most misapplied terms in metaphysics . Brown raises the question , " You claim that nothing can be known with certainty ... how , then , can you be so sure ? " 
 = = = = Christian = = = = 
 According to Pope Benedict XVI , strong agnosticism in particular contradicts itself in affirming the power of reason to know scientific truth . He blames the exclusion of reasoning from religion and ethics for dangerous pathologies such as crimes against humanity and ecological disasters . " Agnosticism " , said Ratzinger , " is always the fruit of a refusal of that knowledge which is in fact offered to man ... The knowledge of God has always existed " . He asserted that agnosticism is a choice of comfort , pride , dominion , and utility over truth , and is opposed by the following attitudes : the keenest self @-@ criticism , humble listening to the whole of existence , the persistent patience and self @-@ correction of the scientific method , a readiness to be purified by the truth . 
 The Catholic Church sees merit in examining what it calls " partial agnosticism " , specifically those systems that " do not aim at constructing a complete philosophy of the unknowable , but at excluding special kinds of truth , notably religious , from the domain of knowledge " . However , the Church is historically opposed to a full denial of the capacity of human reason to know God . The Council of the Vatican declares , " God , the beginning and end of all , can , by the natural light of human reason , be known with certainty from the works of creation " . 
 Blaise Pascal argued that even if there were truly no evidence for God , agnostics should consider what is now known as Pascal 's Wager : the infinite expected value of acknowledging God is always greater than the finite expected value of not acknowledging his existence , and thus it is a safer " bet " to choose God . 
 Peter Kreeft and Ronald <unk> cited 20 arguments for God 's existence , asserting that any demand for evidence testable in a laboratory is in effect asking God , the supreme being , to become man 's servant . 
 = = = Atheistic = = = 
 According to Richard Dawkins , a distinction between agnosticism and atheism is unwieldy and depends on how close to zero a person is willing to rate the probability of existence for any given god @-@ like entity . About himself , Dawkins continues , " I am agnostic only to the extent that I am agnostic about fairies at the bottom of the garden . " Dawkins also identifies two categories of agnostics ; " Temporary Agnostics in Practice " ( <unk> ) , and " Permanent Agnostics in Principle " ( <unk> ) . Dawkins considers temporary agnosticism an entirely reasonable position , but views permanent agnosticism as " fence @-@ sitting , intellectual cowardice " . 
 = = Related concepts = = 
 <unk> is the view that a coherent definition of a deity must be put forward before the question of the existence of a deity can be meaningfully discussed . If the chosen definition is not coherent , the <unk> holds the <unk> view that the existence of a deity is meaningless or empirically untestable . 
 A.J. Ayer , Theodore <unk> , and other philosophers see both atheism and agnosticism as incompatible with <unk> on the grounds that atheism and agnosticism accept " a deity exists " as a meaningful proposition that can be argued for or against . 
 = The Cookbook = 
 The Cookbook is the sixth studio album by American rapper Missy Elliott , released by The <unk> Inc. and Atlantic Records on July 4 , 2005 , in the United States . The album is notable for the fact that Timbaland , who produced the vast majority of material on Elliott 's past albums , only produced two tracks . 
 Three singles were released from the album ; the first , " Lose Control " , was released on May 27 , 2005 , and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and charted well internationally . The second single , " <unk> Eyed " , was released on August 8 , 2005 , and failed to chart on any Billboard chart and charted low in other countries . The third single , " We Run This " , was released on February 21 , 2006 , and peaked at number forty @-@ eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and charted moderately well internationally . 
 The album received generally favorable reviews from critics and peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 . It was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , selling 657 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and received a Grammy nomination for Best Rap Album , ultimately losing to Kanye West 's Late Registration . The music video for " Lose Control " , directed by Dave Meyers won the Grammy for Best Short Form Music Video . 
 = = Background = = 
 The title The Cookbook derived of Elliott feeling " no two records are going to sound alike ; each record has its own spices and herbs . Each record is cooking up a hot recipe for a hot album . " The black and white cover features Elliott posing with a vintage microphone in a 1920s juke joint . She explained the cover , saying , " I wanted people to see I was taking music back to the roots — not just hip hop , but our ancestors . Whether they was on railroad tracks or cooking in somebody 's kitchen , they was always singing . " 
 In an interview with Billboard magazine , Elliott said , " I really do think this is my best album . I was in a really great space with this album . I wasn 't in a great space with some of the other albums I 've done . " She went on to say , " I played Lil ' Kim the album the other day , and she told me it was incredible and that there was not one song on it that she didn 't like . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 In January 2005 , it was revealed Elliott had been working on a new album . Two months later , Ciara confirmed she would appear on the album , singing and rapping on the potential first untitled single at the time . Elliott worked on The Cookbook with such producers as The Neptunes , Rich Harrison and Scott Storch . The album included only two songs produced by Timbaland , who produced most or all songs on Elliott 's previous albums . She explained , " Me and Tim , this like our sixth album , so if we go any further left , we gonna be on Mars somewhere . We 've done everything it is to do . I think both of us came to a spot where we didn 't know where to go with each other . " She said Timbaland was very involved with the album , supporting or opposing certain producers . Elliott went on to say , " I was eight songs deep and I let Tim listen and he was like , ' Nah , you 're going in the wrong direction . You trippin ' . ' I had to go back in the studio and come up with new records . [ When he heard those ] , he was like , ' This is the Missy people are listening to . ' " 
 = = Singles = = 
 The first , " Lose Control " , was released on May 27 , 2005 , and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , number six on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and number two on the Billboard Pop 100 . The single also peaked at number two on the New Zealand RIANZ Singles Chart and in the top ten in four other countries . A Dave Meyers @-@ directed promotional video accompanied the song ; it was the most played video on BET and MTV2 and second most played video in the United States . It went on to win a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video , while the song itself received a nomination for Best Rap Song . 
 The second single , " <unk> Eyed " , was released on August 8 , 2005 ; it failed to chart except in Australia and Switzerland . The music video for the song was directed by Antti J. Jokinen and was filmed " like a movie " . It features Elliott responding to a relationship that had gone wrong . 
 The third single , " We Run This " , was released on February 21 , 2006 , and peaked at number 48 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 39 on the Billboard Pop 100 and peaked in the top forty in Australia , Ireland and the United Kingdom . An edited version of the song was used as the theme song for the gymnastics @-@ themed film Stick It , as well as for the music video , which was directed by Dave Meyers . The video features a cameo by gold @-@ medalist Dominique Dawes as Elliott 's gymnastics coach , with scenes from the film being used throughout the video . The song received a Grammy nomination for Best Rap Solo Performance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Cookbook received positive reviews from most music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 74 , based on 28 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Rich Juzwiak of Stylus Magazine gave the album an A rating , stating " Her adventurous and , yes , massive , persona is allowed to wander wherever it wants on The Cookbook , be it avant or common . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian wrote , " The Cookbook is a convincing return to form .... Sounding as unique and startling and formidable as ever , Missy Elliott is clearly not a woman to be messed with . " John Bush of AllMusic noted that " Elliott forces a few rhymes , plays to type with her themes , and uses those outside producers to follow trends in hip @-@ hop .... What 's different here is how relaxed Elliott is , how willing she seems to simply go with what comes naturally and sounds best . " Q stated " If not Elliott 's most inventive album , The Cookbook is certainly her most colourful and entertaining " . 
 However , Ben Sisario of Blender wrote , " For every killer raise @-@ your @-@ hands hook there is a snoozer of an SWV @-@ esque torch ballad , and she can 't seem to tell the difference . " He went on to say , " Almost half the songs are treacly Kleenex soul ballads ; even the titles ... bring a cringe . " Los Angeles Times writer Natalie Nichols found that " her souffle of hip @-@ hop , soul , R & B , funk and dance music falls a bit flat " . Rolling Stone 's Brian Hiatt called The Cookbook Elliott 's " least cohesive , most conventional album yet . " Entertainment Weekly 's Margeaux Watson viewed that " she 's clearly lost without Timbaland " , calling him " the main ingredient of her original flavor " . Steve Horowitz of PopMatters noted that it " does have a few duds " and found some of the " offensive lyrics " as flaws , but wrote that " While not every cut is a winner , Elliott does a fairly consistent job of gaining the listener 's attention through her outrageous lyrics and performance style " . 
 Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal found the album " Even more bipolar than usual " , with Elliott " jolting from uber @-@ <unk> to soul @-@ crushing balladry . Fortunately , supported by an array of producers both grizzly and green , her invaluable unpredictability is alternately harnessed and given new life on this album , despite its uneven and transitional nature . " Joan Morgan of The Village Voice complimented Elliott 's " ability to capture the ain 't @-@ afraid @-@ to @-@ sweat flava " and stated " Elliott mines the best of hip @-@ hop 's old @-@ school elements for throwback tracks that are engagingly sparse and elemental " . In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave The Cookbook an A- rating , indicating " the kind of garden @-@ variety good record that is the great luxury of musical micromarketing and overproduction " . Christgau called it a " benchmark album " and commented that " Elliott showcases the musical health of African American pop [ ... ] Elliott 's disinclination to give it up to gangsta 's thrill cult or black pop 's soft @-@ focus porn , plus her proven ability to work a good beat when she gets one , leads her naturally to a collection that ebbs and flows , peaks and dips , and pokes fun at any canon of taste you got " . 
 The album was nominated at the 2006 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Album , but lost to Kanye West 's Late Registration . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 176 @,@ 000 copies in the first week of release . It has sold 657 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and has been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . The Cookbook peaked in the top thirty in Australia , Belgium , Germany , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway and Switzerland . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Sample credits = = = 
 " <unk> " contains a sample from " <unk> Jammer " by The J. Geils Band 
 " Irresistible Delicious " contains a sample from " Lick the Balls " by Slick Rick 
 " Lose Control " contains a sample from " Clear " by <unk> and " Body Work " by Hot Streak 
 " My Struggles " contains a sample from " What 's the 411 ? " by Mary J. Blige 
 " We Run This " contains a sample from " Apache " by The Sugarhill Gang 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Chandra Levy = 
 Chandra Ann Levy ( April 14 , 1977 – c . May 1 , 2001 ) was an American intern at the Federal Bureau of Prisons in Washington , D.C. , who disappeared in May 2001 . She was presumed murdered after her skeletal remains were found in Rock Creek Park in May 2002 . The case attracted attention from the American news media for years . 
 The police investigation revealed she was having an affair with Congressman Gary Condit , a married Democrat then serving his fifth term representing California 's 18th congressional district , and a senior member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence . Condit was never named as a suspect by police and was eventually cleared of involvement . However , after a cloud of suspicion was raised by the intense media focus on the missing intern and the later revelation of the affair , he was not re @-@ elected in 2002 , with the Levy issue cited as a contributory factor . 
 The circumstances surrounding Levy 's death were unclear for eight years . On March 3 , 2009 , D.C. authorities obtained a warrant to arrest Ingmar Guandique , an illegal immigrant from El Salvador . He had been convicted of assaulting two other women in Rock Creek Park around the time of Levy 's disappearance . Prosecutors alleged that Guandique had attacked and tied up Levy in a remote area of the park and left her to die of dehydration or exposure . In November 2010 Guandique was convicted of murdering Levy ; he was sentenced in February 2011 to 60 years in prison . In June 2015 , Guandique was granted a new trial and in March 2016 , the date was set to October 11 , 2016 . 
 = = Life and background = = 
 Levy was born in Cleveland , Ohio , to Robert and Susan Levy ; the family moved to Modesto , California , where she attended Grace M. Davis High School . Her parents are members of Congregation Beth Shalom , a Conservative Jewish synagogue . She attended San Francisco State University , where she earned a degree in journalism . After interning for the California Bureau of Secondary Education and working in the office of Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan , she began attending the University of Southern California to earn a master 's degree in public administration . 
 As part of her final semester of study , Levy moved to Washington , D.C. , to become a paid intern with the Federal Bureau of Prisons . In October 2000 she began her internship at the bureau 's headquarters , where she was assigned to the public affairs division . Her supervisor , bureau spokesperson Dan Dunne , was impressed with Levy 's work , especially her handling of media inquiries regarding the upcoming execution of Timothy McVeigh , convicted of bombing the Oklahoma City Federal Building . Levy 's internship was abruptly terminated in April 2001 because her academic eligibility was found to have expired in December 2000 . She had already completed her master 's degree requirements and was scheduled to return to California in May 2001 for graduation . 
 = = Murder case = = 
 = = = Disappearance and search = = = 
 Levy was last seen on May 1 , 2001 . The Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia was first alerted on May 6 , when Levy 's parents called from Modesto to report that they had not heard from their daughter in five days . Police called hospitals and visited Levy 's apartment in Dupont Circle that day , finding no indication of foul play . On May 7 , Levy 's father told the police that his daughter had been having an affair with a U.S. congressman , and said the next day that he believed the congressman to be U.S. Representative Gary Condit . Levy 's aunt also called the police and told them that Chandra had confided in her about the affair . Police obtained a warrant on May 10 to conduct a formal search of Levy 's apartment . Investigators found her credit cards , identification and mobile phone left behind in her purse , along with partially packed suitcases . The answering machine was full , with messages left by her relatives and two from Condit . A police sergeant tried to examine Levy 's laptop computer and inadvertently corrupted the internet search data , as he was not a trained technician . 
 Computer experts took a month to reconstruct the data to determine that the laptop was used on the morning of May 1 to search for websites related to Amtrak , Baskin @-@ Robbins , Condit , Southwest Airlines , and a weather report from The Washington Post . The last search at 12 : 24 p.m. was for the location of the Pierce @-@ <unk> Mansion , a historic house in Rock Creek Park that is used as the park 's administrative office . On July 25 , 2001 , three D.C. police sergeants and 28 police cadets searched along Glover Road in the park but failed to find evidence related to Levy . Later , a second attempt found nothing . 
 = = = Relationship with Condit = = = 
 Controversy surrounding Levy 's disappearance drew the attention of the American news media . Levy 's parents and friends held numerous vigils and news conferences in an attempt to " bring Chandra home . " Condit , a married man who represented the congressional district in which the Levy family resided , at first denied that he had had an affair with her . Though police stated that Condit was not a suspect , Levy 's family said they felt Condit was being evasive and possibly hiding information about the matter . 
 Unidentified police sources alleged that Condit had admitted to an affair with Levy during an interview with law enforcement officers on July 7 , 2001 . Condit described her to police as a vegetarian who avoided drinking and smoking . He thought that Levy was going to return to Washington , DC after her graduation and was surprised to find out that the lease on her apartment had ended . Investigators searched Condit 's apartment on July 10 . They questioned flight attendant Anne Marie Smith , who claimed that Condit told her she did not need to speak to the Federal Bureau of Investigation about his personal life . Federal officials began investigating Condit for possible obstruction of justice as Smith was also involved in an affair with him . ( She was not acquainted with Levy . ) Upset by leaks to the media , Condit refused to submit to a polygraph test by the D.C. police ; his attorney asserted that Condit passed a test administered by a privately hired examiner on July 13 . He avoided answering direct questions during a televised interview on August 23 , with news anchor Connie Chung on the ABC News program Primetime Thursday . Intensive coverage continued until news of the September 11 attacks superseded the media 's coverage of the Levy case . 
 In a nationwide Fox News / Opinion Dynamics poll of 900 registered voters conducted in July 2001 , 44 percent of American respondents thought that Condit was involved in Levy 's disappearance and 27 percent felt that he should resign . Fifty @-@ one percent of the respondents believed that he was acting as if he were guilty ; 13 percent felt that he should run again for office . A poll sample taken from Condit 's congressional district held a more favorable view of Condit . On March 5 , 2002 , Condit lost the Democratic primary election for his Congressional seat to his former aide , then @-@ Assemblyman Dennis <unk> , with the Levy controversy being cited as a contributing factor . He was subpoenaed to appear on April 1 , 2002 , before a District of Columbia grand jury investigating the disappearance . The date was kept a carefully guarded secret to avoid further leaks . Condit left Congress at the end of his term on January 3 , 2003 . 
 = = = Discovery of remains = = = 
 District of Columbia Police Chief Charles H. Ramsey announced on May 22 , 2002 , that skeletal remains matching Levy 's dental records had been discovered by a man walking his dog and looking for turtles in Rock Creek Park . Detectives found bones and personal items scattered , but not buried , in a forested area along a steep incline . A sports bra , sweat shirt , leggings and tennis shoes were among the evidence that was recovered . Though police had previously searched over half the 1 @,@ 754 @-@ acre main section of the park ( 2 @.@ 74 mi2 , 7 @.@ 10 km2 ) , the wooded slope where Levy 's remains were eventually found had not been searched as it was very remote : about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the Pierce @-@ <unk> Mansion and about four miles ( 6 km ) from Levy 's apartment . 
 After a preliminary autopsy was performed , District of Columbia police announced that there was sufficient evidence to open a homicide investigation . On May 28 , D.C. medical examiner Jonathan L. Arden officially declared Levy 's death a homicide , but said , " There 's less to work with here than I would like . It 's possible we will never know specifically how she died . " Arden found damage to her hyoid bone , suggesting possible strangulation , but did not deem it to be conclusive evidence of such a cause of death . On June 6 , after the police completed their search , private investigators hired by the <unk> found her shin bone with some twisted wire about 25 yards ( 23 m ) from the other remains . Police chief Ramsey said , " It is unacceptable that these items were not located . " 
 = = = Memorial services = = = 
 On May 28 , 2002 , the Levy family organized a memorial service at the Modesto Centre Plaza that drew over 1 @,@ 200 people , some from as far as Los Angeles . Speakers at the 90 @-@ minute ceremony included Levy 's brother , grandmother , great @-@ aunt and friends . In a eulogy delivered in Hebrew and English by Rabbi Paul Gordon , Levy was described as " a good person taken from us much too soon . " About a year later , on May 27 , 2003 , Levy 's remains were buried in Lakewood Memorial Park Cemetery at Hughson , California , near her home town of Modesto . Attended by about 40 of Levy 's friends and family members , the private ceremony concluded with the release of 12 white doves . 
 = = = Identification of the prime suspect = = = 
 In September 2001 , D.C. police and federal prosecutors were contacted by the lawyer of an informant , held in a D.C. jail , who claimed to have knowledge of Levy 's killer . The informant , whose identity was protected for his safety , said that Ingmar Guandique , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old illegal immigrant from El Salvador also being held in the jail , told him that Condit paid him $ 25 @,@ 000 to kill Levy . Investigators ruled out the story about Condit , because Guandique had already admitted to assaulting two other women in the same park where Levy 's remains were found . Guandique failed to show up for work on the day of Levy 's disappearance . His former landlady recalled that his face appeared scratched and bruised at around that time . The investigators on the Levy case did not interview the other Rock Creek Park victims . Police chief Ramsey avoided calling Guandique a suspect and described him as a " person of interest " , telling reporters not to make " too big a deal " about him . Assistant chief Terrance W. Gainer said that if Guandique had been considered a suspect , D.C. police would have been after him " like flies on honey . " 
 Guandique denied attacking Levy . On November 28 , the FBI had the informant take a polygraph test , which he failed . A polygraph test on Guandique , administered on February 4 , 2002 , returned inconclusive results that were officially ruled " not deceptive " . Because neither the informant nor Guandique was fluent in English , D.C. chief detective Jack Barrett said that he would have preferred polygraph tests to have been administered by bilingual examiners , who were unavailable at the time . When Judge Noel Anketell Kramer was asked about Guandique 's potential connection to the Levy homicide , she responded , " This is such a satellite issue . To me it doesn 't have anything to do with this case . " Kramer sentenced Guandique to 10 years in prison for his attacks on two other women at Rock Creek Park . Guandique was sent to the U.S. Penitentiary , Big Sandy near Inez , Kentucky , and was later transferred to the U.S. Penitentiary at Victorville , California . 
 The Levy homicide remained listed as a " cold case " until 2006 , when Cathy L. Lanier succeeded Ramsey as D.C. police chief . Lanier replaced the lead detective on the case with three veteran investigators who had more homicide experience . In 2007 , the editors of the Washington Post assigned a new team of reporters to take a year to re @-@ examine the Levy case . The resulting series of articles , published during the summer of 2008 , focused on the past failure of the police to fully investigate Guandique 's connection to the attacks in Rock Creek Park . In September 2008 , investigators searched Guandique 's federal prison cell in California and found a photo of Levy that he had saved from a magazine . Police interviewed acquaintances of Guandique and witnesses of the other Rock Creek Park incidents . 
 On March 3 , 2009 , the Superior Court of the District of Columbia issued an arrest warrant for Guandique . He was returned to the custody of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections on April 20 via the Federal Transfer Center in Oklahoma City . Two days later , Guandique was charged in D.C. with Levy 's murder . He was indicted by a grand jury on six counts : kidnapping , first @-@ degree murder committed during a kidnapping , attempted first @-@ degree sexual abuse , first @-@ degree murder committed during a sexual offense , attempted robbery , and first @-@ degree murder committed during a robbery . Guandique pleaded not guilty at his arraignment , where a trial date was initially set for January 27 , 2010 . His lawyers argued that Guandique 's federal prison cell was outside the jurisdiction of a court @-@ ordered search . After errors in processing contaminated some of the gathered evidence with DNA from employees of the prosecution , the start date of the trial at the Moultrie Courthouse was moved to October 4 , 2010 . 
 = = = Trial of Guandique = = = 
 On October 18 , 2010 , jury selection commenced in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia before Judge Gerald I. Fisher . Assistant U.S. Attorney Fernando <unk> @-@ Sanchez presented the names of potential witnesses for the trial , including FBI agent Brad Garrett and the two women whom Guandique was convicted of assaulting . At the start of the trial , the prosecution 's case was expected to take around four weeks and the defense was expected to take one day . On October 25 and 26 , Halle Shilling and Christy Wiegand testified about being attacked by Guandique while independently jogging in Rock Creek Park . Wiegand recounted that Guandique grabbed her from behind , dragged her down a ravine and held a knife against her face . 
 On October 26 , 2010 , Levy 's then @-@ 64 @-@ year @-@ old father , Robert , took the stand and refuted statements about his past suspicions of Condit . Robert Levy testified that he told authorities during the early years of the investigation that his daughter Chandra would have been too cautious to jog in the woods alone , but said that he no longer believed this to be true . He said that he also told police that his daughter and Condit had a five @-@ year plan between them to get married . In retrospect , Robert Levy admitted : " I just said whatever came to mind just to point to him as the villain . " Levy added that he had been convinced that Condit was “ guilty until we learned about this character here ” , referring to Guandique . On November 1 , Condit testified at the trial and was asked on at least three occasions if he and Chandra Levy had been involved in a sexual relationship . He replied , " I am not going to respond to that question out of privacy for myself and Chandra . " FBI biologist Alan Giusti testified that semen found on underwear from Levy 's apartment contained sperm matching Condit 's DNA profile . 
 Prosecution witness Armando Morales , who shared a cell with Guandique at the U.S. Penitentiary in Kentucky , testified that Guandique was concerned about being transferred between prisons in 2006 because of inmate violence against suspected rapists . Morales stated that Guandique , a fellow member of the Mara Salvatrucha gang , confided to him that he had killed Levy while trying to rob her , but said that he did not rape her . The prosecution rested their case on November 10 , while dropping two out of the six charges against Guandique : sexual assault and murder associated with that assault . On November 15 , the defense rested its case without calling Guandique to the stand . Other prison witnesses called by the defense refuted Morales ' testimony . Jose Manuel Alaniz said that Guandique made no mention of rape or murder while sharing a cell with both Alaniz and Morales at the penitentiary in Kentucky . Alaniz admitted under cross @-@ examination that he " didn 't want to be too nosy " and was often asleep at the prison while recovering from a gunshot wound . The prosecution dropped two more charges because the statute of limitations had passed : kidnapping and attempted robbery . During closing arguments for the remaining charges of first @-@ degree murder committed during a kidnapping and during a robbery , prosecutor Amanda Haines contended that Guandique bound and gagged Levy after attacking her , leaving her to die of dehydration or exposure in the park . Defense attorney Santha Sonenberg countered with the lack of any DNA evidence connecting Guandique to the crime scene . Calling the prosecution 's case " fiction " , Sonenberg suggested that Levy had been murdered elsewhere , with her dead body being dumped in the park . 
 The jury began deliberations on November 17 , 2010 . Scheduled proceedings of the case met delays because of increased security at the courthouse . After two days of deliberations , all but one juror had voted to convict Guandique . On the third day , the jury asked Judge Gerald Fisher to clarify the definition of assault . Fisher responded that any physical injury could legally be considered an assault , regardless of how small . On November 22 , 2010 , the jury found Guandique guilty of both remaining counts of first @-@ degree murder . After the trial , a juror said the testimony of Morales was decisive in reaching the verdict . The conviction was called a " miracle " for having been reached with only circumstantial evidence . Gladys Weatherspoon , who had previously represented Guandique in the 2001 assault cases , stated that she was troubled by the jury 's verdict : " I just think they were going to convict anyway .... They felt bad for that woman , the mom . She 's sitting in there every day . " At a post @-@ trial press conference , Susan Levy said , " There 's always going to be a feeling of sadness . I can surely tell you , it ain 't closure . " Since the conclusion of the trial , Susan Levy has acted to keep photographic evidence of her daughter 's remains sealed from the news media . 
 = = = = Sentencing and appeals = = = = 
 On February 1 , 2011 , Guandique 's attorneys requested a new trial on the grounds that the verdict had been improperly attained . The 17 @-@ page filing claimed that the prosecutors had appealed to the emotions of the jury , using " references to facts not in evidence . " The motion also alleged that one juror , who did not take notes , had breached the judge 's instructions not to be " influenced by another juror 's notes . " The prosecution opposed a retrial , arguing that the issue regarding the notes was no more than a technicality that did not have a significant effect on the verdict . 
 Guandique faced a minimum penalty of 30 years to a maximum of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole . In seeking the maximum possible sentence , the prosecutors stated that Guandique " is unable to control himself and thus , will always remain a danger to women . " A memo submitted by the prosecution in February 2011 cited Guandique 's harassment of female staff in prison , including soliciting a nurse and masturbating in front of guards . Assistant U.S. Attorney Fernando <unk> @-@ Sanchez disclosed that he had traveled to El Salvador with a detective to investigate allegations that Guandique had fled his native country because of suspected attacks against local women dating back to 1999 . During the sentencing hearing on February 11 , Guandique said to Levy 's family , " I am sorry for what happened to your daughter , " and insisted on his innocence . Before Judge Gerald Fisher reminded Susan Levy to address the court instead of the defendant , Levy said to him , " Did you really take her life ? Look me in my eyes and tell me . " Fisher denied Guandique 's motion for retrial and handed down a sentence of 60 years in prison , stating that Guandique " will be a danger for some time . He 's a sexual predator . " 
 Guandique repeated his innocence during his sentencing . He has maintained his innocence in the years since the trial . 
 On February 25 , 2011 , public defender James Klein filed an appeal of Guandique 's conviction with the District of Columbia Court of Appeals . According to the court 's annual report , appeals take an average of 588 days to reach resolution . Guandique will not be eligible for parole until he is at least 80 years old . In December 2012 and January 2013 , a set of secret hearings was made known to the public , but the subject of the meetings was sealed by the judge . After a third hearing in February , the judge in the case unsealed transcripts from the previous hearings which revealed that Klein was seeking a new trial based on new evidence in the case . A fourth hearing was scheduled for April 2013 . 
 = = = = New trial ordered = = = = 
 On May 22 , 2015 , prosecutors dropped their opposition to a new trial . On June 3 , 2015 , the defense said a new witness , a neighbor , called 911 at 4 : 37 a.m. on the last day Levy was alive to report hearing a ' blood @-@ curdling scream ' , possibly coming from Levy 's apartment . On June 4 , 2015 , Judge Gerald Fisher granted a motion for the new trial . Guandique 's attorneys suggested that Morales fabricated Guandique 's confession to gain favor with law enforcement . On June 12 , 2015 , Judge Robert E. Morin set the retrial of Guandique for March 1 , 2016 but in March , the trial date was moved to October 11 , 2016 . 
 In November 2015 , prosecutors told a D.C. Superior Court judge that their office failed to turn over documents to the defense before the defendant ’ s first trial . In December 2015 , defense attorneys argued in new court filings that the charges should be dismissed because of prosecutorial errors . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 The disappearance of Chandra Levy became a national topic of the news media in the summer of 2001 , with 63 percent of Americans closely following the case . The media swamped Levy 's parents from the moment they decided to go to Washington , D.C. in search of their daughter . According to Condit , there were about a hundred reporters camped out in front of his apartment during the morning of September 11 , 2001 , but they all left after news spread about the terrorist attacks . Media critics and cable news executives later cited the Levy case , as well as the concurrent sensationalist coverage of a string of shark attacks , as a reflection of the manner of news coverage in the United States before the September 11 attacks had taken priority . 
 In 2002 , D.C. newspaper Roll Call first reported the possible connection of Ingmar Guandique to the case , with little effect on the news media 's focus on Condit . Conservative commentator Michelle Malkin noted the lack of headlines that an illegal immigrant had been questioned in the Levy case . She said that in her review of 115 news items from the <unk> @-@ Nexis database , not a single mention of Guandique referred to his status as a " criminal illegal alien . " She called the " glaring omission " of his status " a newsworthy act of negligence . " She wrote that only the very conservative Human Events reported that the Immigration and Naturalization Service had approved his working legally while applying for temporary protected status . That application was ultimately denied , but not before he had assaulted two other women at Rock Creek Park . 
 In 2005 , investigative journalist Dominick Dunne said on Larry King Live that he believed Gary Condit knew more information about the Levy case than he had been disclosing . Condit filed two lawsuits against Dunne , forcing him into an undisclosed financial settlement on one of them . In 2008 , U.S. District Judge Peter Leisure dismissed the other suit that alleged slander , because " The context in which Dunne 's statements were made demonstrates that they were part of a discussion about ' speculation ' in the media and inaccurate media coverage . " 
 During the summer of 2008 , The Washington Post ran a 13 @-@ part series billed , in part , as " a tale of the tabloid and mainstream press pack journalism that helped derail the investigation . " The two investigative reporters behind the Post series , Scott Higham and Sari Horwitz , wrote a book detailing their investigation . The book , Finding Chandra , was published in May 2010 . Commentators , including The Washington Post Metro reporter Robert Pierre , wrote that emphasis on a glamorous white murder victim , when " about 200 people are killed in this city every year , most of them black and male , " was " absolutely absurd and dare I say , racist , at its core . " 
 The media were criticized for their " rush to judgment " in suggesting , sometimes blatantly , that Condit was guilty of the murder , especially in the early days of the investigation . Some of the reporters camped in front of Condit 's Washington apartment house were quoted as saying that they would remain there " until he resigns . " When Ingmar Guandique was convicted in November 2010 of murdering Levy , Condit 's lawyer Bert Fields remarked , " It 's a complete vindication but that comes a little late . Who gives him his career back ? " 
 = = Impact = = 
 Levy 's death has had a lasting impact , due in part to the efforts of her family and friends . Levy 's disappearance came after a number of other high @-@ profile cases that led to the creation of resources for missing young adults . For example , Levy 's parents quickly turned for help to the Carole Sund / Carrington Memorial Reward Foundation , a nonprofit group that was established in Modesto after three female hikers disappeared from a 1999 trip to Yosemite National Park and were later found slain . That foundation , which offered the <unk> staff support and contributed towards a cash reward for information about Chandra 's disappearance , was merged into the Laci & Conner Search and Rescue Fund in 2009 ; Susan Levy had previously participated in the efforts to find Laci Peterson , another missing woman from Modesto . In 1997 , when Kristen <unk> mysteriously disappeared from the San Francisco Bay Area just three weeks after her 18th birthday , her parents turned to their congresswoman for help they were ineligible to receive from the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children . As a result , Congress enacted " Kristen 's Law " in October 2000 , which established the National Center for Missing Adults ( <unk> ) within the U.S. Department of Justice to coordinate such missing person cases . By the time Levy disappeared , institutions were in place to provide her family with support and to assist in a nationwide search to locate her . Although the Levy family moved quickly to mobilize all such available resources , including offering a cash reward for information , hiring their own investigators , and seeking media attention , those efforts to locate Chandra Levy or find her killer were overshadowed by the speculation surrounding her possible relationship with Condit . Susan Levy later joined with Donna Raley , the mother of another young woman who disappeared in 1999 from Modesto , to form " Wings of Protection " , a support group for people with missing loved ones . The Mary Ann Liebert company , publishers of the Journal of Women 's Health and Gender @-@ Based Medicine , presented their annual Criterion Award in May 2002 to Susan Levy for her work with " Wings of Protection . " 
 Newsweek magazine stated that the media may have become more skeptical of " herd mentality " and open to alternative suspects after the Levy case . The D.C. police claimed that they would have discovered Levy 's body earlier , if not for a miscommunication regarding the scope of the search . Commanders had ordered a search within 100 yards ( 91 m ) of each road and trail in Rock Creek Park , but searches were focused within 100 yards of roads only , resulting in the body remaining undiscovered for a longer period of time . Both the Chief of Detectives , Jack Barrett , and the Chief of Police , Charles H. Ramsey , have since left the force in D.C. Ramsey became head of the Philadelphia Police Department ; Barrett , who became an analyst for an intelligence support firm in Arlington , Virginia , stated in hindsight that the media had imposed " enormous amounts of pressure " on the D.C. police . Morales , who is serving time for conspiracy to distribute methamphetamine and crack cocaine , is scheduled to be released on August 5 , 2016 . Condit retired from politics and moved with his wife to Phoenix , Arizona , to manage real estate and open two Baskin @-@ Robbins franchises , which have since closed . 
 = Fly Like a Bird = 
 " Fly Like a Bird " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , first released on February 13 , 2006 by Island Records as the sixth single from her tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . Written and produced by Carey and James " Big Jim " Wright , the song is influenced by Gospel , soul , and R & B music genres . Its arrangement is built on piano chords and guitar melodies , and features Carey 's pastor Clarence Keaton , who recites two Biblical verses during the song 's introduction and bridge . Carey described " Fly Like a Bird " as the most personal and religious track from The Emancipation of Mimi , with its lyrics featuring a veritable prayer to God : " Fly like a bird , take to the sky , I need you now Lord , carry me high ! " . 
 At the time of its release , " Fly Like a Bird " received acclaim from music critics . While many praised Carey 's strong vocal performance throughout its climax , many pinpointed on its lyrical content and compared it to Carey 's debut song , " Vision of Love " . Released as the final single from its parent album , the song was only sent to adult contemporary and gospel radio stations , during the same time " Say Somethin ' " was commissioned to mainstream channels . Carey performed the song on several high profile industry events , including the 48th annual Grammy Awards , the Shelter from the Storm : A Concert for the Gulf Coast concert charity benefit , and Idol Gives Back . Additionally , Carey included the song on the set @-@ lists for all her succeeding tours since its release . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following record @-@ breaking success throughout the 1990s , Carey departed from Columbia Records after the release of Rainbow ( 1999 ) . Almost a year later , she signed an unprecedented $ 100 million five @-@ album record contract with Virgin Records , and began work on a film and soundtrack project titled Glitter . Prior to its release on September 11 , 2001 , Carey suffered an " emotional and physical breakdown " , and was subsequently hospitalized over a period of several weeks . Glitter became a box @-@ office bomb , earning less than eight million dollars , and receiving scathing reviews . The soundtrack , while faring slightly better , failed to reach the critical or commercial heights of Carey 's previous releases , and eventually lead to the annulment of her record contract with Virgin . 
 Following the events , as well as the release of Carey 's succeeding album , Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) , she began working on new material for The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . Aside from the dance @-@ influenced tracks and the ballads , Carey created a concept , in which a song 's lyrics would reach out to God . She created the song 's choral lyrics , melody and main instrumentation , before calling James " Big Jim " Wright for a collaboration . During their meeting , Wright helped Carey arrange the song 's chord structure , as well as produce the introduction , while Carey finished the rest of the lyrics . Once completing " Fly Like a Bird " , Carey had her pastor , Clarence Keaton , read two verses from the Bible on the song , " Weeping may endure for the night , but joy comes in the morning " during the introduction , and " He said ' He 'll never forsake you , or leave you alone ' Trust him " . According to Carey , the song , as well as the Biblical verses , were included on her " comeback album " because they helped her get through many difficult situations in the past . She described moments that were difficult growing up , during which she reached out to God , as well as during her breakdown , when she used such verses to give her faith . Carey explained how although the verses helped her greatly , no one had ever said them to her . For this reason , she wanted to make sure they were there for fans and listeners to hear , in order to give them faith and assurance lest they be in a grave situation . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Following the extended chart success of The Emancipation of Mimi , " Fly Like a Bird " was released as a promotional single from the project . Simultaneously promoted alongside " Say Somethin ' , the song was released on March 13 , 2006 to urban , urban AC and gospel stations , while the latter to mainstream Top 40 channels . Tom Ferguson from Billboard did not agree with releasing both singles concurrently , as he had given " Say Somethin ' " a negative review . According to Ferguson , while the latter had radio appeal , its " scantily produced drum 'n'bass " only distracted , concluding " ' Fly Like A Bird ' is a classic : why muddy the water with this release . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fly Like a Bird " is a mid @-@ tempo ballad , drawing influence from Gospel , soul and R & B music genres . It incorporates music from several musical instruments , including the organ , bass drum and trumpet . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 54 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B minor with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of B2 in a background note to the high @-@ note of A6 . The song 's chorus has a chord progression of F ♯ m7 @-@ Bm @-@ G / A @-@ <unk> in the verses , while changing into Gmaj7 during the bridge . Lyrically , " Fly Like a Bird " boasts a prayer in which the protagonist asks God for help during difficult times , and to carry them " higher and higher " . Cintra Wilson from LA Weekly described the song 's lyrics in depth , as well as where she felt the yearning lyrics stemmed from : 
 <unk> Like A Bird ' , is a kitchen @-@ sink , hyper @-@ produced gospel number , but is really quite moving . There is a real , human yearning for mercy in it — Mariah ’ s true cry for help from a place of near @-@ suicidal despair : ' Sometimes this life can be so cold / ( Lord ) I pray you 'll come and carry me home ' . But there ’ s a lot of hope and faith in this wounded voice : Carey keeps , with touching conviction , a firm grip on the idea that some higher , divine intelligence out there loves her , even if nobody else does ; even if she is lost to herself . It comes across emotionally , because her heart is fully in it — Mimi has been beaten , humiliated , heartbroken ; joys have been slapped out of her hands quicker than she could appreciate them . She ’ s deeply confused , and God , she really needs help . Hell : We ’ ve all been there . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair described the song as a " veritable prayer that explicitly references God " , and highlighted the lines " Sometimes this life can be so cold / I pray you 'll come and carry me home , Carry me higher , higher , higher . " According to Carey , the song holds deep lyrical meaning for herself , as well as her fans . She compared it to older emotional ballads from her career , and described the sentiment they held for many fans " Usually , I 'll have an introspective bleak @-@ outlook @-@ on @-@ life song . In the past it 's been ' Petals ' or ' Close My Eyes ' . Those were the ones that the hard @-@ core fans related to most . But this has a hopefulness to it . That 's why it 's one of my favorites , too . " Additionally , Carey outed Keaton 's verse during the song 's introduction as her favorite part of the song , and included it as a guide for fans , due to the help it had given her in the past : 
 <unk> me the most important thing is the message he says in the beginning of the song , ' she notes . ' Weeping may endure for a night , but joy comes in the morning . ' I felt like a lot of people may not hear that message and a lot of people need to . It wasn 't to be preachy . A lot of times people will hear songs that I write that are not the typical songs people look at as ' Mariah Carey <unk> 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fly Like a Bird " received acclaim from music critics , many of whom praised Carey 's gospel @-@ flavored vocal performance , as well as the song 's lyrical content . Critic Jim DeRogatis from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called Carey 's voice as " one @-@ in @-@ a @-@ million " , and wrote " she 's never been shy about showing off with frequently annoying octave @-@ spanning trills – and her instrument seems to be intact ; witness the display of bravado on ' Fly Like a Bird ' . " When describing the song , Dina Passaro from Newsday wrote " This songstress is back and better than ever ! " and claimed Carey " sounds awesome and tears it apart " . Tom Ferguson from Billboard called the track a " classic " , and wrote " the re @-@ crowned diva delivers a consummate vocal . " Similarly , in a separate review for the song , Ferguson went into detail regarding Carey 's performance in " Fly Like a Bird " : 
 The Emancipation of Mimi spawns yet another career @-@ redefining hit in the sweet , soulful " Fly Like a Bird " , an honest @-@ to @-@ God religious mantra about redemption . Set against a low @-@ key , organ @-@ spiced groove that recalls mid- ' 70s R & B , Carey opens with a pretty , wispy vocal and buoyant harmonies throughout the first chorus before she waves her arms , parts the clouds and wails to the heavens as a mile @-@ high wall of gospel background vocals joins in for the crescendo . The flight of ' Bird ' from humble call for deliverance into a frenzied ecclesiastic hymn is utterly spine @-@ tingling . A joyful noise . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair outed the song as a " heart @-@ on @-@ my @-@ sleeve number " , and called it the " crux of the album " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt the song " made Mariah likeable again " and wrote " [ it 's ] an inspirational ballad that 's equal parts ' Butterfly ' and ' Hero ' . " A writer from the Sarasota Herald @-@ Tribune compared it to Carey 's debut single , " Vision of Love " , and called it one of the best cuts from The Emancipation of Mimi . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic gave the song a mixed review , criticizing the condition of Carey 's voice , " As good as those Wright @-@ helmed cuts are , they are also the times that the mixes slip and don 't hide the flaws in Mariah 's voice , and it sounds as airy , thin , and damaged as it did on Charmbracelet . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 During April 2006 , " Fly Like a Bird " was released to US urban and adult contemporary radio stations , at the same time " Say Somethin ' " ( featuring Snoop Dogg , the sixth single from The Emancipation of Mimi ) , was released to pop and rhythmic radio stations . " Fly Like a Bird " failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , instead reaching number four on Billboards Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which represents the twenty @-@ five songs below the Hot 100 's number 100 position that have not yet appeared on the Hot 100 . It peaked at number nineteen on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and topped the Hot Adult R & B Airplay chart for six weeks . The song experienced longevity in the urban market , reaching its peak on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart in its twenty @-@ fourth week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Following the radio premiere of " Say Somethin ' " , as well as the video release , MTV News reported that Carey would film a music video for " Fly Like a Bird " at the end of March 2006 . According to Carey , the video had already been conceptualized by mid @-@ March , with a script featuring Carey , Keaton and a church choir as the main focuses . In a later interview , Carey said , " We don 't have a lot of time to do it . It 's not a big @-@ budget thing . But it doesn 't need to be . It just needs to be about the song , capturing the song and the emotion of it . " While plans for the video 's filming were made , a final version was never released or commissioned . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Following the European promotional tour for The Emancipation of Mimi , Carey launched the stateside release of the album on Good Morning America , in the form of an interview and five @-@ piece outdoor concert . The concert , taking place in Times Square , and featuring the largest crowd in the plaza since the 2004 New Year 's Eve celebration , Carey performed the first three singles from the album , as well as " Fly Like a Bird " and " Make It Happen " ( 1991 ) . Months later , following the tragic events involving Hurricane Katrina in the Gulf Coast throughout August 2005 , she was featured as a head @-@ lining performer at the Shelter from the Storm : A Concert for the Gulf Coast concert charity benefit . Carey , wearing a non @-@ formal ensemble of a pink tank @-@ top and blue jeans , performed " Fly Like a Bird " alongside a large church choir . According to Nielsen Media Research , the special was viewed by over twenty @-@ four million United States citizens , airing on over twelve different cable channels and in ninety @-@ five countries . Following the beginning of 2006 , and the continued charting of the album , Carey was nominated for eight Grammy Awards , the most she had received in one night throughout her career . Due to the continued success of The Emancipation of Mimi , Carey decided to return to the Grammy stage for the 48th annual ceremony , held on February 8 , 2006 , for the first time since 1996 . The performance opened with a pre @-@ taped video of Carey discussing the importance of religion and God in her life , and how it helped her get through difficult times as a child and adult . Following the video , she appeared on stage wearing a white Chanel evening gown , and began with a shortened version of " We Belong Together " . Following its completion , the spotlight focused on Carey 's now @-@ deceased pastor Clarence Keaton , who opened " Fly Like a Bird " with a passage from the Bible , also featured in the studio recording of the song . Mid @-@ way through the song , a black temporary wall was removed , revealing a large choir , who joined Carey for the song 's gospel climax . After completing her performance , " Fly Like a Bird " induced the night 's only standing ovation , prompting Teri Hatcher , who was presenting the next award , to exclaim " It 's like we 've all just been saved . " 
 Critics raved about Carey performance following the completion of the ceremony , with Jon Pareles from The New York Times saying " once she was worked up , she moaned , growled and swooped to the high and low extremes of her voice in " Fly Like a Bird " . A writer from USA Today complimented her recital of both songs , writing " Carey certainly earned the right to savor the spotlight this year . But the diva made room for Walker 's booming baritone in ' Bird ' , her fluttering homage to Minnie <unk> . " Gary Susman from Entertainment Weekly called Carey the " comeback queen " and wrote " Its what her voice did , soaring into the rafters like only Carey 's can . " Roger Friedman from Fox News outed the performance as " the number that sent the audience into a frenzy " . On April 9 , 2008 , reality competition American Idol aired its second annual charity event , titled Idol Gives Back . Backed up by Randy Jackson on the bass , Carey appeared on stage as the last head @-@ lining performer of the evening . Mid @-@ way through the performance , a large church choir walked on stage in blue garbs , and provided the gospel climax for the song . Ann Powers from the Los Angeles Times called the song an " inspirational show @-@ stopper " and felt Carey 's vocal 's were " patented impossible notes " . In regards to the performance , Katie Byrne from MTV News wrote " Carey was at her over @-@ the @-@ top best , with a full gospel choir and the high notes that made her famous . " Aside from several televised performances , Carey included " Fly Like a Bird " on the set @-@ lists of all her tours following its release . During Carey 's The Adventures of Mimi Tour ( 2006 ) stop at Madison Square Garden , the song was dedicated to Ol ' Dirty Bastard , who died in 2004 from an accidental drug overdose . The performance had to be re @-@ done , as Carey 's pastor , Clarence Keaton , missed his cue for the Biblical verses , and was forced to be found backstage and ushered to the spotlight . Four years later , Carey performed the song throughout her Angels Advocate Tour , only dedicating it to Keaton , who died on July 3 , 2009 . Editor and journalist Thomas Kintner from the Hartford Courant felt that during her live recital of " Fly Like a Bird " , Carey " displayed power and sky @-@ scraping pitch " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 United States CD single ( Promo ) 
 " Fly Like a Bird " – 3 : 53 
 " My Saving Grace " – 4 : 10 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the The Emancipation of Mimi liner notes . 
 Vocals – Mariah Carey 
 Songwriting – Mariah Carey , James " Big Jim " Wright 
 Production – Mariah Carey , James " Big Jim " Wright 
 Background vocals – Mariah Carey , Mary Ann Tatum , Melonie Daniels , Trey Lorenz , Sherry Tatum , Courtney Bradley , Rev. Dr. Clarence Keaton 
 Engineers – Brian Garten , Dana Jon Chapelle 
 Assistant engineer – Jason Finkel , Michael Leedy , Manuel Farolfi , Riccardo Durante 
 Mixer – Phil Tan ( mixed at Right Track Studios , NYC ) 
 Mastering – Herb Powers 
 Additional keyboards – Loris Holland 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo = 
 Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo , fully titled Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo , her murder 'd Husband , is an oil painting by British artist William Hogarth . Finished in 1759 , it was the principal piece of the eight works he displayed in an exhibition in 1761 . It was the final and most ambitious of his attempts to secure for himself a reputation as a genre painter . It depicts a dramatic moment in one of the novelle in Boccaccio 's Decameron . While Hogarth had expected this work to be acclaimed as a masterpiece of dramatic painting , the work was met with criticism and ridicule . In the catalogue of the exhibition of Hogarth 's works at the Tate Gallery in 2007 , the criticism was described as " some of the most damning critical opprobrium the artist ever suffered " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo illustrates a scene from the first tale on Day 4 of The Decameron , a medieval collection of short stories ( novelle ) by Italian author and poet , Giovanni Boccaccio . 
 Seated at an ornate wooden table , wearing a pearl tiara and flowing silk , is Sigismunda ( called <unk> in Boccaccio 's original tale ) , the heroine of one of the novelle . It is probable that Hogarth modelled her on his wife , Jane . She clasps a golden goblet containing the heart of her murdered husband , Guiscardo . 
 Guiscardo was a servant and page in the court of Sigismunda 's father , Prince Tancred of Salerno . When Sigismunda 's father discovered that Guiscardo and Sigismunda had wed secretly , he angrily ordered his men to murder the low @-@ born Guiscardo , and had Guiscardo 's heart delivered to Sigismunda in a golden cup . Despite having committed to die without shedding a tear , she weeps as she realises her father has murdered her husband . She adds poison to the cup containing Guiscardo 's heart , and commits suicide by drinking it . 
 Hogarth claimed to have long been interested in the story of Sigismunda , which had appeared in England in several versions by the mid @-@ 18th century . It had become popular after being translated in John Dryden 's 1699 volume of Fables , Ancient and Modern , and adapted for the English stage by James Thomson in 1745 . 
 = = Commissioning = = 
 The painting was one of Hogarth 's last works , commissioned in 1758 by Sir Richard Grosvenor . James <unk> , 1st Earl of Charlemont had previously commissioned a painting from Hogarth , allowing Hogarth to select the subject and price . 
 For Lord Charlemont , Hogarth chose to paint the satirical Piquet , or Virtue in Danger ( also known as The Lady 's Last Stake , after a 1708 play by Colley Cibber ) , which , with echoes of Marriage à @-@ la @-@ Mode , shows an army officer offering an aristocratic lady a chance to recover the fortune she has just lost by gambling ( with the implication that if she loses again , she will have to take him as her lover ) . After Grosvenor saw this painting in Hogarth 's studio in 1758 , he asked Hogarth to paint a picture for him as well , under the same terms . 
 Hogarth chose a more serious topic for Grosvenor 's painting . He is said to have painted Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo with the aim of proving that he could equal works of the " Old Italian Masters " , and intending the painting to be one of his masterpieces . In the leg of the table in the painting , a turbaned , pug @-@ nosed figure is carved , emerging from the ornate decoration , which is reminiscent of Hogarth 's self @-@ portrait The Artist Painting the Comic Muse from around 1757 , and is perhaps Hogarth 's attempt to insert himself bodily into the picture , thereby making an overt connection between himself and the Old Masters . In 1758 , Sir Thomas Sebright , 5th Baronet had paid £ <unk> in an Old Master auction for a painting of Sigismunda supposedly by Correggio . Hogarth doubted the attribution and was later proved correct : the painting is now considered to be by Francesco <unk> . Nevertheless , Hogarth priced his Sigismunda in line with what was paid for the " Correggio " version and commensurate with the time he had spent creating it – at least two hundred days ( although it appears he was also working on finishing Piquet during this period ) – and this may have contributed to Grosvenor 's eventual loss of interest . When Hogarth presented the piece to Grosvenor , he rejected it , ostensibly because it was " so striking and inimitable , that the constantly having it before one 's eyes would be too often occasioning melancholy ideas to arise in one 's mind " ; in disgust , Hogarth released him from their bargain . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hogarth exhibited the painting at the Society of Artists in Spring Gardens in 1761 . Although press reports – perhaps placed by Hogarth and his supporters – were enthusiastic , Sigismunda mourning over the Heart of Guiscardo was attacked by critics who marked Hogarth 's attempt to emulate the drama depicted in older Italian paintings as foolhardy and ridiculous . Many critics were repulsed by the shocking contrast between the melancholy beauty of Sigismunda and the grotesquely bloody organ that she delicately touched . It was said that Hogarth placed an attendant next to the painting to note the remarks made by the viewers ; changes to the painting suggest that he may have responded to these criticisms by altering his work , although it is impossible to ascertain whether many of the changes were made before or after the painting was exhibited . 
 One of the fiercest critics of Hogarth 's work was the critic and writer Horace Walpole . Walpole , who had admired the " Correggio " , compared Hogarth 's portrayal of Sigismunda to that of a " maudlin fallen virago " , and saw in it : 
 None of the somber grief , no dignity of suppressed anguish , no involuntary tear , no settled meditation on the fate she meant to meet , no <unk> warmth turned holy by despair 
 John Wilkes dismissed it as " not human " . More predictably , in his Epistle to William Hogarth , Charles Churchill sympathised with Sigismunda as the " helpless victim of a <unk> 's hand " . 
 After ten days of the exhibition , Hogarth replaced the painting with another of his canvases , Chairing the Member , the fourth and last piece in his <unk> of an Election series . 
 Hogarth was unable to sell the painting , but he considered selling engravings based on it . A subscription ticket for the engraving of Sigismunda depicting Time Smoking a Picture was made , and some subscriptions were sold before being recalled , but by March 1761 Hogarth had abandoned the project , having failed to find an engraver to produce the plates . Hogarth instructed his widow not to sell the canvas for less than £ 500 . On Jane Hogarth 's death in 1789 , the painting passed to her cousin , Mary Lewis . She sold it by auction at Greenwood 's in 1790 for 56 guineas to the publisher John Boydell , who exhibited it in his Shakespeare Gallery . Benjamin Smith made an engraving which was published in 1795 . The painting was sold for 400 guineas at Christie 's in 1807 , and had been acquired by J.H. Anderdon by 1814 . He bequeathed it to the Tate Gallery in 1879 . 
 = = Alterations = = 
 A number of alterations are visible to the naked eye as pentimenti . A piece of paper draped over the edge of the table is clearly visible in outline , despite having been painted over with detailing of the table itself . Sigismunda 's index finger which was bent towards and perhaps touching the heart has been straightened , but the outline of the tip is still visible on the surface of the heart . A looped cord in the top right @-@ hand corner is poorly concealed under the topmost layer of paint . It is also known that , to attempt to appease critics , Hogarth repainted the fingers of Sigismunda so that the blood that was previously there would no longer be visible . 
 = Sardines ( Inside No. 9 ) = 
 " Sardines " is the first episode of British dark comedy anthology series Inside No. 9 . Written by Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , it premiered on BBC Two and BBC Two HD on 5 February 2014 . The episode features a stand @-@ alone plot revolving around a group of adults , who are non @-@ recurring characters , playing sardines at an engagement party . Rebecca , the bride @-@ to @-@ be , finds a boring man named Ian in a wardrobe ; he introduces himself as a colleague of Jeremy , Rebecca 's fiancé . The pair are subsequently joined by family , friends and colleagues of Rebecca and Jeremy . As more people enter the room and step into the wardrobe , secrets shared by some of the characters are revealed , with various allusions to incestuous relationships , child sexual abuse and adultery . The humour is both dark and British , with references to past unhappiness and polite but awkward interactions . 
 The story takes place entirely in the bedroom of a country house , with much of the filming taking place inside the wardrobe . Pemberton and Shearsmith wrote the episode with the intention of evoking a feeling of claustrophobia in viewers . In addition to the writers , the episode starred Katherine Parkinson , Tim Key , Luke Pasqualino , Ophelia Lovibond , Anne Reid , Julian Rhind @-@ Tutt , Anna Chancellor , Marc Wootton , Ben Willbond and Timothy West . The cast and writing were praised by television critics , and the episode was chosen as pick of the day in a number of publications . On its first showing , " Sardines " was watched by 1 @.@ 1 million viewers , which was 5 @.@ 6 % of the audience . 
 = = Development and production = = 
 Writers Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , who had previously worked together on The League of Gentlemen and Psychoville , took inspiration for Inside No. 9 from " David and Maureen " , episode 4 of the first series of Psychoville , which was in turn inspired by Alfred Hitchcock 's Rope . " David and Maureen " took place entirely in a single room , and it was filmed in only two shots . The writers were keen to explore other stories in this bottle episode or TV play format , and Inside No. 9 allowed them to do this . At the same time , the concept of Inside No. 9 was a " reaction " to Psychoville , with Shearsmith saying that " We 'd been so involved with labyrinthine over @-@ arcing , we thought it would be nice to do six different stories with a complete new house of people each week . That 's appealing , because as a viewer you might not like this story , but you 've got a different one next week . " 
 The format of the series also pays homage to Tales of the Unexpected , The Twilight Zone and Alfred Hitchcock Presents . Pemberton and Shearsmith returned to writing more macabre stories , according to the latter , as they " always feel slightly unfulfilled if [ they ] write something that 's purely comedic , it just feels too frivolous and light " . During the filming of " Sardines " , Shearsmith professed excitement to be working on Inside No. 9 , saying that " being in the middle of filming a third series of Psychoville would be utterly depressing " . Pemberton and Shearsmith aimed for a simpler experience than Psychoville , describing " Sardines " by saying the episode is " just about some good actors in a wardrobe with a good story " . As each episode of Inside No. 9 features new characters , the writers were able to attract actors who might have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . In addition to Pemberton and Shearsmith , " Sardines " starred Katherine Parkinson , Tim Key , Luke Pasqualino , Ophelia Lovibond , Anne Reid , Julian Rhind @-@ Tutt , Anna Chancellor , Marc Wootton , Ben Willbond and Timothy West . West had previously starred in Tales of the Unexpected , and Shearsmith said that , due to this prior appearance , " it was a great nod " to have West in the episode . " Sardines " has more characters than any other episode of the first series , and these characters were written before casting took place . Pemberton recalls the fun he had in selecting a cast for the episode , aiming to bring together a very varied group of actors who would work well as a group . 
 Pemberton described the concept of " Sardines " as " a simple idea " , and he was happy that the pair did not " have to worry about the consequences of it " , due to the format of the series . The writers were inspired by a large wardrobe in their workspace . They had already written several other episodes for the series , and confinement was a recurring theme ; the possibility of putting characters into a wardrobe gave them the opportunity to develop the theme to a more extreme level . The story was not initially about the game of sardines . Pemberton said that the writers " talked about various ideas of why [ the characters ] were in a wardrobe " , but that the pair " were certainly not working out [ their ] Freudian psychobabble " . A list of characters was written before the script , and the script included the introduction of a new character every three pages . 
 " Sardines " was written so that a feeling of claustrophobia would develop as the story progressed ; Pemberton said that " our first consideration was , ' Can we get 12 people in a wardrobe ? ' So when we did the script read @-@ through , the designer bought a wardrobe off eBay and we checked whether we could all get in it and shut the door " . Writers for Broadcast described seeing the assortment of actors " crammed inside an imposing wardrobe " during filming as " an arresting spectacle " . The story is filmed from within a single bedroom , with much of it taking place inside the wardrobe . Filming presented a particular challenge , as the aim was to give the impression that the viewer was in the wardrobe with the characters , and not to " cheat " by giving the impression that the viewer was outside the wardrobe looking in . The episode was filmed with two wardrobes ; one complete one , and one " faked " one . The complete prop was used to film the characters entering the wardrobe , while the other was in a different room for close @-@ up shots from " within " the wardrobe . For director David Kerr , the difficulty was sustaining the illusion that everything was happening in a single place , ideally without viewers even realising that there was a technical challenge involved . The episode was filmed mostly in sequence , meaning more actors arrived as the filming continued , reflecting the fact that more characters arrive as the episode progresses . Kerr aimed for a particularly " immersive " filming style on the episode , with extensive use of wide angle shots . He aimed to avoid " leading " the audience with regards to the more important characters , by , for instance , " not giving [ them ] coverage " earlier in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rebecca and Jeremy host their engagement party at Rebecca 's family 's stately home . The guests play the parlour game sardines , a variation of hide @-@ and @-@ seek in which one person hides and the other players have to join them in their hiding place once they are found . Rebecca finds Ian ( who works with Jeremy ) in a bedroom wardrobe . As they wait for more people to arrive , Ian mistakenly calls her " Rachel " . A young man , Lee , enters the room but does not find the pair , though they are later found and joined by Rebecca 's prudish brother Carl , and then Carl 's flamboyant partner Stuart . Jeremy 's ex @-@ girlfriend Rachel finds the group and joins them . Ian mentions that Jeremy frequently talks about " you " , but it is unclear whether he is talking to Rebecca or Rachel . To Rebecca 's annoyance , Stuart , Rachel and Ian briefly leave the wardrobe for a break . Stuart enters the en suite where Geraldine is sat on the toilet . In the wardrobe , Carl and Rebecca talk ; the former is uncomfortable , and , when Rebecca asks why , he tells her to " look where we are " . 
 Ian , Rachel and Geraldine join Rebecca and Carl . Geraldine says that the room is normally locked , but Rebecca rebukes her . Stuart rejoins the group after using the toilet . As the group talk , Mark and his wife , Liz , enter the bedroom , unaware of the people hiding in the wardrobe . The pair talk candidly before beginning foreplay and lying down on the bed . Geraldine shouts to alert them , and those in the wardrobe pretend they did not hear Mark and Liz 's conversation . Mark and Liz reluctantly enter the wardrobe . As the doors close , Rachel 's boyfriend Lee enters the room , but as the wardrobe has become more cramped , Stuart and Lee hide under the bed and Ian moves to the en suite bathroom . Stuart and Carl argue , and it is revealed that Carl has a fear of intimacy . When " Stinky " John enters the room , both those in the wardrobe and under the bed claim there is no room , so he hides behind a curtain . Jeremy enters the room and tells Rebecca he is going to pick up another guest from the train station , but as he turns to leave he mistakenly calls her " Rachel " . Andrew , Rebecca 's father , enters and becomes annoyed when he sees people hiding in different places . He forces Jeremy , Stuart , Lee and Stinky John into the wardrobe with everyone else and follows them in . 
 The people in the wardrobe are uncomfortable , not least because of John 's odour . Geraldine passes around mints as Andrew tells Mark that he no longer has contact with Dicky Lawrence , a potential business contact of Mark 's . Andrew sings the " sardine song " , but Carl angrily stops him . Andrew and Geraldine reminisce about a scout jamboree held in the house many years ago , but Geraldine remembers that a boy named Phillip Harrison , nicknamed " Little Pip " , said Andrew did " terrible things " , and that the police were involved . Carl says how Andrew paid Pip 's family to move away , and Andrew counters by claiming he did nothing to Pip and was only teaching him how to wash himself . Carl implies that he and John were not as lucky as Pip , and John says he can smell carbolic soap . There is silence , and Stuart points out no one else is looking for them , but they realise Ian has not yet returned from the bathroom . Jeremy says Ian is the person he was going to pick up from the station , but when Mark claims Ian is already at the party , Jeremy reveals the person Mark is referring to is not Ian . Outside , " Ian " locks the wardrobe and sprays it with lighter fluid while singing the sardine song . Carl realises Ian is actually Phillip , and the episode ends with Phillip leaning against the wardrobe , a lighter in his hand . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The episode is , in effect , a one @-@ scene , one @-@ act , play . Writing in The Times , Andrew Billen observed that Aristotle " ruled that plays should take place over a single day in a single place " , while " Sardines " takes place " over half an hour in a single wardrobe " . The use of the wardrobe is reminiscent of <unk> absurd theatre , and presented particular cinematographic challenges . For Ryan Lambie , writing for entertainment website Den of Geek , the single @-@ camera setup and Kerr 's direction gave the episode " the tense look of an early Hitchcock film , all low angles and illuminating shafts of light " . 
 The characters bring their respective agendas , relationships and backstories into the wardrobe . The various interconnected plotlines are seeded towards the start of the episode , and more is gradually revealed before they are resolved . " Sardines " starts as comedic , before becoming darker ; as more characters arrive , their relatively cordial interactions become more unpleasant . The increasingly claustrophobic environment serves to heighten the tension . 
 The comedy is black , with the most overt humour coming from Stuart , a flamboyant character played by Shearsmith . The humour is also extremely British . <unk> of Britishness identified by PopMatters critic David Upton include the dated clothing , and interaction between Katherine and Tim at the start of the episode . Despite not knowing each other , they converse courteously , which " smacks of more refined days " ; the conversation is a " portrayal of social awkwardness " . With the introduction of the noticeably younger Lee , there is a clash of customs , illustrating the differing norms of the respective generations . This " 1940s aesthetic " and the fact the story took place in a single location tied the episode to " a golden age of plays on British television " . Broadcaster and writer Mark Radcliffe felt that the script " could be a really arresting stage play " . 
 As is typical of Shearsmith and Pemberton 's work , " Sardines " addresses dark topics . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Paul Kendall identified some of Shearsmith and Pemberton 's " regular tropes " utilised in the episode ; namely " a bunch of misfits , uncomfortable silences and allusions to dark crimes in the distant past " . Billen felt that the treatment of dark issues was reminiscent of the work of Alan Ayckbourn . Particular themes addressed in the episode include murder , incestuous relationships , child sexual abuse , vengeance and adultery . As the episode progresses , secrets related to these themes are revealed to be the explanation for apparently innocuous tendencies , such as Carl 's dislike for the sardine song and John 's aversion to soap . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sardines " was well received by television critics . Kendall , Billen , Keith Watson and Dan Owen , writing for The Daily Telegraph , the Metro , MSN and The Times , respectively , all gave the episode four out of five stars , while , writing for The Arts Desk , Veronica Lee gave it five out of five . The episode was labelled " pick of the day " in The Times , The Sunday Times , The Observer and the Daily Record . 
 Reviewers responded positively to the cast . Kendall described the acting as " top notch " and Owen said that all cast @-@ members " played their roles to perfection " , while Jane Simon , writing for The Daily Mirror , said that " every twinge of awkwardness and discomfort is played to perfection as the mood turns darker " . Harry Venning , writing for The Stage , described the cast as " impressively stellar " , and also commended the writers ' performances . Comedy critic Bruce Dessau said that the " cast alone is almost recommendation enough " , while another reviewer said that if " a bomb dropped on the cupboard where they were hiding , a good portion of the acting talent in this country would be wiped out . " Key 's portrayal of Ian and Parkinson 's portrayal of Rebecca were particularly praised . 
 Journalists also lauded the script , with Kendall labelling the dialogue " perfectly pitched " , Dessau calling it " tightly written " and without wastage , and Owen praising the way each character was " delivered into the story at the exact right moment " . Brad Newsome , writing for The Sydney Morning Herald ( the episode having been shown in Australia on BBC First in 2015 ) , said that the episode was " deftly written " , and Venning said the " lean , mean narrative didn 't just twist and turn , it folded back upon itself to provide a totally unexpected , profoundly disturbing and deeply satisfying denouement " . On The Arts Desk , Lee praised the direction of Kerr , saying that he delivered " a pitch @-@ perfect piece with no character overwritten or line overplayed " . 
 Dean , writing for The Independent , commended the writers ' " weaving together of the morbid with the laugh @-@ out loud " , and Mike Bradley , writing in The Observer , called the episode " wickedly funny " ; similarly , Newsome said the episode displayed " a wicked sense of humour " . Dessau concurred on the darkness and quality of humour . Watson was more ambivalent , saying the episode offered " more of a knowing chuckle than an outright belly laugh " . 
 Watson wrote that " the chief joy [ of the episode ] was the stealthy way the atmospheric story was built up layer by layer " . In The Times , Billen described " Sardines " as " a disciplined comedy , but a little bit of discipline , as one of the League 's perverts might say , never did anyone any harm " . With the exception of the ending , Billen " loved it " . A separate review in The Times , however , praised the twist ending ; " this isn 't just an inspired set @-@ up performed by a stellar cast – it builds to a macabre and horribly imagined climax . " Owen was ambivalent about the ending of " Sardines " , saying that it " worked very well in terms of narrative , but perhaps it landed with too much softness " . Mark Jones , writing in The Guardian , gave a more mixed review overall , describing " Sardines " as a " slow burner , but a decent introduction to a series " . Newsome called the episode a " gem of an opener " . 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 On its first showing , " Sardines " was seen by 1 @.@ 1 million viewers , which was 5 @.@ 6 % of the British audience . This was lower than the premiere of Psychoville , but higher than the audience towards the end of the second series . " Sardines " immediately followed the first episode of the two @-@ part Royal Cousins at War , a BBC documentary . This had stronger viewing figures , with 2 million viewers ( 8 @.@ 6 % of the audience ) . Nonetheless , " Sardines " was more highly viewed than is typical for the slot . Despite this strong start for the series , the viewing figures for Inside No. 9 later dipped ; the average viewing for the series was 904 @,@ 000 people , or 4 @.@ 9 % of the audience , lower than the slot average of 970 @,@ 000 ( 5 @.@ 1 % of the audience ) . 
 = Yuffie Kisaragi = 
 Yuffie Kisaragi ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Kisaragi ) is a video game character from Square Enix 's Final Fantasy series . Designed by Tetsuya Nomura , she was first introduced in the 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII as a young female ninja princess and thief . She can become one of the game 's player characters after finishing a special sidequest . Yuffie reappears in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII series , expanding her background and showing her after the events of the original game . 
 Yuffie has also been featured in other Square Enix games , most notably the Kingdom Hearts crossover series , voiced by Yumi <unk> in the Japanese versions of the games . In the English versions , Christy Carlson Romano provides her voice for Kingdom Hearts and Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , and Mae Whitman is Yuffie 's voice for Kingdom Hearts II and Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII . The character has achieved a high level of popularity in Japan , but the English @-@ language media reception has been more mixed . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 One of two secret characters in the 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII , Yuffie is a 16 @-@ year @-@ old ninja and a thief who fights with oversized shuriken that she can throw like a boomerang . A fiercely patriotic daughter of Godo Kisaragi ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Kisaragi ) , the leader of Wutai ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a culture based on real @-@ world East Asia , Yuffie feels her country has lost its former glory and become nothing more than a resort town . After losing the war against Shinra Electric Power Company , Godo began to turn Wutai into a tourist attraction . This did not suit Yuffie , who began running off , stealing the magical Materia from unaware travelers in hope to someday become strong enough to change this situation . Sneaky and arrogant , Yuffie has a tomboyish and charismatic personality and obsessively steals and collects Materia . She also tends to be short @-@ tempered and is prone to motion sickness . Gameplay @-@ wise , Yuffie possesses the special Materia " Throw " , enabling her to throw almost any item from the player 's inventory at enemies during combat , and when leveled up , the ability " Coin " becomes available , allowing her to throw the party 's Gil currency at the enemy . 
 Yuffie is introduced when she ambushes the protagonist Cloud Strife and his allies in either the Gongaga jungle or the forests south of Junon , appearing as " Mystery Ninja " . If the player defeats her in combat and then chooses the correct series of dialogue choices , she introduces herself and joins the player 's party as one of player characters . However , once in Wutai Village , Yuffie steals the party 's Materia and hides , but is kidnapped by a Midgar crime lord , the lecherous Don <unk> . When the group rescues Yuffie , she returns the stolen Materia and continues working with the party . In another sidequest , she proves herself by fighting the bosses of Wutai 's five story pagoda , the last of these battles against Godo . These fights , and the sequence of conversations following , enable both father and daughter to understand the other 's actions and to come to a mutual respect . At Godo 's request , Cloud officially takes Yuffie ( who obtains her level 4 Limit Break special attack , called " All Creation " ) with him on his quest . 
 If Yuffie is present at the end of disc one , when Aerith Gainsborough is murdered by the party 's nemesis Sephiroth , the player can witness an uncharacteristic display of emotion from the character , as she breaks down in Cloud 's arms after failing to control her sobs . Yuffie 's loyalty to the team is called into question after Cloud temporarily disbands his party ahead of their final confrontation with Sephiroth ; when Yuffie is the last to return Barret Wallace suspects her of abandoning the team in light of her earlier treachery at Wutai . When Yuffie returns to the group she subsequently rebukes Barrett for his judgement . 
 = = = Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 In the 2005 computer animated film Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , Yuffie reunites with her Final Fantasy VII allies to fight against the summon creature Bahamut SIN . In the On the Way to a Smile novella " Case of Yuffie " , which is set between the end of Final Fantasy VII and the beginning of Advent Children , the disease Geostigma spreads to Wutai , and Yuffie sets out to find a cure . 
 In the 2004 action role @-@ playing game Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , set six years before Final Fantasy VII , Yuffie encounters Shinra 's agents called the Turks in Wutai and unknowingly works with them against the eco @-@ terrorist group AVALANCHE . In the 2006 third @-@ person shooter game Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , set one year after Advent Children , Yuffie leaves home and joins the World Regenesis Organization , where she is placed in charge of espionage and intelligence gathering . Yuffie infiltrates Mako Reactor Zero deep within the ruins of Midgar and shuts it off when the ex @-@ Turk Vincent Valentine defeats the Shinra remnant Deepground . The nine @-@ year @-@ old Yuffie also makes brief appearances in the 2007 prequel action role @-@ playing game Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , where she fights against Shinra following their invasion and takeover of Wutai . After meeting Zack Fair , she enlists his help to find treasures in several side missions . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Outside the Final Fantasy series , Yuffie has also been featured in the Kingdom Hearts series since 2002 . In the first Kingdom Hearts , a younger Yuffie acts as a supporting character in Traverse Town , helping to defeat the Heartless who had destroyed her world . Yuffie 's appearance in 2004 's Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories is a projection from Sora 's memories in Traverse Town . In 2005 's Kingdom Hearts II , she aids Leon and the others as part of the Hollow Bastion Restoration Committee , this time appearing in her Advent Children attire . In both Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II , Yuffie is additionally featured as an opponent in the Olympus Coliseum , while 2008 's Kingdom Hearts coded features a virtual simulation of Yuffie . She also appears in the manga adaptations of Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts II and Chain of Memories published by Gangan Comics and Tokyopop . 
 Yuffie is an unlockable playable character in the PlayStation version of the 1998 fighting game Ehrgeiz : God Bless the Ring , appearing alongside other characters from Final Fantasy VII . She is also one of the playable characters in the 2006 board video game Itadaki Street Portable for the PlayStation Portable , in a chibi @-@ style design that is similar to her model during the exploration gameplay mode of Final Fantasy VII , and in the 2013 action puzzle mobile game <unk> Final Fantasy , also in a chibi form . She was the first DLC character released for the 2014 rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy : Curtain Call . 
 Yuffie also makes unplayable appearances in some video games . In the 2008 action role @-@ playing / fighting game hybrid Dissidia Final Fantasy , she is a tutor of the in @-@ game manuals and an unlockable friend card in this game . Yuffie is a " Legend " type assist character in the 2012 social role @-@ playing mobile game Final Fantasy Airborne Brigade , depicted in her Final Fantasy VII , Advent Children and Kingdom Hearts outfits . She appears as one of three summonable support characters in the 2014 racing mobile game Final Fantasy VII G @-@ Bike . She is also featured on various cards in Final Fantasy Trading Card Game ( 2011 ) and Final Fantasy Artniks ( 2012 ) . 
 Two large Yuffie action figures were released by Square Enix as part of the Final Fantasy VII Play Arts Vol . 2 series in 2008 ( in her original game attire ) , and Final Fantasy VII Movie Advent Children Series 2 in 2009 ( in her film attire ) . Other merchandise include a small super deformed figurine version as she appears in Itadaki Street Portable , from 2009 's Final Fantasy Trading Arts Mini Vol . 4 , a 1997 plush doll and a <unk> figurine by Banpresto , a 2001 garage kit figure by Kotobukiya , and a <unk> poster in Final Fantasy Poster Vol . 5 . Her theme music in Final Fantasy VII , " Descendant of Shinobi " , is included in a vocal form on the album Final Fantasy Song Book : Mahoroba as " Walking in the Road , After the Rain " by Nobuo Uematsu and Yuji Hasegawa . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 During early development of Final Fantasy VII , Yuffie was envisioned as a 25 @-@ year @-@ old ex @-@ SOLDIER now working as a bounty hunter , seeking both the game 's protagonist Cloud Strife and its antagonist Sephiroth , while also having a bounty on her own head . Her job class was originally listed as " ninja ( assassin ) " and she was intended to be a daughter of the long @-@ deceased Kasumi Kisaragi . The Wutai sidequest present in the final incarnation of the game was significantly different . Her age and description was different for each of the several wanted posters ; what Yuffie looks like , as her level , is determined on the last wanted poster viewed . She would also encounter the party in a random encounter , or attack Cloud when he is sleeping in an inn . The Wutai scenario required Yuffie to be recruited to complete it . 
 Having a close attachment to Yuffie 's character , Final Fantasy VII event planner Jun Akiyama was responsible for the large number of cutscenes featuring her and her actions during fights . Mae Whitman , who voiced Yuffie in the English versions of Kingdom Hearts II and Dirge of Cerberus , said she was not " aware of the extent to which people were familiar with her character already . " In a 2012 interview , Whitman recalled Yuffie as " bubbly and bright and nice . But still super cool ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Yuffie Kisaragi has received a notably positive reception in Japan , having placed as the 42nd best PlayStation character in the 2007 " Den @-@ Play Awards " by Dengeki PlayStation . In 2010 , readers of Japanese magazine Famitsu voted her as the 48th best video game character of all time . 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly included " seeing Yuffie once again " as one of the greatest moments of Kingdom Hearts while giving it their Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year 2002 award . David Smith from IGN ranked Yuffie seventh on the 2008 list of top ten Final Fantasy VII characters , stating that she " belongs in the Wacky <unk> wing of the RPG hall of fame ; " although commenting that Yuffie can sometimes be " a pain in the neck , " Smith said that she became such an appealing sidekick character that Square would go on to use the " Yuffie formula " with Rikku from Final Fantasy X. In a 2013 poll by Square Enix , Yuffie was voted the 14th most popular Final Fantasy female character , sharing that spot with Beatrix from Final Fantasy IX . 
 According to Edge , Yuffie , being one of characters that are " are brands in and of themselves " , " created a new anime stereotype -- the , uh , giddy girl ninja . " <unk> gave the character an overall score of 7 @.@ 0 / 10 , opining that while " a 16 year old ninja girl was a nice refreshing change [ ... ] it would have been nice if her character had matured and developed through this story . " In 2012 , Becky Cunningham of Cheat Code Central ranked her as the fourth top ninja in video games , stating that despite her " cocky , brash , and slightly abrasive personality , " Yuffie is " also a compassionate person with an impressive goal , " serving " as both comic relief and unlikely hero , a seemingly self @-@ centered sneak thief who always does the right thing in the end . " In 2013 , Liam Gilchrist of What Culture included her ten memorable Final Fantasy characters that deserve their own game , possibly " a Thief @-@ esque title , but more suitable for younger players . " In a 2014 poll by Spanish magazine Hobby <unk> , Yuffie was voted one of eight best ninja characters in video games . Márcio Pacheco Alexsandro of Brazil 's Game Hall placed Yuffie at fifth spot on his 2014 list of top female ninja characters in games , commenting on her close resemblance to <unk> Misao from Rurouni Kenshin . In 2012 Jef Rouner of the Houston Press listed Yuffie 's reaction to Aerith 's death as one of the five most " heartbreaking " <unk> scenes in the Final Fantasy franchise ; which he felt rivalled the emotional impact of anything found in the main narrative . 
 UGO.com featured her in the 2011 list of 25 most sexy ninja girls in all media for her appearance in Advent Children , adding " that third @-@ dimension certainly adds something . " In his review for Advent Children , James Mielke of 1UP.com called her " as cutely jailbait as ever ; " the film itself was called " <unk> Legal @-@ Age Yuffie " by <unk> Hatchett of Hardcore Gamer . In 2015 , Indonesian television <unk> 6 ranked her seventh in their list of the sexiest Oriental characters in gaming . 
 However , some of the reception was more negative . In her character profile , IGN wrote called her " both impressively useful and incredibly annoying . " In 2010 , Scott Sharkey of 1UP.com placed her in the category " The <unk> Idiot " alongside Rikku and Selphie while discussing the top five character types in the Final Fantasy series . That same year , GamesRadar 's Mikel Reparaz included the appearance of Yuffie among the other Final Fantasy VII characters in Ehrgeiz on the list of the 55 best character cameos in video game history , but called her " hyper @-@ annoying " . In 2013 , Kyle Lowe of Complex ranked her as the fifth most annoying classic video game character . Joe Juba of Game Informer included her among " Final Fantasy 's particular breed of annoying female companions , like Selphie and Vaan . " Lisa Foiles of The Escapist included this " crazy , hyperactive teenager " on her 2014 list of top five annoying princesses in video games , calling her " just a definition of annoying . " 
 = Forrest Highway = 
 Forrest Highway is a 95 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 59 mi ) highway in Western Australia 's Peel and South West regions , extending Perth 's Kwinana Freeway from east of Mandurah down to Bunbury . Old Coast Road was the original Mandurah – Bunbury route , dating back to the 1840s . Part of that road , and the Australind Bypass around Australind and Eaton , were subsumed by Forrest Highway . The highway begins at Kwinana Freeway 's southern terminus in Ravenswood , continues around the Peel Inlet to Lake Clifton , and heads south to finish at Bunbury 's Eelup Roundabout . There are a number of at @-@ grade intersections with minor roads in the shires of Murray , <unk> , and Harvey including Greenlands Road and Old Bunbury Road , both of which connect to South Western Highway near Pinjarra . 
 The settlement of Australind by the Western Australian Land Company in 1840 – 41 prompted the first real need for a good quality road to Perth . A coastal Australind – Mandurah route was completed by 2 November 1842 . Though the road was rebuilt by convicts in the 1850s , its importance was already declining . With a new road via Pinjarra at the foothills of the Darling Scarp completed in 1876 , and the opening of the Perth − Bunbury railway in 1893 , few people travelled up the old coastal road . In the late 1930s there was a proposal to re @-@ establish the road as a tourist route , which could also reduce traffic on the main road along the foothills , but it was put on hold due to World War II . Improvements to Old Coast Road started in the early 1950s , but with little progress made until 1954 when the Main Roads Department approved £ 1000 worth of works . The name " Old Coast Road " was formally adopted on 27 January 1959 , and a sealed road was completed in September 1969 . 
 Since the 1980s , the state government has been upgrading the main Perth to Bunbury route , by extending Kwinana Freeway south from Perth , and constructing a dual carriageway on Old Coast Road north of Bunbury , including bypasses around Australind and Dawesville . A bypass was also planned around Mandurah , which underwent detailed environmental reviews and assessments in the 1990s and early 2000s . Construction of the New Perth Bunbury Highway project , which became Forrest Highway and the final Kwinana Freeway extension , began in December 2006 , and the new highway was opened on 20 September 2009 . Within one year of opening , the number of road accidents in the area had decreased significantly , but tourism and businesses in the towns on bypassed routes were also affected . There are few services alongside the highway , although as of June 2015 a pair of roadhouses are planned near Greenlands Road . In June 2014 , Forrest Highway was extended south to Bunbury by renaming much of Old Coast Road as well as Australind Bypass as part of the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Forrest Highway is the southern section of State Route 2 , continuing south from Kwinana Freeway at a folded diamond interchange with Pinjarra Road . All other intersections with the highway are at @-@ grade , with cross roads intersected via two closely spaced T junctions . The highway , which is controlled and maintained by Main Roads Western Australia , has two lanes in each direction separated by a wide median strip , and a speed limit of 110 kilometres per hour ( 70 mph ) . The road travels south for six kilometres ( 4 mi ) , over the Murray River and through rural farmland in and beyond South Yunderup . The highway then veers south @-@ west , meeting Greenlands Road at a pair of staggered T junctions , and continues towards the Harvey Estuary over a distance of nine kilometres ( 6 mi ) before intersecting Mills Road , at another pair of closely spaced T junctions . The road curves back to the south , reaching Old Bunbury Road after ten kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . Forrest Highway meanders across the Spearwood dune system for ten and a half kilometres ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) , through a series of large curves , before it reaches Old Coast Road at Lake Clifton , an alternative coastal route to Mandurah . 
 Forrest Highway continues south for 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) , to the west of Myalup State Forest and two to three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 9 mi ) east of Lake Preston . A further 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) takes the highway to the northern edge of Leschenault . In these sections , the highway passes turnoffs to Preston Beach , Myalup and <unk> . The countryside for this part is mostly tuart , jarrah and marri forest , with some wetland vegetation and some cleared farming land . The highway then heads south @-@ east , going inland to bypass the developed areas east of the Leschenault Inlet . After five and a half kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) Forrest Highway crosses the Brunswick River , continues southwards towards the Collie River for another five and a half kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) . It crosses the river , then curves around Eaton to head westward to the Eelup Roundabout , which it reaches after travelling for nine kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) and crossing the adjacent Preston River . The signalised roundabout provides access into Bunbury , as well as to Robertson Road , a ring road that connects to South Western Highway and Bussell Highway . 
 When the highway was first opened in 2009 , the average daily weekday traffic volume north of Old Bunbury Road was 9 @,@ 680 . By April 2011 , it had increased to 10 @,@ 660 vehicles . In 2012 up to 14 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the highway , and 17 @,@ 000 by 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following the establishment of the Swan River Colony , the earliest report of exploration of the district around what is now Bunbury is from Lieutenant H. W. Bunbury in December 1836 . The route he – and later others – took was slow and hazardous , taking four days to cover around 80 miles ( 130 km ) , and crossing four rivers . The route began with passage from Perth to Pinjarra , before turning south @-@ west and passing through low , open scrubland , and a medium @-@ timbered area with low marshes . The first river to cross was the Harvey River , which could only be forded by horses at a single point , near the river mouth . Continuing south @-@ westward , the northern tip of Leschenault Estuary was reached , and its shores followed before curving around into Bunbury . The last stretch of approximately 12 miles ( 19 km ) was the most dangerous for many years , as it required precarious crossings at the Collie and Preston Rivers . 
 In an initial attempt to settle the area , the government declared the land open for pastoral settlement by ordinary settlers , but little progress was made . By 1840 , the population was just fifty @-@ three , and most of those were in or near Bunbury ( then known as Port Leschenault ) . The settlement of Australind by the Western Australian Land Company in 1840 – 41 prompted the first real need for a good quality road to Perth . Throughout much of 1842 , there was much debate and discussion over providing a new route to Bunbury . A coastal route from Fremantle had been proposed , while an alternative proposal published on 11 May was a new route from Pinjarra to Bunbury , via an upstream crossing of the Harvey River , where a bridge could easily be built . The coastal route would have required a ferry to cross the Murray River 's estuary , and would not go through Pinjarra , a significant settlement in the area ; however , it would be shorter , had more water along the route , and would go through the village of Mandurah , which had a population of twenty @-@ nine people from six families . 
 In a letter dated 12 June 1842 in the Colonial Secretary 's Records , Marshall Clifton , Chief Commissioner of the Western Australian Land Company , wrote of the need for an improved Perth – Fremantle – Bunbury road . On a special trip he took in the previous October to look for a new route , two surveyors gave their approval to the proposed coastal route , with a ferry across the estuary . Governor John Hutt approved of the idea of a road , but thought a ferry would be impractical , at least during winter , and that the lack of public funds made it impossible . Clifton continued to write letters to the Colonial Secretary advocating the construction of a road . 
 = = = 19th century road = = = 
 During the winter of 1842 , the existing route became impassable , and Clifton undertook the creation of the proposed coastal route . He sent his company 's men to clear the path and make a road . The first report of the new road was on 19 October , praising the new route but deriding the almost impassable obstacles presented by the large rivers en route . The Australind – Mandurah route was completed by 2 November , and the speed of the new route allowed almost daily communication . It could be travelled in 32 hours , with a ferry to cross the estuary at Mandurah . The ferry was operated , and later owned , by nearby resident Mrs Lyttleton , as the government was not interested at that time in owning or leasing out the ferry . The government later appropriated the ferry on 2 February 1843 , and imposed standardised tolls for passengers and livestock . Ten years later , the ferry service was made available to the public free of charge . 
 The road was rebuilt by convicts in the 1850s , but by that decade , the importance of the coast road was diminishing . For most of its length , the road went through well @-@ timbered , sandy limestone country of little value to agriculture , and settlers in the vicinity of the road were scarce . In contrast , settlements had spread and prospered in the foothills of the Darling Scarp , and on 1 July 1853 , Colonial Secretary Frederick <unk> announced a new proposal for a Perth – Pinjarra – Bunbury route along the foothills , with a one chain ( 66 ft ; 20 m ) width , mostly following the alignment of previous tracks . Between 1864 and 1876 , two parties of convicts were involved in the making of the road . 
 From 30 June 1868 , the government discontinued the ferry 's operation and the position of caretaker , leaving travellers to work the ferry themselves . The news was not well received , with newspaper letters complaining of the great inconvenience to the users of the shorter coastal route . As a result , the government reappointed a caretaker on 30 March 1869 . In 1894 the ferry was finally abandoned in favour of a 600 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 180 m ) wooden bridge adjacent to old ferry jetties , which was built by contract at a cost of £ 1700 . However , following the completion of the Perth – Bunbury railway in 1893 , few people travelled up the coast road . While the adjacent land was still privately owned , it was uninhabited . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Within the first few years of the twentieth century , the road had become known as " the old coast road " , or simply Old Coast Road . In 1907 , the road was described as being seldom used , except by tramps , runaway sailors , and <unk> , with very few settlers in the area . For the next three decades , there was little interest in the road , other than maintaining it in a usable condition . By 1918 it had become almost impassable , so the Harvey Road Board decided to spend £ 300 to reconstruct a 30 @-@ chain ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ; 600 m ) length . A few years later , in 1921 , the section from Lake Clifton to Mandurah was reopened by Jack <unk> , so as to be suitable for motor vehicles , and in 1926 the section from Bunbury to Lake Preston was similarly suitable . 
 The establishment of a tourist route along the coastal road between Australind and Mandurah was proposed in the late 1930s by the Harvey Road Board . The Bunbury Road Board supported the idea , with the beauty and pleasure of the route discussed at a meeting of the road board in January 1939 ; the lack of a proper road surface was seen as the only obstacle . Traffic was predicted to grow over the next five years to an extent that would justify a second route to Perth , particularly as the traffic volume on the existing inland road was already heavy and causing accidents . The Minister for Works , Harry Millington , considered the proposal in July 1939 , and by early 1940 a number of rumours emerged regarding the imminent commencement of works ; however , the Main Roads Department had no intention to undertake them . The Harvey Road Board decided to refrain from pursuing the matter until World War II had concluded . By 1943 , vegetation was <unk> the road , making it difficult to spot in places , and in December 1946 about 200 yards ( 180 m ) was inundated by water one @-@ foot ( 30 cm ) deep . Negotiations between Main Roads and the road boards recommenced in 1947 , and by October 1948 the provision of a suitable road was costed at £ 280 @,@ 000 . Given that a good quality road already linked Perth and Bunbury , and there was likely to be little immediate benefit , Main Roads did not consider the proposal to be warranted . 
 At a February 1949 conference of officials from local governments in the South West region it was decided to once more pursue the reopening of the coastal route , due to the amount of traffic on the existing Perth – Bunbury road . Over the next year the proposal was supported by the Bunbury Chamber of Commerce , South West Zone Development Committee , and Bunbury Municipal Council . Reasons for supporting the proposal included " defence , land settlement , relieving the main highway , and tourist advantages " . It was also a political issue leading up to the 1950 state election , as well as afterwards . The summer of 1950 had seen a shortage of milk in Perth , leading to the consideration of turning undeveloped land along Old Coast Road into pastures for dairy farming . After inspecting the land on 17 May 1950 , the Agriculture Minister advocated for Old Coast Road to be reopened , to develop the adjacent land which was well suited to milk production . 
 = = = New construction in the 1950s = = = 
 An official inspection in October 1950 reported that it would not be difficult to improve the old road into a reasonable track , which would then have a better chance of attracting assistance from Main Roads . The Mandurah Road Board spent £ 1200 on the road , while the Harvey Road Board requested a £ 500 grant from Main Roads for their portion of the road . Two years later little progress had been made , and Main Roads therefore refused to fund feeder roads to connect to Old Coast Road . By May 1952 , works had halted as Main Roads believed that the existing , winding route around the estuary was too prone to flooding . Settlers in the area recalled it never flooding previously , and the Mandurah Road Board was concerned that should a new road be built , they would still have to maintain the old road for access to properties . The road was inspected by the Premier , Deputy @-@ Commissioner of Main Roads J. D. Leach , and the district engineer H. A. Smith . They indicated that a new road would likely closely follow the old road , but that a detailed survey would be needed . Nearby limestone deposits would be suitable for the road 's foundation , with the cost estimated at £ 11 per chain . 
 Mandurah had grown rapidly as a tourist destination in the post war period , and on 17 May 1953 a new bridge connecting Old Coast Road to Mandurah was opened . Construction of the new bridge , adjacent to the old bridge , began in September 1951 , and was designed with reinforced concrete piles . The old wooden bridge had rapidly deteriorated due to the presence of marine organisms , and needed considerable attention to maintain it in a usable condition . The opening ceremony was attended by the Chairman of the Mandurah Road Board , W. Anderson , Leader of the Opposition , Ross McLarty , Minister for Works , John Tonkin ; Commissioner of Main Roads , Digby Leach ; C. H. Henning , MLC ; engineer in charges of bridges , Ernest Godfrey ; local government representatives , and a number of schoolchildren who were given a half @-@ day off school . 
 No further work had been done on Old Coast Road by 1954 , as the road boards in the area had insufficient funds . More pressure for a new road came from the Education Department , which saw the need for a school bus in the area , but could not provide the service due to the poor condition of Old Coast Road . Leach , who was by then the Commissioner , indicated that Main Roads would likely approve requests for grants to improve Old Coast road from the road boards in the area , and that provision for funding had been made in the 1954 – 55 budget . Work was finally cleared to commence in September 1954 with Main Roads approving the Mandurah Road Board 's schedule of works , including £ 1000 for the following works on Old Coast Road : 
 " New construction 18 ft [ 5 @.@ 5 m ] wide southwards from <unk> @-@ rd , and new construction 12 ft [ 3 @.@ 7 m ] wide along the eastern boundary of Location 1130 from the end of the existing construction to the northern boundary of Reserve 2851 . " 
 The name " Old Coast Road " was formally adopted on 27 January 1959 , and a sealed road was completed in September 1969 . 
 = = = Perth Bunbury Highway = = = 
 Since the 1980s , the state government has been committed to constructing and upgrading the Perth Bunbury Highway , a route along coastal roads , including Old Coast Road south of Mandurah . The ultimate design is for a freeway or expressway @-@ standard road , but with staged construction initially providing a dual carriageway . 
 = = = = Australind Bypass = = = = 
 The 20 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 12 @.@ 7 mi ) Australind Bypass was constructed in the 1980s to relieve pressure on Old Coast Road , and improve local amenity . The bypass travelled to the east and south of Australind and Eaton , to connect to Bunbury 's Eelup Roundabout via an alignment previously part of Jubilee Road . There were slight deviations in the route to protect remnant paperbark trees , <unk> , acacia , and aquatic plants , as well as a site of aboriginal importance , identified by botanical and aboriginal heritage surveys . Australind Bypass was built in two stages by the Bunbury Division of Main Roads . The first stage opened on 11 December 1987 , and was a 4 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) length from Eelup Roundabout to Eaton Drive , plus a 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) link from the bypass ( north of the rail line ) and the Collie River bridge on Old Coast Road . Stage two , the remaining 15 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 8 mi ) to reconnect with Old Coast Road , was completed ahead of schedule in December 1998 . 
 Australind Bypass was opened on 16 December 1988 by Federal Transport Minister Bob Brown , who helped complete the final seal , together with the Mayor of Bunbury Ern Manea . State Transport Minister Bob Pearce planted a roadside tree to commemorate the opening of the bypass , which was also attended by the Commissioner of Main Roads Albert <unk> , and Mitchell MLA David Smith , Minister for Community Service , Justice and the South West . Vintage cars led a procession from the on @-@ site opening ceremony to a reception held in Bunbury . The new road was designed to be easily made into a dual carriageway when required ; this was completed nine years later , with the Australind Bypass duplication project officially opened by Mitchell MLA Dan Sullivan on 18 December 1997 . 
 = = = = Dual carriageway sections = = = = 
 In addition to the Australind Bypass , much of Old Coast Road was upgraded to a dual carriageway . A 7 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 5 mi ) second carriageway through Halls Head and Falcon was opened in 1989 . Two further dual carriageway sections , from Harvey to Myalup , and around Glen Iris , opened on 17 June 1996 . The dual carriageway was extended up to Lake Clifton c . December 2000 . Construction of the dual carriageway Dawesville Bypass around eastern Dawesville , south of Mandurah , began in late 2000 , and was opened in July 2001 . 
 = = = New Perth Bunbury Highway = = = 
 While Old Coast Road 's dual carriageway was advancing north from Bunbury , and Kwinana Freeway was progressively being extended south from Perth , the alignment through Mandurah was constrained by existing development . Keeping the existing alignment would result in a traffic bottleneck through Mandurah . To overcome this problem , Main Roads began planning for a new route east of the Peel Inlet in the 1980s . 
 The proposed Perth Bunbury Highway Peel deviation , part of which later became an extension to Kwinana Freeway , underwent a public environmental review in 1997 , and an environmental assessment by the Environmental Protection Authority ( EPA ) in 2000 . The relevant environment factors considered by the EPA were vegetation communities , declared rare and priority flora , wetlands , and traffic noise . Main Roads proposed management plans for each factor . Only clearing of vegetation critical for road construction would be undertaken , and more vegetation would be replaced than the amount impacted , using local native species . A survey for declared rare and priority flora found no rare species , and only one priority species , Lasiopetalum <unk> , near the southern end of the project . Road construction would impact one conservation class wetland , but no protected wetlands . To minimise impact , road drainage would be designed to contain spills and prevent direct discharges into the surrounding environment . Noise levels would be contained to an acceptable limit in the road design , in accordance with the Main Roads traffic noise policy . The EPA concluded that the road could be designed and managed to an acceptable standard . Main Roads ' 2006 plan for environmental management of the project included numerous aspects , which for the northern segment of the project exceeded the environmental approval requirements . Specific plans were developed regarding fauna , topsoil management , construction , foreshores , and both Aboriginal and European heritage . 
 Construction of the highway and freeway extension began in December 2006 , with the whole project then called the New Perth Bunbury Highway . The work was undertaken by a partnership of Main Roads , Leighton Contractors , WA Limestone and GHD , known as the Southern Gateway Alliance . The project consisted of a 32 @-@ kilometre ( 20 mi ) freeway @-@ standard extension as far as South Yunderup Road in South Yunderup , and a 38 @-@ kilometre ( 24 mi ) highway @-@ standard dual carriageway to Old Coast Road at Lake Clifton . Taking traffic around the eastern side of the Peel @-@ Harvey Estuary prior to joining the existing dual carriageway on Old Coast Road reduced the journey time from Perth to Bunbury . The final road names were not known until early 2009 , when Transport Minister Simon O 'Brien revealed that the section south of Pinjarra Road would be known as Forrest Highway , with the section to the north to become part of Kwinana Freeway . The highway 's name commemorates Sir John Forrest , the state 's first premier . The Kwinana Freeway extension and Forrest Highway were opened on 20 September 2009 , with a ceremony held at the interchange between the freeway , highway , and Pinjarra Road . The roads were officially opened by Premier Colin Barnett , Senator Chris Evans , Transport Minister Simon O 'Brien , Member for Canning Don Randall , and the previous Transport Minister Alannah MacTiernan . The $ 705 million project ( equivalent to $ 808 million in 2013 ) was jointly funded by the state and federal governments , which contributed $ 375 million and $ 330 million respectively ( equivalent to $ 430 million and $ 378 million in 2013 ) . At the time it opened , it was Western Australia 's largest ever road infrastructure project . 
 = = = Forrest Highway after opening = = = 
 One year after Forrest Highway opened , the number of road accidents on the main roads in the area had decreased by 60 % . Traffic on South Western Highway had reduced by 50 % north of Pinjarra , and by 20 % to the south , and there was an 82 % reduction along Old Coast Road within a month of the new highway opening . However , tourism in towns along the former routes was affected by the reduced traffic flow , with businesses losing as much as 60 % of their trade . 
 Forrest Highway has been criticised for the lack of roadside facilities . In January 2014 , it was described as " the busiest , most <unk> , long stretch of highway in the nation " by MP Murray Cowper , Member for Murray @-@ Wellington . With toilets only available at the John <unk> Rest Area near the southern end of the highway , travellers have reportedly stopped alongside the highway or side roads to urinate and change nappies . A farming family with property adjacent to the highway was willing to invest in a roadhouse near Herron Point , but Main Roads required roadhouses to be built on both sides of the highway . According to Cowper , traffic volume would need to increase from 17 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 vehicles per day to justify such an investment . 
 A few months later , in April 2014 , a Perth developer had begun constructing twin roadhouses five kilometres ( 3 mi ) south of Greenlands Road , approximately halfway between Perth and Bunbury . The property was purchased in 2004 , before construction began on the highway , with the intention of developing the site when there was a viable amount of traffic . The main tenant will be a national fuel retailer , with food and beverage retailers and other amenities to be located on both sides of the highway . The facilities were initially expected to be completed by the end of 2014 , but work was put on hold due to a legal dispute between the developer and landowner . The dispute was resolved and development resumed in June 2015 , with completion expected by Easter 2016 , according to Cowper . 
 On 5 June 2014 , the Geographic Names Committee decide to rename the roads that connect Forrest Highway to Bunbury – part of Old Coast Road as well as Australind Bypass – as part of the highway . The renaming had been proposed in 2013 due to public confusion over the three names used for the route to Bunbury : Forrest Highway to Lake Clifton , Old Coast Road from there to north of Australind , and then Australind Bypass . Emergency services had difficulty locating incidents due to the confusion . The renaming followed similar changes to Main Roads ' internal @-@ use designations in May 2011 , which deprecated Perth Bunbury Highway ( Highway H2 ) in favour of Melville Mandurah Highway ( Highway H2 ) for the portion north of Mandurah , Lakeland Lake Clifton Road ( Main Road M74 ) for the Mandurah to Lake Clifton section together with Mandjoogoordap Drive , and an extension of Forrest Highway ( Highway <unk> ) for the Lake Clifton to Bunbury portion . Changes to the road signs were expected to be completed by mid @-@ July . The renaming was considered unusual , as it affected a significant length of a major road , which was the address of eleven residential properties . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Old Coast Road = = 
 While much of Old Coast Road was renamed Forrest Highway in 2014 , bypassed sections of the former Perth Bunbury Highway near Mandurah and Australind have retained the name Old Coast Road , and have significance as part of numbered road routes . 
 = = = Mandurah – Lake Clifton = = = 
 Old Coast Road starts at the intersection of Mandurah Terrace and Pinjarra Road in Mandurah . It crosses the Mandurah estuary into Halls Head via the 184 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 604 ft ) Mandurah Bridge . The road heads south @-@ west as a two @-@ lane road serving the canal estate in eastern Halls Head . After 1 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 1 mi ) Old Coast Road intersects Mandurah Road at a T junction . Mandurah Road and Old Coast Road south @-@ westbound form a continuous dual carriageway , and from here Old Coast Road is part of National Route 1 . The road then proceeds through Mandurah 's southern suburbs of Falcon and <unk> for 8 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 4 mi ) before bridging the Dawesville Channel . After 1 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) , Old Coast Road turns south to run through eastern Dawesville as a single carriageway ; about 500 metres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) to the west the dual carriageway also travels south as Dawesville Bypass . The two routes meet again after three and a half kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) . Old Coast Road is briefly a dual carriageway for 700 metres ( 0 @.@ 43 mi ) before reducing to a 28 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 17 mi ) two @-@ lane road through Bouvard , Herron and Lake Clifton . The road terminates at a T junction with Forrest Highway . 
 = = = Leschenault – Pelican Point = = = 
 While Forrest Highway bypasses Australind , there is a turn off for Old Coast Road and Tourist Drive 260 at Leschenault . The road heads south through the residential suburb for three and a half kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) before going through a 1 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) reverse curve . Now at the eastern edge of the Leschenault Inlet , Old Coast Road enters Australind and travels along the shoreline for nine and a half kilometres ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) . The road crosses the Collie River , and 600 metres ( 0 @.@ 37 mi ) later there is a roundabout with Estuary Drive and Hamilton Road . The tourist drive follows Estuary Drive to Bunbury , while Old Coast Road continues south for 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) to rejoin Forrest Highway at the south @-@ eastern edge of Pelican Point . 
 = Pau Gasol = 
 Pau Gasol Sáez ( Catalan pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born July 6 , 1980 ) is a Spanish professional basketball player for the San Antonio Spurs of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He is a six @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star , and a four @-@ time All @-@ NBA selection , twice on the second team and twice on the third team . He has won two NBA championships , both with the Los Angeles Lakers . He was the NBA Rookie of the Year in 2002 with the Memphis Grizzlies , one of only two non @-@ American NBA players to win that award . He is the older brother of fellow NBA player Marc Gasol . 
 Gasol was selected by the Atlanta Hawks with the third overall pick in the first round of the 2001 NBA draft , but his rights were traded to Memphis . He currently holds the Grizzlies franchise records for field goals made and attempted , free throws made and attempted , offensive , defensive , and total rebounds , blocked shots , turnovers , and points . After seven seasons with the team , Gasol was traded to the Lakers in 2008 . In 2014 , he signed with the Chicago Bulls . Gasol has won two Olympic silver medals , a FIBA World Cup and three EuroBasket titles with the Spanish national basketball team . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Pau Gasol was born in Barcelona . He began playing basketball as a center with his school team , <unk> , and he eventually signed with Cornellà . When he was sixteen , he began playing for Barcelona 's junior team . He also won both the 1998 Albert Schweitzer Tournament and the 1998 FIBA Europe Under @-@ 18 Championship . After moving to the senior team of Barcelona , Gasol played just 25 total minutes in the Spanish ACB League 1998 – 99 season , and averaged 13 @.@ 7 minutes per game in the ACB the next year . However , in his final season in the ACB , Gasol averaged 12 @.@ 4 points and 5 @.@ 8 rebounds in 24 @.@ 7 minutes per game . Barcelona was victorious in the Spanish National Cup championship game in 2001 , and Gasol was named Most Valuable Player . After entering the NBA draft , Gasol was selected third overall in the first round in the 2001 NBA draft by the Atlanta Hawks , who traded his draft rights to the Memphis Grizzlies in exchange for Shareef Abdur @-@ Rahim . 
 = = NBA career = = 
 = = = Memphis Grizzlies ( 2001 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In Gasol 's first season with the Grizzlies , he won the Rookie of the Year Award , and was named to the All @-@ Rookie first team . He averaged 17 @.@ 6 points and 8 @.@ 9 rebounds per game , and was also the only team member to play in all 82 games that season . Gasol led the team in scoring ( 19 @.@ 0 points per game ) in his second year with the Grizzlies , and for the second year in a row , played in all 82 games . Gasol missed the first game of his career , during his third year , with a foot injury on April 5 , 2004 , which snapped his string of 240 consecutive games played . He grabbed the 1,500th rebound of his career on November 12 , 2003 , against the Orlando Magic and scored his 3,000th career point on October 31 , 2003 , against the Boston Celtics . Despite having 22 points in Game 4 against the San Antonio Spurs , the highest by a Memphis players in the playoffs , his team was eliminated in the first round , not winning a single game against San Antonio . This was both the Grizzlies and Gasol 's first trip to the NBA Playoffs . He scored 31 points and blocked four shots on January 11 , 2005 , against the Indiana Pacers to earn 5 @,@ 000 points and 500 blocks in his career , becoming the 10th fastest player to reach 5 @,@ 000 points / 500 blocks since 1973 – 74 . He also helped his team make it to the playoffs for the second time in his career , but they were eliminated in the first round and did not win a single game against the Phoenix Suns . 
 In his fifth year with the Grizzlies , he became the franchise ’ s all @-@ time leading rebounder on March 24 against the New York Knicks when he grabbed his <unk> rebound in a Grizzlies uniform . He made 29 consecutive free throw attempts from January 24 to 28 , tying the second best mark in Grizzlies history , including two straight games going 12 – 12 from the line , tying the best single @-@ game mark in franchise history . Gasol and the Grizzlies returned to the 2006 NBA Playoffs | playoffs ] ] for the third time in his and his team 's history . Once again , they were eliminated in the first round and did not win a single game against the Dallas Mavericks . 
 On February 9 , 2006 , making his first appearance , Gasol was selected to play in the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Game in Houston , Texas as a reserve center for the Western Conference . At the time , he was one of four players ranked among Western Conference forwards in the top ten in points , rebounds , assists and blocked shots . He was the first Spanish basketball player as well as the first Grizzlies player to ever make it to the All @-@ Star Game . 
 Gasol missed the first 23 games of the 2006 – 07 NBA season due to a broken foot suffered near the end of Spain 's semifinal win over Argentina in the 2006 FIBA World Championship . He would go on to be named Most Valuable Player of the tournament , which Spain won . He had a season @-@ high 34 points ( most by a Grizzly that season ) , and eight rebounds and tied a career @-@ high and franchise record with eight blocks on January 29 against the Sacramento Kings , and surpassed Shareef Abdur @-@ Rahim as the franchise 's all @-@ time leader in free throw attempts on January 31 against the Dallas Mavericks . He became the all @-@ time franchise leader in field goals made on February 6 against the Houston Rockets , and became the all @-@ time franchise leader in minutes played on February 7 at Dallas . He surpassed Shareef Abdur @-@ Rahim ( 7 @,@ 801 points ) as the Grizzlies ' all @-@ time leading scorer on March 7 , 2007 , against the Toronto Raptors ( 7 @,@ 809 points at the time ) . On January 24 , 2007 , Gasol recorded his second career triple @-@ double against the hosting Utah Jazz , garnering 17 points , 13 rebounds , and 12 assists . He also registered 2 blocks and one steal . 
 = = = Los Angeles Lakers ( 2008 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On February 1 , 2008 , Gasol was traded to the Los Angeles Lakers along with a 2010 second round draft pick for Kwame Brown , <unk> <unk> , Aaron McKie , the rights to Marc Gasol ( Pau 's younger brother ) , and 2008 and 2010 first round draft picks . There has been some controversy surrounding the trade . Chris Wallace denied in an ESPN article that he had been ordered by owner Michael Heisley to make the Grizzlies more attractive to a potential buyer . Wallace said , " No one put pressure on me to do this , and Michael Heisley has actually been reluctant to move Pau . " He also said that they had been " trolling " the waters for a while and dealt with a number of teams . He selected the Lakers deal because " it didn 't get any better than this . " When Gasol departed the Grizzlies , he held twelve franchise records , including games played , minutes played , field goals made , free throws made and attempted , offensive , defensive , and total rebounds , blocked shots , turnovers , and points . Per game statistics , he leads Memphis in defensive and total rebounds along with blocked shots . On February 5 , he made his first Lakers appearance in a game against the New Jersey Nets , during which he scored 24 points and had 12 rebounds in a 105 – 90 win over the Nets . On March 14 , Gasol sprained his ankle in a game against the New Orleans Hornets , stepping on the foot of teammate Vladimir <unk> in the first quarter . Gasol was expected to miss the remaining three games of the Lakers ' road trip after x @-@ rays came up negative . Gasol returned to the starting lineup on April 2 against the Portland Trail Blazers and played nearly thirty @-@ two minutes , registering 10 points , six rebounds and seven assists . He admitted to feeling limited with the swelling in his ankle still present . Gasol helped the Lakers finish the regular season with the best record in the Western Conference ( 57 – 25 ) , with him in the starting lineup the Lakers went 22 – 5 . Kobe Bryant has also stated that playing with Gasol clicked from the start . 
 In the Lakers ' opening game of the playoffs , he contributed 36 points , 16 rebounds , 8 assists and 3 blocked shots . When the Lakers swept the Denver Nuggets in the first round , it was Gasol 's first trip to the second round in four tries . His previous team , the Grizzlies , failed to reach the playoffs for the second year in a row . He contributed 17 points and 13 rebounds in Game 6 against the Utah Jazz to help the Lakers advance to the conference finals . On May 31 , he recorded a career high 19 rebounds in a series @-@ clinching win against the San Antonio Spurs , and he became the first Spaniard to reach the NBA Finals . Gasol scored 14 @.@ 7 points per game on <unk> shooting in the 2008 Finals against the Boston Celtics , which was below his scoring average of 18 @.@ 9 during the regular season , However , he led the Lakers in rebounding with 10 @.@ 2 per game throughout the championship series , up from his regular @-@ season average of 8 @.@ 4 . Los Angeles lost in six games against Boston in the Finals , including a 131 – 92 loss in Game 6 . In the Playoffs , Gasol was the second leading Laker in points ( 16 @.@ 9 ) , rebounds ( 9 @.@ 3 ) and assists per game ( 4 @.@ 0 ) . He was the leader in blocks per game ( 1 @.@ 90 ) and was tied with Lamar Odom with the most postseason double @-@ doubles ( 10 ) . 
 On January 2 , 2009 , in a win against the Utah Jazz , Gasol scored his 10,000th career point . Gasol earned his second All @-@ Star appearance as a reserve for the Western Conference squad during the 2008 – 09 NBA season , his first as a Laker . He was also named Western Conference Player of the Month after helping the Lakers to an 11 – 2 record for the month of February that included road wins over Boston and Cleveland . He finished the regular season with averages of 18 @.@ 9 points , 9 @.@ 6 rebounds , 3 @.@ 5 assists , and 1 block per game . Gasol then won his first NBA championship ring when the Lakers defeated the Orlando Magic in the 2009 Finals . 
 On December 24 , 2009 , Gasol signed a 3 @-@ year extension with the Lakers worth $ 64 @.@ 7 million . Gasol earned his third All @-@ Star appearance as a reserve for the Western Conference and finished the regular season with averages of 18 @.@ 3 points , 11 @.@ 3 rebounds , 3 @.@ 4 assists , and 1 @.@ 7 blocks . In Game 6 of the first round , Gasol grabbed 18 rebounds and his last @-@ second putback eliminated the <unk> City Thunder . In the conference semifinals against the Utah Jazz , he averaged 23 @.@ 5 points and 14 @.@ 5 rebounds , and finally in the conference finals against the Phoenix Suns , he averaged 19 @.@ 7 points with 7 @.@ 2 rebounds . In Game 7 of the NBA Finals against the Boston Celtics , Gasol scored 19 points , ( 6 – 16 FGM @-@ A , 7 – 13 FTM @-@ A ) grabbed 18 rebounds and recorded two blocks as the Lakers repeated as champions . In 2010 , he was chosen as the 15th @-@ smartest athlete in sports by Sporting News . 
 Challenged by Lakers ' coach Phil Jackson to be more assertive while Bryant recovered from offseason knee surgery , Gasol started the season 's first week averaging 25 @.@ 3 points on 52 @.@ 5 percent shooting , 10 @.@ 3 rebounds , and five assists per game as the Lakers started 3 – 0 . He was named Western Conference Player of the Week . He earned his third straight All @-@ Star selection and his season averages of 19 points and 10 rebounds were nearly identical to what he had put up as a Laker the previous three seasons . Pau 's play also merited him All @-@ NBA second team honors for the first time in his career . In the playoffs , Gasol only averaged 13 points on 42 % shooting over 10 games , and the Lakers were swept by the Dallas Mavericks in the second round . Gasol had the worst post season performance of his career . Lakers Hall of Famer and ESPN analyst Magic Johnson cited Gasol as a possible trade option for the Lakers to acquire Magic center Dwight Howard . Gasol ignored the false reports about his relationship status with his girlfriend as the cause of his poor performance and has accepted the criticism of his play as valid . During the 2011 – 12 NBA season , Gasol and teammate Lamar Odom were subjected to trade rumors involving former New Orleans Hornets guard Chris Paul . After the trade fell through , Gasol vowed that it would not affect the way he played . Odom , on the other hand , was angry at the Laker organization and was traded to the 2010 – 11 NBA champion Dallas Mavericks for a future first round pick . After Lakers co @-@ captain Derek Fisher was traded in March 2012 , Gasol joined Bryant as co @-@ captains of the team . He won the 2011 – 12 <unk> NBA Community Assist Award . 
 After a 1 – 4 start to the 2012 – 13 season , the Lakers replaced head coach Mike Brown with Mike D 'Antoni . Gasol was struggling after seven games under D 'Antoni , averaging 10 @.@ 1 points and 8 @.@ 0 rebounds while shooting 38 @.@ 8 percent , and he was benched in the fourth quarter in multiple games . The team had difficulties getting Gasol involved in D 'Antoni 's offense , which historically had not had post players playing forward . Gasol ranked only 27th in the league in post @-@ up points with 2 @.@ 7 per game , down from prior seasons when he was fifth in 2010 – 11 and ninth in 2011 – 12 . On November 18 , 2012 , in a win against the Houston Rockets , Gasol scored his 15,000th career point . Bothered by tendinitis in both knees since training camp , Gasol sat out eight games in December before returning to the starting lineup . Later , he was diagnosed with plantar fasciitis , but continued playing . General manager Mitch <unk> told Lakers season @-@ ticket holders the team needed Gasol to be more involved . On January 7 , 2013 , Gasol received a blow to the face from Denver 's JaVale McGee in the fourth quarter of a 112 – 105 loss . He suffered a concussion , forcing him to miss the next five games . In his first game back , he came off the bench after having started his first 345 games with the Lakers . In the next game , he returned to the starting lineup and scored 25 points against Toronto , only his second 20 @-@ point game of the season . However , in the next game on January 21 , D 'Antoni moved Gasol to a reserve role and started Earl Clark , a change the coach considered permanent . On February 5 against the Brooklyn Nets , Gasol tore the plantar fascia of his right foot . Gasol had tweaked the fascia in the first half , but played through the soreness until he felt it pop when he tried to block a shot by Brook Lopez towards the end of the game . He returned over six weeks later on March 22 after missing 20 games , with D 'Antoni returning him to the starting lineup over Clark . After a two @-@ game adjustment period , Gasol 's play was solid , and Bryant insisted that Gasol receive the ball in the post . D 'Antoni stated that Gasol had played well since January , and attributed the forward 's earlier struggles to injuries and the team 's evolving offensive system . " I have a lot more confidence in him now , and he 's playing great , " D 'Antoni said . He finished the season with career lows in points ( 13 @.@ 7 ) and field @-@ goal percentage ( <unk> ) , and his rebounds ( 8 @.@ 6 ) were his lowest since his first season with Los Angeles . He was limited to career @-@ low 49 games . However , he had three triple @-@ doubles in his last seven games including the playoffs . Gasol was owed $ 19 @.@ 3 million in 2013 – 14 in the final year of his contract , which would cost the Lakers around $ 50 million including luxury taxes . He became a free agent after the season . 
 = = = Chicago Bulls ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On July 18 , 2014 , Gasol signed with the Chicago Bulls . He said after he was introduced : " It was a gut feeling . I thought Chicago was going to be the best fit for me . It 's a great challenge , but I 'm driven by challenge . I look forward to it . " 
 On January 1 , 2015 , Gasol recorded a career @-@ high 9 blocks , along with 17 points and 9 rebounds , in the 106 @-@ 101 win over the Denver Nuggets . Ten days later , he scored a career @-@ high 46 points on 17 @-@ of @-@ 30 shooting in a 95 @-@ 87 win over the Milwaukee Bucks . On April 9 , 2015 , he recorded a league @-@ best 51st double @-@ double of the season with 16 points and 15 rebounds in an 89 @-@ 78 win over the Miami Heat . He recorded his 54th double @-@ double of the season in the regular season finale on April 15 against the Atlanta Hawks to finish as the league @-@ leader in double @-@ doubles in 2014 – 15 . 
 On December 5 , 2015 , Gasol became the 116th player to reach 1 @,@ 000 regular @-@ season games . He had 13 points and 11 rebounds against the Charlotte Hornets for his ninth double @-@ double of the season . On January 25 , 2016 , he recorded his first career first quarter double @-@ double with 13 points and 10 rebounds . He finished the game with 19 points and 17 rebounds , as the Bulls were defeated by the Miami Heat 89 – 84 . On February 9 , Gasol was named as Jimmy Butler 's replacement on the 2016 Eastern Conference All @-@ Star squad . On February 27 , he recorded his eighth career triple @-@ double and first as a Bull with 22 points , 16 rebounds and a career @-@ high 14 assists in a 103 – 95 loss to the Portland Trail Blazers . At 35 years old , he became the oldest player to record a triple @-@ double since Kobe Bryant did so at 36 years old in 2014 . On March 7 , he recorded his second triple @-@ double of the season with 12 points , 17 rebounds and 13 assists in a 100 – 90 win over the Milwaukee Bucks , becoming just the fourth player 35 years or older with multiple triple @-@ doubles in a season , joining Jason Kidd , Kobe Bryant and Paul Pierce . On April 2 , in a loss to the Detroit Pistons , he became the 38th NBA player to reach 10 @,@ 000 career rebounds . He also became the 36th with 10 @,@ 000 points and 10 @,@ 000 rebounds . 
 = = = San Antonio Spurs ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 14 , 2016 , Gasol signed with the San Antonio Spurs . 
 = = Spanish national team = = 
 Gasol 's first competition with the senior Spain national basketball team was the 2001 EuroBasket tournament , having previously won the 1998 FIBA Europe Under @-@ 18 Championship and 1999 FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship with Spanish junior teams . Being considered , against his own will , the leader of the team , Gasol ended up with the bronze medal in the competition . Gasol has since had much success with the Spanish team , winning the 2006 FIBA World Championship and the 2009 and 2011 EuroBasket tournaments , being chosen as the Most Valuable Player in the first two ; he also won silver medals at the 2003 and 2007 EuroBasket , and the 2008 and 2012 Olympic Games . Gasol was also the highest @-@ scoring player of the 2004 Summer Olympics , and Spain 's flag bearer at the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics , replacing the injured Rafael Nadal . In 2014 , Gasol was named to the All @-@ tournament team of the 2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup . In the 2015 FIBA Eurobasket , Gasol was named the MVP of the competition after some amazing performances , averaging 25 @.@ 6 points and 8 @.@ 8 rebounds per game ( he was the competition leader for points per game , and 4th in rebounds per game ) . During the knockout matches of the competition , Gasol inspired the Spanish side which was missing many of its stars like Ricky Rubio , Juan Carlos Navarro , Alex <unk> and his brother Marc Gasol . Remembered will be his incredible showing at the semi @-@ final against France , where he scored 40 points , half of his team 's total . The 35 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> was also named the competition 's leader for blocked shots per game ( 2 @.@ 3 ) . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Gasol is very athletic and quick for a 7 @-@ footer ( 213 cm ) , allowing him to play both the power forward and center positions , much like fellow European players Toni Kukoč and Dirk Nowitzki . He is a refined scorer in the post and midrange ; his overall game is near @-@ ambidextrous and makes it difficult for opposing teams to defend . Gasol uses a variety of midrange jumpers , hook shots , up @-@ and @-@ under moves , and shot fakes to score very efficiently . In addition , his foot speed relative to his size allows him to run the fast break and finish effectively . He is also a skilled passer for a big man , earning 3 @.@ 3 assists per game over his career . Defensively , he is an above @-@ average shot blocker with a career average of 1 @.@ 6 blocks per game . Former Lakers teammate Kobe Bryant said of Gasol , " You 'd be hard @-@ pressed to find a big [ man ] with his skill set in the history of the game . " 
 Gasol is a double @-@ double machine , having recorded over 550 double @-@ doubles in his NBA career . On April 2 , 2016 , he became the 36th player in NBA history to reach the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ point / 10 @,@ 000 @-@ rebound mark . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Note : The Euroleague is not the only competition in which the player participated for the team during the season . He also played in domestic competition , and regional competition if applicable . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = = Playoffs = = = = 
 = = = Euroleague = = = 
 = = Awards & honors = = 
 = = = FC Barcelona = = = 
 Spanish King 's Cup champion ( 2001 ) 
 Most Valuable Player of the Spanish King 's Cup ( 2001 ) 
 Spanish League champion ( 1999 , 2001 ) 
 Spanish League Finals MVP ( 2001 ) 
 All @-@ Euroleague Second Team ( 2001 ) 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 2 × NBA champion ( 2009 , 2010 ) 
 2 × All @-@ NBA Second Team selection ( 2011 , 2015 ) 
 2 × All @-@ NBA Third Team selection ( 2009 , 2010 ) 
 6 × NBA All @-@ Star ( 2006 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2015 , 2016 ) 
 NBA Rookie of the Year Award ( 2002 ) 
 NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team ( 2002 ) 
 = = = European Player of the Year awards = = = 
 2x Mr. Europa ( 2004 , 2009 ) 
 3x Euroscar Award ( 2008 , 2009 , 2010 ) 
 2x FIBA Europe Player of the Year ( 2008 , 2009 ) 
 2x All @-@ Europeans Player of the Year ( 2009 , 2010 ) 
 = = = Spanish national team = = = 
 Gold medal at the FIBA Europe Under @-@ 18 Championship ( 1998 ) 
 Gold medal at the FIBA Under @-@ 19 World Championship ( 1999 ) 
 Bronze medal at the FIBA Europe Under @-@ 20 Championship ( 2000 ) 
 Bronze medal at the EuroBasket 2001 
 Silver medal at the EuroBasket 2003 
 Gold medal at the 2006 FIBA World Championship 
 Most Valuable player of the 2006 FIBA World Championship 
 Silver medal at the EuroBasket 2007 
 Silver medal at 2008 Olympic Basketball Tournament 
 Gold medal at the EuroBasket 2009 
 Gold medal at the EuroBasket 2011 
 Silver medal at 2012 Olympic Basketball Tournament 
 Gold medal at the EuroBasket 2015 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gasol 's mother , Marisa , was a medical doctor , and his father , Agustí , was a nurse administrator . When Pau was born , his family was living in Cornellà , but he was born in Barcelona , at Sant Pau Hospital , where both of his parents worked . When he was six years old , his family moved to another Barcelona suburb , Sant Boi de Llobregat , where he spent the remainder of his childhood . His parents moved to the Memphis suburb of Germantown , Tennessee , after he signed with the Grizzlies , and enrolled his younger brothers Marc and Adrià in Lausanne Collegiate School in Memphis . They planned to move to the Los Angeles area when Pau was traded to the Lakers , with Agustí accepting a job with a health @-@ care company in that area ; although the Grizzlies obtained the rights to Marc 's services as part of the trade , he was expected to re @-@ sign with his Spanish team <unk> Girona . However , when Marc decided to sign with the Grizzlies , their parents chose to stay in Germantown . Agustí now works from home for the same company , while Marisa now volunteers at St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital . 
 Since being traded to the Lakers , Gasol lives in Redondo Beach , across the street from the shoreline . 
 In 2009 , Gasol , along with several other NBA players , joined the Hoops for St. Jude charity program benefitting the St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital . 
 Gasol was never interested in football , but loved basketball . The first sport he played was actually rugby , before switching to basketball . He is described as " a family boy and the perfect student , a tad shy , and a bit of a joker . " 
 He originally did not want to make sports his career . On the day that Magic Johnson announced his HIV @-@ positive status in 1991 , the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Gasol , who had heard the news in school , decided that he wanted to be a doctor and find a cure for AIDS . He enrolled in medical school at the University of Barcelona , but left as his basketball career at FC Barcelona advanced . He remains strongly interested in medicine . Gasol regularly visits Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles , a standard stop for athletes making charitable visits in the L.A. area , but does not limit his business to visiting young patients . On one visit , he asked a group of doctors well @-@ informed questions about their treatment of children with scoliosis . In April 2010 , Gasol was scheduled to sit in on a spinal surgery , wearing surgical scrubs , with Dr. David Skaggs , the hospital 's chief of orthopedic surgery . Skaggs has said , " We talk to him now almost like he is a surgical colleague . " 
 Gasol canceled his original plans to observe a surgery when he came down with a low @-@ grade fever the day before the operation , not wishing to risk infecting anyone at the hospital . He was able to reschedule his observation for June 2010 , witnessing Skaggs lead a team operating on a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl from Colorado with scoliosis . 
 Gasol also has a broad range of intellectual and cultural interests . He has taught himself Italian and French to go along with his childhood languages of Catalan and Spanish plus English . While with the Lakers , he and Kobe Bryant spoke to one another during games in Spanish to keep opponents from knowing their plans . Gasol also regularly reads historical novels , plays the works of French classical composers on his keyboard , and attends concerts and operas ; he is a friend of Spanish tenor Plácido Domingo , and often visits him backstage after performances . 
 His younger brother Marc , who is 216 centimetres ( 7 ft 1 in ) tall and 127 kilograms ( 280 lb ) , is also a professional basketball player , currently playing for the Memphis Grizzlies . Marc was drafted by the Los Angeles Lakers , 48th overall , in the 2007 NBA draft and his rights were traded to the Memphis Grizzlies , as part of the deal that sent Gasol to the Lakers . Their youngest brother Adrià played for Lausanne 's basketball team ; his coach at Lausanne said , " He 's built like Pau , with a mean streak like Marc , " although he was not at the time considered a major basketball prospect . After returning to Spain for his final two years of high school basketball , Adrià enrolled at University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) in August 2012 and joined the UCLA basketball team as a walk on . 
 Gasol denied false reports that he had broken up with his girlfriend , Silvia Lopez Castro , in the exit interviews after his poor performance in the 2011 NBA Playoffs . 
 = Walter Payton = 
 Walter Jerry Payton ( July 25 , 1954 – November 1 , 1999 ) was an American football running back who played for the Chicago Bears of the National Football League ( NFL ) for thirteen seasons . Payton was known around the NFL as " Sweetness " . He is remembered as one of the most prolific running backs in the history of the NFL . Payton , a nine @-@ time Pro Bowl selectee , once held the league 's record for most career rushing yards , touchdowns , carries , yards from scrimmage , all @-@ purpose yards , and many other categories . His eight career touchdown passes are just second to Frank Gifford an NFL record for non @-@ quarterbacks . He was elected into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1993 . Hall of Fame NFL player and coach Mike Ditka described Payton as the greatest football player he had ever seen — but even greater as a human being . 
 Payton began his football career in Mississippi , and went on to have an outstanding collegiate football career at Jackson State University where he was an All @-@ American . He started his professional career with the Chicago Bears in 1975 , who selected him as the 1975 Draft 's fourth overall pick . Payton proceeded to win two NFL Most Valuable Player Awards and won Super Bowl XX with the 1985 Chicago Bears . After struggling with the rare liver disease primary sclerosing cholangitis for several months , Payton died on November 1 , 1999 , aged 46 , from cholangiocarcinoma . His legacy includes the Walter Payton Award , the Walter Payton Man of the Year Award , and a heightened awareness of the need for organ donations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Payton was one of three children born to Peter and <unk> Payton in West Point , Mississippi . His father was a factory worker who had played semi @-@ professional baseball . Payton was an active member of the Boy Scouts , Little League , and his local church . At John J. Jefferson High School , Payton played drums in the marching band , participated in the track team and sang in the school choir . Outside of school , he played drums in jazz @-@ rock groups . 
 His brother Eddie was on the football team , and Payton did not play partly to avoid competing with him . After Eddie graduated , the football coach asked Payton to try out for the team , and he agreed on condition that he be allowed to continue playing in the band . 
 Once he began to play football , as a junior , he achieved instant success as a running back , running 65 yards for a touchdown on his first high school carry . At 5 ft 10 in ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) , he was not especially large , but his speed and strength made him one of the team 's featured players . Jefferson High School was integrated with neighboring Columbia High School that year ; Payton and his teammates were upset that their head coach , Charles L. Boston , had become an assistant and Payton boycotted some of the spring practices in protest , but returned during the fall season . He then earned statewide honors as a member of Mississippi 's all @-@ state team , leading Columbia to an unexpected 8 @-@ 2 season . His performance helped ease the local tensions surrounding desegregation . Tommy Davis , Columbia ’ s football coach , claimed that he could always count on Payton when the team needed to score . Payton ’ s statistics proved that that was no exaggeration : he scored in every game during his junior and senior years . He was named to the all @-@ conference team three years in a row . Payton also led the Little Dixie Conference in scoring his senior year and made the all @-@ state team . In addition to excelling at football , Payton averaged 18 points a game for Columbia ’ s basketball team , leaped three @-@ quarters of an inch short of 23 feet in the long jump , played some baseball , and continued to drum in the school band . 
 = = College career = = 
 Though Payton had established himself as one of Mississippi 's best running back prospects , he received no invitations from Southeastern Conference colleges or universities , which were accepting only a few black players at the time . After originally committing to Kansas State University , he decided to pursue his collegiate career at the historically black , Jackson State University , Jackson , Mississippi , where his older brother Eddie played football ( contrary to popular belief , he was never recruited by the University of Kansas , according to then coach Don <unk> as Payton claimed in his autobiography ) . 
 While attending Jackson State , Payton played alongside many future professional football players , including Jerome <unk> , Robert Brazile , and Jackie Slater . As a member of the Jackson State Tigers , Payton rushed for more than 3 @,@ 500 yards , averaging 6 @.@ 1 yards per carry . Also , he broke the scoring record by rushing for 65 touchdowns during his college career , although this is not an official NCAA record , as they do not recognize individual scoring records . In 1973 , Payton was selected for the All @-@ American Team . The following year he was named Black College Player of the Year . Payton graduated in 1975 with a Bachelor 's degree in Communications . 
 He acquired the nickname " Sweetness " in college . The nickname 's origin is ambiguous : it is variously said to have stemmed from his personality , from his athletic grace , or as a sarcastic description of his aggressive playing style . In 1996 , Payton was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . On January 18 , 2010 , it was announced that Payton would be one of eleven members of the inaugural class inducted into the Black College Football Hall of Fame on February 20 , 2010 . 
 = = = Breakout performance = = = 
 On October 1 , 1972 during Walter Payton ’ s sophomore year , he set a then @-@ best <unk> scoring record by scoring 7 touchdowns and running two points after for 46 points as Jackson State crushed Lane College , 72 − 0 . Payton scored on TD runs of 6 , 8 , 2 , 3 , 1 , 2 , and 31 yards in the blowout win . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1975 – 1982 = = = 
 The Chicago Bears drafted Walter Payton in the first round of the 1975 NFL Draft , as the fourth overall pick . The Bears had endured several losing seasons after the retirement of the iconic Gale Sayers in 1972 . Payton 's first game was not particularly successful ; he was held to zero net rushing yards on eight attempts . His best performance of the season was the final game against the New Orleans Saints , where he rushed for 134 yards on 20 carries . Payton finished the season with only 679 yards and seven touchdowns . However , Payton led the league in yards per kickoff returns . 
 Payton was eager to improve his performance . During the 1976 NFL season , Payton rushed for 1 @,@ 390 yards and scored 13 touchdowns . After the season , he was selected to play in the 1977 Pro Bowl , where he was declared the Pro Bowl MVP . The next year , he rushed for 1 @,@ 852 yards and scored 16 touchdowns , becoming the league ’ s leading scorer for the season . He earned numerous awards that season , including the Associated Press and Pro Football Writers of America 's Most Valuable Player awards . A memorable game of the 1977 NFL season was against the Minnesota Vikings on November 20 . He rushed for a then @-@ record 275 yards , breaking the previous record of 273 yards held by O. J. Simpson . In that record @-@ setting game against the Vikings , Payton was suffering with a 101 @-@ degree fever and intense flu . His longest run was for 58 yards , and he caught one pass for 6 yards . His record stood for 23 years until Corey Dillon of the Cincinnati Bengals ran for 278 yards on October 22 , 2000 — a record that has since been broken by Jamal Lewis ( 295 yards ) on September 14 , 2003 , and Adrian Peterson ( 296 yards ) on November 4 , 2007 . By the end of the decade , Payton had received additional accolades for his exploits as a blocker , receiver , emergency punter , and quarterback . 
 = = = 1983 – 1986 = = = 
 The Bears struggled to assemble consecutive winning seasons , landing only two playoff berths since his arrival . The lack of success prompted the Bears ' management to replace Neill Armstrong with Mike Ditka for the season that began in the Fall of 1982 . Ditka , a tight end during the 1960s and 1970s who would also join the Pro Football Hall of Fame , led the Bears to a 3 – 6 ( strike @-@ shortened ) record in 1982 . He led the Bears to an 8 – 8 finish in 1983 and to a 10 – 6 finish in 1984 . Payton continued his success by rushing for more than 1 @,@ 400 yards in both seasons . On October 7 , 1984 against the New Orleans Saints , Payton broke Jim Brown 's career rushing record of 12 @,@ 312 yards . In 1985 , Payton rushed for more than 1 @,@ 500 yards , helping the Bears establish the league 's second @-@ best offense . The Bears ' 46 defense of that season would go on to become one of the best in NFL history , setting a record for fewest points allowed . 
 Payton performed with his teammates in the widely released 1985 music video The Super Bowl Shuffle . The Bears went on to a 15 – 1 record that culminated in a 46 @-@ 10 victory over the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XX . Although Payton 's offensive prowess had assisted the Bears throughout the 1985 season , he did not score any touchdowns in the postseason and the New England Patriots prevented him from reaching the end zone in the Super Bowl . According to quarterback Jim McMahon , he was targeted by two or three defenders on every play , and others stated that Payton 's mere presence allowed others to shine , given that at least 2 people were targeting Payton on every play . In a later interview , Ditka stated that one of his major regrets was Payton 's lack of a touchdown in this game . 
 = = = 1986 − 1987 = = = 
 Payton , who was a 12 @-@ year veteran , amassed 1 @,@ 333 yards in the 1986 NFL season . The Bears won the NFC Central Division , but lost to the Washington Redskins 27 – 13 in the divisional round . At the end of the 1986 season , he announced that he would retire after completing the 1987 NFL season . During his last season with the Bears , Payton split carries with his successor , Neal Anderson , and rushed for only 533 yards . Payton 's career ended with another loss to the Washington Redskins in the divisional round of the playoffs by the score of 21 – 17 on January 10 , 1988 . Over his entire career , Payton rushed for 16 @,@ 726 yards , which broke the record for most rushing yards by any NFL player in history , and scored 110 touchdowns . He caught 492 passes for 4 @,@ 538 yards and 15 touchdowns . Payton set several team records , including most career rushing yards , receptions , touchdowns , and touchdown passes by a running back . His jersey number was retired by the Bears , and he was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1993 . The only game he missed in his 13 @-@ year career was in his rookie season of 1975 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Payton 's motto was " Never Die Easy " , which is also the title of his posthumously published autobiography . Payton attributed this motto to Bob Hill , his coach at Jackson State . In practice , this meant that Payton refused to deliberately run out @-@ of @-@ bounds and always delivered some punishment to his tacklers before being forced off the field or forced down . 
 One of Payton 's signature maneuvers was the " stutter @-@ step " , a high @-@ stepping , irregularly paced run . He developed this as a way to distract his pursuers during long runs , saying that it startled them into thinking and gave him some advantage over players who were actually faster runners . In his autobiography , he likened the stutter step to a kind of " option play " : when he was stutter @-@ stepping , defenders would have to commit to a pursuit angle based upon whether they thought he would accelerate after the stutter @-@ step , or cut — he would read this angle and do the opposite of what the defender had committed to . 
 He re @-@ invented the practice of stiff @-@ arming his tacklers , which had gone out of favor among running backs in the 1970s . At times , he used his high school experience as a long jumper to leap over his opponents , landing on his head in the end zone to gain a touchdown in a game against the Buffalo Bills . His running gait was somewhat unusual , as his knees were minimally bent , and the motion was largely powered from the hip . This may have given his knees , a football player 's most vulnerable joints , some protection , although he underwent arthroscopic surgery on both knees in 1983 . He referred to this procedure as an 11 @,@ 000 @-@ yard checkup . 
 After scoring touchdowns , Payton declined to celebrate ; instead , he would often hand the ball to his teammates or the official . He disapproved of the growing practice of touchdown celebrations ; he preferred post @-@ game antics such as rushing into the locker room and locking his teammates out in the cold while taking a long shower . Although Payton would have won the respect of his peers and coaches by his running alone , he made 492 receptions and over 4 @,@ 000 yards over his career and was a consistent threat in the passing game . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Throughout his life Walter Payton had claimed his date of birth as July 25 , 1954 , a date which is cited in many of his early biographies . However , while researching his biography of Payton , Sports Illustrated 's Jeff Pearlman discovered his actual date of birth to be July 25 , 1953 . Pearlman found Payton 's earliest use of the later date during his pursuit of the Heisman Trophy at Jackson State . 
 Payton married Connie Norwood in 1976 . During his rookie year he resided in a home on the north side of Arlington Heights , Illinois . The couple had two children , Jarrett Payton ( born 1980 ) and Brittney ( born December 26 , 1985 ) and resided in South Barrington , Illinois . 
 A 2011 biography by Jeff Pearlman describes a tumultuous personal life very different from his positive public image . According to Pearlman 's biography , Payton was a consistent adulterer , and a multiple drug user . His drug use began with painkillers provided to him by the Chicago Bears to cope with the punishment he absorbed during games , and continued after his football career ended . Payton did not cope well with life after his career , especially with issues of boredom and loneliness . His wife and family contend that the book is filled with factual misstatements , and paints too bleak a picture of his life . However , many reviewers of Pearlman 's work have found it to have been " exhaustively " researched and documented by hundreds of interviews . The ghostwriter for Payton 's autobiography called the book " an incredible , thoughtful , deep and profound read . It ’ s exceptional work . " 
 = = Civic Awards = = 
 Walter Payton was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln ( the State ’ s highest honor ) by the Governor of Illinois in 1987 in the area of Sports . 
 = = Investments = = 
 In 1995 , Payton , along with many other investors , sought to bring an NFL expansion team to St. Louis , Missouri , and Payton expressed his interest in becoming the first minority owner in NFL history . Although the NFL strongly favored a franchise in St. Louis , their efforts were thwarted because of internal dissension among the investment group members leading the NFL to award franchises to investment groups in Jacksonville , Florida ( Jacksonville Jaguars ) and Charlotte , North Carolina ( Carolina Panthers ) . St. Louis eventually received a team when the Los Angeles Rams moved to the city in 1995 . 
 Payton pursued various business ventures in retirement , including becoming co @-@ owner of Dale Coyne Racing in the CART IndyCar World Series . He also drove in several Trans @-@ Am Series events , including a 1993 race at Road America in which his car overturned and caught fire . He suffered burns but escaped serious injury . 
 In 1995 , he and several partners purchased a Chicago , Burlington and Quincy Railroad roundhouse in Aurora , Illinois . The property became known as " Walter Payton 's Roundhouse " , hosting a restaurant , brewery , banquet and meeting facility , and museum . In 1999 the property received an award from the National Trust for Historic Preservation . The beers brewed at the Roundhouse received awards in the 2000s . Payton appeared on a 1987 episode of Saturday Night Live ( co @-@ hosting with fellow football player Joe Montana ) . In 1994 , he made an appearance at Summerslam in the corner of Razor Ramon . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In February 1999 , Payton announced that he had a rare autoimmune liver disease known as primary sclerosing cholangitis , which may have led to his cholangiocarcinoma ( bile duct cancer ) . He spent his final months as an advocate for organ transplants , appearing in many commercials to encourage others to donate organs , although by the time his first appeal was recorded , his illness was already too far advanced for transplantation to have been a viable option . In April of that year , Payton made a final public appearance at a Chicago Cubs game with Mike Ditka , where he threw the game 's ceremonial first pitch . Author Don Yaeger worked with him during the last weeks of his life to create his autobiography , Never Die Easy . 
 On November 1 , 1999 , Payton died from the complications that arose from his illness . During the same week , the NFL held special ceremonies in each game to commemorate his career and legacy . In addition , the Chicago Bears wore special # 34 patches on their jerseys to honor Payton . His body was cremated after his death . 
 Speakers at Payton 's public funeral service , held in Soldier Field , included Jesse Jackson ; then National Football League Commissioner Paul Tagliabue ; former teammate Dan Hampton ; his widow Connie Payton ; and his children , Jarrett and Brittney . Among the 1 @,@ 000 mourners at the private service were John Madden ; Illinois Governor George Ryan ; Chicago 's mayor Richard M. Daley ; former teammates Matt <unk> , Mike Singletary , Roland Harper , and Jim McMahon ; the Bears ' equipment manager and building superintendent ; and many other people representing a wide social , political , and economic spectrum . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Payton 's legacy continues through the charitable Walter and Connie Payton Foundation . His own appeals — and after his death , his foundation 's — for greater awareness of the need for organ donations are widely credited with bringing national attention to the problem . After his appeals , donations in Illinois skyrocketed , and the regional organ bank of Illinois was overwhelmed with calls . In response , the City of Chicago inserted organ donation requests into city @-@ vehicle @-@ registration mailings in early 2000 , and by August 2000 , 13 @,@ 000 people had signed on to the program . The foundation continues to run a program that Payton organized to donate toys to underprivileged children across the Chicago area each Christmas . The family established the Walter Payton Cancer Fund in 2002 . 
 Many modern NFL running backs have cited Payton as a source of inspiration . Emmitt Smith tearfully paid homage to Payton after breaking Payton ’ s rushing record . LaDainian Tomlinson , who set numerous records during the 2006 NFL season , named Payton as one of his foremost mentors and inspirations . Ahman Green , a former player for the Bears ' rival Green Bay Packers , is said to have idolized Payton , viewing the highlight film " Pure Payton " before each game . Walter 's son , Jarrett Payton , was a running back for the Tennessee Titans , NFL Europe 's Amsterdam Admirals , CFL 's Montreal Alouettes and IFL 's Chicago Slaughter . During his tenure at the University of Miami , Jarrett wore a # 34 jersey to honor his father 's memory . In 2009 , Jarrett married on March 4 , which was intentionally set to coincide with Payton 's jersey number . 
 The city of Chicago has honored Payton ’ s memory in several ways . In 1999 , the city created a special city sticker that featured Payton . The profits from the sales of these stickers along with the special license plate created by the State of Illinois are given to support organ @-@ donor programs across Illinois . Also , the city named a high school , Walter Payton College Prep , in his honor . In September 2007 , the University of Illinois at Chicago Medical Center opened the Walter Payton Liver Center after a generous donation from Payton 's family , who were pleased with the care he received there . Chicago Metra commuters have long been witness to a simple " # 34 Sweetness " , painted on a bridge piling of the Air Line on the south end of the Chicago Union Station yards . The CBS sitcom Mike and Molly honored Payton in 2011 with " The Walter Payton Elementary School " . 
 Until its sale to Two Brothers Brewing in 2011 , Walter Payton 's Roundhouse continued to draw hundreds of thousands of visitors annually to the Aurora , Illinois site . A plaque now hangs on the building commemorating Payton . There are two athletic awards named after Payton . The NCAA gives the " Walter Payton Award " to the best offensive player from a Division I FCS ( still often known by its former designation of Division I @-@ AA ) football team . The NFL hands out the " Walter Payton Man of the Year " award for player achievements in community service during a particular season . The wellness center at Jackson State University is also named in honor of him , known as " The Walter Payton Recreation and Wellness Center . " 
 The Chicago Bears honored Payton 's career and life on November 1 , 2009 by airing a special tribute video during halftime . The video consisted of highlight clips from Payton 's career and interview segments from Mike Ditka , Virginia McCaskey , Richard Dent , and many other members of the Bears organization . Payton 's wife , daughter , son , and mother were present to watch the video , which aired on Soldier Field 's Jumbotron . 
 After Payton 's death , <unk> Knoll Hill , an old landfill site turned into a golf course in Arlington Heights , Illinois , was renamed " Payton 's Hill " . There are two plaques on the hill to remind visitors of the hill that it was where Payton used to train in the 1970s / 80s . Payton did his morning run at the hill every day . Pictures and memorabilia of Payton cover the walls of the golf course club house . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Payton was the NFL 's all @-@ time leader in rushing yards and all @-@ purpose yards prior to the 2002 NFL season , when Emmitt Smith broke his record . He also held the single game rushing record until the 2000 NFL season , when it was broken by Corey Dillon . Payton led the league in rushing yards and touchdowns in the 1977 NFL season . Also , he was among the top @-@ ten players for rushing attempts during his entire career , including 1976 , 1977 , and 1978 , leading the category in 1979 . As of 2013 , he is the NFL 's second all @-@ time leading rusher , and is ranked fourth in rushing touchdowns scored . Along with Frank Gifford , Payton threw six interceptions , more than any other non @-@ quarterback position in NFL history . He also passed for eight touchdowns , which is second to Gifford ( 14 ) for non @-@ quarterbacks . 
 = = = Career totals = = = 
 = = = Statistics by season = = = 
 = = NFL records = = 
 = = = Service = = = 
 Consecutive regular season starts by a running back : 170 , from <unk> @-@ 12 @-@ 07 @-@ <unk> 7 , 1975 to <unk> @-@ 09 @-@ 20 @-@ <unk> 20 , 1987 
 Payton missed only one game in his career for a coach 's decision , despite being eligible . 
 = = = Rushing attempts = = = 
 Consecutive seasons leading the league in rushing attempts : 4 ( 1976 – 1979 ) 
 = = = Rushing yards gained = = = 
 Rushing yards gained , career : 16 @,@ 726 
 Broken by Emmitt Smith 
 Seasons with 1 @,@ 000 or more yards rushing : 10 ( 1976 – 1981 , 1983 – 1986 ) 
 Payton played in only nine games during the 1982 season because of the players ' strike . 
 Broken by Emmitt Smith 
 Rushing yards gained , game : 275 ( on 40 carries ) , Chicago Bears vs. Minnesota Vikings , <unk> @-@ 11 @-@ 20 @-@ <unk> 20 , 1977 
 Record first broken by Corey Dillon on <unk> @-@ 10 @-@ 22 @-@ <unk> 22 , 2000 
 Games with 100 or more yards rushing , career : 77 
 Consecutive games with 100 or more yards rushing : 9 , from <unk> @-@ 10 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> 13 , 1985 to <unk> @-@ 12 @-@ 08 @-@ <unk> 8 , 1985 
 Broken by Barry Sanders 
 = = = Rushing touchdowns = = = 
 Rushing touchdowns , career : 110 
 First broken by Marcus Allen ; record now held by Emmitt Smith 
 = = = Yards from scrimmage gained = = = 
 Yards from scrimmage gained , career : 21 @,@ 264 
 Broken by Jerry Rice 
 Games with 100 or more yards from scrimmage gained , career : 108 
 = = = All @-@ purpose attempts = = = 
 All @-@ purpose attempts , career : 4 @,@ 368 
 Broken by Emmitt Smith 
 All @-@ purpose attempts , season : 400 ( 1979 ) 
 Broken by Eric Dickerson in 1983 
 = = = All @-@ purpose yards gained = = = 
 All @-@ purpose yards gained , career : 21 @,@ 803 
 Games with 150 or more all @-@ purpose yards gained , career : 46 
 Tied by Barry Sanders 
 = = = Touchdown passes = = = 
 Touchdown passes , non @-@ quarterback , career : 8 
 = JFK ( film ) = 
 JFK is a 1991 American historical legal @-@ conspiracy thriller film directed by Oliver Stone . It examines the events leading to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and alleged cover @-@ up through the eyes of former New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison ( Kevin Costner ) . 
 Garrison filed charges against New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw ( Tommy Lee Jones ) for his alleged participation in a conspiracy to assassinate the President , for which Lee Harvey Oswald ( Gary Oldman ) was found responsible by a government investigation : the Warren Commission . 
 The film was adapted by Stone and Zachary Sklar from the books On the Trail of the Assassins by Jim Garrison and Crossfire : The Plot That Killed Kennedy by Jim Marrs . Stone described this account as a " counter @-@ myth " to the Warren Commission 's " fictional myth . " 
 The film became embroiled in controversy . Upon JFK 's theatrical release , many major American newspapers ran editorials accusing Stone of taking liberties with historical facts , including the film 's implication that President Lyndon B. Johnson was part of a coup d 'état to kill Kennedy . After a slow start at the box office , the film gradually picked up momentum , earning over $ 205 million in worldwide gross . JFK was nominated for eight Academy Awards ( including Best Picture ) and won two for Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing . It was the most successful of three films Stone made about the American Presidency , followed later by Nixon with Anthony Hopkins in the title role and W. with Josh Brolin as George W. Bush . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with newsreel footage , including the farewell address in 1961 of outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower , warning about the build @-@ up of the " military @-@ industrial complex " . This is followed by a summary of John F. Kennedy 's years as president , emphasizing the events that , in Stone 's thesis , would lead to his assassination . This builds to a reconstruction of the assassination on November 22 , 1963 . New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison subsequently learns about potential links to the assassination in New Orleans . Garrison and his team investigate several possible conspirators , including private pilot David Ferrie ( Joe Pesci ) , but are forced to let them go after their investigation is publicly rebuked by the federal government . Kennedy 's suspected assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is killed by Jack Ruby , and Garrison closes the investigation . 
 The investigation is reopened in 1966 after Garrison reads the Warren Report and notices what he believes to be multiple inaccuracies . Garrison and his staff interrogate several witnesses to the Kennedy assassination , and others involved with Oswald , Ruby , and Ferrie . One such witness is Willie O 'Keefe ( Kevin Bacon ) , a male prostitute serving five years in prison for soliciting , who reveals he witnessed Ferrie discussing a coup d 'état . As well as briefly meeting Oswald , O 'Keefe was romantically involved with a man called " Clay Bertrand " . Jean Hill ( Ellen <unk> ) , a teacher who says she witnessed shots fired from the grassy knoll , tells the investigators that Secret Service threatened her into saying three shots came from the book depository , revealing changes that were made to her testimony by the Warren Commission . Garrison 's staff also test the single bullet theory by aiming an empty rifle from the window through which Oswald was alleged to have shot Kennedy . They conclude that Oswald was too poor a marksman to make the shots , indicating someone else , or multiple marksmen , were involved . 
 Garrison meets a high @-@ level figure in Washington D.C. who identifies himself as " X " ( Donald Sutherland ) . He suggests a conspiracy at the highest levels of government , implicating members of the CIA , the Mafia , the military @-@ industrial complex , Secret Service , FBI , and Kennedy 's vice @-@ president & then president Lyndon Baines Johnson as either co @-@ conspirators or as having motives to cover up the truth of the assassination . X explains that the President was killed because he wanted to pull the United States out of the Vietnam War and dismantle the CIA . X encourages Garrison to keep digging and prosecute New Orleans based international businessman Clay Shaw for his alleged involvement . Upon interrogating Shaw , the businessman denies any knowledge of meeting Ferrie , O 'Keefe or Oswald , but he is soon charged with conspiring to murder the President . 
 Some of Garrison 's staff begin to doubt his motives and disagree with his methods , so leave the investigation . Garrison 's marriage is strained when his wife Liz ( Sissy Spacek ) complains that he is spending more time on the case than with his own family . After a sinister phone call is made to their daughter , Liz accuses Garrison of being selfish and attacking Shaw only because of his homosexuality . In addition , the media launches attacks on television and in newspapers attacking Garrison 's character and criticizing the way his office is spending taxpayers ' money . Some key witnesses become scared and refuse to testify while others , such as Ferrie , are killed in suspicious circumstances . Before his death , Ferrie tells Garrison that he believes people are after him , and reveals there was a conspiracy around Kennedy 's death . 
 The trial of Clay Shaw takes place in 1969 . Garrison presents the court with further evidence of multiple killers and dismissing the single bullet theory , and proposes a Dealey Plaza shots scenario involving three assassins who fired six total shots and framing Oswald for the murders of Kennedy and officer J. D. Tippit but the jury acquits Shaw after less than one hour of deliberation . The film reflects that members of that jury stated publicly that they believed there was a conspiracy behind the assassination , but not enough evidence to link Shaw to that conspiracy . Shaw died of lung cancer in 1974 , but in 1979 Richard Helms testified that Clay Shaw had been a part @-@ time contact of the Domestic Contacts Division of the CIA . The end credits claim that records related to the assassination will be released to the public in 2029 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kevin Costner as Jim Garrison . For the role , Stone sent copies of the script to Costner , Mel Gibson , and Harrison Ford . Initially , Costner turned Stone down . However , the actor 's agent , Michael Ovitz , was a big fan of the project and helped Stone convince the actor to take the role . Before accepting the role , Costner conducted extensive research on Garrison , including meeting the man and his enemies . Two months after finally signing on to play Garrison in January 1991 , his film Dances with Wolves won seven Academy Awards and so his presence greatly enhanced JFK 's bankability in the studio 's eyes . 
 Kevin Bacon as Willie O 'Keefe , a composite character who testifies that Bertrand and Shaw are the same person and that he knew Ferrie , and had met Oswald . 
 Tommy Lee Jones as Clay Shaw / Clay Bertrand . A flamboyantly gay , chain @-@ smoking , New Orleans businessman whom Garrison investigates to find a link between him and President Kennedy 's assassination . Jones was originally considered for another role that was ultimately cut from the film and it was Stone who decided to cast him as Shaw . In preparation for the film , Jones interviewed Garrison on three different occasions and talked to others who had worked with Shaw and knew him . 
 Joe Pesci as David Ferrie . Stone originally wanted James Woods to play Ferrie , but Woods wanted to play Garrison . Stone also approached Willem Dafoe and John Malkovich , who both turned down the role . 
 Laurie Metcalf as New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Susie Cox 
 Gary Oldman as Lee Harvey Oswald , a former U.S. Marine who defected to the Soviet Union and later returned . He was arrested on suspicion of killing Dallas police officer J.D. Tippit . According to Oldman , very little was written about Oswald in the script . Stone gave him several plane tickets , a list of contacts and told him to do his own research . Oldman met with Oswald 's wife , Marina , and her two daughters to prepare for the role . 
 Michael Rooker as New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Bill Broussard 
 Jay O. Sanders as Lou <unk> 
 Sissy Spacek as Liz Garrison , Jim Garrison 's wife . 
 Beata Poźniak as Marina Oswald Porter . Oswald 's wife . Poźniak studied 26 volumes of the Warren Report and spent time living with Marina Oswald . Since the script contained few lines for the Oswalds , Poźniak interviewed acquaintances of the Oswalds in order to improvise her scenes with Gary Oldman . 
 Jack Lemmon as Jack Martin , an American private investigator living in New Orleans . He worked with Guy Banister at Banister 's private investigation office . He was the one who implicated Ferrie to Garrison about Kennedy 's assassination . 
 Walter Matthau as Russell B. Long , an American politician who served in the U.S. Senate as a Democrat from Louisiana from 1948 until 1987 . He inspires Garrison in 1966 to re @-@ open the investigation of President Kennedy 's assassination . 
 Donald Sutherland as X , a shadowy colonel in the U.S. Air Force , author , banker , and critic of U.S. foreign policy , especially the Central Intelligence Agency 's activities . He advises Garrison about the U.S. government 's involvement in President Kennedy 's assassination . The character is loosely based on L. Fletcher Prouty . 
 Edward Asner as Guy Banister , a career member of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a private investigator . He was an avid anti @-@ communist , member of the Minutemen , the John Birch Society , Louisiana Committee on Un @-@ American Activities , and publisher of the Louisiana Intelligence Digest . 
 Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as Jack Ruby , an American nightclub operator from Dallas , Texas . He was convicted on March 14 , 1964 for Oswald 's murder on November 24 , 1963 , two days after Oswald was arrested for Kennedy 's assassination . 
 John Candy as Dean Andrews Jr . , an eccentric New Orleans lawyer who was allegedly contacted by Shaw to represent Oswald in the assassination case . 
 Sally Kirkland as Rose <unk> , a Dallas prostitute who was allegedly beaten up by Jack Ruby 's bodyguards . She 's taken to a clinic where she pleads to the doctors that the Mafia is planning on killing President Kennedy . 
 Wayne Knight as Numa Bertel 
 Vincent D 'Onofrio as Bill Newman , an eyewitness 
 Many actors were willing to waive their normal fees because of the nature of the project and to lend their support . Martin Sheen provided the opening narration . The real Jim Garrison , a severe critic of the Warren Commission , played Chief Justice of the United States Earl Warren himself , during the scene in which he questions Jack Ruby in a Dallas jail . Alleged assassination witness Beverly Oliver , who claims to be the " <unk> Lady " seen in the Zapruder film , also appeared in a cameo role inside Ruby 's club . Sean Stone , Oliver Stone 's son , plays a secondary role as Garrison 's oldest son Jasper . Perry R. Russo , one of the sources for the fictional character " Willie O 'Keefe , " appeared in a cameo role as " angry bar patron . " 
 Dutch investigative journalist Willem Oltmans , who worked as a reporter for Dutch TV broadcaster NOS in the 1960s , had established ties to Kennedy 's closest circle of advisers . After Kennedy 's assassination , Oltmans interviewed Lee Harvey Oswald 's mother , Marguerite . Further investigation led him to Oswald 's alleged CIA babysitter George de Mohrenschildt . According to Oltmans , de Mohrenschildt , who had ties to the CIA , was the assassination 's architect . In 1977 , de Mohrenschildt agreed to disclose information to Oltmans , but disappeared from their meeting place and was found dead in Florida a few weeks later . Intent on irony , Oltmans played de Mohrenschildt in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 Zachary Sklar , a journalist and a professor of journalism at the Columbia School of Journalism , met Garrison in 1987 and helped him rewrite a manuscript that he was working on about Kennedy 's assassination . He changed it from a scholarly book in the third person to " a detective story – a <unk> " in the first person . Sklar edited the book and it was published in 1988 . While attending the Latin American Film Festival in Havana , Cuba , Stone met Sheridan Square Press publisher Ellen Ray on an elevator . She had published Jim Garrison 's book On the Trail of the Assassins . Ray had gone to New Orleans and worked with Garrison in 1967 . She gave Stone a copy of Garrison 's book and told him to read it . He did and quickly bought the film rights with $ 250 @,@ 000 of his own money to prevent talk going around the studios about projects he might be developing . 
 Kennedy 's assassination had always had a profound effect on Stone : " The Kennedy murder was one of the signal events of the postwar generation , my generation . " Stone met Garrison and grilled him with a variety of questions for three hours . Garrison stood up to Stone 's questioning and then got up and left . His pride and dignity impressed the director . Stone 's impressions from their meeting were that Garrison " made many mistakes . He trusted a lot of weirdos and followed a lot of fake leads . But he went out on a limb , way out . And he kept going , even when he knew he was facing long odds . " 
 Stone was not interested in making a film about Garrison 's life , but rather the story behind the conspiracy to kill Kennedy . He also bought the film rights to Jim Marrs ' book Crossfire : The Plot That Killed Kennedy . One of the filmmaker 's primary goals with JFK was to provide a rebuttal to the Warren Commission 's report that he believed was " a great myth . And in order to fight a myth , maybe you have to create another one , a counter @-@ myth . " Even though Marrs ' book collected many theories , Stone was hungry for more and hired Jane Rusconi , a recent Yale University graduate , to lead a team of researchers and assemble as much information about the assassination as possible while the director completed post @-@ production on Born on the Fourth of July . Stone read two dozen books on the assassination while Rusconi read between 100 and 200 books on the subject . 
 By December 1989 , Stone began approaching studios to back his film . While in pre @-@ production on The Doors , he met with three executives at Warner Bros. who wanted him to make a film about Howard Hughes . However , Warren Beatty owned the rights and so Stone pitched JFK . Studio president and Chief Operating Officer Terry Semel liked the idea . He had a reputation for making political and controversial films , including All the President 's Men , The Parallax View and The Killing Fields . Stone made a handshake deal with Warner Bros. whereby the studio would get all the rights to the film and put up $ 20 million for the budget . The director did this so that the screenplay wouldn 't be widely read and bid on , and he also knew that the material was potentially dangerous and wanted only one studio to finance it . Finally , Stone liked Semel 's track record of producing political films . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 When Stone set out to write the screenplay , he asked Sklar ( who also edited Marrs ' book ) to co @-@ write it with him and distill the Garrison and Marrs ' books and Rusconi 's research into a script that would resemble what he called " a great detective movie . " Stone told Sklar his vision of the film : 
 I see the models as Z and Rashomon , I see the event in Dealey Plaza taking place in the first reel , and again in the eighth reel , and again later , and each time we 're going to see it differently and with more illumination . 
 Although he did employ ideas from Rashomon , his principal model for JFK was Z : 
 Somehow I had the impression that in Z you had the showing of the crime and then the re @-@ showing of the crime throughout the picture until it was seen another way . That was the idea of JFK – that was the essence of it : basically , that 's why I called it JFK . Not J dot F dot K dot . JFK . It was a code , like Z was a code , for he lives , American @-@ style . As it was written it became more fascinating : it evolved into four DNA threads . 
 Stone broke the film 's structure down into four stories : Garrison investigating the New Orleans connection to the assassination ; the research that revealed what Stone calls , " Oswald legend : who he was and how to try to inculcate that " ; the recreation of the assassination at Dealey Plaza ; and the information that the character of " X " imparts on Garrison , which Stone saw as the " means by which we were able to move between New Orleans , local , into the wider story of Dealey Plaza . " Sklar worked on the Garrison side of the story while Stone added the Oswald story , the events at Dealey Plaza and the " Mr. X " character . Sklar spent a year researching and writing a 550 triple @-@ spaced page screenplay and then Stone rewrote it and condensed it closer to normal screenplay length . Stone and Sklar used composite characters , most notably the " Mr. X " character played by Donald Sutherland . This was a technique that would be criticized in the press . He was a mix of Richard Case <unk> and retired Air Force colonel Fletcher Prouty , another adviser for the film and who was a military liaison between the CIA and the Pentagon . Meeting Prouty was , for Stone , " one of the most extraordinary afternoons I 've ever spent . Pretty much like in the movie , he just started to talk . " According to Stone , 
 I feel this was in the spirit of the truth because Garrison also met a deep throat type named Richard Case <unk> , who claimed to be a CIA agent and made Jim aware of a much larger scenario than the microcosm of New Orleans . 
 The screenplay 's early drafts suggested a four and a half @-@ hour film with a potential budget of $ 40 million – double what Stone had agreed to with Warner Bros. The director knew film mogul Arnon Milchan and met with him to help finance the film . Milchan was eager to work on the project and launch his new company , Regency Enterprises , with a high profile film like JFK . Milchan made a deal with Warner Bros. to put up the money for the film . Stone managed to pare down his initial revision , a 190 @-@ page draft , to a 156 @-@ page shooting script . 
 There were many advisers for the film , including Gerald Hemming , a former Marine who claimed involvement in various CIA activities , and Robert <unk> , a self @-@ proclaimed photographic expert and longtime JFK assassination researcher and author . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 The story revolves around Costner 's Jim Garrison , with a large cast of well @-@ known actors in supporting roles . Stone was inspired by the casting model of the documentary epic The Longest Day , which he had admired as a child : " It was realistic , but it had a lot of stars ... the supporting cast provides a map of the American psyche : familiar , comfortable faces that walk you through a winding path in the dark woods . " 
 Cinematographer Robert Richardson was a week and a half into shooting City of Hope for John Sayles when he got word that Stone was thinking about making JFK . By the time principal photography wrapped on City of Hope , Richardson was ready to make Stone 's film . To prepare , Richardson read up on various JFK assassination books starting with On the Trail of the Assassins and Crossfire : The Plot That Killed Kennedy . 
 The original idea was to film the opening sequence in 1 @.@ 33 : 1 aspect ratio in order to simulate the TV screens that were available at the time of the assassination , then transition to 1 @.@ 85 : 1 when Garrison began his investigation , and finally switch to 2 @.@ 35 : 1 for scenes occurring in 1968 and later . However , because of time constraints and logistics , Richardson was forced to abandon this approach . 
 Stone wanted to recreate the Kennedy assassination in Dealey Plaza . His producers had to pay the Dallas City Council a substantial amount of money to hire police to reroute traffic and close streets for three weeks . He only had ten days to shoot all of the footage he needed and so he used seven cameras ( two 35 mm and five 16 mm ) and 14 film stocks . Getting permission to shoot in the Texas School Book Depository was more difficult . They had to pay $ 50 @,@ 000 to put someone in the window from which Oswald was supposed to have shot Kennedy . They were allowed to film in that location only between certain hours with only five people on the floor at one time : the camera crew , an actor and Stone . Co @-@ producer Clayton Townsend has said that the hardest part was getting the permission to restore the building to the way it looked back in 1963 . It took five months of negotiation . 
 The production spent $ 4 million to restore Dealey Plaza to 1963 conditions . Stone utilized a variety of film stocks . Richardson said , " It depends whether you want to shoot in 35 or 16 or Super 8 . In many cases the lighting has to be different . " For certain shots in the film , Stone employed multiple camera crews shooting at once , using five cameras at the same time in different formats . Richardson said of Stone 's style of direction , " Oliver disdains convention , he tries to force you into things that are not classic . There 's this constant need to stretch . " This forced the cinematographer to use lighting in diverse positions and rely very little on classic lighting modes . The shoot lasted 79 days with filming finished five months before the release date . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 JFK marked a fundamental change in the way that Stone constructed his films : a subjective lateral presentation of the plot , with the editing 's rhythm carrying the story . Stone brought in Hank Corwin , an editor of commercials , to help edit the film . Stone chose him because his " chaotic mind " was " totally alien to the film form . " Stone remembers that Corwin irritated the more traditional editors working on the film because his " concepts are very commercial sixty @-@ seconds @-@ get @-@ your @-@ attention @-@ fragment @-@ your @-@ mind @-@ make @-@ you @-@ rethink @-@ it . But he had not developed the long form yet . And so a lot of his cuts were very chaotic . " Stone employed extensive use of flashbacks within flashbacks for a specific effect . He said in an interview , 
 I wanted to do the film on two or three levels – sound and picture would take us back , and we 'd go from one flashback to another , and then that flashback would go inside another flashback ... I wanted multiple layers because reading the Warren Commission Report is like drowning . 
 Partially due to a setback that occurred during editing , that saw all the time codes disappear , JFK would be the last film that Stone edited on film stock before he switched to digital editing . 
 Years after its release , Stone said of the film that it " was the beginning of a new era for me in terms of film making because it 's not just about a conspiracy to kill John Kennedy . It 's also about the way we look at our recent history ... It shifts from black and white to color , and then back again , and views people from offbeat angles . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Because of his enormous commitment to Steven Spielberg 's Hook , which opened the same month as JFK , composer John Williams did not have time to compose a conventional score for the entire film . Instead he composed and conducted six musical sequences in full for JFK before he saw the film in its entirety . Soon after recording this music , he traveled to New Orleans where Stone was still shooting the film and saw approximately an hour 's worth of edited footage and dailies . Williams remembers , " I thought his handling of Lee Harvey Oswald was particularly strong , and I understood some of the atmosphere of the film – the sordid elements , the underside of New Orleans . " Stone and his team then actually cut the film to fit Williams ' music after the composer had scored and recorded musical cues in addition to the six he had done prior to seeing the film . For the motorcade sequence , Williams described the score he composed as " strongly kinetic music , music of interlocking rhythmic disciplines . " The composer remembered the moment he learned of Kennedy 's assassination and it stuck with him for years . This was a significant factor in his deciding to work on the film . Williams said , " This is a very resonant subject for people of my generation , and that 's why I welcomed the opportunity to participate in this film . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Based on 55 reviews collected from notable publications by popular review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an 84 % " fresh " approval rating , with the consensus , " As history , Oliver Stone 's JFK is dubious , but as filmmaking it 's electric , cramming a ton of information and excitement into its three @-@ hour runtime and making great use of its outstanding cast . " However , the film 's production and release was subject to intense scrutiny and criticism . A few weeks after shooting had begun , on May 14 , 1991 , Jon Margolis wrote in the Chicago Tribune that JFK was " an insult to the intelligence . " Five days later , the Washington Post ran a scathing article by national security correspondent George Lardner titled , " On the Set : Dallas in Wonderland " that used the first draft of the JFK screenplay to blast it for " the absurdities and palpable untruths in Garrison 's book and Stone 's rendition of it . " The article pointed out that Garrison lost his case against Clay Shaw and that he inflated his case by trying to use Shaw 's homosexual relationships to prove guilt by association . Stone responded to Lardner 's article by hiring a public relations firm that specialized in political issues . Other critical articles soon followed . Anthony Lewis in the New York Times stated that the film " tells us that our government cannot be trusted to give an honest account of a Presidential assassination . " Washington Post columnist George Will called Stone " a man of technical skill , scant education and negligible conscience . " 
 TIME magazine ran its own critique of the film @-@ in @-@ progress on June 10 , 1991 and alleged that Stone was trying to suppress a rival JFK assassination film based on Don DeLillo 's 1988 novel Libra . Stone rebutted these claims in a letter to the magazine . Richard Corliss , TIME 's film critic , wrote later on ( Dec. 23 , 1991 ) : So , you want to know , who killed the President and connived in the cover @-@ up ? Everybody ! High officials in the CIA , the FBI , the Dallas constabulary , all three armed services , Big Business and the White House . Everybody done it — everybody but Lee Harvey Oswald . Yet on the movie itself : Whatever one 's suspicions about its use or abuse of the evidence , JFK is a knockout . Part history book , part comic book , the movie rushes toward judgment for three breathless hours , lassoing facts and factoids by the thousands , then bundling them together into an incendiary device that would <unk> any viewer 's complacency . Stone 's picture is , in both meanings of the word , sensational : it 's tip @-@ top tabloid journalism . In its bravura and breadth , JFK is seditiously enthralling ; in its craft , wondrously complex . 
 The filmmaker ended up splitting his time between making his film , responding to criticism , and conducting a publicity campaign of his own that saw him " omnipresent , from CBS Evening News , to Oprah . " However , the Lardner Post piece stung the most because Lardner had stolen a copy of the script . Stone recalls , " He had the first draft , and I went through probably six or seven drafts . " 
 Upon theatrical release , it polarized critics . The New York Times ran an article by Bernard Weinraub entitled , " Hollywood Wonders If Warner Brothers let JFK Go Too Far . " The article called for intervention by the studio , asking " At what point does a studio exercise its leverage and blunt the highly charged message of a film maker like Oliver Stone ? " The newspaper also ran a review of the film by Vincent Canby who wrote , " Mr. Stone 's hyperbolic style of film making is familiar : lots of short , often hysterical scenes tumbling one after another , backed by a soundtrack that is layered , strudel @-@ like , with noises , dialogue , music , more noises , more dialogue . " Pat Dowell , veteran film critic for The Washingtonian , had her 34 @-@ word capsule review for the January issue rejected by her editor John <unk> on the grounds that he didn 't want a positive review for a film he felt was " preposterous " associated with the magazine . Dowell resigned in protest . 
 The Miami Herald said about the controversy in its review , " the focus on the trivialities of personality conveniently prevents us from having to confront the tough questions [ Stone 's ] film raises . " However , Roger Ebert praised the film in his review for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , saying , 
 The achievement of the film is not that it answers the mystery of the Kennedy assassination , because it does not , or even that it vindicates Garrison , who is seen here as a man often whistling in the dark . Its achievement is that it tries to marshal the anger which ever since 1963 has been gnawing away on some dark shelf of the national psyche . 
 Rita Kempley in the Washington Post wrote , 
 Quoting everyone from Shakespeare to Hitler to bolster their arguments , Stone and Sklar present a gripping alternative to the Warren Commission 's conclusion . A marvelously paranoid thriller featuring a <unk> of spies , moles , pro @-@ commies and Cuban freedom @-@ fighters , the whole thing might have been thought up by Robert Ludlum . 
 On Christmas Day , the Los Angeles Times ran a critical article entitled " Suppression of the Facts Grants Stone a Broad Brush . " New York Newsday followed suit the next day with two articles – " The Blurred Vision of JFK " and " The Many Theories of a Jolly Green Giant . " A few days later , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times followed suit with " Stone 's Film <unk> Facts , <unk> J.F.K. " Jack Valenti , then president and chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America , denounced Stone 's film in a seven @-@ page statement . He wrote , " In much the same way , young German boys and girls in 1941 were mesmerized by Leni Riefenstahl 's Triumph of the Will , in which Adolf Hitler was depicted as a newborn God . Both JFK and Triumph of the Will are equally a propaganda masterpiece and equally a hoax . Mr. Stone and Leni Riefenstahl have another genetic linkage : neither of them carried a disclaimer on their film that its contents were mostly pure fiction . " Stone recalls in an interview , " I can 't even remember all the threats , there were so many of them . " 
 TIME magazine ranked it the fourth best film of 1991 , while including it in Top 10 Historically Misleading Films . Roger Ebert of Chicago Sun @-@ Times went on to name Stone 's film as the best film of the year and one of the top ten films of the decade , as well as one of The Great Movies . The Sydney Morning Herald named JFK as the best film of 1991 . Entertainment Weekly ranked it the 5th Most Controversial Movie Ever . 
 Ebert 's colleague Richard Roeper was less complimentary : " One can admire Stone 's filmmaking skills and the performances here while denouncing the utter <unk> presented as ' evidence ' of a conspiracy to murder . " Roeper applauded the film 's " dazzling array of filmmaking techniques and a stellar roster of actors " but criticized Stone 's narrative : " As a work of fantastical fiction , JFK is an interesting if overblown vision of a parallel universe . As a dramatic interpretation of events , it 's journalistically bankrupt nonsense . " 
 Harry Connick Sr. , the New Orleans district attorney who defeated Garrison in 1973 , criticized Stone 's view of the assassination : " Stone was either unaware of the details and particulars of the Clay Shaw investigation and trial or , if he was aware , that didn 't get in his way of what he perceived to be the way the case should have been . " In his book Reclaiming History : The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy , a history of the assassination published 16 years after the film 's release , Vincent Bugliosi devoted an entire chapter to Garrison 's prosecution of Shaw and Stone 's subsequent film . Bugliosi lists thirty @-@ two separate " lies and fabrications " in Stone 's film and describes the film as " one continuous lie in which Stone couldn 't find any level of deception and invention beyond which he was unwilling to go . " David <unk> stated that " 80 percent of the film is in factual error " and rejected the premise of a conspiracy involving the CIA and the so @-@ called military @-@ industrial complex as " irrational . " Warren Commission investigator David Belin called the film " a big lie that would make Adolf Hitler proud " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 JFK was released in theaters on December 20 , 1991 . Box office started slow but picked up momentum and by the first week in January 1992 , it had grossed over $ 50 million worldwide . Stone started to get support for his film . Warner Brothers executives pointed out that because of the film 's long running time , it had fewer screenings . The studio undertook a $ 15 million marketing campaign promoting Stone 's film . 
 On its first week of release , JFK tied with Beauty and the Beast for fifth place in the U.S. box office and its critics began to say it was a flop . However , JFK eventually earned over $ 200 million worldwide , and $ 70 million in the United States during its initial run . Garrison 's estate subsequently sued Warner Bros. for a share of the film 's profits , alleging a book @-@ keeping practice known as " Hollywood accounting . " The lawsuit contends that JFK made in excess of $ 150 million worldwide but the studio claimed that the film did not earn any money under its " net profits " accounting formula . The suit also claims that Garrison 's estate didn 't receive any of the net profits income . He should have been paid more than $ 1 million . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 JFK was nominated for eight Academy Awards including Best Picture , Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( Tommy Lee Jones ) , Best Director ( Oliver Stone ) , Best Original Score ( John Williams ) , Best Sound ( Michael <unk> , Gregg <unk> and Tod A. Maitland ) , Best Cinematography ( Robert Richardson ) , Best Film Editing , and Best Adapted Screenplay ( Stone and Zachary Sklar ) . It won two awards , for Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing . 
 Stone was nominated for an award for Outstanding Directing by the Directors Guild of America but didn 't win . He also won a Golden Globe for Best Director and in his acceptance speech , he said , " A terrible lie was told to us 28 years ago . I hope that this film can be the first step in righting that wrong . " 
 Entertainment Weekly ranked JFK as one of the 25 " Powerful Political Thrillers " . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 In 1992 , the television show Seinfeld pastiched the " Magic Bullet Theory " featured in JFK in an episode ( " The Boyfriend " ) wherein Kramer and Newman believe that they had been spat at by New York Met Keith Hernandez , who later reveals that there had been a second <unk> , Roger McDowell . Wayne Knight , who plays Newman , is also in JFK as a member of Garrison 's team . He would be one of the two men to model the shooting in court to prove the implausibility of the " magic bullet , " not unlike how Jerry disproves Newman and Kramer 's theory of the " magic <unk> . " In each case , Knight played the second victim in the sequence , John Connally and Newman , respectively . 
 = = Legislative impact = = 
 The final report of the Assassination Records Review Board ( ARRB ) partially credited concern over the conclusions in JFK with the passage of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992 , also known as the JFK Act . 
 The ARRB stated that the film " popularized a version of President Kennedy 's assassination that featured U.S. government agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , and the military as conspirators . " While describing the film as " largely fictional " , the ARRB acknowledged Stone 's point that official records were to be sealed from the public until 2029 , and his suggestion that " Americans could not trust official public conclusions when those conclusions had been made in secret . " By ARRB law , all existing assassination @-@ related documents will be made public by 2017 . 
 = = Home video = = 
 JFK has been released on VHS , LaserDisc , and several times on DVD . The film 's only version ever released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the United States is the 206 @-@ minute " Director 's Cut " . The theatrical cut has been released on DVD in only a few foreign territories , including the UK . In 2001 , the " Director 's Cut " was released as part of the Oliver Stone Collection box set with the film on one disc and supplemental material on the second . Stone contributed several extras to this edition , including an audio commentary , two multimedia essays , and 54 minutes ' worth of deleted / extended scenes with optional commentary by Stone . In 2003 , a two @-@ DVD " Special Edition " was released with all of the extras on the 2001 edition in addition to a 90 @-@ minute documentary entitled , Beyond JFK : The Question of Conspiracy . 
 The film was released on Blu @-@ ray on November 11 , 2008 . The disc features many of the extras included on the previous DVD releases , including the Beyond JFK : The Question of Conspiracy documentary . 
 = Station to Station = 
 Station to Station is the tenth studio album by English musician David Bowie , released by RCA Records in 1976 . Commonly regarded as one of his most significant works , Station to Station was the vehicle for his last distinct performance persona , the Thin White Duke . The album was recorded after he completed shooting Nicolas Roeg 's The Man Who Fell to Earth , and the cover artwork featured a still from the movie . During the sessions Bowie was heavily dependent on drugs , especially cocaine , and later claimed that he recalled almost nothing of the production . 
 Musically , Station to Station was a transitional album for Bowie , developing the funk and soul music of his previous release , Young Americans , while presenting a new direction towards synthesisers and motorik rhythms that was influenced by German electronic bands such as Neu ! and Kraftwerk . This trend culminated in some of his most acclaimed work , the so @-@ called " Berlin Trilogy " , recorded with Brian Eno in 1977 – 79 . Bowie himself said that Station to Station was " a plea to come back to Europe for me " . The album 's lyrics reflected his preoccupations with Friedrich Nietzsche , Aleister Crowley , mythology and religion . 
 Blending funk and krautrock , romantic balladry and occultism , Station to Station has been described as " simultaneously one of Bowie 's most accessible albums and his most impenetrable " . Preceded by the single " Golden Years " , it made the top five in both the UK and US charts . In 2003 , the album was ranked No. 323 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to biographer David Buckley , the Los Angeles @-@ based David Bowie , fuelled by an " astronomic " cocaine habit and subsisting on a diet of peppers and milk , spent much of 1975 – 76 " in a state of psychic terror " . Stories — mostly from one interview , pieces of which found their way into Playboy and Rolling Stone — circulated of the singer living in a house full of ancient Egyptian artefacts , burning black candles , seeing bodies fall past his window , having his semen stolen by witches , receiving secret messages from The Rolling Stones , and living in morbid fear of fellow Aleister Crowley aficionado Jimmy Page . Bowie would later say of L.A. , " The fucking place should be wiped off the face of the earth " . 
 It was on the set of his first major film , The Man Who Fell to Earth , that Bowie began writing a pseudo @-@ autobiography called The Return of the Thin White Duke . He was also composing music on the understanding that he was to provide the picture 's soundtrack , though this would not come to fruition . ( At Bowie 's recommendation , John Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas would write and produce all the original music for the film instead . ) Director Nicolas Roeg warned the star that the part of Thomas Jerome Newton would likely remain with him for some time after production completed . With Roeg 's agreement , Bowie developed his own look for the film , and this carried through to his public image and onto two album covers over the next twelve months , as did Newton 's air of fragility and aloofness . 
 The Thin White Duke became the mouthpiece for Station to Station and , often during the next six months , for Bowie himself . <unk> dressed in white shirt , black trousers and waistcoat , the Duke was a hollow man who sang songs of romance with an agonised intensity , yet felt nothing — " ice masquerading as fire " . The persona has been described as " a mad aristocrat " , " an amoral zombie " , and " an emotionless Aryan superman " . For Bowie himself , the Duke was " a nasty character indeed " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Station to Station was recorded in late 1975 at Cherokee Studios , Los Angeles . In 1981 , NME editors Roy Carr and Charles Shaar Murray surmised that it was cut — " in 10 days of feverish activity " — when Bowie decided that there was no hope of his producing a soundtrack for The Man Who Fell to Earth . More recent scholarship contends that the album was recorded over a couple of months — with the sessions beginning in late September or early October 1975 and ending in late November — so that it was in the can before Bowie began his abortive sessions on the soundtrack . 
 At various times to be titled The Return of the Thin White Duke , or Golden Years , Station to Station was co @-@ produced by Harry Maslin , Bowie 's associate for " Fame " and " Across the Universe " on Young Americans . Tony Visconti , who after a three @-@ year absence had recently returned to the Bowie fold mixing Diamond Dogs and co @-@ producing David Live and Young Americans , was not involved due to competing schedules . However , the recording did cement the band line @-@ up that would see Bowie through the rest of the decade , with bassist George Murray joining Young Americans drummer Dennis Davis and rhythm guitarist Carlos Alomar . 
 The recording process developed with this team set the pattern for Bowie 's albums up to and including Scary Monsters ( And Super Creeps ) in 1980 : backing tracks laid down by Murray , Davis and Alomar ; saxophone , keyboard and lead guitar overdubs ( here by Bowie , Roy Bittan and Earl Slick , respectively ) ; lead vocals ; and finally various production tricks to complete the song . According to Bowie , " I got some quite extraordinary things out of Earl Slick . I think it captured his imagination to make noises on guitar , and textures , rather than playing the right notes . " Alomar recalled , " It was one of the most glorious albums that I 've ever done ... We experimented so much on it " . Harry Maslin added , " I loved those sessions because we were totally open and experimental in our approach " . 
 Bowie himself remembered almost nothing of the album 's production , not even the studio , later admitting , " I know it was in LA because I 've read it was " . The singer was not alone in his use of cocaine during the sessions , Carlos Alomar commenting , " if there 's a line of coke which is going to keep you awake till 8 a.m. so that you can do your guitar part , you do the line of coke ... the coke use is driven by the inspiration . " Like Bowie , Earl Slick had somewhat vague memories of the recording : " That album 's a little fuzzy — for the obvious reasons ! We were in the studio and it was nuts — a lot of hours , a lot of late nights . " 
 The sleeve front cover used a black @-@ and @-@ white still from The Man Who Fell to Earth , in which Bowie , as the character Thomas Jerome Newton , steps into the space capsule that will return him to his home planet . Bowie had insisted on the cropped black @-@ and @-@ white image as he felt that in the original coloured full @-@ size image the sky looked artificial ; when Rykodisc reissued Bowie 's catalogue in the early 1990s the colour version was used . The back cover showed Bowie sketching the Kabbalah <unk> with chalk — something he had been doing on the set of the film . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Station to Station is often cited as a transitional album in Bowie 's career . Nicholas Pegg , author of The Complete David Bowie , called it a " precise halfway point on the journey from Young Americans to Low " , while for Roy Carr and Charles Shaar Murray , it " effectively divides the ' 70s for David Bowie . It ties off the era of Ziggy Stardust and plastic soul , and introduces the first taste of the new music that was to follow with Low . " 
 In terms of Bowie 's own output , Station to Station 's Euro @-@ centric flavour had its musical antecedents in tracks like " Aladdin Sane 1913 @-@ 1938 @-@ 197 ? " and " Time " ( 1973 ) , while its funk / disco elements were a development of the soul / R & B sound of Young Americans ( 1975 ) . More recently Bowie had begun to soak up the influence of krautrock and electronic music by bands like Neu ! , Can , and Kraftwerk . Thematically the album revisited concepts dealt with in songs such as " The Supermen " from The Man Who Sold the World ( 1970 ) and " Quicksand " from Hunky Dory ( 1971 ) : Nietzsche 's ' Overman ' , the occultism of Aleister Crowley , Nazi fascination with Grail mythology , and the Kabbalah . Pegg considered the album 's theme to be a clash of " occultism and Christianity " . 
 AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that , " at its heart , Station to Station is an avant @-@ garde art @-@ rock album , most explicitly on " TVC 15 " and the epic sprawl of the title track . " The musical style of " Golden Years " , the first track recorded for the album , built on the funk and soul of Young Americans but with a harsher , grinding edge . It has been described as carrying with it " an air of regret for missed opportunities and past pleasures " . Bowie said that it was written for — and rejected by — Elvis Presley , while Bowie 's wife at the time Angie claimed it was penned for her . Though a top ten single on both sides of the Atlantic , it was rarely performed live on the subsequent Station to Station tour . " Stay " was another riff @-@ driven funk piece , " recorded very much in our cocaine frenzy " , according to Alomar . Its lyrics have been variously interpreted as reflecting on " the uncertainty of sexual conquest " , and as an example of " the Duke 's spurious romanticism " . 
 The Christian element of the album was most obvious in the hymn @-@ like " Word on a Wing " , though for some commentators religion , like love , was simply another way for the Duke to " test his numbness " . Bowie himself has claimed that in this song , at least , " the passion is genuine " . When performing it live in 1999 , the singer described it as coming from " the darkest days of my life ... I 'm sure that it was a call for help " . The closing ballad , " Wild Is the Wind " , was the album 's sole cover , and has been praised as one of the finest vocal performances of Bowie 's career . Bowie was inspired to record it after he met singer / pianist / songwriter Nina Simone ( whose version is on the eponymous 1966 album ) . 
 The spectre of The Man Who Fell to Earth 's Thomas Jerome Newton sprawled in front of dozens of television monitors is said to have partly inspired the album 's most upbeat track , " <unk> " . Supposedly also about Iggy Pop 's girlfriend being eaten by a TV set , it has been called " incongruously jolly " and " the most oblique tribute to The Yardbirds imaginable " . 
 The title track has been described as heralding " a new era of experimentalism " for Bowie . " Station to Station " was in two parts : a slow , portentous piano @-@ driven march , introduced by the sound of an approaching train juxtaposed with Earl Slick 's agitated guitar feedback , followed by an up @-@ tempo rock / blues section . In 1999 Bowie told <unk> magazine , " Since Station To Station the hybridization of R & B and electronics had been a goal of mine " . Despite the noise of a train in the opening moments , Bowie says that the title refers not so much to railway stations as to the Stations of the Cross , while the line " From Kether to <unk> " relates to mystical places in the Kabbalah , mixing Christian and Jewish allusions . Fixation with the occult was further evident in such phrases as " white stains " , the name of a book of poetry by Aleister Crowley . The lyrics also gave notice of Bowie 's recent drug use ( " It 's not the side effects of the cocaine / I 'm thinking that it must be love " ) . With its krautrock influence , it was the album 's clearest foretaste of Bowie 's subsequent ' Berlin Trilogy ' . 
 Speaking to Creem magazine in 1977 , Bowie proclaimed that Station to Station was " devoid of spirit ... Even the love songs are detached , but I think it 's fascinating . " 
 = = Singles and unreleased tracks = = 
 Every song on Station to Station eventually appeared on a single . " Golden Years " was released in November 1975 , two months before the album . Bowie allegedly got drunk to perform it on TV for the American show Soul Train , resulting in the film clip seen on music video programmes . It reached No. 8 in the UK and No. 10 in the US ( where it charted for sixteen weeks ) but , like " Rebel Rebel " ' s relationship to Diamond Dogs ( 1974 ) , was a somewhat unrepresentative teaser for the album to come . 
 The title track was released as a promo 7 @-@ inch single in January 1976 . The single was exclusively released in France and featured a shortened version of the track , lasting just over three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes , on the a @-@ side as well as the album version of " TVC 15 " on the b @-@ side . The single did not chart in any countries . 
 " TVC 15 " was released in edited form as the second single in May 1976 , reaching No. 33 in the UK and No. 64 stateside . " Stay " , also shortened and appearing the same month , was issued as a companion 45 to RCA 's <unk> greatest hits collection , though it did not appear on the compilation ( <unk> was itself packaged as a uniform edition to Station to Station , featuring a black @-@ and @-@ white cover and similar lettering ) . In November 1981 , as Bowie 's relationship with RCA was winding down , " Wild Is the Wind " was issued as a single to push the <unk> compilation . Backed with " Word on a Wing " and accompanied by a video shot especially for the release , it made No. 24 in the UK and charted for ten weeks . 
 Another song purportedly recorded during the album sessions at Cherokee Studios , a cover of Bruce Springsteen 's " It 's Hard to Be a Saint in the City " , went unreleased at the time but was issued in 1990 on the Sound + Vision box set . Harry Maslin and Carlos Alomar have claimed that they never recorded the song during the Cherokee sessions , while Tony Visconti believes that the song most likely consisted of overdubs to a track originally cut at Olympic and Island Studios during the Diamond Dogs sessions , with Aynsley Dunbar on drums , Herbie Flowers on bass and Mike Garson on keyboards . The song would later be re @-@ released on The Best of David Bowie 1974 / 1979 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Station to Station was released in January 1976 . Billboard considered that Bowie had " found his musical niche " following songs like " Fame " and " Golden Years " but that " the 10 @-@ minute title cut drags " . NME called it " one of the most significant albums released in the last five years " and named it the second greatest album of the year . Both found the meaning of the lyrics difficult to fathom . In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A rating , indicating " a great record both of whose sides offer enduring pleasure and surprise . You should own it " . Christgau wrote that Bowie " can merge Lou Reed , disco , and Huey Smith " and found the album a progression from his previous albums , stating " Miraculously , Bowie 's attraction to black music has matured ; even more miraculously , the new relationship seems to have left his hard @-@ and @-@ heavy side untouched " . 
 Rolling Stone writer Teri Moris applauded the album 's ' rockier ' moments but discerned a move away from the genre , finding it " the thoughtfully professional effort of a style @-@ conscious artist whose ability to write and perform demanding rock & roll exists comfortably alongside his fascination for diverse forms ... while there 's little doubt about his skill , one wonders how long he 'll continue wrestling with rock at all " . Circus , noting that Bowie was " never one to maintain continuity in his work or in his life " , declared that Station to Station " offers cryptic , expressionistic glimpses that let us feel the contours and palpitations of the <unk> 's soul but never fully reveal his face . " The review also found various allusions to earlier Bowie efforts , such as the " density " of The Man Who Sold the World , the " pop feel " of Hunky Dory , the " dissonance and angst " of Aladdin Sane , the " compelling percussion " of Young Americans , and the " youthful mysticism " of " Wild Eyed Boy from <unk> " , concluding that " it shows Bowie pulling out on the most challenging leg of his winding journey " . 
 Station to Station was Bowie 's highest @-@ charting album in the US until 2013 's The Next Day , reaching No. 3 and remaining for 32 weeks . It was certified gold by the RIAA on 26 February 1976 . In the UK , it charted for seventeen weeks , peaking at No. 5 , the last time one of his studio albums placed lower in his home country than in America . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the Station to Station sessions completed in December 1975 , Bowie started work on a soundtrack for The Man Who Fell to Earth with Paul Buckmaster as his collaborator . Bowie expected to be wholly responsible for the film 's music but found that " when I 'd finished five or six pieces , I was then told that if I would care to submit my music along with some other people 's ... and I just said " Shit , you 're not getting any of it " . I was so furious , I 'd put so much work into it . " Notwithstanding , Harry Maslin argued that Bowie was " burned out " and couldn 't complete the work in any case . The singer eventually collapsed , admitting later , " There were pieces of me laying all over the floor " . In the event , only one instrumental composed for the soundtrack saw the light of day , evolving into " Subterraneans " on his next studio album , Low . 
 After abandoning the soundtrack album , Bowie went on tour in support of Station to Station , commencing 2 February 1976 and completing on 18 May 1976 . Kraftwerk 's " Radioactivity " was employed as an overture to the shows , accompanying footage from Luis Buñuel 's and Salvador Dalí 's surrealist film Un Chien Andalou . The staging featured Bowie , dressed in the Duke 's habitual black waistcoat and trousers , a pack of <unk> placed ostentatiously in his pocket , moving stiffly among " curtains of white light " , an effect that spawned the nickname ' the White Light Tour ' . In 1989 Bowie reflected , " I wanted to go back to a kind of Expressionist German @-@ film look ... and the lighting of , say , Fritz Lang or Pabst . A black @-@ and @-@ white movies look , but with an intensity that was sort of aggressive . I think for me , personally , theatrically , that was the most successful tour I ’ ve ever done . " The Station to Station tour was the source of one of the artist 's best @-@ known bootlegs , culled from an FM radio broadcast of his 23 March 1976 concert at Nassau Coliseum . 
 Bowie drew criticism during the tour for his alleged pro @-@ fascist views . In a 1974 interview he had declared , " Adolf Hitler was one of the first rock stars ... quite as good as Jagger ... He staged a country " , but managed to avoid condemnation . On the Station to Station tour , however , a series of incidents attracted publicity , starting in April 1976 with his detention by customs in Eastern Europe for possession of Nazi memorabilia . The same month he was quoted in Stockholm as saying that " Britain could benefit from a Fascist leader " . Bowie would blame his addictions and the persona of the Thin White Duke for his lapses in judgment . The controversy culminated on 2 May 1976 , shortly before the tour completed , in the so @-@ called ' Victoria Station incident ' in London , when Bowie arrived in an open @-@ top Mercedes convertible and apparently gave a Nazi salute to the crowd that was captured on film and published in NME . Bowie claimed that the photographer simply caught him in mid @-@ wave , a contention backed by a young Gary Numan who was among the throng that day : " Think about it . If a photographer takes a whole motor @-@ driven film of someone doing a wave , you will get a Nazi salute at the end of each arm @-@ sweep . All you need is some dickhead at a music paper or whatever to make an issue out it ... " The stigma remained , however , to the extent that the lines " To be insulted by these fascists / It 's so degrading " from Scary Monsters ' opening track " It 's No Game " , four years later , were interpreted as an attempt to bury the incident once and for all . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Station to Station was a milestone in Bowie 's transition to his late 1970s ' Berlin Trilogy ' . Bowie himself has said of the album , " As far as the music goes , Low and its siblings were a direct follow @-@ on from the title track " , while Brian Eno opined that Low was " very much a continuation from Station to Station " . It has also been described as " enormously influential on post @-@ punk " . Roy Carr and Charles Shaar Murray wrote in 1981 , " If Low was Gary Numan 's Bowie album , then Station to Station was Magazine 's . " However , Stylus declared in 2004 that " just as few had anticipated Bowie ’ s approach , few copied it ... for the most part this is an orphaned , abandoned style " . 
 More than twenty years after its release , Bowie considered both Station to Station and Low " great , damn good " albums , but due to his disconnected state during its recording , listened to Station to Station " as a piece of work by an entirely different person " . He elaborated : 
 In 1999 , music biographer David Buckley described Station to Station as a " masterpiece of invention " that " some critics would argue , perhaps unfashionably , is his finest record " . The same year , Eno called it " one of the great records of all time " . In 2003 , the album was ranked No. 323 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . A year later , The Observer ranked the album No. 80 on its list of the 100 greatest British albums . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by David Bowie , except where noted . 
 = = = CD releases = = = 
 The album has been released several times on CD , the first being in 1985 by RCA , with the original black @-@ and @-@ white cover art . The album was released again in 1991 by Rykodisc , with two , live bonus tracks . A 1999 rerelease by EMI featured 24 @-@ bit digitally remastered sound and no bonus tracks . The 1991 and 1999 rereleases used colour cover art . EMI Japan replicated the original , black @-@ and @-@ white artwork on a 2007 release . The album was released by EMI in Special and Deluxe Editions in 2010 , both of which presented the album in a mini @-@ LP @-@ replica sleeve , within a larger box . 
 = = = 2010 reissues = = = 
 A deluxe edition was released in 2010 , including a Dolby 5 @.@ 1 mix of the album and the entire 1976 Nassau Coliseum show on two CDs . On 1 July 2010 , Bowie 's official website announced the contents of the reissues , which was then released on 20 September . 
 = = = = Special edition and digital download = = = = 
 The special edition features three CDs in a special CD sized packaging , including a 16 @-@ page booklet and three <unk> . The digital download edition includes the same audio content and a bonus track . 
 2010 transfer of Station to Station from the original stereo analogue master ; CD in mini @-@ LP @-@ replica sleeve . 
 Recorded live at the Nassau Coliseum , Uniondale , New York , U.S. on 23 March 1976 ; CDs in gatefold wallet . 
 Recorded live at the Nassau Coliseum , Uniondale , New York , U.S. on 23 March 1976 . 
 = = = = Deluxe edition = = = = 
 The deluxe edition features five CDs , one DVD and three 12 " LPs in a sturdy box lined with studio @-@ style acoustic foam reminiscent of the sleeve photo background . It also includes a 24 @-@ page booklet , a poster and two folders of replica collectible material . 
 CD 1 : Station to Station 2010 transfer 
 CD 2 : Station to Station 1985 CD master 
 CD 3 : Station to Station single edits five track EP 
 " Golden Years " 
 " TVC 15 " 
 " Stay " 
 " Word on a Wing " ( First time on CD ) 
 " Station to Station " ( Previously unreleased version ) 
 CD 4 & 5 : Live Nassau Coliseum ' 76 
 DVD 
 Station to Station ( Original analogue master , 96 kHz / 24 bit LPCM stereo ) 
 Station to Station ( New Harry Maslin mix , 96 kHz / 24 bit DTS 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix ) 
 Station to Station ( New Harry Maslin mix , 48 kHz / 24 bit Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 AC3 surround sound mix ) 
 Station to Station ( New Harry Maslin mix , 48 kHz / 24 bit LPCM stereo ) 
 LP 1 : Heavyweight 12 " of Station to Station from the original stereo analogue master in replica sleeve 
 LP 2 & 3 : Heavyweight 12 " s of Live Nassau Coliseum ' 76 in gatefold sleeve 
 24 @-@ page booklet including text and rare photographs 
 David Bowie on Stage 1976 replica collectibles folder ( for example , a backstage pass ) 
 1976 Fan Club Folder replica collectibles folder ( for example , two badges / pins ) 
 Fold @-@ out Poster 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 David Bowie – vocals , guitar , tenor and alto saxophone , Moog synthesiser , Mellotron 
 Carlos Alomar – guitar 
 Roy Bittan – piano 
 Dennis Davis – drums 
 George Murray – bass guitar 
 Warren Peace – backing vocals 
 Earl Slick – guitar 
 On Live Nassau Coliseum ' 76 : 
 David Bowie - vocals 
 Stacey Heydon - lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Carlos Alomar - rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 George Murray - bass , backing vocals 
 Tony Kaye - keyboards 
 Dennis Davis - drums , percussion 
 = = = Production = = = 
 David Bowie – producer 
 Harry Maslin – producer 
 Steve Shapiro – photography 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Uttar Pradesh = 
 Uttar Pradesh ( / <unk> <unk> / , Hindi : उत ् <unk> प ् <unk> literally " Northern Province " ) , abbreviated as UP , is the most populous state in the Republic of India as well as the most populous country subdivision in the world . It was created on 1 April 1937 as the United Provinces , and was renamed Uttar Pradesh in 1950 . Lucknow is the capital city of Uttar Pradesh . Ghaziabad , Kanpur , Gorakhpur , Allahabad , <unk> , Moradabad , Bareilly , Aligarh , <unk> , and Varanasi are known for their industrial importance in the state . On 9 November 2000 , a new state , Uttarakhand , was carved out from the Himalayan hill region of Uttar Pradesh . The state in the northern region of the Indian subcontinent has over 200 million inhabitants . 
 The state is bordered by Rajasthan to the west , Haryana and Delhi to the northwest , Uttarakhand and Nepal to the north , Bihar to the east , Madhya Pradesh to the south and touches the states of Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh to the south east . It covers 243 @,@ 290 square kilometres ( 93 @,@ 933 sq mi ) , equal to 6 @.@ 88 % of the total area of India , and is the fourth largest Indian state by area . Hindi is the official and most widely spoken language in its 75 districts . Uttar Pradesh is the third largest Indian state by economy , with a GDP of ₹ 9 @,@ 763 billion ( US $ 150 billion ) . Agriculture and service industries are the largest parts of the state 's economy . The service sector comprises travel and tourism , hotel industry , real estate , insurance and financial consultancies . 
 Uttar Pradesh was home to powerful empires of ancient and medieval India . The two major rivers of the state , the Ganges and Yamuna , join at Allahabad and then flow as the Ganges further east . The state has several historical , natural , and religious tourist destinations , such as , Agra , Varanasi , <unk> , <unk> , Kaushambi , Kanpur , Ballia , Shravasti , Gorakhpur , <unk> , Chauri Chaura situated in Gorakhpur , Kushinagar , Lucknow , Jhansi , Allahabad , <unk> , Meerut , Mathura , Jaunpur and Muzaffarnagar . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Modern human hunter @-@ gatherers have been in Uttar Pradesh since between around 85 and 73 thousand years ago . There have also been pre @-@ historical finds in Uttar Pradesh from the Middle and Upper Paleolithic dated to 21 – 31 thousand years old and Mesolithic / <unk> hunter @-@ gatherer 's settlement , near Pratapgarh , from around <unk> – <unk> BC . Villages with domesticated cattle , sheep , and goats and evidence of agriculture began as early as 6000 BC , and gradually developed between c . 4000 and 1500 BC beginning with the Indus Valley Civilization and Harappa Culture to the Vedic period ; extending into the Iron Age . 
 = = = Ancient and Classical period = = = 
 The kingdom of Kosala , in the <unk> era , was located within the regional boundaries of modern @-@ day Uttar Pradesh . According to Hindu legend , the divine king Rama of the Ramayana epic reigned in Ayodhya , the capital of Kosala . Krishna , another divine king of Hindu legend , who plays a key role in the Mahabharata epic and is revered as the eighth reincarnation ( Avatar ) of the Hindu god Vishnu , is said to have been born in the city of Mathura , in Uttar Pradesh . The aftermath of the Mahabharata <unk> is believed to have taken place in the area between the Upper Doab and Delhi , ( in what was Kuru <unk> ) , during the reign of the Pandava king Yudhishthira . The kingdom of the Kurus corresponds to the Black and Red Ware and Painted Gray Ware culture and the beginning of the Iron Age in North @-@ west India , around 1000 BC . 
 Most of the invaders of south India passed through the Gangetic plains of what is today Uttar Pradesh . Control over this region was of vital importance to the power and stability of all of India 's major empires , including the Maurya ( 320 – 200 BC ) , Kushan ( AD 100 – 250 ) , Gupta ( 350 – 600 ) , and Gurjara @-@ Pratihara ( 650 – 1036 ) empires . Following the Huns invasions that broke the Gupta empire , the Ganges @-@ Yamuna Doab saw the rise of Kannauj . During the reign of Harshavardhana ( 590 – 647 ) , the Kannauj empire reached its zenith . It spanned from Punjab in the north and Gujarat in the west to Bengal in the east and Odisha in the south . It included parts of central India , north of the Narmada River and it encompassed the entire Indo @-@ Gangetic plain . Many communities in various parts of India claim descent from the migrants of Kannauj . Soon after Harshavardhana 's death , his empire disintegrated into many kingdoms , which were invaded and ruled by the Gurjara @-@ Pratihara empire , which challenged Bengal 's Pala Empire for control of the region . Kannauj was several times invaded by the south Indian Rashtrakuta Dynasty from the 8th century to the 10th century . 
 = = = Medieval and Early Modern period = = = 
 In the 16th century , Babur , a Timurid descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan from Fergana Valley ( modern @-@ day Uzbekistan ) , swept across the Khyber Pass and founded the Mughal Empire , covering India , along with modern @-@ day Afghanistan , Pakistan and Bangladesh The Mughals were descended from Persianised Central Asian Turks ( with significant Mongol admixture ) . In the Mughal era , Uttar Pradesh became the heartland of the empire . Mughal emperors Babur and Humayun ruled from Delhi . In 1540 an Afghan , Sher Shah Suri , took over the reins of Uttar Pradesh after defeating the Mughal king <unk> . Sher Shah and his son Islam Shah ruled Uttar Pradesh from their capital at Gwalior . After the death of Islam Shah Suri , his prime minister Hemu became the de facto ruler of Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Madhya Pradesh , and the western parts of Bengal . He was bestowed the title of <unk> Vikramaditya ( title of Vikramāditya adopted from vedic times ) at his formal coronation took place at Purana <unk> in Delhi on 7 October 1556 . Hemu died in the Second Battle of Panipat , and Uttar Pradesh came under Emperor Akbar 's rule . Akbar ruled from Agra and Fatehpur Sikri . In the 18th century , after the fall of Mughal authority , the power vacuum was filled by the Maratha Empire , in the mid 18th century , the Maratha army invaded the Uttar Pradesh region , which resulted in Rohillas losing control of <unk> to the Maratha rulers Raghunath Rao and <unk> Holkar . The conflict between Rohillas and Marathas came to an end on 18 December 1788 with the arrest of Ghulam Qadir , the grandson of Najeeb @-@ ud @-@ Daula , who was defeated by the Maratha general <unk> Scindia . In 1803 , following the Second Anglo @-@ Maratha War , when the British East India Company defeated the Maratha Empire , much of the region came under British suzerainty . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 = = = = British India @-@ era = = = = 
 Starting from Bengal in the second half of the 18th century , a series of battles for north Indian lands finally gave the British East India Company accession over the state 's territories . Ajmer and Jaipur kingdoms were also included in this northern territory , which was named the " North @-@ Western Provinces " ( of Agra ) . Although UP later became the fifth largest state of India , NWPA was one of the smallest states of the British Indian empire . Its capital shifted twice between Agra and Allahabad . 
 Due to dissatisfaction with British rule , a serious rebellion erupted in various parts of North India ; Bengal regiment 's sepoy stationed at Meerut cantonment , Mangal Pandey , is widely credited as its starting point . It came to be known as the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . After the revolt failed , the British attempted to divide the most rebellious regions by reorganising the administrative boundaries of the region , splitting the Delhi region from ' NWFP of Agra ' and merging it with Punjab , while the <unk> Marwar region was merged with Rajputana and Oudh was incorporated into the state . The new state was called the ' North Western Provinces of Agra and Oudh ' , which in 1902 was renamed as the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh . It was commonly referred to as the United Provinces or its acronym UP . 
 In 1920 , the capital of the province was shifted from Allahabad to Lucknow . The high court continued to be at Allahabad , but a bench was established at Lucknow . Allahabad continues to be an important administrative base of today 's Uttar Pradesh and has several administrative headquarters . Uttar Pradesh continued to be central to Indian politics and was especially important in modern Indian history as a hotbed of the Indian independence movement . Uttar Pradesh hosted modern educational institutions such as the <unk> Hindu University , Aligarh Muslim University and the Darul Uloom Deoband . Nationally known figures such as Chandra Shekhar Azad were among the leaders of the movement in Uttar Pradesh , and Motilal Nehru , Jawaharlal Nehru , Madan Mohan Malaviya and Gobind Ballabh Pant were important national leaders of the Indian National Congress . The All India Kisan Sabha ( <unk> ) was formed at the Lucknow session of the Congress on 11 April 1936 , with the famous nationalist Swami Sahajanand Saraswati elected as its first President , in order to address the longstanding grievances of the peasantry and mobilise them against the <unk> landlords attacks on their occupancy rights , thus sparking the Farmers movements in India . During the Quit India Movement of 1942 , Ballia district overthrew the colonial authority and installed an independent administration under Chittu Pandey . Ballia became known as " <unk> Ballia " ( Rebel Ballia ) for this significant role in India 's independence movement . 
 = = = = Post @-@ independence = = = = 
 After India 's independence , the United Provinces were renamed " Uttar Pradesh " in 1950 . The state has provided seven of India 's prime ministers and is the source of the largest number of seats in the Lok Sabha . Despite its political influence , its poor record in economic development and administration , organised crime and corruption have kept it amongst India 's backward states . The state has been affected by repeated episodes of caste and communal violence . In December , 1992 the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya was demolished by radical activists , leading to widespread violence across India . In 1999 , northern districts of the state were separated to form the state of Uttarakhand . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Uttar Pradesh , with a total area of 243 @,@ 290 square kilometres ( 93 @,@ 935 sq mi ) , is India ’ s fourth largest state in terms of land area . It is situated on the northern spout of India and shares an international boundary with Nepal . The Himalayas border the state on the north , but the plains that cover most of the state are distinctly different from those high mountains . The larger Gangetic Plain region is in the north ; it includes the Ganges @-@ Yamuna Doab , the <unk> plains , the Ganges plains and the Terai . The smaller Vindhya Range and plateau region is in the south . It is characterised by hard rock strata and a varied topography of hills , plains , valleys and plateaus . The <unk> tract gives place to the terai area which is covered with tall elephant grass and thick forests interspersed with marshes and swamps . The sluggish rivers of the bhabhar deepen in this area , their course running through a tangled mass of thick undergrowth . The terai runs parallel to the bhabhar in a thin strip . The entire alluvial plain is divided into three sub @-@ regions . The first in the eastern tract consisting of 14 districts which are subject to periodical floods and droughts and have been classified as scarcity areas . These districts have the highest density of population which gives the lowest per capita land . The other two regions , the central and the western are comparatively better with a well @-@ developed irrigation system . They suffer from waterlogging and large @-@ scale user tracts . In addition , the area is fairly arid . The state has more than 32 large and small rivers ; of them , the Ganges , Yamuna , Saraswati , <unk> , Betwa , and <unk> are larger and of religious importance in Hinduism . 
 Cultivation is intensive . The valley areas have fertile and rich soil . There is intensive cultivation on terraced hill slopes , but irrigation facilities are deficient . The Siwalik Range which forms the southern foothills of the Himalayas , slopes down into a boulder bed called ' <unk> ' . The transitional belt running along the entire length of the state is called the terai and bhabhar area . It has rich forests , cutting across it are innumerable streams which swell into raging torrents during the monsoon . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Uttar Pradesh has a humid subtropical climate and experiences four seasons . The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May and the monsoon season between June and September . Summers are extreme with temperatures fluctuating anywhere between 0 ° C and 50 ° C in parts of the state . The Gangetic plain varies from semiarid to sub @-@ humid . The mean annual rainfall ranges from 650 mm in the southwest corner of the state to 1000 mm in the eastern and southeastern parts of the state . Primarily a summer phenomenon , the Bay of Bengal branch of the Indian monsoon is the major bearer of rain in most parts of state . It is the south @-@ west monsoon which brings most of the rain here , although rain due to the western disturbances and north @-@ east monsoon also contribute small quantities towards the overall precipitation of the state . 
 The rain in U.P. can vary from an annual average of 170 cm in hilly areas to 84 cm in Western U.P. Given the concentration of most of this rainfall in the four months of the monsoon , excess rain can lead to floods and shortage to droughts . As such , these two phenomena , floods and droughts , commonly recur in the state . The climate of the Vindhya Range and plateau is subtropical with a mean annual rainfall between 1000 and 1200 mm , most of which comes during the monsoon . Typical summer months are from March to June , with maximum temperatures ranging from 30 to 38 ° C ( 86 to 100 ° F ) . There is low relative humidity of around 20 % and dust @-@ laden winds blow throughout the season . In summers , hot winds called loo blow all across Uttar Pradesh . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 The state has an abundance of natural resources . In 2011 the recorded forest area in the state was 16 @,@ 583 km2 ( 6 @,@ 403 sq mi ) which is about 6 @.@ 88 % of the state 's geographical area . In spite of rapid deforestation and poaching of wildlife , a diverse flora and fauna continue to exist in the state . Several species of trees , large and small mammals , reptiles , and insects are found in the belt of temperate upper mountainous forests . Medicinal plants are found in the wild and are also grown in plantations . The Terai @-@ Duar savanna and grasslands support cattle . Moist deciduous trees grow in the upper Gangetic plain , especially along its riverbanks . This plain supports a wide variety of plants and animals . The Ganges and its tributaries are the habitat of large and small reptiles , amphibians , fresh @-@ water fish , and crabs . <unk> trees such as the babool and animals such as the chinkara are found in the arid <unk> . 
 Tropical dry deciduous forests are found in all parts of the plains . Since much sunlight reaches the ground , shrubs and grasses are also abundant . Large tracts of these forests have been cleared for cultivation . Tropical thorny forests , consisting of widely scattered thorny trees , mainly babool are mostly found in the southwestern parts of the state . These forests are confined to areas which have low annual rainfall ( 50 – 70 cm ) , a mean annual temperature of 25 @-@ 27 ° C and low humidity . 
 Uttar Pradesh is known for its extensive avifauna . The most common birds which are found in the state are doves , peafowl , junglefowl , black partridges , house sparrows , songbirds , blue jays , parakeets , quails , bulbuls , comb ducks , kingfishers , woodpeckers , snipes , and parrots . Bird sanctuaries in the state include <unk> Sanctuary , National Chambal Sanctuary , Chandra Prabha Sanctuary , Hastinapur Sanctuary , <unk> Sanctuary , and <unk> Sanctuary . 
 Other animals in the state include reptiles such as lizards , cobras , kraits , and gharials . Among the wide variety of fishes , the most common ones are <unk> and trout . Some animal species in Uttar Pradesh have gone extinct in recent years , while others , like the lion from the Gangetic Plain and the rhinoceros from the Terai region , have become endangered . Many species are vulnerable to poaching despite regulation by the government . 
 = = Divisions , districts and cities = = 
 Uttar Pradesh is divided into 75 districts under these 18 divisions : 
 The following is a list of top six districts from state of Uttar Pradesh by rank in India . 
 Each district is governed by a district collector or District Magistrate , who is an Indian Administrative Service officer appointed Government of Uttar Pradesh and reports to Divisional Commissioner of the division in which his district falls . Each district is divided into subdivisions , governed by a sub @-@ divisional magistrate , and again into Blocks . Blocks consists of panchayats ( village councils ) and town municipalities . These blocks consists of urban units viz. census towns and rural units called gram panchayat . 
