 Further north , I @-@ 196 / US 31 crosses into Van Buren County and assumes the Gerald R. Ford Freeway name . The inland side of the freeway is forested while the <unk> side is predominantly either forest or fields . As it approaches South Haven , the freeway passes near the Palisades Nuclear Generating Station and Van Buren State Park . North of the power plant and park , the freeway turns farther inland to bypass the city of South Haven . There is an interchange on the south side of town that provides access to BL I @-@ 196 and M @-@ 140 . The freeway crosses over M @-@ 43 without an interchange and then intersects the other end of the business loop about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) later . It crosses the Black River near the Van Buren – Allegan county line . 
 In Allegan County , I @-@ 196 / US 31 passes a pair of golf courses and continues northward through farm fields . Near the community of Glenn , A @-@ 2 crosses over the freeway and runs parallel to it on the east . The two roads trade places again when I @-@ 196 / US 31 turns northeasterly on the south side of the twin cities of Saugatuck and Douglas . The freeway crosses over a section of Kalamazoo Lake , a wider section of the Kalamazoo River that flows between the two towns . A @-@ 2 crosses back to the eastern side of the freeway north of Saugatuck , and I @-@ 196 / US 31 continues north @-@ northeasterly toward Holland . 
 On the south side of Holland , US 31 and I @-@ 196 separate as the Interstate turns northeasterly around the city to continue to Grand Rapids . US 31 follows the BL I @-@ 196 freeway northward into Holland around the north side of the West Michigan Regional Airport . The business loop has an interchange for A @-@ 2 ( Blue Star Highway ) and Washington Avenue before the freeway ends in the southern reaches of Holland . The trunkline then runs as a divided highway northward , bypassing downtown Holland to the east and intersecting M @-@ 40 . Northeast of downtown Holland , BL I @-@ 196 leaves US 31 and the LMCT at an interchange to follow an expressway along the route of Chicago Drive while US 31 turns northwesterly on its own expressway alignment . 
 = = = West Michigan = = = 
 Northwest of Holland , the highway runs as a four @-@ lane expressway and divided highway parallel , but inland from , the Lake Michigan shoreline . This section of US 31 runs through a mix of farm fields and forests as it runs to the community of Agnew . There , US 31 intersects the western end of M @-@ 45 ( Lake Michigan Drive ) before continuing into the southern end of Grand Haven . In that city , the highway follows a four @-@ lane boulevard with a grass median . On the northern edge of the city of Grand Haven , US 31 crosses the Grand River on a bascule bridge that opens about 450 – 500 times per year . North of the structure , US 31 transitions into a freeway at the interchange with the western end of M @-@ 104 in Ferrysburg . This freeway continues northward through the suburban edges of the Muskegon area and meets the western end of I @-@ 96 near the Muskegon County Airport in Norton Shores . 
 At this interchange with I @-@ 96 , US 31 has its southernmost business loop as U.S. Route 31 Business runs westerly and northward into downtown Muskegon . The main freeway continues through the suburban eastern edge of the city through several interchanges , including one with M @-@ 46 ( Apple Avenue ) . Just south of the Muskegon River , the business loop merges back into the main freeway . US 31 crosses the river and turns northwesterly through forests . The freeway passes to the east of Michigan 's Adventure , an amusement park , and crosses the White River near the communities of Whitehall and Montague ; a business loop curves off to the west to connect the two communities with the freeway . In this area , US 31 runs through the southern portion of the Manistee National Forest as well . 
 As the freeway continues northward , US 31 intersects the western end of M @-@ 20 in New Era in Oceana County . The landscape in this area is dominated by forest land as the trunkline crosses the Hart @-@ Montague Trail State Park , a linear state park that follows a bike trail in the area . North of the trail crossing , US 31 has a business spur for Hart that runs east into that town ; north of this interchange , the freeway crosses the Pentwater River near the community of Pentwater which also has its own business loop . 
 North of Pentwater , US 31 crosses into Mason County and passes Bass Lake and the Ludington Pumped Storage Power Plant , which uses a reservoir next to the freeway to generate electricity . Just north of that reservoir , the freeway turns to the northeast and Ludington 's business spur runs off to the northwest . US 31 curves around the east side of Ludington , crossing the Pere Marquette River . Due east of downtown , the freeway ends and US 31 turns east to merge with US 10 . The concurrent highways follow a four @-@ lane roadway to Scottville . On the west side of that town , US 31 separates from US 10 , turning northward to bypass Scottville . 
 = = = Northwest Michigan = = = 
 US 31 runs due north through Northwest Michigan forest land bypassing <unk> to the west . Northwest of that town , the highway crosses the Big Sable River before entering Manistee County . Across the county line , the trunkline runs northwesterly parallel to Manistee Lake as US 31 enters Manistee . The highway follows Cypress Street to a drawbridge over the Manistee River and then Cleveland Street on the northern side . As the trunkline rounds the northern shore of Manistee Lake , it passes the SS City of Milwaukee , a car ferry preserved as a museum . From there , the highway runs northeasterly , intersecting the western end of M @-@ 55 ( Caberfae Highway ) . Next to the Little River Casino , the highway intersects the southern end of M @-@ 22 ( Orchard Highway ) , and the LMCT separates from US 31 . 
 The highway continues on a northeasterly course running inland along Chippewa Highway to the community of Bear Lake . US 31 rounds the east side of the community 's namesake body of water on Lake Street and exits town on Pleasanton Highway . The trunkline continues northward and northeasterly through Pleasanton and crosses into Benzie County . Over the county line , it follows Benzie Highway northward to an intersection with M @-@ 115 ( Cadillac Highway ) . The two merge and run north into Benzonia , following Michigan Avenue in town . Near the south shore of Crystal Lake , M @-@ 115 turns westward toward Frankfort and US 31 follows Michigan Avenue into Beulah , running around the eastern end of the lake . Near the eastern end of Platte Lake , US 31 turns to run easterly into Honor before crossing into Grand Traverse County . 
 Across the county line , US 31 continues eastward , passing north of the community of Interlochen . At Interlochen Corners , it intersects M @-@ 137 . The highway then angles northeasterly north of Duck Lake and south of Silver Lake . A few miles farther east , US 31 meets M @-@ 37 at a location known as Chums Corners . The two highways join and run northward through the unincorporated community . It passes <unk> Park , the home stadium for the Traverse City Beach Bums , a minor @-@ league baseball team . From there , US 31 / M @-@ 37 runs downhill into Garfield Township . In this area , the highway passes through a cluster of retail stores and car dealerships near the Grand Traverse Mall . North of the intersection with 14th Street , the trunkline follows Division Street into Traverse City . From there it runs to the east of Grand Traverse Commons , the former Traverse City State Hospital , before US 31 / M @-@ 37 meets Grandview Parkway next to the West Arm of the Grand Traverse Bay . 
 At that intersection , the trunkline meets the northern end of M @-@ 22 , which is running concurrently with M @-@ 72 along the parkway . As US 31 / M @-@ 37 turns east to run along the bay north of downtown , the highway merges with M @-@ 72 and picks up the LMCT again . Grandview Parkway runs between the Boardman River and the bay . Near the mouth of the river , US 31 / M @-@ 37 / M @-@ 72 turns to follow Front Street along the remainder of the bay 's shoreline . At Garfield Avenue , M @-@ 37 turns northward to run up the Old Mission Peninsula , and US 31 / M @-@ 72 continues across the base of the peninsula to the East Arm of the Grand Traverse Bay . The highway runs north of the Cherry Capital Airport near the east arm as it angles southeasterly to Traverse City State Park . East of the park , the trunkline exits suburban Traverse City and rounds the bay to run northward along its eastern shore . In the community of Acme , M @-@ 72 turns eastward while US 31 continues north past the Grand Traverse Resort . 
 About nine miles ( 14 km ) north of Acme , US 31 crosses into Antrim County as it runs between Elk Lake and the Grand Traverse Bay . Between towns , the landscape is mostly agricultural lands with mixed patches of forest . A few miles north of the county line , the trunkline passes through Elk Rapids and crosses a channel connecting the Spencer Bay portion of Elk Lake to Lake Michigan . North of this crossing , US 31 continues northeasterly , running on an isthmus between Torch Lake and Grand Traverse Bay . The highway passes through Eastport at the northern end of Torch Lake and intersects the western end of M @-@ 88 . Further north , US 31 runs through Atwood and crosses into Charlevoix County . 
 = = = North to the Straits Area = = = 
 As US 31 curves around to the northeast and east in Charlevoix County , it follows a section of the Lake Michigan shoreline that is not considered to be part of any bay . The highway continues through Northern Michigan agricultural areas to the southeast of Charlevoix . Once it enters the city , the trunkline intersects the northern end of M @-@ 66 and follows a series of city streets to a drawbridge over the channel that connects Lake Charlevoix to Lake Michigan . South of the structure it is Bridge Street , and north of the bridge it is Michigan Avenue . The highway turns eastward to exit town on Petoskey Avenue and follow the Lake Michigan shoreline . Near the community of Bay Shore , US 31 crosses into Emmet County . The trunkline continues past the Bay Harbor development on Charlevoix Avenue into the city of Petoskey . 
 Once in Petoskey , US 31 intersects the northern end of US 131 ( Spring Street ) and turns northward along Spring Street through downtown . The highway curves around to follow Mitchell Street to cross the Bear River and then follow Bay View Road . US 31 runs along the Little Traverse Bay through the eastern end of Petoskey and into Bay View . From there , it intersects the southern end of M @-@ 119 and passes through a pair of small towns , Conway and Oden , that border inland lakes like Round Lake and various bays of Crooked Lake . 
 North of Oden , US 31 runs through <unk> before entering the village of Alanson . There the highway intersects the western end of M @-@ 68 and runs parallel to the Crooked River , part of the Inland Waterway . North of town , US 31 runs through the town of Brutus before entering <unk> . The highway runs past the <unk> Regional Airport and continues due north to Levering . From there , US 31 turns northwesterly and then northeasterly on Mackinaw Highway to round Lake Paradise in the community of Carp Lake . North of the lake , US 31 follows a limited @-@ access highway into Cheboygan County . Less than 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) east of the county line , US 31 connects to I @-@ 75 in a partial interchange . At this interchange , northbound traffic defaults onto northbound I @-@ 75 and US 31 terminates . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Predecessor highways = = = 
 The first major overland transportation corridors in the future state of Michigan were the Indian trails . Only one of these followed part of the path of US 31 ; the Mackinac Trail roughly paralleled the route of US 31 from Petoskey northward . 
 In the age of the auto trail , the roads that later formed US 31 through Michigan were given a few different highway names . The West Michigan Lake Shore Highway Association was founded on January 10 , 1912 , and the group reorganized on May 30 , 1913 , as the West Michigan Pike Association . Their auto trail was marked by a series of concrete markers eight feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall along the 400 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 640 km ) roadway from the Indiana state line northward to Mackinaw City . 
 The highway was also a part of the Western Mainline of the Dixie Highway in Michigan , another auto trail that was built starting in 1915 . In 1916 , the northern junction between the West Michigan Pike and the East Michigan Pike , which served as the connection for the two mainlines of the Dixie Highway in Michigan in Mackinaw City , was marked with a stone monument at the junction of Central Avenue and Huron Street . By the middle of 1921 , the trail used about 413 miles ( 665 km ) of roadways along its western branch parallel to Lake Michigan . Michigan led all other states in the Dixie Highway Association by 1922 at improvements to its sections of the roadway . 
 The State Trunkline Highway System was created on May 13 , 1913 , by an act of the Michigan Legislature ; at the time , one of the system 's divisions corresponded to US 31 . Division 5 followed a course from Niles northward to Mackinaw City . In 1919 , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) signposted the highway system for the first time , and the future US 31 corridor was assigned two numbers . From the state line north through Niles to St. Joseph , it carried the original M @-@ 58 designation and from there northward it was the original M @-@ 11 . 
 = = = US Highway System era = = = 
 The American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) approved the United States Numbered Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , and the MSHD designated US 31 in Michigan according to AASHO 's plan to run northward from the Indiana state line and along the Lake Michigan shoreline to Mackinaw City . A section in the Benton Harbor – St. Joseph area overlapped US 12 and the modern concurrency with US 10 was also in place . By the end of the next year , the highway was extended across the Straits of Mackinac on the state car ferries to connect to US 2 in the Upper Peninsula north of St. Ignace . In 1930 , Muskegon was bypassed ; the new highway east of downtown was numbered US 31A . 
 By the end of 1936 , the last section of US 31 in the state was paved near Charlevoix , making the entire highway in Michigan a hard @-@ surfaced road . Early the next year , the route of US 2 was realigned to run into St. Ignace ; after the change , US 2 and US 31 ran concurrently . Later that year , a set of curves were straightened out south of Ludington and the routes of US 31 and a US 31A between Saugatuck and Holland were switched , and US 31 was realigned to bypass downtown Ludington . 
 In 1938 , the southern end of US 31 was given a second designation when US 33 was extended into the state from Indiana to terminate in St. Joseph . Later that year , the US 31A in the Holland area was decommissioned . The next year , the US 31 concurrency was removed from US 2 in the Upper Peninsula and the former highway no longer crossed the Straits of Mackinac , terminating instead in Mackinaw City . By the early 1940 , the Muskegon Bypass was given the US 31 designation , and the route downtown was redesignated US 31A . 
 During World War II , a bypass of downtown South Haven was built ; the former route of US 31 through the heart of the city was designated Bus . US 31 at that time . After the war , the route of US 31 north of Charlevoix was realigned to follow the shoreline ; this section opened by the middle of 1949 . The route of the highway between Holland and West Olive was changed to run on a more angular course northwesterly in 1950 . A few years later , a bypass to the south and east of Holland opened and the former route through down was redesignated as a business loop in 1954 . 
 = = = Freeway era = = = 
 On November 1 , 1957 , the Mackinac Bridge opened to traffic . For the opening of the bridge , the highways coming into Mackinaw City from the south were realigned to connect to it ; US 31 terminated at the southern approach to the Mackinac Bridge . In November 1960 , sections of I @-@ 75 's freeway opened from Indian River north to the southern Mackinac Bridge approaches , and US 31 was rerouted to follow segments of that freeway from the current northern terminus south of Mackinaw City northward . By the end of the decade , another freeway segment opened along the Muskegon Bypass as well . The next year , US 33 was extended northward along US 31 from St. Joseph for about 10 miles ( 16 km ) . 
 In 1962 , a section of freeway along US 31 was opened between I @-@ 94 and the Berrien – Van Buren county line . This section was originally designated as part of I @-@ 96 / US 31 ; the former route near the lakeshore became just US 33 . The MSHD petitioned federal highway officials to switch the Interstate designations west of Grand Rapids , reversing the I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 196 numbers to their current configurations . After the designation switch was approved in 1963 , an additional 35 miles ( 56 km ) was opened from the northern end of the freeway near Benton Harbor to Holland as I @-@ 196 / US 31 . The freeway was also extended northward from Muskegon to the Muskegon – Oceana county line north of Montague in 1963 . 
 When I @-@ 196 was completed between Holland and Grandville in 1974 , the BL I @-@ 196 designation was applied along US 31 and Bus . US 31 . The next year , the US 31 freeway was extended northward into Oceana County to New Era . In 1976 , this freeway was lengthened further to Hart . The section of I @-@ 196 / US 31 in all but Berrien County was dedicated as the " Gerald R. Ford Freeway " in July 1978 . Also that year , the US 31 freeway was extended to the southern side of Pentwater . 
 At the end of the 1970s and into the early 1990s , US 31 gained additional freeway segments on both ends of the highway . The first section of the St. Joseph Valley Parkway was completed in 1979 and ran from the Indiana state line north to US 12 . The freeway was extended northward from Pentwater to the Oceana – Mason county line in 1980 . Construction of the Niles Bypass was finished in 1987 , bringing the parkway north to Walton Road northwest of Niles . Bus . US 31 was created along the former routing in Niles . The northern freeway was extended further into Mason County in two stages . In 1989 , it was expanded to the south side of Ludington . The next year , Ludington was bypassed , completing the freeway to its current northern end at US 10 east of town . One more bypass , this time a non @-@ freeway routing to the west of Scottville , opened in 1991 . The Berrien Springs Bypass was completed in late 1992 . Since then , MDOT built a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) freeway segment north from Berrien Springs to Napier Avenue that was opened on August 27 , 2003 , at a cost of $ 97 million ( equivalent to $ 137 million in 2015 ) . The last change to the routing of US 31 occurred in August 2004 when the route of Bus . US 31 in Holland was turned back to local control ; BL I @-@ 196 was rerouted to follow US 31 around downtown instead of following the former business loop through it . 
 Starting in 1996 , Traverse City @-@ area residents and tourists requested a freeway bypass the city . These residents decided to not build the highway . In 2001 , The idea was revived , but MDOT abandoned these plans in June of that year . 
 = = Future = = 
 = = = Completion of the St. Joseph Valley Parkway = = = 
 The MSHD started studies for a freeway routing of US 31 from the state line northward to I @-@ 94 in 1967 . The first section northward to Niles was approved in 1972 , and the remainder of the route was approved in 1981 . Since then , MDOT re @-@ evaluated the St. Joseph Valley Parkway extension east of Benton Harbor , due to environmental , economic , and historical site issues . One of the environmental concerns that was studied relates to the habitat of an endangered species , the Mitchell 's Satyr butterfly , which has its habitat in the area of the proposed freeway . The 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) habitat is home to the second @-@ largest population of the rare butterfly . The freeway between Niles and Benton Harbor was planned as a series of five segments when approved in 1981 . Since that approval , the butterfly was discovered in the Blue Creek Fen in the late 1980s , and it was listed as an endangered species in 1992 . This listing stalled MDOT 's planning and construction of the fifth freeway segment north of Berrien Springs . The United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( USFWS ) issued an opinion two years later that the project would jeopardize the species . MDOT was given permission to modify the previously approved freeway to cross the Blue Creek on longer bridges ; the USFWS also required that any construction be done from elevated platforms , among other restrictions . In the interim , MDOT proceeded with construction of the southern portion of the last freeway segment , completing it northward from Berrien Springs to the Napier Avenue interchange in August 2003 . 
 A revised environmental impact study to account for the butterfly 's habitat in the northern area of the freeway was approved in 2004 . The study compared the original routing for this extension that involved connecting directly to I @-@ 196 at I @-@ 94 with an alternate route that involved an indirection connection via the BL I @-@ 94 interchange and an I @-@ 94 concurrency near Benton Harbor . The study recommended using a version of the alternate connection to avoid the Blue Creek Fen , both to save money and decrease impact to the Mitchell 's Satyr . At the time the freeway segment opened in 2003 , MDOT expected the remaining segment would not take much longer to complete , but since then , funding has not been available . MDOT did not include construction of the extension was not included for this reason in the department 's 2014 – 18 highway projects plan released in 2013 , although most of the design work and land acquisition has been completed . Until the missing freeway segment is built , US 31 follows a stretch of Napier Avenue , which was upgraded in conjunction with the St. Joseph Valley Parkway opening to that point , westward to I @-@ 94 . The US 31 / I @-@ 94 / BL I @-@ 94 interchange will be converted to a cloverleaf interchange and additional lanes will be added to I @-@ 94 as well . The St. Joseph Valley Parkway name has already been applied to this unbuilt section . MDOT 's 2017 – 21 plan draft released in July 2016 split the remaining work into three phases . The department has listed funding for only the first two of these three phases , and construction is anticipated to start in 2021 . 
 = = = Bypassing Grand Haven = = = 
 As of 2014 , travelers had to use either US 31 through Grand Haven or 68th Avenue through <unk> to cross the Grand River in Ottawa County . A new highway , part of a long @-@ range plan to build a US 31 bypass of Grand Haven , provides a river crossing almost equidistant between the two , greatly reducing drive times between areas north and south of the river . A drive from Nunica to Robinson is a 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) trip ; the new highway provides a route closer to seven miles ( 11 km ) in length . Called M @-@ 231 , this highway is a scaled @-@ down bypass of US 31 through Grand Haven , even though it will not physically connect to US 31 . By January 4 , 2013 , MDOT had completed work for this highway , including a bridge over North Cedar Drive , additional ramps at the I @-@ 96 and M @-@ 104 interchange , and reconstruction and widening of M @-@ 104 near I @-@ 96 . The department had also completed a reconfiguration of the intersection between M @-@ 104 and Cleveland Drive and widening the bridge that carries M @-@ 104 over I @-@ 96 . The expected date of completion for M @-@ 231 was set for sometime in 2016 pending funding availability . MDOT planned to build 1 @.@ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) of the new highway starting in 2013 , including the bridges over the Grand River and Little Robinson Creek . The 2005 <unk> @-@ LU transportation bill provided funding earmarked for the project by US Representative Pete Hoekstra from Holland as well as matching funds from the state 's Michigan Jobs Today program . The total cost of the project was expected to be near $ 150 million . On October 30 , 2015 , the highway opened to traffic . 
 = = Memorial designations and tourist routes = = 
 The sections of the route of US 31 in Michigan has been dedicated several times to various organizations . The route of US 33 in the state , which at the time was concurrent with US 31 , was dedicated as the Blue & Gray Trail in 1938 to honor veterans of the American Civil War . The Blue Star Memorial Highway designation was applied to the highway to honor those serving in the military . The designation was dedicated on October 10 , 1948 by the State Highway Commissioner Charles Ziegler . 
 In 1917 , the Upper Peninsula Development Bureau created a tourist route that is a predecessor of the modern Great Lakes Circle Tours ( <unk> ) . The Great Lakes Automobile Route was a series of roads on both the Upper and Lower peninsulas of Michigan . It included US 31 between Manistee and the Benton Harbor – St. Joseph area . The concept did not last a year ; the American entry into World War I and a lack of focus on a single route consigned the idea into obscurity . The idea of a tourist route around the Great Lakes was revived in 1986 as a pet project of Michigan First Lady Paula Blanchard . MDOT and its counterparts in Wisconsin , Minnesota and Ontario created the <unk> scheme which includes the LMCT that follows US 31 from Lake Michigan Beach northward to Manistee and from Traverse City north to the terminus near Mackinaw City excluding locations where business loops run closer to the lake at South Haven , Muskegon , Whitehall – Montague and Pentwater . 
 A group of area residents has initiated an effort to have the former West Michigan Pike designated what is now called a Pure Michigan Byway . If successful , the designation would prioritize the area for historic preservation grants . A Preserve America grant funded a survey from June 2007 through September 2010 , the results of which were a set of reports through the Michigan State Historic Preservation Office on the historical nature of the West Michigan Pike . In 2011 , the group was in the process of securing resolutions from municipalities along the highway in support of the designation . According to officials working on the byway , it can take up to seven years to complete the process . As of December 22 , 2014 , MDOT had not yet received an application for the designation , which is now only supposed to run as far north as Ludington , although the initial proposals had the byway continuing to Mackinaw City . 
 = = Historic bridges = = 
 MDOT maintains a listing of the historic bridges in the state ; along US 31 , the department has listed four structures . In downtown Charlevoix , the US @-@ 31 – Island Lake Outlet Bridge carries the highway over a channel dredged between Lake Michigan and Round Lake that also connects to Lake Charlevoix . Built from 1947 through 1949 , it is the fifth bridge at the location . It is a double @-@ leaf bascule bridge . In Petoskey , the highway crosses Bear Creek on a concrete girder bridge built in 1930 . At 265 feet ( 81 m ) in length , it is the fourth longest such bridge in Michigan . In Manistee , the Manistee River is spanned by a double @-@ leaf bascule bridge built in 1933 . North of Hart in Pentwater Township , the 270 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 82 m ) US 31 – Pentwater River Bridge is a long @-@ span steel bridge that crosses the Pentwater River . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 20 , 1999 . It carries Oceana Drive along a former routing of US 31 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Jeanne = 
 The meteorological history of Hurricane Jeanne lasted for about two weeks in September 2004 . Hurricane Jeanne was the eleventh tropical cyclone , tenth named storm , seventh hurricane , and sixth major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . It formed from a tropical wave on September 13 near the Lesser Antilles , and encountered favorable enough conditions to reach tropical storm status . Jeanne strengthened further in the eastern Caribbean Sea , becoming a strong tropical storm and developing an eye before striking Puerto Rico on September 15 . Remaining well @-@ organized , it attained hurricane status before hitting the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic on September 16 . 
 Hurricane Jeanne steadily weakened while crossing eastern Hispaniola , and on September 17 it briefly weakened to tropical depression status after reaching open waters . Its original circulation dissipated as a new one reformed closer to the main area of thunderstorms . Turning northward , Jeanne slowly reorganized and again reached hurricane status on September 20 . It executed a clockwise loop to the west , weakening due to upwelling upon reaching its path again . Jeanne encountered favorable conditions as it continued westward , and it reached major hurricane status before crossing the northern Bahamas on September 25 . The next day , it struck Martin County , Florida in nearly the same location as Hurricane Frances just weeks before . Jeanne weakened over land while turning the northwest , deteriorating to tropical depression status over Georgia on September 27 . It turned northeastward , becoming extratropical on September 28 before dissipating on September 29 after merging with a cold front . 
 The hurricane produced heavy rainfall across its path , including in Haiti where precipitation caused devastating mudslides ; over 3 @,@ 000 deaths were reported in the country . Heavy rainfall also occurred during its landfalls on Puerto Rico and Florida , resulting in river flooding . In its strongest landfall , the hurricane produced strong winds across an area earlier affected by Hurricane Frances and , in some locations , by Hurricane Charley . Late in its duration , the combination of moisture from Jeanne and cool air resulted in a tornado outbreak that extended from Georgia through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . 
 = = Formation and first landfall = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Jeanne were from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on September 7 . Containing a scattered area of moderate convection , the wave tracked westward at 12 – 17 mph ( 19 – 28 km / h ) , located to the south of a large ridge . The system initially showed no signs of development , with unfavorably dry air persisting across the region . On September 11 , convection became slightly better organized , and the next day broad cyclonic turning became evident . However , overall development was hindered by upper @-@ level wind shear from Hurricane Ivan in the Caribbean Sea , as well as from an upper @-@ level low to the north of the wave . 
 Late on September 12 , while approaching the northern Lesser Antilles , convection increased and became better organized around an area of increased cyclonic turning . Environmental conditions became more favorable , allowing for the development of a low pressure area and for banding features to increase . Late on September 13 , with the formation of a broad low @-@ level circulation , it is estimated the system developed into Tropical Depression Eleven about 70 mi ( 110 km ) east @-@ southeast of Guadeloupe . 
 Upon first becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was located to the south of the subtropical ridge , resulting in a west @-@ northwest track which brought the center over Guadeloupe . The circulation was initially broad , and dry air temporarily entrained the northwest quadrant of the storm . However , environmental conditions were favorable enough for further development , with a deepening trough to its west providing beneficial flow . Banding features improved around the circulation , and the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Jeanne on September 13 about 135 mi ( 220 km ) southeast of Saint Croix . While crossing the Lesser Antilles , the storm brought locally heavy rainfall , with a total of 12 inches ( 305 mm ) reported in Guadeloupe . 
 Tropical Storm Jeanne quickly organized over the eastern Caribbean Sea , developing a tight inner core and well @-@ defined outflow as it tracked over warm water temperatures of about 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) . Initially , the storm was forecast to attain hurricane status before crossing Puerto Rico . However , its organization deteriorated by early on September 15 , with radar imagery tracking a low @-@ level circulation moving away from the convection . The temporary weakening was due increased shear and dry air . At 1600 UTC on September 15 , Jeanne made landfall near Guayama , Puerto Rico with winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) , and as it moved ashore it was in the process of developing an eye . Across the territory , the storm produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 23 @.@ 75 inches ( 605 mm ) on Vieques Island . Rainfall across the region resulted in moderate to severe river flooding , with several river stations in Puerto Rico reporting historical levels . Light winds , generally around tropical storm force , affected the region as well . 
 = = Second landfall and reorganization = = 
 Tropical Storm Jeanne remained over Puerto Rico for about eight hours , during which it maintained its eye feature and well @-@ defined inner core of convection . It intensified over the Mona Passage , and attained hurricane status as it struck the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic on September 16 . Continuing slowly west @-@ northwestward near the coast , Jeanne quickly weakened to tropical storm status , and by 24 hours after landfall its convection had deteriorated as the eye feature dissipated . Late on September 17 , it emerged into the Atlantic Ocean as a tropical depression , after having dropped torrential rainfall across Hispaniola . Catastrophic flooding and mudslides were experienced in Haiti , including in the coastal city of Gonaïves , and over 3 @,@ 000 deaths were reported in the country . 
 On September 17 , while it was over Hispaniola , the National Hurricane Center issued a forecast that predicted Jeanne to make landfall near Savannah , Georgia in about five days . However , the forecast noted uncertainty in regards to the steering currents , which depended on the movement of the remnants of Hurricane Ivan and a ridge building behind it . After it left the nation as a tropical depression , the original center of circulation tracked westward away from the convection and dissipated . However , a new circulation developed closer to the convection , and Jeanne regained tropical storm status on September 18 . By then , the mid @-@ level circulation associated with Hurricane Ivan had combined with a trough to weaken the ridge located across the western Atlantic Ocean ; this caused Jeanne to track northward through the Turks and Caicos Islands . 
 As it tracked northward , the storm failed to organize at first , due to the influence of an upper @-@ level low to its south . The circulation became broad and elongated , as well as removed from the deepest convection . However , after moving away from the low , the convection became better organized and more associated with the convection . After some initial slow organization continued , an area of deep convection developed over the center midday on September 20 . An eye developed within the convection , and late on September 20 Jeanne re @-@ attained hurricane status about 350 mi ( 570 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Abaco Islands in the Bahamas . 
 While intensifying as a tropical storm , the National Hurricane Center faced difficulties in the future track of Jeanne , based on two major divergences between computer hurricane models . One scenario involved the storm accelerating east @-@ northeastward to the south of a trough , following the path of Hurricane Karl to its east . The other scenario involved Jeanne turning southeastward and looping westward due to a building ridge . By early on September 20 , the official forecast followed the first scenario , though later that day , officials changed the forecast to indicate the turn to the south . 
 = = Peak intensity and final landfall = = 
 Hurricane Jeanne steadily intensified as it turned eastward , developing a 52 mi ( 83 km ) wide eye . A motion to the southeast began on September 22 , and around the same time it reached winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . At the same time , the National Hurricane Center forecast to turn westward and later northwestward , with its projected five @-@ day track within 60 mi ( 100 km ) of Cape Fear , North Carolina . The westernmost outlier during one model run was the NOGAPS model , which predicted a continued westward motion across central Florida . The official forecast changed early on September 23 to bring Jeanne across northeastern Florida , though initially the cyclone was predicted to turn northeastward and hit South Carolina as a hurricane . 
 By September 23 , Jeanne had begun a slow westward motion , with its previously well @-@ defined eye becoming ragged . It moved slowly over waters it traversed just four days prior , causing upwelling ; this is the process in which a stationary storm causes the water temperatures to decrease by bringing the cooler , deeper waters to the surface . As a result , Jeanne weakened to a minimal hurricane midday on September 23 , though it was forecast to re @-@ intensify and attain major hurricane status . By early on September 24 , the winds had decreased to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) ; its convection weakened in intensity , and the eyewall eroded due to dry air entrainment . However , as Jeanne moved toward an area of warmer waters , deep convection redeveloped around the eye . Its favorable upper @-@ level environment allowed the outflow to become better defined , with a large eye and nearby dry air being the primary restraining factors for development . At 1200 UTC on September 25 , Jeanne attained major hurricane status , and two hours later it made landfall on Abaco Island . 
 After it had been previously forecast to turn northwestward and track along the northeastern Florida coast , the forecast shifted 24 hours prior to moving ashore to a landfall point in the east @-@ central portion of the state ; the change was due to the persistence of the ridge to its north . The hurricane moved over Grand Bahama Island , and in the Bahamas it produced wind gusts of up to 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) . As it approached the Florida coastline it did not strengthen much further , due to an eyewall replacement cycle ; this is the process in which an outer eyewall forms , causing the original eye to shrink and dissipate due to lack of moisture . At 0400 UTC on September 26 , Jeanne made landfall with peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) on the southern end of Hutchinson Island near Stuart , Florida , with an eye 50 mi ( 85 km ) in diameter . The hurricane moved ashore in almost the same location as Hurricane Frances , which made landfall 21 days prior . 
 Upon moving inland in east @-@ central Florida , the hurricane produced a storm tide of up to 10 feet ( 3 m ) in St. Lucie County . In New Smyrna Beach , the storm tide washed away much of the beach to the east of the city seawall . Overall impact from the storm tide was less than expected , due to the storm hitting at low tide . Jeanne produced peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) in a very small north of the center near Sebastian , though the National Hurricane Center noted the possibility of the strongest winds remaining over water . The National Weather Service office in Melbourne recorded sustained winds of 91 mph ( 147 km / h ) , which was the strongest official sustained wind reading ; stronger readings were not available due to widespread power outages along its track . Wind gusts peaked at 128 mph ( 206 km / h ) in Fort Pierce . In addition to the winds , the hurricane dropped heavy rainfall in the vicinity of its eyewall , peaking at 11 @.@ 97 inches ( 304 mm ) in <unk> . The rainfall caused freshwater flooding , as well as increased levels along the St. Johns River . The hurricane also produced several eyewall mesovortices and tornadoes near where it moved ashore . 
 = = Dissipation = = 
 As Hurricane Jeanne moved inland , its inner eyewall dissipated , and its outer eyewall quickly became less distinct . It turned west @-@ northwestward over the state , curving around the western periphery of the ridge to its northeast . By 14 hours after landfall , Jeanne weakened to tropical storm status near the Tampa Bay area . In western Florida , offshore winds produced a tide of 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) below normal in Cedar Key ; however , after the storm passed the area , the onshore winds produced above normal tides . Despite initial forecasts that it would emerge into the Gulf of Mexico , the storm remained over land and continued to slowly weaken . Early on September 27 , dry air became entrained into the southern periphery of the circulation , which diminished the thunderstorms to the south . After turning northward , Jeanne entered southern Georgia and weakened into a tropical depression . 
 As it moved northward , Jeanne continued to drop moderate to heavy rainfall , including over 7 inches ( 175 mm ) in southern Georgia . A cold front across the region caused the depression to accelerate northeastward , combining moisture from the Gulf of Mexico with cool and stable air over the Carolinas . This combination produced severe thunderstorms across the region , spawning six tornadoes in Georgia , eight in South Carolina , and eight in North Carolina . 
 After crossing into Virginia , Jeanne transitioned into an extratropical cyclone by September 29 near Washington , D.C. In Wilmington , Delaware , the storm spawned an F2 tornado . Across the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England , moisture from the storm produced light to heavy rainfall , with totals of over 7 inches ( 175 mm ) near Philadelphia and Nantucket . Subsequent to becoming extratropical , the remnants of Jeanne turned eastward , exited into the Atlantic Ocean , and merged with a cold front . 
 = Mirror symmetry ( string theory ) = 
 In algebraic geometry and theoretical physics , mirror symmetry is a relationship between geometric objects called Calabi – Yau manifolds . The term refers to a situation where two Calabi – Yau manifolds look very different geometrically but are nevertheless equivalent when employed as extra dimensions of string theory . 
 Mirror symmetry was originally discovered by physicists . Mathematicians became interested in this relationship around 1990 when Philip Candelas , Xenia de la Ossa , Paul Green , and Linda Parkes showed that it could be used as a tool in enumerative geometry , a branch of mathematics concerned with counting the number of solutions to geometric questions . Candelas and his collaborators showed that mirror symmetry could be used to count rational curves on a Calabi – Yau manifold , thus solving a longstanding problem . Although the original approach to mirror symmetry was based on physical ideas that were not understood in a mathematically precise way , some of its mathematical predictions have since been proven rigorously . 
 Today mirror symmetry is a major research topic in pure mathematics , and mathematicians are working to develop a mathematical understanding of the relationship based on physicists ' intuition . Mirror symmetry is also a fundamental tool for doing calculations in string theory , and it has been used to understand aspects of quantum field theory , the formalism that physicists use to describe elementary particles . Major approaches to mirror symmetry include the homological mirror symmetry program of Maxim Kontsevich and the SYZ conjecture of Andrew Strominger , Shing @-@ Tung Yau , and Eric Zaslow . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Strings and compactification = = = 
 In physics , string theory is a theoretical framework in which the point @-@ like particles of particle physics are replaced by one @-@ dimensional objects called strings . These strings look like small segments or loops of ordinary string . String theory describes how strings propagate through space and interact with each other . On distance scales larger than the string scale , a string will look just like an ordinary particle , with its mass , charge , and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string . Splitting and recombination of strings correspond to particle emission and absorption , giving rise to the interactions between particles . 
 There are notable differences between the world described by string theory and the everyday world . In everyday life , there are three familiar dimensions of space ( up / down , left / right , and forward / backward ) , and there is one dimension of time ( later / earlier ) . Thus , in the language of modern physics , one says that spacetime is four @-@ dimensional . One of the peculiar features of string theory is that it requires extra dimensions of spacetime for its mathematical consistency . In superstring theory , the version of the theory that incorporates a theoretical idea called supersymmetry , there are six extra dimensions of spacetime in addition to the four that are familiar from everyday experience . 
 One of the goals of current research in string theory is to develop models in which the strings represent particles observed in high energy physics experiments . For such a model to be consistent with observations , its spacetime must be four @-@ dimensional at the relevant distance scales , so one must look for ways to restrict the extra dimensions to smaller scales . In most realistic models of physics based on string theory , this is accomplished by a process called compactification , in which the extra dimensions are assumed to " close up " on themselves to form circles . In the limit where these curled up dimensions become very small , one obtains a theory in which spacetime has effectively a lower number of dimensions . A standard analogy for this is to consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose . If the hose is viewed from a sufficient distance , it appears to have only one dimension , its length . However , as one approaches the hose , one discovers that it contains a second dimension , its circumference . Thus , an ant crawling on the surface of the hose would move in two dimensions . 
 = = = Calabi – Yau manifolds = = = 
 Compactification can be used to construct models in which spacetime is effectively four @-@ dimensional . However , not every way of compactifying the extra dimensions produces a model with the right properties to describe nature . In a viable model of particle physics , the compact extra dimensions must be shaped like a Calabi – Yau manifold . A Calabi – Yau manifold is a special space which is typically taken to be six @-@ dimensional in applications to string theory . It is named after mathematicians Eugenio Calabi and Shing @-@ Tung Yau . 
 After Calabi – Yau manifolds had entered physics as a way to <unk> extra dimensions , many physicists began studying these manifolds . In the late 1980s , Lance Dixon , Wolfgang <unk> , Cumrun Vafa , and Nick Warner noticed that given such a compactification of string theory , it is not possible to reconstruct uniquely a corresponding Calabi – Yau manifold . Instead , two different versions of string theory called type IIA string theory and type IIB can be <unk> on completely different Calabi – Yau manifolds giving rise to the same physics . In this situation , the manifolds are called mirror manifolds , and the relationship between the two physical theories is called mirror symmetry . 
 The mirror symmetry relationship is a particular example of what physicists call a duality . In general , the term duality refers to a situation where two seemingly different physical theories turn out to be equivalent in a nontrivial way . If one theory can be transformed so it looks just like another theory , the two are said to be dual under that transformation . Put differently , the two theories are mathematically different descriptions of the same phenomena . Such dualities play an important role in modern physics , especially in string theory . 
 Regardless of whether Calabi – Yau compactifications of string theory provide a correct description of nature , the existence of the mirror duality between different string theories has significant mathematical consequences . The Calabi – Yau manifolds used in string theory are of interest in pure mathematics , and mirror symmetry allows mathematicians to solve problems in enumerative algebraic geometry , a branch of mathematics concerned with counting the numbers of solutions to geometric questions . A classical problem of enumerative geometry is to enumerate the rational curves on a Calabi – Yau manifold such as the one illustrated above . By applying mirror symmetry , mathematicians have translated this problem into an equivalent problem for the mirror Calabi – Yau , which turns out to be easier to solve . 
 In physics , mirror symmetry is justified on physical grounds . However , mathematicians generally require rigorous proofs that do not require an appeal to physical intuition . From a mathematical point of view , the version of mirror symmetry described above is still only a conjecture , but there is another version of mirror symmetry in the context of topological string theory , a simplified version of string theory introduced by Edward Witten , which has been rigorously proven by mathematicians . In the context of topological string theory , mirror symmetry states that two theories called the A @-@ model and B @-@ model are equivalent in the sense that there is a duality relating them . Today mirror symmetry is an active area of research in mathematics , and mathematicians are working to develop a more complete mathematical understanding of mirror symmetry based on physicists ' intuition . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of mirror symmetry can be traced back to the mid @-@ 1980s when it was noticed that a string propagating on a circle of radius <formula> is physically equivalent to a string propagating on a circle of radius <formula> in appropriate units . This phenomenon is now known as T @-@ duality and is understood to be closely related to mirror symmetry . In a paper from 1985 , Philip Candelas , Gary Horowitz , Andrew Strominger , and Edward Witten showed that by compactifying string theory on a Calabi – Yau manifold , one obtains a theory roughly similar to the standard model of particle physics that also consistently incorporates an idea called supersymmetry . Following this development , many physicists began studying Calabi – Yau compactifications , hoping to construct realistic models of particle physics based on string theory . Cumrun Vafa and others noticed that given such a physical model , it is not possible to reconstruct uniquely a corresponding Calabi – Yau manifold . Instead , there are two Calabi – Yau manifolds that give rise to the same physics . 
 By studying the relationship between Calabi – Yau manifolds and certain conformal field theories called <unk> models , Brian Greene and Ronen <unk> found nontrivial examples of the mirror relationship . Further evidence for this relationship came from the work of Philip Candelas , Monika <unk> , and Rolf <unk> , who surveyed a large number of Calabi – Yau manifolds by computer and found that they came in mirror pairs . 
 Mathematicians became interested in mirror symmetry around 1990 when physicists Philip Candelas , Xenia de la Ossa , Paul Green , and Linda Parkes showed that mirror symmetry could be used to solve problems in enumerative geometry that had resisted solution for decades or more . These results were presented to mathematicians at a conference at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute ( <unk> ) in Berkeley , California in May 1991 . During this conference , it was noticed that one of the numbers Candelas had computed for the counting of rational curves disagreed with the number obtained by Norwegian mathematicians Geir <unk> and Stein Arild <unk> using ostensibly more rigorous techniques . Many mathematicians at the conference assumed that Candelas 's work contained a mistake since it was not based on rigorous mathematical arguments . However , after examining their solution , <unk> and <unk> discovered an error in their computer code and , upon fixing the code , they got an answer that agreed with the one obtained by Candelas and his collaborators . 
 In 1990 , Edward Witten introduced topological string theory , a simplified version of string theory , and physicists showed that there is a version of mirror symmetry for topological string theory . This statement about topological string theory is usually taken as the definition of mirror symmetry in the mathematical literature . In an address at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1994 , mathematician Maxim Kontsevich presented a new mathematical conjecture based on the physical idea of mirror symmetry in topological string theory . Known as homological mirror symmetry , this conjecture formalizes mirror symmetry as an equivalence of two mathematical structures : the derived category of coherent sheaves on a Calabi – Yau manifold and the Fukaya category of its mirror . 
 Also around 1995 , Kontsevich analyzed the results of Candelas , which gave a general formula for the problem of counting rational curves on a quintic threefold , and he reformulated these results as a precise mathematical conjecture . In 1996 , Alexander <unk> posted a paper that claimed to prove this conjecture of Kontsevich . Initially , many mathematicians found this paper hard to understand , so there were doubts about its correctness . Subsequently , Bong Lian , <unk> Liu , and Shing @-@ Tung Yau published an independent proof in a series of papers . Despite controversy over who had published the first proof , these papers are now collectively seen as providing a mathematical proof of the results originally obtained by physicists using mirror symmetry . In 2000 , Kentaro Hori and Cumrun Vafa gave another physical proof of mirror symmetry based on T @-@ duality . 
 Work on mirror symmetry continues today with major developments in the context of strings on surfaces with boundaries . In addition , mirror symmetry has been related to many active areas of mathematics research , such as the McKay correspondence , topological quantum field theory , and the theory of stability conditions . At the same time , basic questions continue to vex . For example , mathematicians still lack an understanding of how to construct examples of mirror Calabi – Yau pairs though there has been progress in understanding this issue . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = <unk> geometry = = = 
 Many of the important mathematical applications of mirror symmetry belong to the branch of mathematics called enumerative geometry . In enumerative geometry , one is interested in counting the number of solutions to geometric questions , typically using the techniques of algebraic geometry . One of the earliest problems of enumerative geometry was posed around the year 200 BCE by the ancient Greek mathematician Apollonius , who asked how many circles in the plane are tangent to three given circles . In general , the solution to the problem of Apollonius is that there are eight such circles . 
 <unk> problems in mathematics often concern a class of geometric objects called algebraic varieties which are defined by the vanishing of polynomials . For example , the <unk> cubic ( see the illustration ) is defined using a certain polynomial of degree three in four variables . A celebrated result of nineteenth @-@ century mathematicians Arthur Cayley and George Salmon states that there are exactly 27 straight lines that lie entirely on such a surface . 
 <unk> this problem , one can ask how many lines can be drawn on a quintic Calabi – Yau manifold , such as the one illustrated above , which is defined by a polynomial of degree five . This problem was solved by the nineteenth @-@ century German mathematician Hermann Schubert , who found that there are exactly 2 @,@ 875 such lines . In 1986 , geometer Sheldon Katz proved that the number of curves , such as circles , that are defined by polynomials of degree two and lie entirely in the quintic is 609 @,@ 250 . 
 By the year 1991 , most of the classical problems of enumerative geometry had been solved and interest in enumerative geometry had begun to diminish . According to mathematician Mark Gross , " As the old problems had been solved , people went back to check Schubert 's numbers with modern techniques , but that was getting pretty stale . " The field was reinvigorated in May 1991 when physicists Philip Candelas , Xenia de la Ossa , Paul Green , and Linda Parkes showed that mirror symmetry could be used to count the number of degree three curves on a quintic Calabi – Yau . Candelas and his collaborators found that these six @-@ dimensional Calabi – Yau manifolds can contain exactly 317 @,@ 206 @,@ 375 curves of degree three . 
 In addition to counting degree @-@ three curves on a quintic three @-@ fold , Candelas and his collaborators obtained a number of more general results for counting rational curves which went far beyond the results obtained by mathematicians . Although the methods used in this work were based on physical intuition , mathematicians have gone on to prove rigorously some of the predictions of mirror symmetry . In particular , the enumerative predictions of mirror symmetry have now been rigorously proven . 
 = = = Theoretical physics = = = 
 In addition to its applications in enumerative geometry , mirror symmetry is a fundamental tool for doing calculations in string theory . In the A @-@ model of topological string theory , physically interesting quantities are expressed in terms of infinitely many numbers called Gromov – Witten invariants , which are extremely difficult to compute . In the B @-@ model , the calculations can be reduced to classical integrals and are much easier . By applying mirror symmetry , theorists can translate difficult calculations in the A @-@ model into equivalent but technically easier calculations in the B @-@ model . These calculations are then used to determine the probabilities of various physical processes in string theory . Mirror symmetry can be combined with other dualities to translate calculations in one theory into equivalent calculations in a different theory . By outsourcing calculations to different theories in this way , theorists can calculate quantities that are impossible to calculate without the use of dualities . 
 Outside of string theory , mirror symmetry is used to understand aspects of quantum field theory , the formalism that physicists use to describe elementary particles . For example , gauge theories are a class of highly symmetric physical theories appearing in the standard model of particle physics and other parts of theoretical physics . Some gauge theories which are not part of the standard model , but which are nevertheless important for theoretical reasons , arise from strings propagating on a nearly singular background . For such theories , mirror symmetry is a useful computational tool . Indeed , mirror symmetry can be used to perform calculations in an important gauge theory in four spacetime dimensions that was studied by Nathan <unk> and Edward Witten and is also familiar in mathematics in the context of Donaldson invariants . There is also a generalization of mirror symmetry called 3D mirror symmetry which relates pairs of quantum field theories in three spacetime dimensions . 
 = = Approaches = = 
 = = = <unk> mirror symmetry = = = 
 In string theory and related theories in physics , a brane is a physical object that generalizes the notion of a point particle to higher dimensions . For example , a point particle can be viewed as a brane of dimension zero , while a string can be viewed as a brane of dimension one . It is also possible to consider higher @-@ dimensional branes . The word brane comes from the word " membrane " which refers to a two @-@ dimensional brane . 
 In string theory , a string may be open ( forming a segment with two endpoints ) or closed ( forming a closed loop ) . D @-@ branes are an important class of branes that arise when one considers open strings . As an open string propagates through spacetime , its endpoints are required to lie on a D @-@ brane . The letter " D " in D @-@ brane refers to a condition that it satisfies , the Dirichlet boundary condition . 
 Mathematically , branes can be described using the notion of a category . This is a mathematical structure consisting of objects , and for any pair of objects , a set of morphisms between them . In most examples , the objects are mathematical structures ( such as sets , vector spaces , or topological spaces ) and the morphisms are functions between these structures . One can also consider categories where the objects are D @-@ branes and the morphisms between two branes <formula> and <formula> are states of open strings stretched between <formula> and <formula> . 
 In the B @-@ model of topological string theory , the D @-@ branes are complex submanifolds of a Calabi – Yau together with additional data that arise physically from having charges at the endpoints of strings . Intuitively , one can think of a submanifold as a surface embedded inside the Calabi – Yau , although submanifolds can also exist in dimensions different from two . In mathematical language , the category having these branes as its objects is known as the derived category of coherent sheaves on the Calabi – Yau . In the A @-@ model , the D @-@ branes can again be viewed as submanifolds of a Calabi – Yau manifold . Roughly speaking , they are what mathematicians call special Lagrangian submanifolds . This means among other things that they have half the dimension of the space in which they sit , and they are <unk> , <unk> , or volume @-@ minimizing . The category having these branes as its objects is called the Fukaya category . 
 The derived category of coherent sheaves is constructed using tools from complex geometry , a branch of mathematics that describes geometric curves in algebraic terms and solves geometric problems using algebraic equations . On the other hand , the Fukaya category is constructed using symplectic geometry , a branch of mathematics that arose from studies of classical physics . <unk> geometry studies spaces equipped with a symplectic form , a mathematical tool that can be used to compute area in two @-@ dimensional examples . 
 The homological mirror symmetry conjecture of Maxim Kontsevich states that the derived category of coherent sheaves on one Calabi – Yau manifold is equivalent in a certain sense to the Fukaya category of its mirror . This equivalence provides a precise mathematical formulation of mirror symmetry in topological string theory . In addition , it provides an unexpected bridge between two branches of geometry , namely complex and symplectic geometry . 
 = = = Strominger @-@ Yau @-@ Zaslow conjecture = = = 
 Another approach to understanding mirror symmetry was suggested by Andrew Strominger , Shing @-@ Tung Yau , and Eric Zaslow in 1996 . According to their conjecture , now known as the SYZ conjecture , mirror symmetry can be understood by dividing a Calabi – Yau manifold into simpler pieces and then transforming them to get the mirror Calabi – Yau . 
 The simplest example of a Calabi – Yau manifold is a two @-@ dimensional torus or donut shape . Consider a circle on this surface that goes once through the hole of the donut . An example is the red circle in the figure . There are infinitely many circles like it on a torus ; in fact , the entire surface is a union of such circles . 
 One can choose an auxiliary circle <formula> ( the pink circle in the figure ) such that each of the infinitely many circles decomposing the torus passes through a point of <formula> . This auxiliary circle is said to <unk> the circles of the decomposition , meaning there is a correspondence between them and points of <formula> . The circle <formula> is more than just a list , however , because it also determines how these circles are arranged on the torus . This auxiliary space plays an important role in the SYZ conjecture . 
 The idea of dividing a torus into pieces parametrized by an auxiliary space can be generalized . Increasing the dimension from two to four real dimensions , the Calabi – Yau becomes a K3 surface . Just as the torus was decomposed into circles , a four @-@ dimensional K3 surface can be decomposed into two @-@ dimensional tori . In this case the space <formula> is an ordinary sphere . Each point on the sphere corresponds to one of the two @-@ dimensional tori , except for twenty @-@ four " bad " points corresponding to " pinched " or singular tori . 
 The Calabi – Yau manifolds of primary interest in string theory have six dimensions . One can divide such a manifold into 3 @-@ tori ( three @-@ dimensional objects that generalize the notion of a torus ) parametrized by a 3 @-@ sphere <formula> ( a three @-@ dimensional generalization of a sphere ) . Each point of <formula> corresponds to a 3 @-@ torus , except for infinitely many " bad " points which form a grid @-@ like pattern of segments on the Calabi – Yau and correspond to singular tori . 
 Once the Calabi – Yau manifold has been decomposed into simpler parts , mirror symmetry can be understood in an intuitive geometric way . As an example , consider the torus described above . Imagine that this torus represents the " spacetime " for a physical theory . The fundamental objects of this theory will be strings propagating through the spacetime according to the rules of quantum mechanics . One of the basic dualities of string theory is T @-@ duality , which states that a string propagating around a circle of radius <formula> is equivalent to a string propagating around a circle of radius <formula> in the sense that all observable quantities in one description are identified with quantities in the dual description . For example , a string has momentum as it propagates around a circle , and it can also wind around the circle one or more times . The number of times the string winds around a circle is called the winding number . If a string has momentum <formula> and winding number <formula> in one description , it will have momentum <formula> and winding number <formula> in the dual description . By applying T @-@ duality simultaneously to all of the circles that decompose the torus , the radii of these circles become inverted , and one is left with a new torus which is " fatter " or " skinnier " than the original . This torus is the mirror of the original Calabi – Yau . 
 T @-@ duality can be extended from circles to the two @-@ dimensional tori appearing in the decomposition of a K3 surface or to the three @-@ dimensional tori appearing in the decomposition of a six @-@ dimensional Calabi – Yau manifold . In general , the SYZ conjecture states that mirror symmetry is equivalent to the simultaneous application of T @-@ duality to these tori . In each case , the space <formula> provides a kind of blueprint that describes how these tori are assembled into a Calabi – Yau manifold . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Yau , Shing @-@ Tung ; Nadis , Steve ( 2010 ) . The Shape of Inner Space : String Theory and the Geometry of the Universe 's Hidden Dimensions . Basic Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 465 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Zaslow , Eric ( 2005 ) . " <unk> " . arXiv : physics / <unk> . 
 Zaslow , Eric ( 2008 ) . " Mirror Symmetry " . In Gowers , Timothy . The Princeton Companion to Mathematics . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = = = Textbooks = = = 
 Aspinwall , Paul ; <unk> , Tom ; Craw , Alastair ; Douglas , Michael ; Gross , Mark ; <unk> , Anton ; Moore , Gregory ; Segal , Graeme ; <unk> , Balázs ; Wilson , <unk> , eds . ( 2009 ) . Dirichlet Branes and Mirror Symmetry . American Mathematical Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Cox , David ; Katz , Sheldon ( 1999 ) . Mirror symmetry and algebraic geometry . American Mathematical Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ 2127 @-@ 5 . 
 Hori , Kentaro ; Katz , Sheldon ; Klemm , Albrecht ; <unk> , Rahul ; Thomas , Richard ; Vafa , Cumrun ; Vakil , Ravi ; Zaslow , Eric , eds . ( 2003 ) . Mirror Symmetry ( PDF ) . American Mathematical Society . ISBN 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = The Concert in Central Park = 
 The Concert in Central Park is the first live album by American folk rock duo Simon & Garfunkel , released in February 1982 on Warner Bros. Records . It was recorded in September 1981 at a free benefit concert in Central Park , New York City , where the pair performed in front of more than 500 @,@ 000 people . Proceeds went toward the redevelopment and maintenance of the run @-@ down green space in the middle of Manhattan . This concert and album marked the start of a short @-@ lived reunion for Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel . The concept of a benefit concert in Central Park had been proposed by Parks Commissioner Gordon Davis and promoter Ron Delsener . Television channel HBO agreed to carry the concert , and worked with Delsener to decide on Simon and Garfunkel as the appropriate act for this event . Besides hit songs from their years as a duo , their set @-@ list included material from their solo careers , and covers . The show consisted of 21 songs , though two were not used in the live album . Among the songs performed were the classics " The Sound of Silence " , " Mrs. Robinson " , and " The Boxer " ; the event concluded with a reprise of Simon 's song , " Late in the Evening " . Ongoing personal tensions between the duo led them to decide against a permanent reunion , despite the success of the concert and a subsequent world tour . 
 The album and a film were released the year after the concert . Simon and Garfunkel 's performance was praised by music critics and the album was commercially successful ; it peaked at number six on the Billboard 200 album charts and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The video recordings were initially broadcast on HBO , and were subsequently made available on VHS and DVD . 
 = = Idea and arrangement = = 
 = = = A concert for the park = = = 
 New York City 's Central Park , an oasis that functions as the city 's " green lung " , was in a state of deterioration in the mid @-@ 1970s . Though Central Park had been designated a National Historic Landmark in 1962 , at the start of the 1980s , the city lacked the financial resources to spend an estimated US $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to restore or even to maintain the park . The nonprofit Central Park Conservancy was founded in 1980 , and began a successful campaign to raise renovation funds . 
 In the early 1980s , Parks Commissioner Gordon Davis , responsible for New York City 's green areas , and Ron Delsener , one of the city 's most influential concert promoters , developed the idea of helping Central Park financially with a free open @-@ air concert , under the legal guidance of Bob Donnelly . The city would use profits from merchandising , television , and video rights to renovate the park . Earlier park performances by Elton John and James Taylor showed that this concept could be a success . Davis authorized the project , and Delsener entered discussions with cable TV channel HBO to decide who would perform . 
 They decided on Simon & Garfunkel , a group that had formed in New York City in the 1960s , and had been one of the most successful folk rock groups through the late 60s / early 70s . Simon & Garfunkel had broken up at the height of their popularity and shortly after the release of their fifth studio album , Bridge Over Troubled Water , which is deemed to be their artistic peak and which topped the 1970 Billboard charts for ten weeks . They had grown apart artistically and did not get along well with each other . In the following eleven years , both continued musical careers as solo artists , and worked together only sporadically on single projects . Garfunkel made brief guest appearances at Simon 's concerts , which were always successful . 
 Delsener presented the plan to Paul Simon in the summer of 1981 . Simon was enthusiastic about the idea , but questioned whether it could be financially successful , especially given the poor audience attendance of his last project , the autobiographical movie One @-@ Trick Pony . Simon 's confidence had declined and he had sought treatment for depression . He questioned whether he and Art Garfunkel could work together , but contacted Garfunkel , who was vacationing in Switzerland . Garfunkel was excited about the idea , and immediately returned to the US . 
 From the promoter 's viewpoint , Simon and Garfunkel were ideal choices . Not only were they likely to draw a large crowd to the concert , they also had roots in the city - both had grown up and gone to school in Forest Hills , Queens . Music critic Stephen Holden pointed out that , unlike artists who had left in pursuit of lifestyles offered by other locales , the two had always been a part of New York City . Both gained inspiration from the cityscape and the cultural variety of New York , and spoke of these influences in their songs . 
 = = = Planning and rehearsals = = = 
 Planning and rehearsals for the concert took about three weeks in a Manhattan theater . The rehearsals were characterized by past tensions that resurfaced between the performers under the intense time pressure . Paul Simon later said : " Well , the rehearsals were just miserable . Artie and I fought all the time . " An early concept was for each singer to give a solo performance , with Simon allotted the greater amount of time , and to conclude with the duo performing their joint works . This idea was rejected because , according to Garfunkel , " It didn 't seem right to either of us that Paul should be the opening act for Simon & Garfunkel , and for him to follow Simon & Garfunkel didn 't make show @-@ business sense " . The two decided to perform most of the show together , with room for each to showcase some solo material . Simon , who had resumed songwriting after a long hiatus , interrupted a series of studio recording sessions for the concert preparations . He used the live show as an opportunity to test one of his new songs in front of an audience . Garfunkel also planned to present a new song , " A Heart in New York " , from his soon @-@ to @-@ be released album Scissors Cut . 
 The two differed on the presentation of the concert . Garfunkel wanted to recreate the duo 's mid @-@ 1960s live performances , using only their voices backed by Simon 's acoustic guitar . Simon felt that this was impossible , as an injury had rendered him incapable of playing guitar for the full length of a concert , and his newer material was typically arranged for larger ensembles that often included horns and amplified instruments such as electric piano and electric guitar . Garfunkel initially agreed to hire a second guitarist , but later rejected the idea . A group of eleven musicians was assembled for the concert , most of whom were experienced studio musicians and had played on albums involving Simon or Garfunkel . These included David Brown ( guitar ) , Pete Carr ( guitar ) , Anthony Jackson ( bass guitar ) , Rob Mounsey ( synthesizer ) , John Eckert ( trumpet ) , John Gatchell ( trumpet ) , Danny Cahn ( trumpet ) , Dave <unk> ( saxophone ) , Gerry <unk> ( saxophone ) , Grady Tate ( drums , percussion ) , and Richard Tee ( keyboard , piano ) . 
 The musical arrangements for the concert were written by Paul Simon and David Matthews . Some songs differed significantly from their original versions ; for example , " Me and Julio Down by the <unk> " featured more prominent Latin elements and included a salsa break , while the folk rock " Kodachrome " was set as a harder rock song and played together with the Chuck Berry classic " Maybellene " as a medley . The military rhythm of " 50 Ways to Leave Your Lover " was replaced with a Latin arrangement that included brass . 
 Garfunkel had difficulties in the rehearsals . Both men easily recalled their songs from the 1960s , but Garfunkel had to learn the harmonies and arrangements for Simon 's solo songs , as modified for the reunion concert . He was also uncomfortable that Simon had rewritten some of the lyrics for their old songs . Despite the need to adapt to Simon and his style , Garfunkel enjoyed some of the songs , and was glad to perform a duet version of Simon 's " American Tune " . 
 The fact that the Central Park show would feature the two men performing together on stage was kept secret until an announcement was published in New York newspapers only a week before the concert . These news reports and the Michael Doret @-@ designed posters named the musicians individually and did not bill them as " Simon & Garfunkel " , but the event was nevertheless interpreted as a reunion . The two stated in interviews that further collaboration was not planned . 
 = = The concert = = 
 The concert took place on Saturday , September 19 , 1981 , on the Great Lawn , the central open space of Central Park . The first spectators , many carrying chairs or picnic blankets , arrived at daybreak to secure a good spot . The Parks Department originally expected about 300 @,@ 000 attendees . Although rain fell throughout the day and continued until the start of the concert , an estimated 500 @,@ 000 audience members made this the seventh @-@ largest concert attendance in the United States in history . 
 The stage backdrop depicted an urban rooftop with water tank and air outlet , symbolic of New York 's skyline . At twilight , the backing band went onstage , followed by New York 's mayor , Ed Koch , who announced , " Ladies and gentlemen , Simon and Garfunkel ! " The duo entered through a side stage door , took center stage amid audience applause , looked at each other and shook hands , and began the concert with their 1968 hit " Mrs. Robinson " . 
 After the second song , " Homeward Bound " , Simon delivered a short speech which began , " Well , it 's great to do a neighborhood concert . " He then thanked the police , the fire department , the park administration and finally Ed Koch . The audience booed at the mention of Koch , who had suggested permanent closure of the park , but they applauded as Simon continued and the irony in his reference became clear . 
 Simon & Garfunkel played twenty @-@ one songs in total : ten by the duo , eight by Simon , one by Garfunkel , a cover of The Everly Brothers ' " Wake Up Little Susie " , and the medley version of " Maybellene " . Each performer sang three songs alone , including one new song apiece . Garfunkel sang the Simon & Garfunkel classic " Bridge Over Troubled Water " and " April Come She Will " , and " A Heart in New York " , a song written by Gallagher and Lyle that appeared on his album Scissors Cut , which had been released the previous month . Simon 's solo performances were the title song of his 1975 album Still Crazy After All These Years , the number @-@ one single " 50 Ways to Leave Your Lover " , and the unreleased " The Late Great Johnny Ace " , which would appear on his 1983 album Hearts and Bones . 
 " The Late Great Johnny Ace " was interrupted when an audience member ran to the stage and shouted at Simon : " I need to talk to you ! " The man was carried away by security , and Simon finished the song . The incident provoked associations to the song 's lyrics , in which Simon speaks as a first @-@ person narrator concerning the deaths of Johnny Ace , John F. Kennedy and John Lennon . Lennon 's murder by an obsessed fan had taken place less than a year previously , not far from the concert site . Despite this association , Simon said that he was not afraid of any on @-@ stage incidents . In May 1982 as a guest on Late Night with David Letterman , he explained that while it is not unusual for fans , for example , to jump onto the stage with flowers , this action was new to him , but also felt that the man simply appeared intoxicated . His greater concern was that the song 's premiere was ruined . 
 Lyrics referring to the New York area produced audience applause , such as Garfunkel 's ode to his home city , " A Heart in New York " , which describes from a New Yorker 's point of view the first glimpse of the city when returning there by air : 
 New York , lookin ' down on Central Park , where they say you should not wander after dark 
 Applause broke out during " The Sound of Silence " , when the narrative voice refers to a large crowd of people in the dark : 
 And in the naked light I saw ten thousand people maybe more 
 After the 17th song , " The Boxer " , which contained an additional stanza not included in the album version , Simon & Garfunkel thanked the audience and left the stage , but returned to deliver an encore of three songs – " Old Friends / Bookends Theme " , " The 59th Street Bridge Song ( Feelin ' Groovy ) " and " The Sound of Silence " . Simon then said that their planned use of pyrotechnics had been disallowed , and told the crowd , " Let 's have our own fireworks ! " Many spectators sparked lighters . The duo then introduced the members of the backing band and gave a final encore , a reprise of " Late in the Evening " . 
 = = = Set list = = = 
 = = Release = = 
 A recording of the concert was released five months later , on February 16 , 1982 . The audio tracks were put through album postproduction , but it was noted by Rolling Stone magazine that they were not completely polished , and preserved the roar and the fuzziness of live rock music heard through a loudspeaker . Two songs were removed from the album version : the interrupted " Late Great Johnny Ace " , and the encore reprise of " Late in the Evening " . The album was an international success . It peaked at number six on the Billboard 200 chart , and was certified 2 × Multi @-@ Platinum with sales of over 2 million copies in USA . The album sold more than 1 @,@ 270 @,@ 000 copies in France , where it was certified Diamond . It was also successful in seven other countries , including France and New Zealand . Originally the album was released as a double LP and as a single Compact Cassette . In 1988 it was issued as a single CD . Various reissues in different formats have been released , including , alongside the DVD , a 2 @-@ CD @-@ release also containing the two missing songs from the original album . The Concert was recorded by Roy Halee on the Record Plant NY Black Truck with David Hewitt Director , assisted by Phil <unk> , Steve Barash and , John Mathias . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 The song " The Late Great Johnny Ace " and the reprise of " Late in the Evening " were not included in the original release of the live album but are included on the DVD . 
 = = = Video release = = = 
 Film of the concert was produced for television broadcast and the home video market . It was produced by James Signorelli , and directed by Michael Lindsay @-@ Hogg , a specialist in music documentaries who had worked on The Beatles ' film Let It Be , and executive produced by Lorne Michaels , who had recently departed the NBC @-@ TV comedy / variety series Saturday Night Live . Simon himself financed the US $ 750 @,@ 000 cost of the staging and the video recording . It is unknown how much HBO paid for the television and video rights of the recording ; US $ 1 million according to some sources , over US $ 3 million according to others . The film includes the two songs that had not appeared on the album , and with an 87 @-@ minute duration , is 12 minutes longer than the album . 
 HBO televised the film , Simon and Garfunkel : The Concert in Central Park , on February 21 , 1982 , five days after the album was released . The film was later released for sale in VHS , CED Videodisc , Laserdisc , and DVD formats . It sold more than 50 @,@ 000 copies in the US , where it earned Gold certification for a music longform video . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The concert and recordings were positively received by music critics . Stephen Holden praised the performance in The New York Times the day after the concert ; he subsequently praised the live album in Rolling Stone magazine . He wrote that Simon and Garfunkel were successful in reviving their sound , that the backing band was " one of the finest groups of musicians ever to play together at a New York rock concert " , and the rearrangements of Simon 's solo material were improvements over the originals . Despite the risks in performing so many acoustic ballads in an open @-@ air concert on a cool night , the songs " were beautifully articulated , in near @-@ perfect harmony . " 
 An October 1981 review in Rolling Stone called the concert " one of the finest performances of [ 1981 ] " , one that " vividly recaptured another time , an era when well @-@ crafted , melodic pop bore meanings that stretched beyond the musical sphere and into the realms of culture and politics . " This reviewer noted that Garfunkel 's voice was noticeably restrained in high passages , though still harmonious , and that the evening 's only weak spot was the " Kodachrome " / " Maybellene " medley , because neither singer could raise the right level of emotion for the rock songs . A Billboard reviewer wrote in March 1982 , " This 19 song , two record set gloriously recaptures the past with sterling renditions of most of the duo 's classics as well as a few of Simon 's solo compositions filled out by Garfunkel 's harmony . " However , Robert Christgau of The Village Voice dismissed the album as " a corporate boondoggle — a classy way for Warner Bros. artist Simon to rerecord , rerelease , and resell the catalogue CBS is sitting on . " He felt Simon had been better off without Garfunkel since 1971 and quipped , " live doubles are live doubles , nostalgia is nostalgia , wimps are wimps , and who needs any of ' em ? " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The duo were disappointed with their performance , particularly Garfunkel , who felt that he sang poorly . Simon said that he did not immediately realize the magnitude of the event : " I didn 't get what had happened – how big it was – until I went home , turned on the television and saw it on all the news ... and later that night on the front pages of all the newspapers . Then I got it . " 
 In May 1982 , Simon & Garfunkel went on a world tour with stops in Japan , Germany , Denmark , Sweden , Switzerland , the Netherlands , Ireland , France , Great Britain , New Zealand , the US and Canada . The European leg of their tour began on May 28 , 1982 , at the Stadion am <unk> Berg in Offenbach am Main . This was their first performance in Germany , and had an attendance of around 40 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 After the tour concluded , the duo went into the studio to work on what was to be a reunion album . However , after increasingly acrimonious disagreements , Garfunkel dropped out of the project , which became Simon 's 1983 solo album Hearts and Bones . 
 Several years would pass before Simon & Garfunkel worked together again . Their next joint public appearance was in 1990 , when they performed for their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . When Simon gave another free concert in Central Park on 15 August 1991 , he rejected Garfunkel 's offer to participate . However , they agreed to perform together in 1993 for 21 sold out concerts in New York , with half of the show being Paul Simon solo with a band and the other half Simon and Garfunkel . Later the same year , they did some charity concerts , including the Bridge School Benefit concerts and a benefit for United Way of Canada Children 's Charities at SkyDome in Toronto . Their next performance as a duo was in December 2003 , at New York 's Madison Square Garden . This concert was recorded , and released in December 2004 as the album Old Friends : Live on Stage . 
 Simon & Garfunkel 's Concert in Central Park raised around $ 51 @,@ 000 for Central Park . Benefit concerts by other musicians followed , and helped to raise awareness of the park 's state . With donations from the general public and with the help of wealthy benefactors , the park was restored during the 1980s and gained recognition as a major tourist attraction . As of 2011 , donations still make up the majority of its budget . Today concerts and other benefits are regularly held on the Great Lawn . 
 = = Chart performance and certification = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = Yermolayev Yer @-@ 2 = 
 The Yermolayev Yer @-@ 2 was a long @-@ range Soviet medium bomber used during World War II . It was developed from the Bartini Stal @-@ 7 prototype airliner before the war . It was used to bomb Berlin from airbases in Estonia after Operation Barbarossa in 1941 . Production was terminated in August 1941 to allow the factory to concentrate on building higher @-@ priority Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 ground @-@ attack aircraft , but was restarted at the end of 1943 with new , fuel @-@ efficient , Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30B aircraft Diesel engines . 
 Although designed as a long @-@ range medium bomber it was flown on tactical ground @-@ attack missions during the Battle of Moscow with heavy losses . The survivors were flown , in ever dwindling numbers , until August 1943 when the last examples were transferred to schools . However , the resumption of production in 1943 allowed the aircraft to resume combat operations in April 1945 . The Yer @-@ 2 remained in service with Long @-@ Range Aviation until replaced by four @-@ engined bombers at the end of the 1940s . 
 = = Development = = 
 Roberto Bartini had designed and built the Stal @-@ 7 airliner whilst he was the chief designer at the <unk> NII <unk> ( Russian : Zavod <unk> <unk> Naoochno @-@ Issledovatel 'skiy Institoot <unk> <unk> <unk> — " Factory for Special Construction at the Scientific Test Institute for the Civil Air Fleet " ) . The performance of the Stal @-@ 7 was extremely good , particularly in respect to its payload ; at gross overload weight over 56 % of the total weight was payload . During flight trials with maximum all @-@ up weight the prototype crashed on takeoff in early 1938 , resulting in the arrest of Bartini and his imprisonment in a Siberian Gulag in February 1938 . The Stal @-@ 7 lay unrepaired until Vladimir <unk> was appointed as chief designer at OKB @-@ 240 after Bartini 's arrest , with the task of transforming the Stal @-@ 7 design into a long @-@ range bomber , a task made easier since Bartini had reserved space for a bomb bay in the fuselage . After repair the Stal @-@ 7 carried on with the flight @-@ test programme , including a record @-@ breaking nonstop flight on 28 August 1939 when it flew Moscow — Sverdlovsk — Sevastopol — Moscow ; a distance of 5 @,@ 086 km ( 3 @,@ 160 mi ) at an average speed of 405 km / h ( 252 mph ) . 
 Preliminary design of the DB @-@ 240 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> — " long @-@ range bomber " ) , as the bomber version was designated , was completed by the beginning of 1939 and the construction of two prototypes began the following July . The DB @-@ 240 retained little apart from the general layout of the Stal @-@ 7 as the structure was almost completely redesigned . The pilot 's cockpit was offset to port to improve his downward view and the navigator / bomb aimer sat in the extensively glazed nose with a 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) ShKAS machine gun , the radio operator sat below and to starboard of the pilot and the dorsal gunner in a partially retractable turret with one 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) Berezin UBT machine gun . Another ShKAS was fitted in a ventral hatch . Up to 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 409 lb ) of bombs could be carried in the bomb bay and two 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 102 lb ) bombs could be carried externally . Up to 4 @,@ 600 kg ( 10 @,@ 141 lb ) of fuel could be carried . The DB @-@ 240 had been designed to use the experimental Klimov M @-@ 106 V12 engines , but the less @-@ powerful Klimov M @-@ 105 engine had to be substituted because the M @-@ 106 was not available . 
 The DB @-@ 240 prototype flew for the first time on 14 May 1940 and began its State acceptance tests on 27 September 1940 . The weaker engines prevented the DB @-@ 240 from reaching its designed performance . It could only attain 445 km / h ( 277 mph ) at 4 @,@ 250 m ( 13 @,@ 944 ft ) instead of the expected 500 km / h ( 311 mph ) at 6 @,@ 000 meters ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) . Its defensive armament was deemed inadequate and other problems included an excessively long take @-@ off run and engine defects . However , these did not offset its virtues of a heavy bomb load and long @-@ range ( 4 @,@ 100 kilometers ( 2 @,@ 548 mi ) carrying 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 205 lb ) of bombs ) . It was ordered into production at Factory No. 18 , in Voronezh , as the Yermolayev Yer @-@ 2 . 
 Manufacture began in March 1941 , with approximately 50 aircraft delivered by 22 June 1941 . These aircraft were about 5 – 8 km / h ( 3 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 0 mph ) slower than the prototype and their normal weight increased 1 @,@ 220 kg ( 2 @,@ 690 lb ) to 12 @,@ 520 kg ( 27 @,@ 602 lb ) . Production was terminated in August after 128 had been completed to allow the factory to concentrate on the higher @-@ priority Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 ground @-@ attack aircraft . 
 A Yer @-@ 2 was modified with experimental Mikulin AM @-@ 37 engines , a reinforced undercarriage , armored seats for the navigator and gunner , and 12 @.@ 7 mm UBT machine guns in place of its original ShKAS weapons . It first flew in July 1941 and was able to reach 505 km / h ( 314 mph ) at 6 @,@ 000 m ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) , but the range was reduced to ( 3 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 175 mi ) carrying 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 205 lb ) of bombs . One significant problem with this version was the excessive takeoff roll which hindered operations from grass airstrips . The engine was unreliable , however , and had cooling problems that the Mikulin OKB did not have the resources to resolve so it was cancelled in October when the factory was forced to evacuate from Moscow by the German advance . 
 The Charomskiy M @-@ 40F Diesel engine was also evaluated in a Yer @-@ 2 in 1941 . This engine , like all Diesels , offered a greatly reduced fuel consumption compared to a standard gasoline @-@ powered engine , but at a great penalty in weight . These engines increased the gross takeoff weight to 13 @,@ 500 kg ( 29 @,@ 762 lb ) which required the undercarriage to be reinforced and the wing area increased to keep the same wing loading . The M @-@ 40F @-@ powered aircraft reached a maximum speed of 430 km / h ( 267 mph ) at 6 @,@ 050 m ( 19 @,@ 849 ft ) . However , the M @-@ 40 was not yet ready for service use and the project was cancelled . 
 The aircraft / engine combination did have enough potential that development work continued using the closely related , but more mature , Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30B Diesel engine . The cockpit was modified to accommodate two pilots side @-@ by @-@ side and the wing and tailplane areas were increased . The 12 @.@ 7 mm UBT machine gun in the dorsal turret was replaced by a 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK cannon and the nose and ventral ShKAS machine guns were exchanged for 12 @.@ 7 mm UBT machine guns . Up to 5 @,@ 460 kg ( 12 @,@ 037 lb ) of fuel could be carried . The Yer @-@ 2 / ACh @-@ 30B was placed into production at Factory No. 39 in Irkutsk at the end of 1943 and the first production aircraft was submitted to its State acceptance trials the following month . Some excess aircraft were converted as Yer @-@ <unk> VIP transports . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The Yer @-@ 2 was not in squadron service when Germany invaded on 22 June 1941 , but the 420th and 421st Long @-@ Range Bomber Regiments ( Russian : Dahl <unk> <unk> <unk> — DBAP ) were formed shortly afterwards . However neither regiment flew any operational missions until later in the summer . On the evening of 10 August Yer @-@ 2s of the 420th DBAP , accompanied by Petlyakov Pe @-@ 8s of the 432nd DBAP , attempted to bomb Berlin from <unk> Airfield near Leningrad . The airfield was too short to accommodate a fully loaded Yer @-@ 2 , but three bombers did manage to take off regardless . Two managed to bomb Berlin , or its outskirts , but only one successfully returned ; the other was shot down by ' friendly ' Polikarpov I @-@ 16s when it reentered Soviet airspace and the third aircraft went missing . Three crews from the 420th DBAP bombed Königsberg during the nights of 28 – 29 August and 30 August – 1 September from Ramenskoye Airport , southeast of Moscow . 
 On 1 October 1941 63 Yer @-@ 2s were in service , but only 34 were operational . The 420th DBAP had flown 154 sorties by the beginning of November ( 6 in August , 81 in September , 67 in October ) and had lost 30 of its 40 aircraft . Over half of these ( 19 ) were due to non @-@ combat losses . Losses were extremely high over the autumn and winter as they were inappropriately committed against German tactical frontline targets during the Battle of Moscow at low altitudes and only 12 were in service on 18 March 1942 . On 4 August 1942 the 747th DBAP had only ten Yer @-@ 2s on hand and it was briefly committed during the Battle of Stalingrad . The survivors were flown , in ever dwindling numbers , until August 1943 when the last few aircraft were transferred to schools by the 2nd Guards DBAP and the 747th DBAP . 
 The Yer @-@ 2 was placed back into production at the end of 1943 , but none of the new bombers had been issued to combat units by 1 June 1944 . However 42 were in service on 1 January 1945 and 101 on 10 May 1945 after the war ended . The first combat mission undertaken by Yer @-@ 2s after they returned to production was a raid on Königsberg on 7 April 1945 by the 327th and 329th Bomber Aviation Regiments ( Russian : <unk> <unk> Polk ) . It remained in service with Long @-@ Range Aviation units until replaced by four @-@ engined bombers like the Tupolev Tu @-@ 4 in the late 1940s . 
 = = Variants = = 
 DB @-@ 240 
 Two prototypes of the Yer @-@ 2 series with two 1 @,@ 050 hp M @-@ 105 engines . 
 Yer @-@ 2 
 Production version with two M @-@ 105 engines , 128 built . 
 Yer @-@ 2 / AM @-@ 37 
 One aircraft re @-@ engined with two prototype 1 @,@ 380 hp Mikulin AM @-@ 37 engines , the fastest of all Yer @-@ 2s . 
 Yer @-@ 2 / M @-@ 40F 
 The first diesel @-@ powered Yer @-@ 2 , with modified wings . One converted with two 1 @,@ 500 hp Charomskiy M @-@ 40F diesel engines . 
 Yer @-@ 2 / ACh @-@ 30B 
 Production model of the diesel @-@ engined version . Performance was excellent despite the poor reliability and rough running of the Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30B diesel engines . Range increased 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 mi ) from the version with M @-@ 105 engines . 
 Yer @-@ <unk> 
 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> – Special Assignment ) Two aircraft from the Yer @-@ 2 / ACh @-@ 30B production line were modified with a 12 @-@ seat VIP cabin , military equipment removed and long @-@ range fuel tanks in the bomb @-@ bay . A third aircraft was converted from a Yer @-@ 2 ( 1941 production ) and used for shuttle flights between Irkutsk and Moscow . 
 Yer @-@ 2N 
 ( Russian : <unk> — Carrier ) One aircraft was modified as an engine testbed for captured Argus As 014 pulse jet engines . 
 Yer @-@ 2 / MB @-@ 100 
 One production aircraft used as a testbed for the 2 @,@ 200 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 600 kW ) <unk> MB @-@ 100 engine in 1945 . 
 Yer @-@ 4 
 The final iteration of the Yer @-@ 2 series was a 1941 production aircraft re @-@ engined with ACh @-@ 30BF engines and redesignated as the Yer @-@ 4 . It had a slightly larger wingspan , increased takeoff weight and improved armament . The prototype was tested in December 1943 , but did not enter production . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 VVS ( Russian : Voyenno @-@ <unk> Seely — Soviet Air Forces ) 
 ADD ( Russian : <unk> Dahl 'nevo Deystviya — Long Range Aviation ) 
 420th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment , later the <unk> Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment 
 421st Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment , later the 747th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment 
 747th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment 
 <unk> Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment , later the 2nd Guards Long @-@ Range Aviation Regiment 
 327th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment 
 329th Long @-@ Range Bomber Aviation Regiment 
 = = Specifications ( Yer @-@ 2 / ACh @-@ 30B ) = = 
 Data from Gunston , Bill . Encyclopedia of Russian Aircraft 1875 – 1995 , p . 503 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : four 
 Length : 16 @.@ 42 m ( 53 ft 10 ½ in ) 
 Wingspan : 23 m ( 75 ft 5 ½ in ) 
 Height : 4 @.@ 82 m ( 15 ft 10 in ) 
 Wing area : 79 m2 ( 850 ft2 ) 
 Empty weight : 10 @,@ 455 kg ( 23 @,@ 049 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 18 @,@ 580 kg ( 40 @,@ 961 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Charomskiy ACh @-@ 30B V12 diesel engines , 1 @,@ 118 kW ( 1 @,@ 500 hp ) each each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 420 km / h ( 261 mph ) 
 Range : 5 @,@ 500 km ( 3 @,@ 418 miles ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 200 m ( 23 @,@ 620 ft ) 
 Armament 
 1 x 12 @.@ 7 mm UBT machine @-@ gun in nose flexible mount . 
 1 x 12 @.@ 7 mm UBT machine @-@ gun in ventral flexible mount . 
 1 x 20 mm ShVAK cannon in a <unk> @-@ 5 dorsal turret . 
 Up to 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 11 @,@ 023 lb ) of bombs in the internal bomb @-@ bay . 
 = 10th Combat Aviation Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The Combat Aviation Brigade , 10th Mountain Division is a combat aviation brigade of the United States Army based at Fort Drum , New York . It is a subordinate unit of the 10th Mountain Division . 
 Reactivated in 1988 , the 10th Mountain Division 's Combat Aviation Brigade supported the division as it undertook numerous operations and overseas contingencies in the 1990s , including Operation Restore Hope , Operation Uphold Democracy , and Task Force Eagle , as well as disaster relief following Hurricane Andrew . The brigade has since become involved in the War on Terrorism , seeing four deployments to Afghanistan to support Operation Enduring Freedom and a deployment to Iraq to support Operation Iraqi Freedom . The brigade is currently on its fourth deployment to Afghanistan and is serving in Regional Command - East under Combined Joint Task Force 101 in support of Operation Enduring Freedom . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The Combat Aviation Brigade , 10th Mountain Division comprises five principal battalions under the command of its Headquarters and Headquarters Company . The brigade commands 1st , 2nd , 3rd Battalions , 10th Aviation Regiment , and 6th Squadron , 6th Cavalry Regiment , which operate a number of aircraft including UH @-@ 60 Black Hawks , AH @-@ 64 Apaches , CH @-@ 47 Chinooks , and OH @-@ 58 Kiowas . In addition , the 277th Aviation Support Battalion provides supporting services to the combat battalions when they are deployed , making the brigade capable of operating independently of higher command headquarters , and capable of taking on additional battalions and other , smaller units when deployed , as necessary . 
 = = History = = 
 The brigade HHC was constituted on 1 April 1988 as Headquarters and Headquarters Company , Aviation Brigade , 10th Mountain Division , and activated at Fort Drum , New York . The brigade was activated at Griffiss Air Force Base in Rome , NY as part of the 10th Mountain Division ( Light Infantry ) on 2 July 1988 . The brigade remained based at Griffiss until 1992 ( August ? ) . It appears that initially the brigade was made up of 3 @-@ 17 CAV , and the 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the 25th Aviation Regiment ( 2 @-@ 25 and 3 @-@ 25 AVN ) . 
 The brigade has played a key role in all Division missions , including support for Hurricane Andrew relief in south Florida , in Somalia , Operation Uphold Democracy in Haiti , SFOR and KFOR missions in Bosnia and Kosovo and most recently Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom . In each instance , the Brigade has demonstrated its capability to rapidly deploy and conduct aviation missions upon arrival . The 10th Combat Aviation Brigade has 12 CH @-@ 47s , 24 AH @-@ 64s , 30 OH @-@ 58s , and 50 UH @-@ 60s to assist the 10th Mountain Division to fight and win in any environment . 
 In Somalia from 1993 ( ' Operation Restore Hope and Operation Continue Hope ' ) the 10th Mountain Division brought an aviation task force to support them in their UNOSOM II missions . Task Force Raven , built around 2nd Battalion , 25th Aviation Regiment , was a task organized aviation unit with a total of 52 attack , scout , lift , and medical evacuation aircraft . They flew over 6000 missions over the streets of Mogadishu . Twelve AH @-@ 1 Cobras made up the attack helicopter force . The lessons learned by this aviation task force are particularly useful for the rest of the conventional aviation units in the U.S. Army . Fortunately , LTC R. Lee Gore , commander of Task Force Raven ordered a detailed after action review upon the unit 's return . " During the Battle of Mogadishu on 3 – 4 October 1993 , UH @-@ 1V and MH @-@ 60s moved casualties from the airfield to the 46th Combat Support Hospital at the U.S. Embassy compound . The battalion returned home in December 1993 @-@ January 1994 , relieved by the 4th Battalion , 4th Aviation Regiment , from Fort Carson . ( Casper , 128 ) 
 = = = Haiti 1994 = = = 
 The division formed the nucleus of the Multinational Force Haiti and Joint Task Force 190 ( JTF 190 ) in Haiti during Operation Uphold Democracy . More than 8 @,@ 600 of the division 's troops deployed during this operation . On 19 September 1994 , the 1st Brigade conducted the Army ’ s first air assault from an aircraft carrier . This force consisted of 54 helicopters and almost 2 @,@ 000 soldiers . They occupied the Port @-@ au @-@ Prince International Airport . This was the largest Army air operation conducted from a carrier since the Doolittle Raid in World War II . 
 = = = Afghanistan Deployments = = = 
 In 2003 and into 2004 , the brigade deployed for the first time to Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom . As the only aviation brigade in the theater , the brigade provided air support for all U.S. Army units operating in the country . The brigade 's mission at that time focused on close air support , medevac missions , and other duties involving combat with Taliban and Al @-@ Qaeda forces in the country . The brigade returned to Fort Drum in 2004 . 
 In winter 2006 the brigade was deployed again to Afghanistan to support Operation Enduring Freedom as the only aviation brigade in the theater , stationed at Bagram Air Base , Afghanistan . Named " Task Force Falcon , " the brigade 's mission was to conduct aviation operations to destroy insurgents and anti @-@ coalition militia in an effort to help build the Afghan National Security Force 's capability and allow the Afghan government to increase its capabilities . In addition , the Task Force provided logistical and aviation support for ISAF forces throughout the country , conducted tactical maneuvers and performed security and attack operations when needed . 
 Prior to the modular force structure reorganization , the 10th Aviation Brigade consisted of a Headquarters Company , 10th Aviation Brigade ; 3rd Squadron , 17th Cavalry Regiment , 1st Battalion , 10th Aviation Regiment ( United States ) ( formerly 2nd Battalion , 25th Aviation Regiment ) , 2nd Battalion ( Assault ) , 10th Aviation Regiment ( formerly 3rd Battalion , 25th Aviation Regiment ) ; 3rd Battalion , 10th Aviation ( General Support ) , and C Company ( Aviation Intermediate Maintenance ) , 10th Aviation Regiment . 
 After the transformation , the reorganized brigade retained the 3 – 17th Cavalry and 1- and 2 – 10th Aviation . 3 – 10th Aviation and C @-@ 10th Aviation were inactivated . Also reactivated as part of the reorganized unit were 6th Squadron , 6th Cavalry Regiment and the 277th Aviation Support Battalion . During the transition elements of the 10th Aviation continued to be deployed as part of Task Forces part of Operation Iraqi Freedom , with units returning to Fort Drum for reorganization after their tours were complete . Elements of the 10th Aviation Brigade were deployed to Iraq in 2008 as part of continued operations in that country . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The brigade has been awarded two Meritorious Unit Commendation ( Army ) for Somalia , and service in ' Afghanistan 2003 – 2004 ' . As of 6 February 2009 , the Army 's official lineage and honors website says that Campaign Participation Credit for the war on terrorism has ' yet to be <unk> 
 = Naayak = 
 Naayak ( English : Leader ) is a 2013 Indian Telugu @-@ language masala film written by Akula Siva and directed by V. V. Vinayak . The film was jointly produced by <unk> Danayya and S. Radhakrishna under the banner Universal Media . The film features Ram Charan , Kajal Aggarwal and Amala Paul in the lead roles . S. Thaman composed the film 's soundtrack and background score . Chota K. Naidu undertook the cinematography and Gautham Raju was the film 's editor . 
 The film features Ram Charan in dual roles : Cherry , a software engineer in Hyderabad , and Siddharth Naayak , an inspiring young leader in Kolkata fighting against an evil politician named Rawat . The film revolves around Cherry assisting Siddharth in the triumph of good over evil after their paths cross . 
 Production began on 9 November 2011 , and principal photography began on 7 February 2012 . The film was extensively shot in Hyderabad and Kolkata , while a couple of the songs were shot in Dubai , Iceland , and Slovenia , making Naayak the first Indian film to be shot in Slovenia . Filming ended on 29 December 2012 . 
 Released during the season of the Makar Sankranti festival on 9 January 2013 , on 1600 screens worldwide , the film received generally positive reviews from critics and was commercially successful . The film was dubbed into Tamil and Malayalam with the same title . The film was loosely remade into Bengali as Hero : The Superstar in 2014 . It was also dubbed in Hindi under the title Double Attack by Goldmines Telefilms in the same year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Siddharth Naayak kills Central Minister Rawat 's brother , Taxi Seth , and his henchmen to save three men . Rawat orders a CBI Officer to catch the criminal so that he may be executed . In <unk> , Hyderabad there works a software engineer , Cherry , who is a dead ringer for Siddharth . Cherry 's uncle Jilebi , the CEO of <unk> , unexpectedly runs into trouble , angering the local Don , Babji . Cherry saves Jilebi from Babji by manipulation , but in the process becomes romantically interested in Babji 's sister , Madhu . After Cherry saves several children from a mafia don , Madhu reciprocates his love . This angers Babji and he goes to kill Cherry , but is shocked when he sees what he thinks is Cherry assassinating the DGP of West Bengal . The CBI Officer also misunderstands , believing that Cherry is responsible for the two murders , although Siddharth is the real murderer . With Jilebi , the CBI Officer goes to Kumbh Mela at Varanasi in pursuit of Cherry . As Rawat is offering holy rituals , the CBI Officer catches Cherry and holds him , however Siddharth rises from the Ganges and stabs Rawat with a trident , after which he fights with all of Rawat 's guards . As he is about to kill Rawat , the CBI Officer attacks him with a taser and arrests him , thereby exonerating Cherry . 
 Cherry comes to know the story of his look – alike . Siddharth visits his sister 's house in Kolkata to pursue higher education . He shares a strong bond of love and affection with his sister , her husband , and his sister @-@ in @-@ law Nandini . Siddharth and Nandini are about to be married . Meanwhile , his brother @-@ in @-@ law , who is a doctor , attends a case of a minor who was injected with steroids by Rawat 's second Brother Badvel , and then forced into prostitution . When he complains to the police , he is unaware that the police officer is friends with Badvel , and is betrayed to Badvel , who kills him to keep him quiet . Siddharth is unable to bear this and kills Badvel , becoming a public sensation overnight . 
 Shortly after , Siddharth seizes all of Rawat 's property and distributes it to the public . Rawat kills the Minister , and puts the blame on Siddharth , who he stabs and throws into the Ganges . Rawat becomes the Minister within a week , while Siddharth survives , planning to kill Rawat . Cherry , after reading about his story , decides to help him . He , along with Jilebi , goes to the CBI Jail where Siddharth is in custody . He introduces himself , and hatches a plan to get Siddharth exonerated . In court , since Siddharth admits that he committed the crime , the Judge orders that he be put to death . 
 Cherry enters the court , stating that he is Siddharth Naayak and the one standing there is his fan . Siddharth tells exactly the same story , which causes some confusion . The Judge orders the CBI to find out the real identities of the two persons within ten days . During that time , Siddharth manages to bring Madhu and her family , including Babji and his paternal uncle , to Kolkata , uniting Cherry and Madhu . The next day , Rawat makes a call to <unk> to come to his place to save the kidnapped school children . 
 But Cherry eavesdrops on the conversation , and goes to Rawat 's place ahead of Siddharth , where he is severely attacked by Rawat . Siddharth reaches the place after watching a MMS sent by Rawat , saves Cherry and the two kill Rawat . The case is dismissed due to lack of evidence , and Siddharth is freed . In the end , both Siddharth and Cherry unite with their respective lovers . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ram Charan as Charan ( Cherry ) / Siddharth Naayak . 
 Kajal Aggarwal as Madhu . 
 Amala Paul as Nandini . 
 Pradeep Rawat as Rawat . 
 Brahmanandam as Jilebi . 
 Rahul Dev as Babji . 
 Jaya Prakash Reddy as Babji 's paternal uncle . 
 Ashish Vidyarthi as the CBI officer , who is appointed to find the culprit in the murder case of Rawat 's brother , Taxi Seth . 
 Posani Krishna Murali as Shukla Bhai . 
 Cameo Appearances 
 Dev Gill as Badvel , Rawat 's younger brother . 
 Surekha Vani as Siddharth 's sister . 
 Rajiv <unk> as Siddharth 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 M. S. Narayana as drunkard CBI officer . 
 Raghu Babu as Babji 's henchman . 
 <unk> Khan as Taxi Seth , Rawat 's first brother . 
 <unk> Kumar as <unk> , a mafia don in Hyderabad . 
 Venu Madhav as Nandini 's friend . 
 Tanikella Bharani as judge . 
 Satyam Rajesh as <unk> 's henchman . 
 Sudha as Cherry 's mother . 
 Charmee Kaur in a special appearance in the item number Nellorae . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 At the end of April 2011 , V. V. Vinayak held story discussions for his next film , featuring Ram Charan as the protagonist and written by Akula Siva . By then , Vinayak was busy in giving final touches to his film Badrinath ( 2011 ) , and Ram Charan was participating in the shooting of Racha ( 2012 ) , directed by Sampath Nandi . After completing all of the promotional activities for Badrinath , Vinayak and Siva started working on the film 's script in early July 2011 . <unk> Danayya was confirmed to produce the film under the banner Universal Media , and pre @-@ production on the film was expected to be launched in August , followed by filming starting in September 2011 . The film 's script was approved by Ram Charan 's father , and it was announced that actor Chiranjeevi would be part of the cast ; Kona Venkat was brought in to assist with the film 's screenplay . The project was confirmed in late October 2011 . The film was officially launched on 9 November 2011 , at Annapurna Studios in Hyderabad . 
 S. Thaman was announced as the music director , marking his first collaboration with both Vinayak and Charan ; Chota K. Naidu and Gautham Raju were announced as the film 's cinematographer and editor , respectively . The film 's title was announced as Naayak , with the caption " The Leader " , on 13 August 2012 . Weeks before the film 's release , a few <unk> students protested that the term " Naayak " referred to a certain tribal group , and they demanded a change of the title . While censoring the film , the Central Board of Film Certification looked into the group 's objection about the title . They found that there was no derogatory reference to either the name Naayak or the caste of tribes , either visually or in the audio part of the film , and cleared the use of the title . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kajal Aggarwal was considered for one of the two female leads in the film in early October 2011 , later signing on to the film , which marked her second collaboration with Ram Charan after Magadheera ( 2009 ) . Ram Charan confirmed that he would be seen in a dual role in the film . Hansika Motwani was rumoured as the second female lead , however this was denied by Danayya , who added that she was never considered for that role , and Kajal was the only actress who had been signed up until that point . In late February 2012 , Amala Paul was selected as the second female lead , which she confirmed to Sify saying " <unk> meets Magadheera " . 
 It was reported that Shruti Haasan would perform an item number in the film , which she later denied . Chiranjeevi and N. T. Rama Rao Jr. were rumoured to make cameo appearance in the film . Charmee Kaur confirmed in late December 2012 that she would perform an item number along with Ram Charan . Posani Krishna Murali and Jaya Prakash Reddy were seen in comic roles . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 7 February 2012 . By April 2012 , the film was shot at various locales in Hyderabad . A few action sequences were shot at night , for which Ram Charan trained for several days ; he performed several of the stunt sequences himself without using a body double . Filming was suspended for almost three weeks when Ram Charan was injured during filming Racha ( 2012 ) . Vinayak intended to complete shooting Ram Charan 's solo portions and then start the schedule with Kajal ; Ram Charan and Amala Paul would take part in the final part of the planned schedule . 
 The next portion of the schedule started in Dubai , where a song , " Laila O Laila " , with Ram Charan and Kajal was shot . Ram Charan later said " It was a week before my wedding and I had just returned from my bachelor 's party . I landed directly in Dubai to shoot the song . I had to wear shades to hide the fatigue " and added " I was told that I wouldn 't need much rehearsals , but was zapped when I saw the choreographer take me through the routine . I was like ' can we please slow the beat or something ? ' I couldn 't settle for anything less than the best and went ahead and completed the song in seven days . " After its completion , some key scenes and songs were shot in Europe involving the three leads . 
 Subsequent to the marriage ceremony , Ram Charan resumed his work on Naayak in late June 2012 , after shooting for a Tata DoCoMo commercial . The song " Subhalekha <unk> " was shot in Iceland on 22 August 2012 . It was originally planned to be shot using Ram Charan and Kajal , but it was filmed using Amala Paul instead , as Kajal had a scheduling conflict . After the completion of that song , two more songs were shot using Ram Charan and Kajal . After returning from Iceland , filming continued in the Old City in Hyderabad . On 7 October 2012 , scenes featuring Ram Charan and Amala Paul were shot at the <unk> Multiplex near <unk> . 
 The next part of the schedule started in Kolkata from 12 October 2012 . Some action episodes involving Ram Charan , Dev Gill , and others , and a few continuity scenes were shot . An entire day was spent shooting a few action episodes with Ram Charan at <unk> Ghat near the <unk> flower market , since Vinayak insisted on perfection . This portion of the schedule ended on 22 October 2012 . The team returned to Hyderabad and filming continued in a set erected at <unk> Studios . By mid November 2012 , a majority of the filming was complete , with final completion expected in December 2012 . 
 The last portion of the schedule began on 4 December 2012 , during which the remaining climax action episodes scenes and a song were planned to be shot until 18 December 2012 . Amala Paul joined the filming of the climax on 7 December 2012 , after returning from the sets of <unk> ( 2013 ) . The song " Nellorae " was shot using Ram Charan and Charmee at Ramoji Film City on 24 December 2012 , and after its completion , filming came to an end on 29 December 2012 . The filming phase lasted for approximately 9 months , and the film was the first Indian film to be shot in Slovenia . Ram Charan completed his part of dubbing in late December 2012 . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 The film features a protagonist in a dual role , revolving around their lifestyles and the circumstances when they meet . A reviewer from Sify felt that the film 's script was inspired from V. V. Vinayak 's previous works like Tagore ( 2003 ) , Lakshmi ( 2006 ) , Krishna ( 2008 ) and <unk> ( 2009 ) , as well as from S. S. Rajamouli 's past works like <unk> ( 2003 ) and Chhatrapati ( 2005 ) and S. Shankar 's Tamil film Sivaji ( 2007 ) . 
 Akula Siva said that the dialogue in the film had a philosophical touch despite being humorous and added , " The hero is elevated on par with divinity in the introduction ; such glorification is imperative , if the hero doesn 't have that power and courage he cannot fight so many people " . 
 = = Music = = 
 S. Thaman composed the film 's soundtrack and background music , marking his first collaboration with both V. V. Vinayak and Ram Charan . In April 2012 , it was reported that Thaman was composing the film 's songs with a focus on romantic songs featuring the two female leads . The song " Subhalekha <unk> " , originally composed by Ilaiyaraaja for the soundtrack of the 1990 Telugu film <unk> Donga , was remixed for this film in mid @-@ July 2012 without any alterations in the tune and lyrics written by Veturi Sundararama Murthy . The lyrics of the remaining five songs were penned by Chandrabose , Bhaskarabhatla , and <unk> . All the songs were arranged by Thaman and were recorded at Studio <unk> in Mumbai and Studio <unk> in Hyderabad . 
 Aditya Music acquired the audio rights for an undisclosed high price . The audio teasers were unveiled in mid @-@ December 2014 , and the official track list featuring six songs was unveiled on 14 December 2012 . The film 's soundtrack was launched on 17 December 2012 , during a promotional event at Ramanaidu Studios . Pawan Kalyan attended the function as the chief guest along with the film 's principal cast & crew . Oneindia Entertainment placed " Nellorae " in fourth place on the list of top 10 item numbers of the year in 2013 . 
 Telugu version 
 Tamil version 
 = = Release = = 
 Naayak was planned to be released on 14 January , the eve of Sankranthi . Later the film 's release was rumoured to be delayed due to Danayya 's financial hardships , although he later confirmed the release date as 9 January 2013 , denying the previous reports as rumours . The film was awarded an ' A ' certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification on 4 January 2013 . Six cuts were suggested by the board to delete politically charged dialogue , and few other lines that included the names of the Andhra Pradesh Governors , A. P. J. Abdul Kalam and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan . The board also requested a few words being altered in the song " Nellorae " , and the display of a statutory warning on drinking and smoking wherever they occur in the film . 
 The film was shown on 110 screens in Hyderabad , breaking the previous records set by Cameraman Gangatho Rambabu ( 2012 ) and Businessman ( 2012 ) , which were released in 105 and 103 theatres , respectively . Universal Media , in association with <unk> Media , released the film on more than 100 screens in the United States , including 70 digital prints and sixteen 35 mm prints , which was a first for a Telugu film in an overseas market . The makers said that the film would be released in more than 1200 theatres in Andhra Pradesh . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On the eve of Valentine 's Day , first look stills of the film were released to the media . A few stills featuring Ram Charan were unveiled on 18 August 2012 , which featured him sporting a new look . Two first look posters , confirming the film 's title and its spelling , were unveiled on 26 November 2012 . The film 's first teaser was unveiled on 14 December 2012 . Allu Arjun and S. S. Rajamouli unveiled the trailers at Shilpakala Vedika during the soundtrack launch . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 By early November 2012 , the film 's trade came to an end in all areas except Guntur . Bharath Pictures acquired the film 's Nellore distribution rights , while Shobu acquired the rights for the ceded ( Rayalaseema ) area . Shakti Films acquired the theatrical rights for the Krishna District , and Siri Media obtained the film 's Nizam region rights . V. Rao , Challa Shankar Rao and <unk> Films acquired the screening rights in Vishakhapatnam , East Godavari district , and West Godavari district . Abhirami Movies acquired the film 's Tamil Nadu distribution rights . Errabus acquired the screening rights for the United Kingdom and Europe . 
 Gayathri Films bought the Karnataka distribution rights for ₹ 41 million , the highest price offered for any Telugu film in Karnataka up to that time . Universal Media distributed the film in the United States . Producer Dil Raju acquired the film 's distribution rights in the Nizam region in mid @-@ December 2012 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The satellite rights for the Hindi dubbed version were sold for a record price of ₹ 35 million ( US $ 520 @,@ 000 ) . Gemini TV paid an advance of ₹ 26 million for the satellite rights of the original version , and fully acquired them after the film 's release for an additional ₹ 75 million . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray were marketed by Sri Balaji Videos and were released on 3 April 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . Y. Sunita Chowdary of The Hindu wrote , " ... the writing is humorous , lively and consistent . What more , the film works mainly on its dialogues and a brisk screenplay and has all the potential to rake in <unk> at the box office , " and added , " Vinayak , having read the pulse well , comes out with Naayak that is a throwback to many of his earlier films but with correct dose of humour added , to cover the flaws . By the time you sense something wrong , he cleverly comes up with another funny scene . This way the film progresses and winds up before it gets too heavy , and <unk> there are smiles everywhere " . Mahalakshmi Prabhakaran of Daily News and Analysis wrote , " We ’ ll say that even if the film is about the age @-@ old formula of the hero bashing the bad guys and coming up trumps , Naayak is an entertaining film that you won ’ t regret watching , " and rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . AS <unk> of The Times of India termed the film a " pot boiling paisa vasool entertainer " and rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . Oneindia Entertainment stated , " V. V. Vinayak may not have given a great screenplay , but he has had a high entertainment quotient with his narration . His mass appearance has doubled up Ram Charan 's performance . Naayak is a perfect Sankranthi entertainer , " and rated the film 3 out of 5 . Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com wrote , " The first half of the film moves at a breezy pace while the interval brings in the twist . In the second half there 's mostly stomach @-@ churning violence which is pretty repulsive . Technically the film is top @-@ notch . V V Vinayak delivers a hardcore commercial entertainer for the festival . If you can watch Naayak without analysing it , you will find it fun , " and rated the film 3 out of 5 . IndiaGlitz summarised , " Vinayak proves to be a director who knows how to play gimmicks with a formula story in hand and a narration baptized in masala . Naayak is for all those who love to watch an entertainer filled with doses of heroism and comedy , and also good music , " and added that the film is " commercial to the hilt " . 
 In contrast , a reviewer from Sify stated , " Director V V Vinayak , has chosen a routine story which has nothing new to offer . He chose a simple story and weaved an entertaining screenplay around it . Vinayak concentrated more on the presentation of the movie rather than the subject . The story and screenplay is predictable after the interesting interval bang " and called the film " Average " . Another reviewer from Sify rated the film 3 out of 5 and stated , " Nayak , a regular commercial potboiler , starts off as a regular mass movie and ends up the same way . Nayak team should have concentrated on the story more . A rehashed film that can be watched once " . B. V. S. Prakash of Deccan Chronicle wrote , " Even though Ram Charan impresses in the role of a brooding young IT employee who is determined to smash evil forces , the final outcome is more comic than serious . Vinayak tends to repackage scenes from his earlier movies . Akula Siva pens strong punch lines to enthral Ram Charan fans " . 
 = = = Box Office = = = 
 Naayak grossed ₹ 112 @.@ 5 million at the worldwide box office on its opening day , and ₹ 170 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 5 million ) on its second day , taking its two @-@ day total to ₹ 282 @.@ 9 million . The film collected a total of ₹ 295 million in its first week . As of late April 2014 , the film stood in fifth place of the top 10 Telugu films with the highest first week gross . In its second week of release , the film 's gross suffered due to the competition from the release of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , slipping to the second spot in the charts . It witnessed more than a 50 % drop in its business , collecting approximately ₹ 80 million during the second weekend , and a total of ₹ 450 million in 10 days . By the end of its second week , the film had added approximately ₹ 55 million , for a 16 @-@ day total of ₹ 505 million net . The film grossed ₹ 600 million in its lifetime worldwide , and became the third most successful film of 2013 , after Attarintiki Daredi and Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu . Its distributor share of ₹ 465 million made it Ram Charan 's third film to cross the ₹ 400 million mark . It was fifth on the list of top 10 all @-@ time highest grossing movies at the Andhra Pradesh box office , as of November 2013 . It also ranked tenth on the list of top 20 hit Telugu movies of all time at the box office , as of May 2014 . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The film averaged 90 % occupancy in both single screens and multiplexes in India on its opening day , collecting ₹ 85 @.@ 5 million at the Andhra Pradesh box office and ₹ 27 million throughout the rest of India . With an average of 66 % across the globe , it collected ₹ 134 @.@ 9 million at the Andhra Pradesh box office , and ₹ 35 @.@ 5 million in the rest of India on its second day . In six days , it collected a total ₹ 234 @.@ 6 million net at Andhra Pradesh box office , and ₹ 25 million in the rest of India . The film completed a successful 50 day run in several centres across Andhra Pradesh on 27 February 2013 . The film collected a distributor share of ₹ 389 @.@ 5 million net at Andhra Pradesh box office in its lifetime , placing it sixth on the list of all @-@ time highest grossing Telugu films , as of November 2013 . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 The film collected ₹ 4 @.@ 5 million in overseas receipts on its opening day , which increased to ₹ 6 @.@ 5 million on its second day . However , the film 's trade was severely affected by Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu , dropping 70 % at the overseas box office , with a three @-@ day total of ₹ 9 @.@ 2 million , compared to Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 3 day opening day total of ₹ 11 @.@ 3 million . The film collected ₹ 21 @.@ 1 million in six days at the overseas box office . The film did good business by the end of its second weekend at the USA box office , ranking third in the charts by collecting ₹ 25 @.@ 3 million , despite of the adverse effect of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu which was in first place . Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola stood in second place , although its per screen average was lower than that of Naayak . The film suffered a big setback after the release of Race 2 and <unk> , dropping to sixth place while collecting ₹ 26 @.@ 5 million in 23 days . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = Ed Muransky = 
 Edward William " Ed " Muransky ( born January 20 , 1960 ) is a former professional American football offensive tackle who played for the Los Angeles Raiders of the National Football League ( NFL ) and Orlando Renegades of the United States Football League ( USFL ) . He was a member of the Super Bowl XVIII Champion Raiders . Prior to this he was an All @-@ American and Academic All @-@ American athlete who played for the University of Michigan Wolverines during the 1979 – 1981 seasons . 
 After retiring from football he became a business partner and advisor to Edward J. DeBartolo Jr . , former San Francisco 49ers owner . As DeBartolo became more involved in the casino industry , he relied on Muransky as a confidant . Muransky testified under a grant of immunity as a government witness in the March 2000 trial of Louisiana Governor Edwin Edwards , mainly about what DeBartolo had confided to Muransky . DeBartolo was the only extortion victim who claimed to have been extorted directly by Edwards , but Muransky could not provide direct testimony about private meetings between DeBartolo and Edwards . Muransky has continued to pursue business interests even after the controversies about DeBartolo have waned . 
 = = Cardinal Mooney High School = = 
 Born in Youngstown , Muransky played football for Cardinal Mooney High School where he was affectionately known as " Big Ed " by family and teammates . He was a three @-@ year varsity letterman and two @-@ year starter as an interior lineman at Cardinal Mooney . In 1976 , he won All @-@ Steel Valley , All @-@ NEO , and All @-@ State honors , and received the Mack Truck Award , given annually to the most outstanding high school lineman in the Youngstown area . 
 = = University of Michigan = = 
 Highly recruited by numerous " blue chip " schools , Muransky chose to play collegiate football at the University of Michigan . He lettered for three years at Michigan , where he wore # 72 , and earned All @-@ Big Ten honors in 1980 and 1981 . Muransky started 33 straight games at offensive tackle for the Wolverines from his sophomore through senior years , 1979 – 1981 . The 6 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) , 320 @-@ pound ( 150 kg ; 23 st ) lineman was a key member of the 1980 Wolverines , coach Bo Schembechler 's first bowl @-@ winning team . In fact , he started all twelve games at right tackle . This includes the 1981 Rose Bowl against the Washington Huskies football team won by Michigan 23 – 6 . The game was Schembechler 's first bowl victory , and the coach was carried off the field on Muransky 's shoulders . Muransky was named to the Associated Press , UPI , and The Sporting News All @-@ American teams in 1981 and also garnered " Academic All @-@ American " his senior year . He was part of a 1981 team that had five All @-@ American honorees ( Anthony Carter , Butch Woolfolk , Bubba Paris and Kurt Becker ) . 
 = = = " Beef Bowl " Record Holder = = = 
 Muransky also set the all @-@ time " Beef Bowl " record by consuming 8 pounds ( 3 @.@ 63 kg ) of prime rib at Lawry 's before the 1979 Rose Bowl . Muransky later recalled : " Bubba Paris and I were two happy freshmen eating together at the Lawry 's Beef Bowl event before the 1979 Rose Bowl Game . After we had enjoyed our fourth plate of prime rib , mashed potatoes , corn and Yorkshire pudding , Bubba asked what the record was , and they said 7 cuts . Bubba continued for 3 more cuts , and I continued for four , totally under the Bo Schembechler radar screen . When they delivered the 8th cut to me , the media started to gather around my table , Bo walked by and let me know what he was thinking without ever saying a word . Afterward , a Paris @-@ Muransky night out ended with some pizza . The next morning in practice , Bo made an example of Bubba and me . We never ran so much in our lives as we did that day . We were in every play of scrimmage and then we ran sprints . " When the Wolverines returned to Pasadena for the 1981 Rose Bowl , " Bo made it a point to come to the back of the plane and talk to me and Bubba Paris . He wanted to let us know that my record from a couple years earlier would not be in jeopardy because we were going to be sitting with him at the Lawry 's Beef Bowl . He said he was going to limit each of us to two cuts of prime rib . " Schembechler had his own take on the story : " I let ' em eat because they were freshmen . They weren 't gonna play anyway . " 
 = = = Big Chill Cameo = = = 
 Muransky is also remembered for a cameo appearance in the 1983 film The Big Chill : " I was in the theater watching it , not knowing what was going to happen . It was kind of interesting with all of ( the characters ) watching ( the 1980 Michigan @-@ Michigan State game ) . It was pretty cool . Watching [ quarterback ] John <unk> go back was pretty cool . For a split @-@ second as they 're going back , I 'm thinking to myself , ' Oh my God , I pray to God I 'm not holding or I missed a block for a sack or something on the big screen pass . ' But it was a good block , and it was a fun moment . Any time I hear ' The Big Chill , ' it 's good memories . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Wolverines were the unanimous pre @-@ season Number 1 pick in 1981 but lost their opener to Wisconsin 21 – 14 . In the team meeting the next day , Schembechler walked into the room and wrote " Ed Muransky " and " Stan Edwards " on the chalkboard , and then barked out , " The rest of you are <unk> . I want nothing more to do with you , " and left . According to the coach , Muransky and Edwards were the only two who played with intensity against Wisconsin , and Bo left it to them to motivate the rest of the team . Muransky issued a challenge to the offense on the night before the following week 's game : " I looked at everyone and said , ' If we continue to play as great individuals , we 'll continue to lose . If we start to play as a great team , we 'll start winning . " The next day , the Wolverines beat Notre Dame , 25 – 7 . 
 = = Professional football career = = 
 = = = Los Angeles Raiders = = = 
 Muransky was selected in the fourth round ( 82nd pick ) by the Oakland Raiders in the 1982 NFL Draft , and he played in 24 games for the Raiders from 1982 – 1984 . The Raiders moved from Oakland to Los Angeles to play the 1982 NFL season . Thus , although he was drafted by the Oakland Raiders , he played his NFL career with the Los Angeles Raiders . In his second season in the NFL , he won a Super Bowl ring with the Raiders ' 1983 Super Bowl Championship team . He played all 16 regular season games for Tom Flores ' Raiders that season . The team went 12 – 4 during the 1983 NFL season and produced eight Pro Bowlers . Muransky played for an offensive line that included Pro Bowlers Henry Lawrence and Todd Christensen . The team was led that season by quarterback Jim Plunkett and future Hall of Famer Marcus Allen , who rushed for nine touchdowns , caught two and threw three on a 4 – 7 passing performance . Muransky described the Super Bowl experience as a " whirlwind " with " two weeks of hype like you 've never seen . " He recalled : " It was a big deal because offensive linemen weren 't making what they make today . That year , I made $ 77 @,@ 000 , which was a pretty decent contract at the time . But if you won the Super Bowl , you won $ 64 @,@ 000 . So it wasn 't peanuts . I remember walking off the field after that , thinking to myself , ' I have a Super Bowl ring for the rest of my life . ' " Although Muransky was cut in for a Super Bowl <unk> , he was not on the official gameday roster . 
 Although the Raiders only won one Super Bowl with Muransky , they had great success . In his rookie season , they were 8 – 1 in the strike @-@ shortened season . This was the best record in the American Football Conference and tied for the best in the League . The team , however , was upset by the 6 – 3 New York Jets in the second round of the 1982 @-@ 83 NFL Playoffs . The 1984 Raiders went 11 – -5 and also made the 1984 @-@ 85 NFL playoffs . The Raiders teams of Muransky 's years went 31 – 10 in the regular season and 4 – 2 in the playoffs under Flores . 
 = = = USFL Orlando Renegades = = = 
 After playing for the Raiders , Muransky signed with the Orlando Renegades of the USFL . He played and started 14 of the Renegades 18 games under Lee Corso . The team was not as successful as the Raiders and went 5 – 13 . When the league folded , he decided to retire and enter the business world . 
 = = Business career = = 
 After his football career ended , Muransky worked briefly as a sportscaster at WYTV in Youngstown . He later became CEO and chairman of his in @-@ laws ' insurance agency , Gallagher Pipino , Inc . He is married to the former Christine Pipino and has three children : Eddie , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Work with Eddie DeBartolo and the Edwards trial = = = 
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Muransky became the most trusted advisor and business partner of Edward J. DeBartolo Jr . , heir to a real estate empire and former owner of the San Francisco 49ers . For a time , Muransky was the CEO of the DeBartolo Property Group , and the two partnered in numerous business ventures , including a chain of ice cream franchises known as " Ed and Eddie 's Homemade Ice Cream , " real estate ventures and pizza . DeBartolo ventured into the casino business against the wishes of his sister , Denise DeBartolo York and hired family contact , Muransky to head DeBartolo Entertainment . Eventually , Muransky who is said to have a keen business sense , became DeBartolo 's most trusted advisor , which caused a rift with Carmen Policy , 49ers president . 
 In 1997 , Muransky became involved in DeBartolo 's efforts to open a riverboat gambling casino in Louisiana . The project required approval of the state gambling board and resulted in a highly publicized bribery scandal that ended with the conviction of former Louisiana Governor Edwin Edwards on 17 counts , including racketeering , extortion , mail fraud , and wire fraud . In order to secure licensing of the casino , Edwards and associates allegedly solicited bribes from DeBartolo , including a briefcase filled with $ 400 @,@ 000 . Of the many who claimed that they were extortion victims , DeBartolo was the only one who claimed to have been extorted directly by Edwards . Muransky was able to describe his relationship with DeBartolo but could not provide testimony about private meetings between DeBartolo and Edwards . 
 Muransky testified under a grant of immunity as a government witness in the March 2000 trial of Edwards . Among other things , Muransky testified to the following : he " had a violent reaction " when DeBartolo told him that Edwards demanded money during a meeting in Baton Rouge in 1997 ; he " went ballistic " when DeBartolo told him about the $ 400 @,@ 000 payment and the requests by the former governor that he be given one percent of the gross at the boat or 25 cents for every patron ; he told jurors he felt he needed to protect DeBartolo from Edwards because DeBartolo lacked the keen business acumen of his late father , Edward J. DeBartolo , Sr. ; he discussed DeBartolo 's exasperation at Edwards ' solicitation of cash . According to Muransky , DeBartolo complained about Edwards and his associates : " They don 't quit . " ; and when asked if there was anyone else in DeBartolo 's organization making $ 50 @,@ 000 per month ( an amount allegedly requested by Edwards ) , Muransky testified : " Maybe Steve Young , Jerry Rice , " referring to the star player on the 49ers . 
 = = = Post @-@ trial business = = = 
 DeBartolo had Muransky placed on the board of directors of the DeBartolo Corporation after reaching a plea agreement which left him ( DeBartolo ) a convicted felon and precluded him from serving on the corporate board . Eventually , after DeBartolo became involved in the corruption , he turned over control of the 49ers to his sister . DeBartolo and Muransky reportedly went through an acrimonious breakup in 2002 . Following the break with DeBartolo , Muransky moved with his family back to Youngstown . 
 In 2007 , Muransky , as owner of Muransky Co. and <unk> Surgical Center in Boardman , Ohio , filed for monetary damages and dissolution of a joint venture intended to open a full @-@ service , for @-@ profit hospital in southern Mahoning County . Muransky told The Vindicator : " I 'm very disappointed for this community . There was an absolute opportunity to grow the health system ... In a few years , we are going to find ourselves having to drive to Akron and Pittsburgh and Cleveland for health care because it is no longer available here . I 'm dumbfounded it has come to this . " Muransky said one of the reasons he came back to Youngstown was to use his skills to give back to the community . 
 Ed also serves as Founder , Chairman and CEO of Chestnut Land Company , the holding company for Auntie Anne ’ s Soft Pretzel franchises operating throughout the United States . He successfully operates almost 70 stores under this franchise name , with locations in 15 states . 
 = H.A.T.E.U. = 
 " H.A.T.E.U. " ( acronym for " Having A Typical Emotional Upset " ) is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by Carey , Tricky Stewart , and The @-@ Dream . It was released as the third single from the album on November 1 , 2009 , for radio airplay in the United States . It is a down @-@ tempo R & B love song about Carey wishing for the love and pain she feels from a break @-@ up to turn into hate so she can get over the relationship . The song garnered a positive response from music critics , with many ranking it amongst the best on the album . The song 's music video was directed by Brett Ratner in Malibu , and features Carey in a variety of swimsuits walking along the beach . She has performed the track live on Today and Late Show with David Letterman . " H.A.T.E.U. " reached number 72 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Production = = 
 " H.A.T.E.U. " was written and produced by Mariah Carey , Tricky Stewart , and The @-@ Dream for Carey 's twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) . It was one of the first songs to be written for the album . It was copyright 2009 by Rye Songs , which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / WB Music Publishing ( ASCAP / Songs of Peer / March 9 Publishing ( ASCAP ) . It was recorded by Chris " Tex " O 'Ryan and Brian Garten The Boom Boom Room in Burbank and Honeywest Studios in New York City . They were assisted by Luis Navarro and Keith Gretlein . It was mixed by Jaycen @-@ Joshua Fowler ( for Penua Project / Innersound Management ) at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , and was assisted by Giancarlo Lino . 
 On May 20 , 2009 , L.A. Reid hosted an event called the Island Def Jam Spring Collection , where he " unveiled his latest muses " . He premiered " H.A.T.E.U. " by Carey as well as music videos by Kanye West , The @-@ Dream , and Fabolous . A low @-@ quality snippet of the song leaked onto the internet the following day , three months before the album 's initial release date of August 25 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A down @-@ tempo R & B love song , " H.A.T.E.U. " is an acronym for " Having A Typical Emotional Upset " . Lyrically , the song is about reaching the point following a break @-@ up where Carey no longer feels love or pain and it turns into hate . The <unk> consists of Carey repeating the lyrics " I can 't wait to hate you " . The singer employs her lower register in a " <unk> vocal haze " which places emphasis on the pain and struggling endured between two people who are no longer in a relationship together . 
 In an interview for YouTube posted on December 24 , 2009 , Carey elaborated on the lyrical meaning , saying that it " really hits people in their hearts because it 's like ... everybody has experienced when you love somebody , and they let you go , but you can 't let them go . So ' I can 't wait to hate you ' is a strong statement " . Michaelangelo Matos of The A.V. Club compared the seagull chirp " vocal acrobatic " sung by Carey during the track 's climax to the whistle notes she sings on her 1991 single " Emotions " . 
 = = Release and remixes = = 
 The song was released as the album 's third single to contemporary hit / Top 40 , rhythmic contemporary , and urban contemporary radio stations in the United States on November 1 , 2009 . Carey revealed that she intended to re @-@ release Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel as a remix album in early 2010 , titled Angels Advocate , consisting of remixes of the standard songs with new featured artists , including Mary J. Blige , Snoop Dogg , Trey Songz , R. Kelly , T @-@ Pain , Gucci Mane , and OJ da Juiceman . 
 OJ da Juiceman confirmed that he had recorded his verse for a remix of " H.A.T.E.U. " in November 2009 . In an interview for MTV News , he revealed his shock at being telephoned by Jermaine Dupri to record some vocals for the remix of " <unk> " alongside Gucci Mane and Big Boi . Juiceman said that his verse took ten minutes to record . It contains a sample of " My Boo " by Ghost Town DJ 's . A writer for DJ Booth wrote that the remixes produced by Dupri sped up the slow tempo of the original version and added some percussion . He continued to write that while the remix is not superior to the original , but it is catchier and more likely to receive radio airplay . 
 " Angels Cry " and " Up Out My Face " from Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel were released as remix singles , with Ne @-@ Yo featured on the former and Nicki Minaj on the latter . A release date of February 23 , 2010 was slated , and then pushed back to March 9 . It was then further pushed back to March 30 . However , it was confirmed in March 2010 that production of Angels Advocate had halted and the project had been shelved indefinitely . Island Def Jam stated that the singer was instead working on a new project and " new surprises " . Metro revealed that Carey was either recording a new studio album or possibly a Christmas album . Jason Nevins produced a remix called " H.A.T.E.U. " ( Jason Nevins " Loves U " Remix ) for the Just Dance 3 soundtrack released in June 2010 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " H.A.T.E.U. " received positive reviews from critics . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said that " H.A.T.E.U. " has an " ease " about it which is similar to previous single releases by Carey . Bill Lamb of About.com described the track as " sad " and placed it in his list of the album 's top four tracks . Rap @-@ Up also included " H.A.T.E.U. " in their top four tracks of the album . 
 The Seattle Times writer Mesfin Fekadu described the song as " a beautiful heartbreak ballad " . Melinda Newman of HitFix commented that despite the name of the song , it is not a rant , and that it is a " bittersweet " ballad about love . Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy thought that the track was " one of the prettiest and most effective " on the album . Michael Cragg of musicOMH felt that Carey achieved a balance of " simplicity with urgency " on the track . 
 A writer for DJ Booth noted that Carey 's confidence on the lead single " Obsessed " bordered on aggression , and that the residual energy from the track carried over to other songs on the album , including " H.A.T.E.U. " and " Up Out My Face " , whereby she was " ready for war " . Kathy Iandoli of HipHopDX criticized Carey 's vocals , writing : " An attempted whistle @-@ tone at the close of ' H.A.T.E.U. ' doesn 't necessarily indicate that Carey ’ s pipes are rusting , but perhaps she 's succeeding more with less blustery vocals these days " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " H.A.T.E.U. " was directed by Brett Ratner in Malibu . It was made available to download on iTunes on December 8 , 2009 . 
 The video starts with Carey walking down some steps onto the beach wearing a black bathing suit and high heel shoes , which she takes off when she gets to the bottom and walks onto the sand . Carey is seen in different shots standing next to a cliff @-@ face as well as in the middle of the beach for the majority of the video . For the bridge , Carey is seen in multiple different shots as she walks along the shoreline , which changes as the last verse takes place , where her outfit changes from a black bathing suit to a different style white bathing suit whilst the sun sets in the background . As the video comes to an end , the scenery has changed to nighttime , and Carey is wearing another black bathing suit with a black jacket standing against a rock @-@ face . Carey then inscribes into the sand " H.A.T.E.U. " using her fingers , which she underlines as the video fades to black . The video is also inter @-@ cut throughout with shots of the scenery on the beach . Rap @-@ Up described the video as " picturesque " . Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy wrote that it is a " slow @-@ mo , beachwear fashion show " . He continued , " Equally depressed by the end of a relationship and inspired by the scenery , Mimi spends a few minutes suggestively touching herself and staring into the middle distance . What becomes of the broken @-@ hearted ? " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On October 2 , 2009 , Carey performed a four @-@ track set list on NBC 's Today . She began with her 1992 single " Make It Happen " , followed by " Obsessed " and " I Want to Know What Love Is " . She concluded with " H.A.T.E.U. " On November 13 , 2009 , Carey performed the track on the Late Show with David Letterman . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio release history = = 
 = H @-@ 33 ( Michigan county highway ) = 
 H @-@ 33 is a county @-@ designated highway in the Upper Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan between Gould City and McMillan that was previously M @-@ 135 , a former state trunkline highway . The roadway follows Manistique Lakes Road from Gould City at a junction with US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) near Lake Michigan north to M @-@ 28 near McMillan . The northern section of the highway is also called County Road 135 ( CR 135 ) in Luce County . 
 From 1929 until 1960 , the road was part of the state highway system as M @-@ 135 . The northern end of the highway always contained a section that ran concurrently with M @-@ 98 , another state highway in the area . For a period in the 1950s , M @-@ 135 had a different northern terminus separate from M @-@ 98 's endpoint . A few years before both highways were removed from the highway system , M @-@ 135 was moved to use M @-@ 98 's terminus with M @-@ 28 . Since the 1970s , M @-@ 135 has been a part of the county @-@ designated highway system and assigned the number H @-@ 33 , a moniker it has borne since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 H @-@ 33 begins at an intersection with US 2 just west of Gould City . From there the route travels due north through woodlands on Manistique Lakes Road , passing by Mitten and South Manistique lakes . The road crosses Norton and Strom creeks near South Manistique Lake before entering the community of Curtis . In that town , H @-@ 33 intersects the eastern end of H @-@ 42 . North of Curtis , H @-@ 33 passes Manistique Lake as the road crosses the Mackinac – Luce county line . North of the line , H @-@ 33 has also been designated CR 135 by the Luce County Road Commission . 
 Continuing north , the roadway enters the community of Helmer where it meets a junction with the eastern terminus of the eastern H @-@ 44 ( CR 98 , Ten Curves Road ) near North Manistique Lake . The roadway also crosses Locke Creek , which flows into that lake . After H @-@ 33 leaves Helmer , it continues northward to a junction with North Road Lake Road ( CR 438 ) and <unk> Road ( CR 417 ) . Manistique Lakes Road turns to the east , replacing North Round Lake Road , and H @-@ 33 follows suit . The road continues to a junction with M @-@ 28 just south of McMillan near East Lake . There H @-@ 33 terminates near farms and several small business . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1929 , M @-@ 135 was designated , creating the concurrency along the last several miles of M @-@ 98 . In late 1949 or early 1950 , M @-@ 28 was realigned to take an angled route southeasterly out of McMillan . The east – west section of the previous M @-@ 28 routing was added to M @-@ 98 while the north – south segment was added to M @-@ 135 . By the middle of 1958 , M @-@ 135 was shifted to follow M @-@ 98 , removing the roadway section added to its routing previously ; this change made M @-@ 98 and M @-@ 135 concurrent north of Helmer all the way to M @-@ 28 once again . M @-@ 135 was removed from the state trunkline system in late 1960 or early 1961 , and the designation was decommissioned at that time . The M @-@ 135 designation has not been reused since . The routing was then assigned as County Road H @-@ 33 after October 5 , 1970 , The road has retained that designation ever since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Music of the Katamari Damacy series = 
 Katamari Damacy ( <unk> , lit . " Clump Spirit " ) is a third @-@ person puzzle @-@ action video game that was published and developed by Namco for the PlayStation 2 video game console . The success of the game led to the release of five sequels in Japan and other territories : We Love Katamari , Me & My Katamari , Beautiful Katamari , Katamari Damacy Mobile , I Love Katamari , and Katamari Forever . It also inspired a spin @-@ off game , a Tetris @-@ like <unk> Puzzle Katamari Damacy . The music of the Katamari Damacy series refers to the soundtracks to all of these games , five of which have been released as albums . Katamari Fortissimo Damacy , a soundtrack album for the original game , was released by Columbia Music Entertainment in 2004 , Katamari wa Damacy was released as a soundtrack album for We Love Katamari by Columbia Music Entertainment in 2005 , and Katamari Original Soundtrack Damacy was released in 2006 as a soundtrack album for Me & My Katamari by the same publisher and also included tracks from We Love that were not included in its album . Katamari Suteki Damacy was released by Columbia Music Entertainment in 2007 as a soundtrack album for Beautiful Katamari , and the latest album , Katamari Damacy Tribute Original Soundtrack : Katamari Takeshi , was released in 2009 by Columbia Music Entertainment as the soundtrack album for Katamari Forever . The soundtracks to the other Katamari games have been composed of tracks from previous games in the series , and have not had separate album releases . 
 Both the soundtracks and their associated albums have been well received by reviewers , who have cited the " catchiness " and " quirkiness " of the music as their most notable features . The soundtrack to Katamari Damacy won both IGN 's and GameSpot 's " Soundtrack of the Year 2004 " awards , while the theme song to We Love Katamari was awarded Best Original Vocal / Pop Song at the 4th Annual Game Audio Network Guild awards in 2006 . None of the other soundtracks have been nominated for any awards . They were still well received by reviewers , with the music of the PlayStation Portable game Me & My Katamari receiving the weakest reviews due to its extensive reuse of songs from previous games in the series . 
 = = Katamari Damacy = = 
 Katamari Damacy is a third @-@ person puzzle @-@ action video game that was published and developed by Namco for the PlayStation 2 in 2004 . The music in the game was widely hailed as imaginative and original , and was considered one of its top selling points . Its eclectic composition featured elements of traditional electronic video game music , as well as heavy jazz and samba influences . The tracks were composed by multiple composers , with Yuu Miyake composing the most at seven and acting as the sound director ; other composers for the game were Asuka Sakai , Akitaka Tohyama , Yoshihito Yano , Yuri Misumi , and Hideki Tobeta . Many of the tracks feature vocals from popular J @-@ pop singers such as Yui Asaka and anime voice actors such as <unk> Matsubara and Ado <unk> . Miyake has stated that they chose the artists by looking for " Japanese singers who were well @-@ known in Japan but nobody had heard from in awhile [ sic ] for whatever reason " . Miyake wanted to use vocal songs because he felt that they were necessary " to make music that only Katamari Damacy could do , really fun music " . He has said that game director Keita Takahashi did not give detailed directions on the sound design of the game , allowing Miyake and his team to instead create whatever they felt would fit best . 
 The artists were chosen after the lyrics were written , and were selected based on how well Miyake and Takahashi felt they would " gel with the world of Katamari Damacy and the content of the song lyrics " . They were also chosen to create a " pretty silly , goofy selection of singers " that would appeal to " a broad spectrum of people from different generations " . Once the lyrics and singers had been chosen , the music was written specifically for each artist with the intention of creating songs that were " familiar " but not " trendy " so that they would not seem dated in the future . The " humming " in the opening song , described by Miyake as " na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ Katamari " , was included as an experiment by Miyake to try to create a " memorable " theme associated with the game , in response to criticisms that modern game music was not as memorable as that of older games . Miyake says that " Cherry Tree Times " is his favorite piece from the series . 
 Katamari Fortissimo Damacy ( <unk> , Katamari <unk> Damashii , lit . " Clump Fortissimo Spirit " ) is the soundtrack album to the game . It includes all of the tracks featured in the game , as well as an additional track , " Katamari March Damacy " , a bonus song that was not included in the game . The album has 21 tracks that span a duration of 1 : 15 : 13 . It was released on May 19 , 2004 by Columbia Music Entertainment with the catalog number COCX @-@ <unk> . 
 The soundtrack to Katamari Damacy won both IGN 's and GameSpot 's " Soundtrack of the Year 2004 " awards . It was also nominated for " Outstanding Achievement in Original Musical Composition " at the 8th annual Interactive Achievement Awards in February 2005 . In GameSpot 's review of the game , they described the soundtrack as based around a " singular , extremely catchy theme " that appeared as pop , jazz , and humming throughout the " insidiously infectious " music . IGN 's review of the game said that " not since Mario created its everlasting tune have we heard tracks so catchy and so genuine " . The soundtrack album was praised in a review by Square Enix Music Online , who said that in addition to the music being " outside the box " , the soundtrack " fits with the graphics and game play in every way possible " , is " extremely pleasing to the ears " , and " could very well be a great album with no game attached " . He described the music as " fun " , " catchy " , and " quirky " and highly recommended the album . The album reached # 191 on the Japanese Oricon charts . 
 = = We Love Katamari = = 
 We Love Katamari ( <unk> , Minna Daisuki Katamari Damashii , roughly " Everyone Loves Clump Spirit " ) , is the sequel to Katamari Damacy published by Namco for the PlayStation 2 in 2005 . It features music from Namco composers Yuu Miyake , Akitaka Tohyama , Asuka Sakai , Hideki Tobeta , and Katsuro Tajima , all of whom except for Tajima had composed for the previous soundtrack . Like the previous soundtrack , it also features a plethora of Japanese artists , including <unk> , <unk> , Arisa , <unk> , YOU , <unk> <unk> , Maki <unk> and Shigeru Matsuzaki . The music has been described as covering styles ranging from swing and techno to J @-@ pop and " other kooky sounds " . Sound director Yuu Miyake has stated that he wanted to use only non @-@ Japanese musicians in contrast to the first game using only Japanese artists , but was unable due to a " lack of foreign friends and ability to negotiate " . He has stated that his goal for the soundtrack was to take what his team had done for the first game and raise the quality , creating a " more grown @-@ up feeling " . He originally wanted to additionally take the music " far beyond imagination " and fans ' expectations , but was stymied by a lack of resources . 
 Katamari wa Damacy ( <unk> , Katamari wa Damashii ) is the official soundtrack album for the game . It does not include all the music from the game , omitting many of the instrumental tracks heard throughout the game . These omissions were later added on the second disc of the soundtrack album of Me & My Katamari . The album was published by Columbia Music Entertainment on July 20 , 2005 with the catalog number COCX @-@ <unk> ; its 18 tracks span a duration of 1 : 19 : 53 . 
 We Love Katamari was nominated for the " best audio " award at the 2005 British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards . While the soundtrack as a whole did not win any awards like its predecessor , " Katamari on the Swing " won the award for Best Original Vocal / Pop Song at the 4th Annual Game Audio Network Guild awards in 2006 . The album reached # 100 on the Japanese Oricon charts . GameSpot 's review of the game termed the music " utterly avant @-@ garde " and a " completely off @-@ the @-@ wall soundtrack that has the same key themes as the first game " , though " decidedly less focused on catchiness " than that of the first game and more " experimental " . Square Enix Music Online , in their review of the soundtrack album , said that it " pretty much lives up to the original 's reputation " and is full of " lots of great original compositions that fit with the concept " . While they said that the soundtrack has " more flaws and it 's a bit less memorable " than the soundtrack to Katamari Damacy , it was still " just as fun and as quirky as the last " . 
 = = Me & My Katamari = = 
 Me & My Katamari ( <unk> , Boku no Watashi no Katamari Damashii , lit . " Our Clump Spirit " ) is the third game in the series , and was released on the PlayStation Portable by Namco in 2005 . Its soundtrack was primarily composed of tracks from the previous two games , and has been described as " ranging from smoky lounge music to bleepy Japanese pop songs " . The new tracks were composed by Yuu Miyake , Yuri Misawa , Hideki Tobeta , Yoshihito Yano , Akitaka Tohyama , and Naoki Tohyama ; Misawa and Tohyama were new composers to the series , while Miyake reprised his role from the previous two games as sound director . 
 Katamari Original Soundtrack Damacy ( <unk> , Katamari Orijinaru Saundotorakku Damashii ) is the soundtrack album for the game . In addition to the new tracks , it includes previously unreleased tracks from We Love Katamari as tracks 10 @-@ 17 on the first disc . Its second disc is made up of orchestral arrangements of previous tracks , tracks from other Namco games , three ambient noise tracks , two taiko drum tracks , and one a cappella track . The album was released by Columbia Music Entertainment on December 26 , 2005 with the catalog numbers COCX @-@ <unk> ~ 8 . Its 37 tracks have a total length of 1 : 48 : 55 . 
 In their review of the game , GameSpot called the music " catchy and eclectic " , though they disapproved of the amount of reused tracks from previous Katamari games . IGN was more ambivalent , saying that while they had no complaints about the music , they also saw " nothing to really praise either " . Square Enix Music Online , in their review of the album , said that the album 's " lack of humorous vocal tracks and high quality experimental instrumentals " meant that it did not match up to the previous soundtracks in the series . They additionally felt that the second disc did not add much to the album , and that on the whole the new Me & My Katamari tracks were not strong or numerous enough to make the purchase worthwhile . Unlike the previous two soundtracks in the series , the soundtrack to Me & My Katamari did not win any awards . 
 Track list 
 = = Beautiful Katamari = = 
 Beautiful Katamari ( <unk> , Byūtifuru Katamari Damashii , lit . " Beautiful Clump Spirit " ) , is a video game produced by Namco Bandai for the Xbox 360 in 2007 . Like previous games in the series , its music was composed by a large number of composers : Yuri Misumi , Yuu Miyake , Hiroto Sasaki , Akitaka Tohyama , and Yoshito Yano returned as previous composers for the series , and were joined by Rio Hamamoto , Yuji <unk> , Keiichi Okabe , Hiroto Sasaki , Tetsuya Uchida , and Ryo Watanabe . Yuu Miyake did not reprise his role as sound director for the game ; this role was instead filled by Tetsuya Uchida . The music for Beautiful Katamari has been described as " the same sort of mix of J @-@ pop , techno @-@ infused jazz , and ambient electro " as that of the original game . Unlike Me & My Katamari , the majority of the music for the game was original , though a few tracks from earlier in the series were remixed . 
 Katamari Suteki Damacy ( <unk> , Katamari Suteki Damashii , lit . " Clump Lovely Spirit " ) is the soundtrack album for the game . The album has 17 tracks and has a length of 1 : 10 : 04 ; it was published by Columbia Music Entertainment on November 21 , 2007 with the catalog number COCX @-@ <unk> . 
 GameSpot , in their review of the game , termed the music " one of the quirkiest and most oddly listenable soundtracks in gaming " , and said that it fit the mood of the game as well as the soundtrack to the first two games . Square Enix Music Online , in their review of the soundtrack album , said that while it had " a lot of original worth " , that it was not any better than the first two soundtrack albums of the series and instead came across as more of the same . They termed the album overall as a " bit underwhelming " and marred by a few " dud " tracks . The album reached # 253 on the Japanese Oricon charts . 
 = = Katamari Forever = = 
 Katamari Forever , known in Japan as Katamari Damacy <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " Katamari Damashii Tribute " ) , was released for the PlayStation 3 in 2009 by Namco Bandai . The music for the game includes a number of remixed tracks from previous iterations of the series , using a combination of " electric " and " organic " sounds according to the sound director Yuu Miyake . Miyake employed the help of over 20 other Japanese artists and remixers to help the soundtrack , which was designed to act as part of a " musical trilogy " with the soundtrack to Katamari Damacy and We Love Katamari . This was accomplished by choosing tracks from those games that were either fan or staff favorites and having them remixed by both Japanese and non @-@ Japanese artists , though Miyake notes that the majority of the artists were Japanese as he did not know many non @-@ Japanese musicians , the same problem that kept non @-@ Japanese artists out of the first two soundtracks of the " trilogy " . Miyake has stated that focusing so much on using music from earlier in the series made it very challenging to still allow each artist to explore their creativity , and does not intend to repeat this strategy if a new game is ever made . 
 Katamari Damacy Tribute Original Soundtrack : Katamari Takeshi ( 「 <unk> 」 オリジナル ・ サウンドトラック ) is the soundtrack album for the game . It was released on August 19 , 2009 by Columbia Music Entertainment with the catalog numbers COCX @-@ <unk> ~ 6 . Its 36 tracks on two discs span a duration of 2 : 38 : 21 . The musical styles used in the soundtrack have been described as an " eclectic mix of sunny J @-@ pop , throbbing dance music , jolly jazz , and more " . 
 GameSpot , in their review of the game , said that Katamari Forever " carries on the series ' tradition of wildly catchy soundtracks " and said that the remixes of the older songs " sound terrific " . PALGN concurred , calling it a " great soundtrack " . The album was received warmly by reviewers such as Square Enix Music Online , who said that it was full of " fresh , diverse , and often downright weird remixes " . Describing it as much more of a spiritual successor to the original game 's soundtrack than the prior sequels , they said that it kept the " upbeat , humorous , and sentimental feel " of the songs in the original while taking them in new directions . The album reached # 158 on the Japanese Oricon charts . 
 = = Touch My Katamari = = 
 Touch My Katamari , known in Japan as Katamari Damacy No @-@ Vita ( <unk> , Katamari <unk> <unk> ) , is a video game produced by Namco Bandai Games for the PlayStation Vita in 2011 . As has become commonplace for the series , its music was composed by a large number of composers : a large team headed by Taku Inoue included series veteran Yuu Miyake , Ken <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Akitaka Tohyama , Hiroyuki Kawada , Yoshihito Yano , Yuichi Nakamura , Hiroshi Okubo , and Trine . The music includes both original pieces as well as many remixes of pieces from prior games , such as a new version of " Lonely Rolling Star " . Inoue was charged by Miyake with making the music of the game " newer and fresher " , as Miyake was tired of the series repeating the same concepts , and Inoue attempted to impart his own style into the original pieces and to use new styles of arrangements . 
 The music was released in several forms . First , as a soundtrack album , Katamari Damacy <unk> Original Soundtrack : <unk> Damacy ( <unk> ･ <unk> ～ <unk> オリジナルサウンドトラック 「 <unk> 」 ) , which contains 16 tracks and has a length of 1 : 12 : 12 . It was published by Columbia Music Entertainment on December 21 , 2011 with the catalog number COCX @-@ <unk> . An additional two digital @-@ only publications of songs from the game , titled <unk> Damacy - Touch My Katamari Original Sound Track 2 and Katamari <unk> Damacy - Touch My Katamari Original Sound Track 3 , were released on April 10 , 2012 and November 20 , 2012 , with eleven and three songs and lengths of 33 : 01 and 10 : 10 , respectively . 
 Christopher Huynh of Video Game Music Online ( formerly Square Enix Music Online ) , in their review of <unk> Damacy , felt that the soundtrack had the energy of the first few soundtracks in the series , while providing a more cohesive experience by not including " filler " tracks like previous albums . 
 = Ramone Moore = 
 Ramone Edward Moore , Jr . ( born May 27 , 1989 ) is an American professional basketball player . 
 He attended South Philadelphia High School , where he was coached by George Anderson . Moore led the Philadelphia Public League in scoring as a senior and earned Public League MVP honors . He enrolled at Temple as a non @-@ scholarship student and redshirted his freshman year . As a redshirt sophomore , he was the Atlantic 10 Sixth Man of the Year . As a junior , he was an All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team selection after leading the team in scoring and more than doubling his points per game average . 
 = = Early life and high school career = = 
 Moore was born on May 27 , 1989 in Philadelphia , the son of Ramone Moore , Sr. and Stephanie Pugh . The younger Moore spent his childhood on the basketball court , playing until nightfall to hone his skills . He attended South Philadelphia High School , the alma mater of basketball players Nate Blackwell and Lionel Simmons . He played on the school basketball team , the Rams , and was coached by George Anderson . As a junior , he was named All @-@ Philadelphia Public League honorable mention . 
 In Moore 's senior year , he led the Public League in scoring with 25 @.@ 1 points per game and was named Public League Most Valuable Player . He finished his career at South Philadelphia High with 1 @,@ 186 points . He was on the All @-@ State Second Team and the Philadelphia Daily News named him to their All @-@ City Team . In addition , Moore participated in the All @-@ Star Labor Classic . Hoop Scoop named him the 166th best player in the Class of 2007 . On January 9 , 2007 , Moore committed to Temple University over the University of Nebraska . He said that he originally wanted to move out of the city , but Nebraska was simply too far . Ultimately , his relationship with Temple coach Fran Dunphy , who began recruiting Moore at a summer Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) event , proved to be the deciding factor . Moore said that he " not only know what kind of coach [ Dunphy ] ' s going to be , but he 's going to help turn me into a man . " 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 To improve his academic profile , Moore planned to attend American Christian School in Aston , Pennsylvania , but a new NCAA rule was instituted that limited the number of core classes able to be taken at a prep school . Lacking the required number of credits to receive an athletic scholarship , he enrolled at Temple as a non @-@ scholarship student and sat out his freshman year as a redshirt . In his freshman debut the following year , he scored 11 points against East Tennessee State . Moore followed that performance up with a double @-@ double of 11 points and 10 rebounds versus the College of Charleston , and a season @-@ high 13 points in a loss to Clemson . As a freshman , Moore averaged 4 @.@ 5 points and 2 @.@ 3 rebounds per game in 13 @.@ 2 minutes of playing time . After his 13th game , he was suspended due to Temple eligibility rules and did not play in the remainder of the season . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 In his sophomore season , Moore played 34 games , starting five , and averaged 7 @.@ 6 points and 3 @.@ 0 rebounds per game . In the November 17 game against Georgetown , with Temple maintaining a one point lead with 23 seconds left , Moore missed the front end of a one @-@ and @-@ one foul shot . Afterwards , Greg Monroe of Georgetown hit a layup to give the Hoyas a 46 – 45 victory . The following game against Siena , Moore was at the foul line with a one @-@ point lead and , with 22 seconds left , hit both free throws to hand Temple a 73 – 69 victory . He increased his scoring average to 9 @.@ 8 points per game in conference play , receiving more minutes due to a head injury to teammate Juan Fernandez . On February 20 , 2010 , he scored a season @-@ high 24 points in an overtime victory over city rival Saint Joseph 's , and made a critical <unk> layup with 1 @.@ 5 seconds left to send the game into overtime . Moore helped Temple to a 29 – 5 record and a third consecutive Atlantic 10 conference tournament title and an automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament . He was named Atlantic 10 Sixth Man of the year . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Prior to his junior season , Moore participated in workouts in Houston with Houston Rocket and former Villanova Wildcat Kyle Lowry . The workouts focused on three point shooting , and Moore improved his percentages from 12 @.@ 5 percent as a sophomore to 38 @.@ 3 percent as a junior . His averages increased as well , to 15 @.@ 2 points per game , a team high , and 4 @.@ 2 rebounds per game , while also being the only Temple player to start all 34 games . On December 9 , 2010 , Moore scored a season @-@ high 30 points in a 68 – 65 upset of Georgetown . He shot 12 @-@ for @-@ 18 in the game , which was coach Fran Dunphy 's 400th career victory . During the season , Moore scored in double @-@ digits in 15 straight games . 
 Moore led Temple to a 26 – 8 record and a seven seed in the 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . He had 23 points as they defeated tenth @-@ seeded Penn State in the Round of 64 , 66 – 64 . Moore finished with 17 points against San Diego State , but the Owls fell in double overtime . He was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 Second Team at the conclusion of the regular season and was a Philadelphia Big Five First Team honoree . He was recognized as an All @-@ Fourth District second @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All ‐ America teams . Since the Atlantic 10 Conference was its own district , this is equivalent to being named second team All @-@ Atlantic 10 by the NABC . Moore considered entering the 2011 NBA Draft to receive NBA evaluations , but decided not to fill out the paperwork . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 Moore was a Preseason All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team selection as a senior . He changed his jersey number from 23 to 10 in honor of his cousin Zaire , who died in a car crash in the summer of 2011 at the age of 10 . He told that he wants to be an NBA player , but that he 's ready to play even elsewhere . 
 He was named to the All @-@ Atlantic 10 First Team at the conclusion of the regular season . He was recognized as an All @-@ Fourth District first @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All @-@ America teams . According to the Sporting News , Moore was the Player of the Year in the Atlantic 10 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 On December 19 , 2012 , Moore was acquired by the Springfield Armor of the NBA D @-@ League after he had stints in Italy for Pallacanestro Biella and Israel for Hapoel Tel Aviv B.C .. 
 On August 29 , 2013 , Moore 's rights were acquired by the Delaware <unk> in the 2013 NBA Development League Expansion Draft . 
 In September 2013 , he signed with Alba <unk> in Hungary . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = NCAA = = = 
 = Bart the Lover = 
 " Bart the Lover " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 13 , 1992 . In the episode Mrs. Edna Krabappel , Bart 's teacher , feels increasingly isolated and , looking for a companion , places a personal ad in the newspaper . Bart , who was given a month 's detention for breaking the class fish tank with his yo @-@ yo , decides to get revenge by responding to the ad . He creates a new adult male alter ego named Woodrow , inspired by a picture of former President Woodrow Wilson , and Mrs. Krabappel becomes infatuated with " Woodrow " . Meanwhile , Ned Flanders asks Homer to cut down on his swearing , so Homer starts using a swear jar . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Carlos Baeza . Vitti had wanted an episode centered on Mrs. Krabappel that examined what it was like to have Bart as a student . It was the first episode of the show to feature her in a prominent role . The subplot where Homer tries to clean up his language was written partially in response to the many complaints the show had been getting about the amount of cursing on the show . Woodrow 's voice was performed by Harry Shearer , who did an impression of Ricardo Montalbán . The picture Bart sends Edna is of NHL and WHA star Gordie Howe . The writers had originally wanted to use a picture of American football player Johnny Unitas , but were unable to get the rights to use his image for free . 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network during February sweeps , the episode had a 12 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating , finishing the week ranked 29th , up from the season 's average . Marcia Wallace , the voice of Mrs. Krabappel , won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for her role in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Springfield Elementary School teacher Mrs. Edna Krabappel feels increasingly lonely , and , searching for love , places a personal ad in the newspaper . A yo @-@ yo craze sweeps through the school after a group of four demonstrate the potential of the toys . Bart breaks the class fish tank with his yo @-@ yo , and is given one month of detention by Mrs. Krabappel . While snooping in her desk to take back his yo @-@ yo , he discovers her personal ad and decides to get revenge on her , by pulling a prank and responding by mail . He creates a new adult male alter ego named Woodrow , after former President Woodrow Wilson . Mrs. Krabappel responds by sending a suggestive photograph . Bart writes a response to Edna using lines from an old love letter Homer had sent Marge . 
 Meanwhile , Marge notices that their dog Santa 's Little Helper needs a new dog house . She wants to buy one , but Homer says that he can save money by building one instead . His infuriating attempts at constructing the dog house cause him to curse loud enough for Todd Flanders to overhear . Todd says " hell no " and " damn " at the dinner table , so his father Ned tries to find out where he learned such language - with possibilities being bumper stickers , comic books , Grandma , television and his elder brother Rod . Ned discovers that Homer is the source when he and his kids hear him curse in frustration after getting his jacket stuck to a piece of wood in another failed attempt to build a dog house . He complains to Homer , who in turn criticizes Ned 's mustache . Ned promises to shave off his mustache in return for Homer 's curtailing uses of profanity . When Homer claims that it is too late for him to stop , Marge disagrees and reveals her own experience with her father 's cursing that lead her mother to use a swear jar . Homer promises to put money in a " swear jar " - 25 cents for each curse . The next couple of days he keeps his word to put money inside the jar for every time he uses profanity in frustration ( this including accidentally placing a 20 dollar note in the church collection plate , failing to knock down all the pins while bowling , seeing a newly clean shaven Ned who got hired as a spokesman in a commercial , failing yet again to build a dog house and having a beehive fall on him while sleeping in a hammock ) until it gets to the point where he instead speaks calmly upon being injured ; " I 'm not going to swear , but I am going to <unk> THIS <unk> DOWN ! " . Homer 's constant cursing puts more than enough money in the swear jar to purchase a dog house for Santa 's Little Helper , along with an added bonus ; Duff Beer for Homer for at least committing . 
 Edna asks " Woodrow " for a photograph , so Bart searches through a book called NHL Stars of 1969 and sends her a picture of hockey star Gordie Howe . Bart , as Woodrow , writes Mrs. Krabappel more letters , telling her what she wants to hear . He then sends a letter asking for them to meet at the Gilded Truffle . Bart sees Mrs. Krabappel waiting for Woodrow . Bart decides to watch a movie thinking Krabappel thinks " Woodrow " is on his way to meet her . But on his way back home he sees Mrs. Krabappel still waiting at the empty restaurant , all alone and on the verge of tears . Bart feels guilty to see her so sad . 
 Bart talks to Mrs. Krabappel after class and starts to feel worse about what he did when he is unable to console her . He confesses to the family what he has done , and , realizing the truth would humiliate her , they all write a poetic and loving letter to tell her why Woodrow must leave which makes Mrs. Krabappel feel better . On Bart 's last day of detention , Mrs. <unk> suggest they spend it outside and Bart agrees . 
 = = Production = = 
 The script for " Bart the Lover " was written by Jon Vitti , who wanted an episode centered on Mrs. Krabappel that examined what it was like to have Bart as a student . Executive producer Mike Reiss pitched the idea of having Bart answer Mrs. Krabappel 's personal ad . It was the first episode of the show to feature Mrs. Krabappel in a prominent role . The subplot where Homer tries to clean up his language was written partially in response to the many complaints the show had been getting about the language on the show . Near the end of the episode , there is a montage where Homer has a series of bad experiences that cause him to curse , although the scene always cuts out before he can be heard swearing . While recording Homer 's lines for that sequence , Dan Castellaneta was told to include the cursing . According to Mike Reiss , by coincidence , some eight @-@ year @-@ old children were allowed to visit the studio the day those lines were recorded . Reiss recalls that " their eyes were as big as saucers " after hearing Homer curse . The ending of the episode was largely pitched by James L. Brooks , who wanted a scene where the entire family got together to write Woodrow 's final letter to Edna . 
 The episode was directed by Carlos Baeza . In the background of the classroom , there are several portraits of past United States presidents . These were added for the scene where Bart tries to think of a name for his fictional letter writer , and sees a portrait of Woodrow Wilson . Woodrow 's voice was performed by Harry Shearer , who did an impression of Ricardo Montalbán . The picture Bart sends Edna is of NHL and WHA star Gordie Howe . The writers had originally wanted to use a picture of American football player Johnny Unitas , but were unable to get the rights to use his image for free . Howe , their second choice , was suggested by Al Jean , who had been a Detroit Red Wings fan growing up . At the end of the episode , Howe 's NHL and WHA statistics are shown because the writers decided to try something different in filling a slight time under @-@ run . 
 During the opening sequence in which Bart 's class watch a film about zinc , a character in the film tries to shoot himself in the head . The Fox censors objected to this , so the producers had to claim that the character was not aiming at his head . For the name of the yo @-@ yo trick that Bart performs for Milhouse , the writers had wanted to use a term that was slang for masturbation . They proposed several names to the censors , and " <unk> the Pickle " was the term they deemed acceptable . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The 1950s educational film at the beginning of the episode is a reference to old science movies that were often shown in classes when the writers were in school , specifically it was a parody of the 1940s educational short film " A Case of Spring Fever " ( later featured on Mystery Science Theater 3000 ) . The Twirl King yo @-@ yo champions are based on groups that companies like Duncan sent to schools to perform tricks . King Crimson guitarist Adrian Belew 's name appears on a paper Edna Krabappel is grading during detention . Todd Flanders watches a television show that features Gomer Pyle from Gomer Pyle , <unk> .. Bart sees the fictional movie Ernest Needs A Kidney , based on the character Ernest P. Worrell . Rod and Todd Flanders sing the song " Bringing in the <unk> " , because the writers liked having them sing " obscure religious songs " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network during February sweeps , the episode had a 12 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 11 @.@ 88 million homes . It finished the week of February 10 – 16 , 1992 ranked 29th , up from the season 's average rank of 39th . The Simpsons was the second highest rated show on Fox that week , after Married ... with Children . 
 Marcia Wallace , the voice of Mrs. Krabappel , won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for her role in the episode . She was one of six voice @-@ actors from The Simpsons to win the award that year . She is one of three guest stars on the show to win the award . The other two are Jackie Mason , who shared the award in 1992 , and Kelsey Grammer who won in 2006 for voicing Sideshow Bob . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It was named the eighth best episode of The Simpsons by Sarah Culp of The Quindecim . Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict said " Bart the Lover " represent The Simpsons " at its apex as a well tuned talent machine grinding out the good stuff with surprising accuracy and skill . " Gibron added that the episode shows that the made @-@ up romance between Mrs. Krabappel and Woodrow " works because it 's so painfully true . [ ... ] How the kiss @-@ off to Mrs. Krabappel is created and handled shows that The Simpsons has heart to add to its humor . " Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a 5 / 5 rating . He thought the intertwining of the two plots in the episode " works very well , creating a fast paced story . Bart 's alias , Woodrow , is a delight to hear in voice @-@ overs and Homer 's antics produce many laughs . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said " Bart the Lover " stands out as a " very strong episode " because it " steers clear of most potentially sappy material and offers a lively piece . [ ... ] The ' B ' story in which Homer tries not to swear also swings and creates some great moments . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said they " loved " Homer 's suggestion for the kiss @-@ off letter from Woodrow : " Dear Baby . Welcome to <unk> , population : you . P.S. I am gay . " In 2000 , the staff of the Star Tribune listed their top ten episodes . " Bart the Lover " was listed at number four . 
 In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed an education film seen in the episode among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " , writing : " ' Thank goodness I still live in a world of telephones , car batteries , handguns and many things made of zinc , ' says Jimmy , a character in an educational film . When confronted with a world without zinc he attempts suicide but fails , as his zinc @-@ free gun cannot work . " In 2002 , Bill Brioux of The Canadian Press ranked the episode and its use of Gordie Howe as the top reference to Canada on the show . In 2004 , ESPN released a list of the Top 100 Simpsons sport moments , ranking Gordie Howe 's image in the episode at number 34 . 
 In 2013 a Wired article described the episode as " the best Krabappel ( and arguably the best Simpsons ) episode " . 
 = Kakha Kaladze = 
 <unk> " Kakha " Kaladze ( Georgian : <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ; born 27 February 1978 ) is a Georgian politician and retired footballer , who played as a defender . A versatile player , he was capable of playing both as a centre @-@ back and as a left @-@ back . He played for the Georgia national team from 1996 to 2011 . He was voted Georgian Footballer of the Year in 2001 – 2003 , and 2006 and was considered as one of Georgia 's most important players . 
 Kaladze started his football career in 1993 at <unk> Liga club Dinamo Tbilisi and made 82 appearances in a five @-@ year spell . In 1998 , he moved to the Ukrainian club Dynamo Kyiv and made 71 appearances until 2001 , when he was signed by the Italian Serie A club Milan . He has won one Serie A , three Ukrainian Premier League and five <unk> Liga titles . With Milan , he won the Champions League on two occasions , the UEFA Super Cup once and the FIFA Club World Cup once . After captaining his country 50 times in 84 appearances , Kaladze announced his retirement from the Georgian national team on 11 December 2011 . 
 Born in Samtredia , a town in Imereti Province , Kaladze comes from a footballing family as his father played for Lokomotiv Samtredia and was also president of the team for some time . His brother was kidnapped in a high @-@ profile case in 2001 and officially declared dead in 2006 , resulting in two men being sentenced to prison for a combined total of 30 years . Outside of football , he owns a company called Kala Capital and an organisation called Kala Foundation , as well as being an ambassador for SOS Children 's Villages . He is married to <unk> <unk> , with whom he has three children with . 
 Kaladze became involved in the politics of Georgia as a member of the opposition Georgian Dream – Democratic Georgia party , founded by Bidzina Ivanishvili in February 2012 . He was elected to the Parliament of Georgia on 1 October 2012 and approved as Deputy Prime Minister as well as Minister of Energy in the cabinet of Bidzina Ivanishvili on 25 October 2012 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Kaladze started his career playing as a striker for his local club Lokomotiv Samtredia , where his father was president , until former Georgia international footballer David <unk> requested Kakha to join Dinamo Tbilisi . At Dinamo , he played in 82 domestic league games and scored one goal . He made his top @-@ flight debut as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old with Dinamo during the 1993 – 94 campaign . Kaladze claims that a good performance against Italy while playing for Georgia in a match that ended 0 – 0 brought him to the attention of Dynamo Kyiv ; he later said , " In that game I was up against Christian Vieri and I marked him well . " 
 A fee equivalent to € 280 @,@ 000 was enough to take him to the Ukrainian Premier League and Dynamo Kiev in January 1998 , where he signed a four @-@ year deal . Here he scored six goals in 71 league games over the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons he spent there . The Ukrainian club had been under the ownership of Hryhoriy <unk> and the late Valeriy <unk> had just been installed as manager ; they would go on to win eight consecutive league titles . Kaladze also appeared in both legs of the semi @-@ final of the 1998 – 99 Champions League against Bayern Munich , which Dynamo Kyiv lost 4 – 3 on aggregate . En route to the semi @-@ finals , they beat teams like Real Madrid , Barcelona and Arsenal . He won eight league titles in a row during his time at both Dinamo Tbilisi and Dynamo Kyiv . 
 = = = A.C. Milan = = = 
 In 2001 , Kaladze became the most expensive Georgian footballer in history when Milan paid € 16 million to bring him to Italy . He cited an injury to Aleksei Gerasimenko as his reason for leaving . At first , Kaladze was tried in different positions and faced competition for places in defense from players such as Jaap Stam and Cafu . In the 2002 – 03 season , however , he made 46 appearances in all competitions , including 27 Serie A appearances . That year , Milan won the Champions League , where they beat Juventus on penalties in the final ( despite Kaladze missing his penalty ) and the Coppa Italia , where they beat Roma 6 – 3 on aggregate in the final . After Kaladze 's double success , the Georgian postal service issued a special stamp bearing the player 's image . He is the first Georgian player to win a Champions League title . 
 Kaladze was limited to just six league appearances and 11 total appearances in the 2003 – 04 season . In the next season , Kaladze played just 19 Serie A matches and five in the Champions League as Milan finished as runners @-@ up in both competitions . He was an unused substitute in that season 's Champions League final , where Milan lost on penalties to Liverpool after a 3 – 3 draw . He was said to be frustrated with his lack of first @-@ team options and a move to Chelsea , in exchange for Hernán Crespo or for £ 4 million , was widely reported . Kaladze himself said , " I have agreed everything with the Chelsea management . Now it is necessary to wait for them to reach an agreement with Milan and I think I could become a Chelsea player next week . " Chelsea opted to sign Asier del Horno instead and Kaladze later declared himself " glad " that the deal fell through . On 30 June 2005 , he extended his contract with Milan until 2010 and again on 4 September 2006 , this time until 2011 . In 2005 – 06 , an injury to Paolo Maldini meant that Kaladze was moved back into the centre of defence , his favoured position . Milan finished third that season , although they would have finished second if there were no 2006 Italian football scandal which resulted in a 30 @-@ point deduction . 
 In the 2006 – 07 Serie A campaign , Kaladze scored a goal against Sampdoria which turned out to be his only goal of the season . Milan finished in fourth place with an eight @-@ point deduction relating to the previous season 's scandal . Kaladze won his second Champions League title on 23 May 2007 after Milan beat Liverpool 2 – 1 in the final ; he came on as a 79th @-@ minute substitute in that match . He later picked up the FIFA Club World Cup in December that year where Milan beat Boca Juniors 4 – 2 in the final , though Kaladze was one of two players to be sent off in that match . He had established himself as a first @-@ team regular in the 2007 – 08 season , making 32 appearances , but had only featured sparingly in the 2008 – 09 season due to a knee ligament injury sustained in a UEFA Cup match against Zürich . Kaladze 's performance in the 15 February 2009 Milan derby was described as a " horror show " on the Channel 4 website which started a dispute over an alleged smear campaign between Kaladze and the Georgian newspaper <unk> , who used the quote , " Milan really does need a new centre @-@ back after Kakha Kaladze ’ s horror show in the derby . " Milan finished third in the league that season , ten points behind Serie A champions Inter Milan ; Kaladze believed this was caused by the many injuries suffered by the Milan squad . 
 = = = Genoa = = = 
 On 31 August 2010 , Kaladze signed with Genoa ; Milan later revealed that it was a free transfer . In the 2010 – 11 season , he played 26 matches and scored one goal , which came against Parma on 30 January 2011 . He was named as second @-@ best defender of the 2010 – 11 Serie A by La Gazzetta dello Sport , being surpassed only by his former teammate , Milan 's Thiago Silva . On 12 May 2012 , Kaladze announced his retirement from football . 
 = = International career = = 
 Kaladze won his first cap against Cyprus in a friendly match on 27 March 1996 , coming on as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute for Mikhail <unk> . Later that year , he was sent off for the first time in his international career against Lebanon in a friendly match . He subsequently featured in his country 's qualifying campaigns for the 1998 , 2002 , 2006 and 2010 FIFA World Cups , and the 2000 , 2004 and 2008 UEFA European Championships . Georgia , however , have never qualified for the FIFA World Cup or the UEFA European Championship since they split from the Soviet Union . His competitive debut was against Poland on 14 June 1997 in a 1998 World Cup qualifier ; Georgia lost the match 4 – 1 . Just two matches later , Kaladze was sent off for the second time playing for Georgia , along with Georgi Kinkladze , against Moldova in another 1998 World Cup qualifier . Georgia finished in fourth place in the group and failed to qualify . In qualifying for Euro 2000 , Georgia finished at the bottom of the group ( Group 2 ) in sixth place , with just one win . Kaladze occasionally captained the side during these qualifiers in the absence of Georgi Nemsadze . 
 The qualifiers for the 2002 World Cup ended with Georgia finishing in third place , ahead of Hungary and Lithuania . Kaladze played in all of the matches and often missed the friendlies in between . Kaladze only played in three matches during the Euro 2004 qualifiers , where Georgia finished in last place in the group . He did , however , feature in a 1 – 0 victory over neighbouring Russia , a victory considered to be one of Georgia 's greatest successes . Kaladze played in all but one of the 2006 World Cup qualifying matches , where Georgia finished sixth in the group , with Kazakhstan being the only team to finish below them . He played fewer matches during the qualification for Euro 2008 and once again Georgia failed to qualify as they finished in sixth place despite starting their campaign with a 6 – 0 win over the Faroe Islands . 
 He scored his first ever international goal against Latvia on 6 February 2008 in a friendly which Georgia lost 3 – 1 . On 5 September 2009 , Kaladze scored two own goals in a 2010 World Cup qualifying match against Italy within the space of 11 minutes . The match ended 2 – 0 to Italy . Kaladze was the captain of the national team , until 11 December 2011 , when he announced his retirement . 
 = = = International goal = = = 
 Scores and results list Georgia 's goal tally first . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 As many footballers , Kaladze appeared in various publicity and advertising capacities , capitalizing on his popularity as an Italian club footballer . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2001 , Kakha Kaladze 's brother Levan , a medical student , was kidnapped in Georgia , with a ransom of $ 600 @,@ 000 demanded . Georgia 's president at the time , Eduard Shevardnadze , promised that " everything is being done to locate him " . Despite this assurance , the only time that Levan was ever seen was in a video where he was shown blindfolded and begging for help . Following the kidnapping , Kaladze threatened to take up Ukrainian citizenship , but reverted his decision , stating , " There was a time when I thought about quitting the national side completely , but I couldn 't do it out of respect for the Georgian people and the fans who come and give us such support . " Roughly four years later , on 6 May 2005 , Georgian police officers found eight dead bodies in the <unk> region and it was speculated that Levan was among the dead . On 21 February 2006 , Levan was officially identified among the deceased , after tests from FBI experts . The local media claimed that the ransom was paid by Kaladze 's family , although another source says that Kaladze 's father attempted to meet the kidnappers , who fled as they believed he was followed by the police . Two men were sentenced to prison for the murder : David <unk> for 25 years and <unk> <unk> for five years . On 14 July 2009 , Kaladze 's wife <unk> gave birth to their first @-@ born son in Milan . The couple named their son Levan , in memory of Kaladze 's brother . 
 Kaladze has also been active in charitable causes and is a FIFA ambassador for the SOS Children 's Villages . Through his Kala Foundation , a charitable organisation established in 2008 , Kaladze raised € 50 @,@ 000 to benefit South Ossetian refugees during the Russian invasion of Georgia . Kaladze also plans to release an autobiography with the proceeds going to the Kala Foundation . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 Along with his football career , Kaladze is an investor in Georgia , Italy , Ukraine and Kazakhstan . Kaladze owns Kala Capital , an investment company established in 2008 in Georgia with a focus on energy businesses , and whose chief executive is former Georgian Prime Minister Zurab <unk> . 
 Kaladze 's other businesses include the Buddha Bar in Kiev that opened in 2008 . Kaladze is also the owner of a restaurant called <unk> , founded in 1899 by <unk> Bindi , which is based in Milan . The restaurant has had a Michelin star under Davide <unk> . 
 Kala Capital owned 45 percent of the Georgia Hydropower Construction Company company <unk> , a joint stock company incorporated in Georgia in 1998 . His candidacy as Minister of Energy and Natural Resources in October 2012 was therefore overshadowed by concerns about a serious risk that a conflict of interests might arise . Reports on the same day indicated that Kaladze might refuse the energy portfolio or sell off his shares in Georgia Hydropower Construction Company within 10 days of his appointment . 
 = = = Political office and conflict of interests = = = 
 Kaladze became involved in the politics of Georgia as a member of the opposition Georgian Dream – Democratic Georgia party founded by billionaire Bidzina Ivanishvili in February 2012 . He was elected to the Parliament of Georgia on 1 October 2012 . He was approved as Deputy Prime Minister as well as Minister of Energy in the cabinet of Bidzina Ivanishvili on 25 October 2012 . The appointment was met with skepticism in professional energy circles . More importantly , it stirred an intense debate on a conflict of interest arising from Kaladze 's business interests in the Georgia Hydropower Construction Company , in which Kala Capital owned 45 percent . Kala Capital sold the shares to GMC Group in November 2012 but concerns whether his indirect commercial interests had been abandoned remain . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 <unk> competitions include the UEFA Champions League , UEFA Cup , and UEFA Super <unk> tournaments include the Supercoppa Italiana and FIFA Club World Cup 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Player = = = 
 Dinamo Tbilisi 
 Georgian League : 1993 – 94 , 1994 – 95 , 1995 – 96 , 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 
 Georgian Cup : 1994 , 1995 , 1996 , 1997 
 Dynamo Kyiv 
 Ukrainian Premier League : 1998 – 99 , 1999 – 2000 , 2000 – 01 
 Ukrainian Cup : 1998 , 1999 , 2000 
 Milan 
 Serie A : 2003 – 04 
 Coppa Italia : 2002 – 03 
 Italian Supercup : 2004 
 UEFA Champions League : 2003 , 2007 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2003 , 2007 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2007 
 = = = = Individual = = = = 
 Georgian Footballer of the Year : 5 
 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2006 , 2011 
 Source : Eurosport at Yahoo 
 = Consciousness = 
 Consciousness is the state or quality of awareness , or , of being aware of an external object or something within oneself . It has been defined as : sentience , awareness , subjectivity , the ability to experience or to feel , wakefulness , having a sense of selfhood , and the executive control system of the mind . Despite the difficulty in definition , many philosophers believe that there is a broadly shared underlying intuition about what consciousness is . As Max <unk> and Susan Schneider wrote in The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness : " Anything that we are aware of at a given moment forms part of our consciousness , making conscious experience at once the most familiar and most mysterious aspect of our lives . " 
 Western philosophers , since the time of Descartes and Locke , have struggled to comprehend the nature of consciousness and pin down its essential properties . Issues of concern in the philosophy of consciousness include whether the concept is fundamentally coherent ; whether consciousness can ever be explained mechanistically ; whether non @-@ human consciousness exists and if so how can it be recognized ; how consciousness relates to language ; whether consciousness can be understood in a way that does not require a dualistic distinction between mental and physical states or properties ; and whether it may ever be possible for computing machines like computers or robots to be conscious , a topic studied in the field of artificial intelligence . 
 Thanks to recent developments in technology , consciousness has become a significant topic of research in psychology , neuropsychology and neuroscience within the past few decades . The primary focus is on understanding what it means biologically and psychologically for information to be present in consciousness — that is , on determining the neural and psychological correlates of consciousness . The majority of experimental studies assess consciousness by asking human subjects for a verbal report of their experiences ( e.g. , " tell me if you notice anything when I do this " ) . Issues of interest include phenomena such as subliminal perception , <unk> , denial of impairment , and altered states of consciousness produced by alcohol and other drugs , or spiritual or meditative techniques . 
 In medicine , consciousness is assessed by observing a patient 's arousal and responsiveness , and can be seen as a continuum of states ranging from full alertness and comprehension , through disorientation , delirium , loss of meaningful communication , and finally loss of movement in response to painful stimuli . Issues of practical concern include how the presence of consciousness can be assessed in severely ill , comatose , or anesthetized people , and how to treat conditions in which consciousness is impaired or disrupted . 
 = = Etymology and early history = = 
 The origin of the modern concept of consciousness is often attributed to John Locke 's Essay Concerning Human Understanding , published in 1690 . Locke defined consciousness as " the perception of what passes in a man 's own mind " . His essay influenced the 18th @-@ century view of consciousness , and his definition appeared in Samuel Johnson 's celebrated Dictionary ( 1755 ) . " Consciousness " ( French : conscience ) is also defined in the 1753 volume of Diderot and d 'Alembert 's Encyclopédie , as " the opinion or internal feeling that we ourselves have from what we do . " 
 The earliest English language uses of " conscious " and " consciousness " date back , however , to the 1500s . The English word " conscious " originally derived from the Latin conscius ( <unk> " together " and <unk> " to know " ) , but the Latin word did not have the same meaning as our word — it meant " knowing with " , in other words " having joint or common knowledge with another " . There were , however , many occurrences in Latin writings of the phrase conscius sibi , which translates literally as " knowing with oneself " , or in other words " sharing knowledge with oneself about something " . This phrase had the figurative meaning of " knowing that one knows " , as the modern English word " conscious " does . In its earliest uses in the 1500s , the English word " conscious " retained the meaning of the Latin conscius . For example , Thomas Hobbes in Leviathan wrote : " Where two , or more men , know of one and the same fact , they are said to be Conscious of it one to another . " The Latin phrase conscius sibi , whose meaning was more closely related to the current concept of consciousness , was rendered in English as " conscious to oneself " or " conscious unto oneself " . For example , Archbishop Ussher wrote in 1613 of " being so conscious unto myself of my great weakness " . Locke 's definition from 1690 illustrates that a gradual shift in meaning had taken place . 
 A related word was conscientia , which primarily means moral conscience . In the literal sense , " conscientia " means knowledge @-@ with , that is , shared knowledge . The word first appears in Latin juridical texts by writers such as Cicero . Here , conscientia is the knowledge that a witness has of the deed of someone else . René Descartes ( 1596 – 1650 ) is generally taken to be the first philosopher to use conscientia in a way that does not fit this traditional meaning . Descartes used conscientia the way modern speakers would use " conscience " . In Search after Truth ( <unk> ad <unk> <unk> ut et <unk> <unk> per lumen naturale , Amsterdam 1701 ) he says " conscience or internal testimony " ( <unk> , vel <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = In the dictionary = = 
 The dictionary meaning of the word consciousness extends through several centuries and associated cognate meanings which have ranged from formal definitions to somewhat more skeptical definitions . One formal definition indicating the range of these cognate meanings is given in Webster 's Third New International Dictionary stating that consciousness is : " ( 1 ) a. awareness or perception of an inward psychological or spiritual fact : intuitively perceived knowledge of something in one 's inner <unk> b. inward awareness of an external object , state , or <unk> c. concerned awareness : <unk> , <unk> -- often used with an attributive noun . ( 2 ) : the state or activity that is characterized by sensation , emotion , volition , or thought : mind in the broadest possible sense : something in nature that is distinguished from the physical . ( 3 ) : the totality in psychology of sensations , perceptions , ideas , attitudes and feelings of which an individual or a group is aware at any given time or within a particular time span -- compare <unk> OF <unk> . " 
 = = Philosophy of mind = = 
 The philosophy of mind has given rise to many stances regarding consciousness . The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy in 1998 defines consciousness as follows : 
 Consciousness — Philosophers have used the term ' consciousness ' for four main topics : knowledge in general , intentionality , introspection ( and the knowledge it specifically generates ) and phenomenal experience ... Something within one 's mind is ' introspectively conscious ' just in case one <unk> it ( or is poised to do so ) . Introspection is often thought to deliver one 's primary knowledge of one 's mental life . An experience or other mental entity is ' phenomenally conscious ' just in case there is ' something it is like ' for one to have it . The clearest examples are : perceptual experience , such as tastings and <unk> ; bodily @-@ sensational experiences , such as those of pains , tickles and itches ; imaginative experiences , such as those of one 's own actions or perceptions ; and streams of thought , as in the experience of thinking ' in words ' or ' in images ' . Introspection and <unk> seem independent , or <unk> , although this is controversial . 
 In a more skeptical definition of consciousness , Stuart Sutherland has exemplified some of the difficulties in fully ascertaining all of its cognate meanings in his entry for the 1989 version of the Macmillan Dictionary of Psychology : 
 Consciousness — The having of perceptions , thoughts , and feelings ; awareness . The term is impossible to define except in terms that are unintelligible without a grasp of what consciousness means . Many fall into the trap of equating consciousness with self @-@ consciousness — to be conscious it is only necessary to be aware of the external world . Consciousness is a fascinating but elusive phenomenon : it is impossible to specify what it is , what it does , or why it has evolved . Nothing worth reading has been written on it . 
 Most writers on the philosophy of consciousness have been concerned to defend a particular point of view , and have organized their material accordingly . For surveys , the most common approach is to follow a historical path by associating stances with the philosophers who are most strongly associated with them , for example Descartes , Locke , Kant , etc . An alternative is to organize philosophical stances according to basic issues . 
 = = = The coherence of the concept = = = 
 Philosophers and non @-@ philosophers differ in their intuitions about what consciousness is . While most people have a strong intuition for the existence of what they refer to as consciousness , skeptics argue that this intuition is false , either because the concept of consciousness is intrinsically incoherent , or because our intuitions about it are based in illusions . Gilbert Ryle , for example , argued that traditional understanding of consciousness depends on a Cartesian dualist outlook that improperly distinguishes between mind and body , or between mind and world . He proposed that we speak not of minds , bodies , and the world , but of individuals , or persons , acting in the world . Thus , by speaking of " consciousness " we end up misleading ourselves by thinking that there is any sort of thing as consciousness separated from behavioral and linguistic understandings . More generally , many philosophers and scientists have been unhappy about the difficulty of producing a definition that does not involve circularity or fuzziness . 
 = = = Types of consciousness = = = 
 Many philosophers have argued that consciousness is a unitary concept that is understood intuitively by the majority of people in spite of the difficulty in defining it . Others , though , have argued that the level of disagreement about the meaning of the word indicates that it either means different things to different people ( for instance , the objective versus subjective aspects of consciousness ) , or else is an umbrella term encompassing a variety of distinct meanings with no simple element in common . 
 Ned Block proposed a distinction between two types of consciousness that he called phenomenal ( P @-@ consciousness ) and access ( A @-@ consciousness ) . P @-@ consciousness , according to Block , is simply raw experience : it is moving , colored forms , sounds , sensations , emotions and feelings with our bodies and responses at the center . These experiences , considered independently of any impact on behavior , are called qualia . A @-@ consciousness , on the other hand , is the phenomenon whereby information in our minds is accessible for verbal report , reasoning , and the control of behavior . So , when we perceive , information about what we perceive is access conscious ; when we <unk> , information about our thoughts is access conscious ; when we remember , information about the past is access conscious , and so on . Although some philosophers , such as Daniel Dennett , have disputed the validity of this distinction , others have broadly accepted it . David Chalmers has argued that A @-@ consciousness can in principle be understood in mechanistic terms , but that understanding P @-@ consciousness is much more challenging : he calls this the hard problem of consciousness . 
 Some philosophers believe that Block 's two types of consciousness are not the end of the story . William <unk> , for example , argued in his book Consciousness and Experience that at least eight clearly distinct types of consciousness can be identified ( organism consciousness ; control consciousness ; consciousness of ; state / event consciousness ; <unk> ; introspective consciousness ; subjective consciousness ; self @-@ consciousness ) — and that even this list omits several more obscure forms . 
 There is also debate in whether or not a @-@ consciousness and p @-@ consciousness always co @-@ exist or if they can exist separately . Although p @-@ consciousness without a @-@ consciousness is more widely accepted , there have been some hypothetical examples of A without P. Block for instance suggests the case of a “ zombie ” that is computationally identical to a person but without any subjectivity . However , he remains somewhat skeptical concluding " I don ’ t know whether there are any actual cases of A @-@ consciousness without P @-@ consciousness , but I hope I have illustrated their conceptual possibility . " 
 = = = Mind – body problem = = = 
 Mental processes ( such as consciousness ) and physical processes ( such as brain events ) seem to be correlated : but what is the basis of this connection and correlation between what seem to be two very different kinds of processes ? 
 The first influential philosopher to discuss this question specifically was Descartes , and the answer he gave is known as Cartesian dualism . Descartes proposed that consciousness resides within an immaterial domain he called res cogitans ( the realm of thought ) , in contrast to the domain of material things , which he called res <unk> ( the realm of extension ) . He suggested that the interaction between these two domains occurs inside the brain , perhaps in a small midline structure called the pineal gland . 
 Although it is widely accepted that Descartes explained the problem cogently , few later philosophers have been happy with his solution , and his ideas about the pineal gland have especially been ridiculed . However , no alternative solution has gained general acceptance . Proposed solutions can be divided broadly into two categories : dualist solutions that maintain Descartes ' rigid distinction between the realm of consciousness and the realm of matter but give different answers for how the two realms relate to each other ; and monist solutions that maintain that there is really only one realm of being , of which consciousness and matter are both aspects . Each of these categories itself contains numerous variants . The two main types of dualism are substance dualism ( which holds that the mind is formed of a distinct type of substance not governed by the laws of physics ) and property dualism ( which holds that the laws of physics are universally valid but cannot be used to explain the mind ) . The three main types of monism are physicalism ( which holds that the mind consists of matter organized in a particular way ) , idealism ( which holds that only thought or experience truly exists , and matter is merely an illusion ) , and neutral monism ( which holds that both mind and matter are aspects of a distinct essence that is itself identical to neither of them ) . There are also , however , a large number of idiosyncratic theories that cannot cleanly be assigned to any of these schools of thought . 
 Since the dawn of Newtonian science with its vision of simple mechanical principles governing the entire universe , some philosophers have been tempted by the idea that consciousness could be explained in purely physical terms . The first influential writer to propose such an idea explicitly was Julien <unk> de La <unk> , in his book Man a Machine ( L 'homme machine ) . His arguments , however , were very abstract . The most influential modern physical theories of consciousness are based on psychology and neuroscience . Theories proposed by neuroscientists such as Gerald Edelman and Antonio Damasio , and by philosophers such as Daniel Dennett , seek to explain consciousness in terms of neural events occurring within the brain . Many other neuroscientists , such as Christof Koch , have explored the neural basis of consciousness without attempting to frame all @-@ encompassing global theories . At the same time , computer scientists working in the field of artificial intelligence have pursued the goal of creating digital computer programs that can simulate or embody consciousness . 
 A few theoretical physicists have argued that classical physics is intrinsically incapable of explaining the holistic aspects of consciousness , but that quantum theory may provide the missing ingredients . Several theorists have therefore proposed quantum mind ( QM ) theories of consciousness . Notable theories falling into this category include the <unk> brain theory of Karl Pribram and David Bohm , and the <unk> @-@ OR theory formulated by Stuart <unk> and Roger Penrose . Some of these QM theories offer descriptions of phenomenal consciousness , as well as QM interpretations of access consciousness . None of the quantum mechanical theories has been confirmed by experiment . Recent publications by G. <unk> , J. Cia , S. Popescu , and H. <unk> could falsify proposals such as those of <unk> , which rely on quantum entanglement in protein . At the present time many scientists and philosophers consider the arguments for an important role of quantum phenomena to be unconvincing . 
 Apart from the general question of the " hard problem " of consciousness , roughly speaking , the question of how mental experience arises from a physical basis , a more specialized question is how to square the subjective notion that we are in control of our decisions ( at least in some small measure ) with the customary view of causality that subsequent events are caused by prior events . The topic of free will is the philosophical and scientific examination of this conundrum . 
 = = = Problem of other minds = = = 
 Many philosophers consider experience to be the essence of consciousness , and believe that experience can only fully be known from the inside , subjectively . But if consciousness is subjective and not visible from the outside , why do the vast majority of people believe that other people are conscious , but rocks and trees are not ? This is called the problem of other minds . It is particularly acute for people who believe in the possibility of philosophical zombies , that is , people who think it is possible in principle to have an entity that is physically indistinguishable from a human being and behaves like a human being in every way but nevertheless lacks consciousness . Related issues have also been studied extensively by Greg <unk> of the University of <unk> and Colin Allen a professor at Indiana University regarding the literature and research studying artificial intelligence in androids . 
 The most commonly given answer is that we attribute consciousness to other people because we see that they resemble us in appearance and behavior ; we reason that if they look like us and act like us , they must be like us in other ways , including having experiences of the sort that we do . There are , however , a variety of problems with that explanation . For one thing , it seems to violate the principle of parsimony , by postulating an invisible entity that is not necessary to explain what we observe . Some philosophers , such as Daniel Dennett in an essay titled The <unk> <unk> of Zombies , argue that people who give this explanation do not really understand what they are saying . More broadly , philosophers who do not accept the possibility of zombies generally believe that consciousness is reflected in behavior ( including verbal behavior ) , and that we attribute consciousness on the basis of behavior . A more straightforward way of saying this is that we attribute experiences to people because of what they can do , including the fact that they can tell us about their experiences . 
 = = = Animal consciousness = = = 
 The topic of animal consciousness is beset by a number of difficulties . It poses the problem of other minds in an especially severe form , because non @-@ human animals , lacking the ability to express human language , cannot tell us about their experiences . Also , it is difficult to reason objectively about the question , because a denial that an animal is conscious is often taken to imply that it does not feel , its life has no value , and that harming it is not morally wrong . Descartes , for example , has sometimes been blamed for mistreatment of animals due to the fact that he believed only humans have a non @-@ physical mind . Most people have a strong intuition that some animals , such as cats and dogs , are conscious , while others , such as insects , are not ; but the sources of this intuition are not obvious , and are often based on personal interactions with pets and other animals they have observed . 
 Philosophers who consider subjective experience the essence of consciousness also generally believe , as a correlate , that the existence and nature of animal consciousness can never rigorously be known . Thomas Nagel spelled out this point of view in an influential essay titled What Is it Like to Be a Bat ? . He said that an organism is conscious " if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism — something it is like for the organism " ; and he argued that no matter how much we know about an animal 's brain and behavior , we can never really put ourselves into the mind of the animal and experience its world in the way it does itself . Other thinkers , such as Douglas Hofstadter , dismiss this argument as incoherent . Several psychologists and ethologists have argued for the existence of animal consciousness by describing a range of behaviors that appear to show animals holding beliefs about things they cannot directly perceive — Donald Griffin 's 2001 book Animal Minds reviews a substantial portion of the evidence . 
 On July 7 , 2012 , eminent scientists from different branches of neuroscience gathered at the University of Cambridge to celebrate the Francis Crick Memorial Conference , which deals with consciousness in humans and pre @-@ linguistic consciousness in nonhuman animals . After the conference , they signed in the presence of Stephen Hawking , the ' Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness ' , which summarizes the most important findings of the survey : 
 " We decided to reach a consensus and make a statement directed to the public that is not scientific . It 's obvious to everyone in this room that animals have consciousness , but it is not obvious to the rest of the world . It is not obvious to the rest of the Western world or the Far East . It is not obvious to the society . " 
 " Convergent evidence indicates that non @-@ human animals [ ... ] , including all mammals and birds , and other creatures , [ ... ] have the necessary neural substrates of consciousness and the capacity to exhibit intentional behaviors . " 
 = = = Artifact consciousness = = = 
 The idea of an artifact made conscious is an ancient theme of mythology , appearing for example in the Greek myth of Pygmalion , who carved a statue that was magically brought to life , and in medieval Jewish stories of the Golem , a magically animated homunculus built of clay . However , the possibility of actually constructing a conscious machine was probably first discussed by Ada Lovelace , in a set of notes written in 1842 about the Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage , a precursor ( never built ) to modern electronic computers . Lovelace was essentially dismissive of the idea that a machine such as the Analytical Engine could think in a humanlike way . She wrote : 
 It is desirable to guard against the possibility of exaggerated ideas that might arise as to the powers of the Analytical Engine . ... The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate anything . It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform . It can follow analysis ; but it has no power of anticipating any analytical relations or truths . Its province is to assist us in making available what we are already acquainted with . 
 One of the most influential contributions to this question was an essay written in 1950 by pioneering computer scientist Alan Turing , titled Computing Machinery and Intelligence . Turing disavowed any interest in terminology , saying that even " Can machines think ? " is too loaded with spurious connotations to be meaningful ; but he proposed to replace all such questions with a specific operational test , which has become known as the Turing test . To pass the test , a computer must be able to imitate a human well enough to fool interrogators . In his essay Turing discussed a variety of possible objections , and presented a counterargument to each of them . The Turing test is commonly cited in discussions of artificial intelligence as a proposed criterion for machine consciousness ; it has provoked a great deal of philosophical debate . For example , Daniel Dennett and Douglas Hofstadter argue that anything capable of passing the Turing test is necessarily conscious , while David Chalmers argues that a philosophical zombie could pass the test , yet fail to be conscious . A third group of scholars have argued that with technological growth once machines begin to display any substantial signs of human @-@ like behavior then the dichotomy ( of human consciousness compared to human @-@ like consciousness ) becomes passé and issues of machine autonomy begin to prevail even as observed in its nascent form within contemporary industry and technology . 
 In a lively exchange over what has come to be referred to as " the Chinese room argument " , John Searle sought to refute the claim of proponents of what he calls " strong artificial intelligence ( AI ) " that a computer program can be conscious , though he does agree with advocates of " weak AI " that computer programs can be formatted to " simulate " conscious states . His own view is that consciousness has subjective , first @-@ person causal powers by being essentially intentional due simply to the way human brains function biologically ; conscious persons can perform computations , but consciousness is not inherently computational the way computer programs are . To make a Turing machine that speaks Chinese , Searle imagines a room with one monolingual English speaker ( Searle himself , in fact ) , a book that designates a combination of Chinese symbols to be output paired with Chinese symbol input , and boxes filled with Chinese symbols . In this case , the English speaker is acting as a computer and the rulebook as a program . Searle argues that with such a machine , he would be able to process the inputs to outputs perfectly without having any understanding of Chinese , nor having any idea what the questions and answers could possibly mean . If the experiment were done in English , since Searle knows English , he would be able to take questions and give answers without any algorithms for English questions , and he would be effectively aware of what was being said and the purposes it might serve . Searle would pass the Turing test of answering the questions in both languages , but he is only conscious of what he is doing when he speaks English . Another way of putting the argument is to say that computer programs can pass the Turing test for processing the syntax of a language , but that the syntax cannot lead to semantic meaning in the way strong AI advocates hoped . 
 In the literature concerning artificial intelligence , Searle 's essay has been second only to Turing 's in the volume of debate it has generated . Searle himself was vague about what extra ingredients it would take to make a machine conscious : all he proposed was that what was needed was " causal powers " of the sort that the brain has and that computers lack . But other thinkers sympathetic to his basic argument have suggested that the necessary ( though perhaps still not sufficient ) extra conditions may include the ability to pass not just the verbal version of the Turing test , but the robotic version , which requires grounding the robot 's words in the robot 's sensorimotor capacity to categorize and interact with the things in the world that its words are about , Turing @-@ indistinguishably from a real person . Turing @-@ scale robotics is an empirical branch of research on embodied cognition and situated cognition . 
 = = Scientific study = = 
 For many decades , consciousness as a research topic was avoided by the majority of mainstream scientists , because of a general feeling that a phenomenon defined in subjective terms could not properly be studied using objective experimental methods . In 1975 George Mandler published an influential psychological study which distinguished between slow , serial , and limited conscious processes and fast , parallel and extensive unconscious ones . Starting in the 1980s , an expanding community of neuroscientists and psychologists have associated themselves with a field called Consciousness Studies , giving rise to a stream of experimental work published in books , journals such as Consciousness and Cognition , Frontiers in Consciousness Research , and the Journal of Consciousness Studies , along with regular conferences organized by groups such as the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness . 
 Modern medical and psychological investigations into consciousness are based on psychological experiments ( including , for example , the investigation of priming effects using subliminal stimuli ) , and on case studies of alterations in consciousness produced by trauma , illness , or drugs . Broadly viewed , scientific approaches are based on two core concepts . The first identifies the content of consciousness with the experiences that are reported by human subjects ; the second makes use of the concept of consciousness that has been developed by neurologists and other medical professionals who deal with patients whose behavior is impaired . In either case , the ultimate goals are to develop techniques for assessing consciousness objectively in humans as well as other animals , and to understand the neural and psychological mechanisms that underlie it . 
 = = = Measurement = = = 
 Experimental research on consciousness presents special difficulties , due to the lack of a universally accepted operational definition . In the majority of experiments that are specifically about consciousness , the subjects are human , and the criterion used is verbal report : in other words , subjects are asked to describe their experiences , and their descriptions are treated as observations of the contents of consciousness . For example , subjects who stare continuously at a Necker cube usually report that they experience it " flipping " between two 3D configurations , even though the stimulus itself remains the same . The objective is to understand the relationship between the conscious awareness of stimuli ( as indicated by verbal report ) and the effects the stimuli have on brain activity and behavior . In several paradigms , such as the technique of response priming , the behavior of subjects is clearly influenced by stimuli for which they report no awareness . 
 Verbal report is widely considered to be the most reliable indicator of consciousness , but it raises a number of issues . For one thing , if verbal reports are treated as observations , akin to observations in other branches of science , then the possibility arises that they may contain errors — but it is difficult to make sense of the idea that subjects could be wrong about their own experiences , and even more difficult to see how such an error could be detected . Daniel Dennett has argued for an approach he calls <unk> , which means treating verbal reports as stories that may or may not be true , but his ideas about how to do this have not been widely adopted . Another issue with verbal report as a criterion is that it restricts the field of study to humans who have language : this approach cannot be used to study consciousness in other species , pre @-@ linguistic children , or people with types of brain damage that impair language . As a third issue , philosophers who dispute the validity of the Turing test may feel that it is possible , at least in principle , for verbal report to be dissociated from consciousness entirely : a philosophical zombie may give detailed verbal reports of awareness in the absence of any genuine awareness . 
 Although verbal report is in practice the " gold standard " for ascribing consciousness , it is not the only possible criterion . In medicine , consciousness is assessed as a combination of verbal behavior , arousal , brain activity and purposeful movement . The last three of these can be used as indicators of consciousness when verbal behavior is absent . The scientific literature regarding the neural bases of arousal and purposeful movement is very extensive . Their reliability as indicators of consciousness is disputed , however , due to numerous studies showing that alert human subjects can be induced to behave purposefully in a variety of ways in spite of reporting a complete lack of awareness . Studies of the neuroscience of free will have also shown that the experiences that people report when they behave purposefully sometimes do not correspond to their actual behaviors or to the patterns of electrical activity recorded from their brains . 
 Another approach applies specifically to the study of self @-@ awareness , that is , the ability to distinguish oneself from others . In the 1970s Gordon Gallup developed an operational test for self @-@ awareness , known as the mirror test . The test examines whether animals are able to differentiate between seeing themselves in a mirror versus seeing other animals . The classic example involves placing a spot of coloring on the skin or fur near the individual 's forehead and seeing if they attempt to remove it or at least touch the spot , thus indicating that they recognize that the individual they are seeing in the mirror is themselves . Humans ( older than 18 months ) and other great apes , bottlenose dolphins , killer whales , pigeons , European magpies and elephants have all been observed to pass this test . 
 = = = Neural correlates = = = 
 A major part of the scientific literature on consciousness consists of studies that examine the relationship between the experiences reported by subjects and the activity that simultaneously takes place in their brains — that is , studies of the neural correlates of consciousness . The hope is to find that activity in a particular part of the brain , or a particular pattern of global brain activity , which will be strongly predictive of conscious awareness . Several brain imaging techniques , such as EEG and fMRI , have been used for physical measures of brain activity in these studies . 
 Another idea that has drawn attention for several decades is that consciousness is associated with high @-@ frequency ( gamma band ) oscillations in brain activity . This idea arose from proposals in the 1980s , by Christof von der <unk> and Wolf Singer , that gamma oscillations could solve the so @-@ called binding problem , by linking information represented in different parts of the brain into a unified experience . Rodolfo <unk> , for example , proposed that consciousness results from recurrent <unk> @-@ cortical resonance where the specific <unk> systems ( content ) and the non @-@ specific ( <unk> thalamus ) <unk> systems ( context ) interact in the gamma band frequency via synchronous oscillations . 
 A number of studies have shown that activity in primary sensory areas of the brain is not sufficient to produce consciousness : it is possible for subjects to report a lack of awareness even when areas such as the primary visual cortex show clear electrical responses to a stimulus . Higher brain areas are seen as more promising , especially the prefrontal cortex , which is involved in a range of higher cognitive functions collectively known as executive functions . There is substantial evidence that a " top @-@ down " flow of neural activity ( i.e. , activity propagating from the frontal cortex to sensory areas ) is more predictive of conscious awareness than a " bottom @-@ up " flow of activity . The prefrontal cortex is not the only candidate area , however : studies by Nikos Logothetis and his colleagues have shown , for example , that visually responsive neurons in parts of the temporal lobe reflect the visual perception in the situation when conflicting visual images are presented to different eyes ( i.e. , bistable <unk> during binocular rivalry ) . 
 Modulation of neural responses may correlate with phenomenal experiences . In contrast to the raw electrical responses that do not correlate with consciousness , the modulation of these responses by other stimuli correlates surprisingly well with an important aspect of consciousness : namely with the phenomenal experience of stimulus intensity ( brightness , contrast ) . In the research group of Danko Nikolić it has been shown that some of the changes in the subjectively perceived brightness correlated with the modulation of firing rates while others correlated with the modulation of neural synchrony . An fMRI investigation suggested that these findings were strictly limited to the primary visual areas . This indicates that , in the primary visual areas , changes in firing rates and synchrony can be considered as neural correlates of qualia — at least for some type of qualia . 
 In 2011 , Graziano and Kastner proposed the " attention schema " theory of awareness . In that theory , specific cortical areas , notably in the superior temporal sulcus and the <unk> @-@ parietal junction , are used to build the construct of awareness and attribute it to other people . The same cortical machinery is also used to attribute awareness to oneself . Damage to these cortical regions can lead to deficits in consciousness such as hemispatial neglect . In the attention schema theory , the value of explaining the feature of awareness and attributing it to a person is to gain a useful predictive model of that person 's attentional processing . Attention is a style of information processing in which a brain focuses its resources on a limited set of interrelated signals . Awareness , in this theory , is a useful , simplified schema that represents attentional states . To be aware of X is explained by constructing a model of one 's attentional focus on X. 
 In the 2013 , the <unk> complexity index ( PCI ) was proposed , a measure of the algorithmic complexity of the electrophysiological response of the cortex to transcranial magnetic stimulation . This measure was shown to be higher in individuals that are awake , in REM sleep or in a locked @-@ in state than in those who are in deep sleep or in a vegetative state , making it potentially useful as a quantitative assessment of consciousness states . 
 Assuming that not only humans but even some non @-@ mammalian species are conscious , a number of evolutionary approaches to the problem of neural correlates of consciousness open up . For example , assuming that birds are conscious — a common assumption among neuroscientists and ethologists due to the extensive cognitive repertoire of birds — there are comparative <unk> ways to validate some of the principal , currently competing , mammalian consciousness – brain theories . The rationale for such a comparative study is that the avian brain deviates structurally from the mammalian brain . So how similar are they ? What homologues can be identified ? The general conclusion from the study by Butler , et al . , is that some of the major theories for the mammalian brain also appear to be valid for the avian brain . The structures assumed to be critical for consciousness in mammalian brains have homologous counterparts in avian brains . Thus the main portions of the theories of Crick and Koch , Edelman and <unk> , and Cotterill seem to be compatible with the assumption that birds are conscious . Edelman also differentiates between what he calls primary consciousness ( which is a trait shared by humans and non @-@ human animals ) and higher @-@ order consciousness as it appears in humans alone along with human language capacity . Certain aspects of the three theories , however , seem less easy to apply to the hypothesis of avian consciousness . For instance , the suggestion by Crick and Koch that layer 5 neurons of the mammalian brain have a special role , seems difficult to apply to the avian brain , since the avian homologues have a different morphology . Likewise , the theory of Eccles seems incompatible , since a structural homologue / analogue to the dendron has not been found in avian brains . The assumption of an avian consciousness also brings the reptilian brain into focus . The reason is the structural continuity between avian and reptilian brains , meaning that the phylogenetic origin of consciousness may be earlier than suggested by many leading neuroscientists . 
 Joaquin Fuster of UCLA has advocated the position of the importance of the prefrontal cortex in humans , along with the areas of Wernicke and Broca , as being of particular importance to the development of human language capacities neuro @-@ anatomically necessary for the emergence of higher @-@ order consciousness in humans . 
 = = = Biological function and evolution = = = 
 Opinions are divided as to where in biological evolution consciousness emerged and about whether or not consciousness has any survival value . It has been argued that consciousness emerged ( i ) exclusively with the first humans , ( ii ) exclusively with the first mammals , ( iii ) independently in mammals and birds , or ( iv ) with the first reptiles . Other authors date the origins of consciousness to the first animals with nervous systems or early vertebrates in the Cambrian over 500 million years ago . Donald Griffin suggests in his book Animal Minds a gradual evolution of consciousness . Each of these scenarios raises the question of the possible survival value of consciousness . 
 Thomas Henry Huxley defends in an essay titled On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata , and its History an <unk> theory of consciousness according to which consciousness is a causally inert effect of neural activity — “ as the steam @-@ whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive engine is without influence upon its machinery ” . To this William James objects in his essay Are We Automata ? by stating an evolutionary argument for mind @-@ brain interaction implying that if the preservation and development of consciousness in the biological evolution is a result of natural selection , it is plausible that consciousness has not only been influenced by neural processes , but has had a survival value itself ; and it could only have had this if it had been efficacious . Karl Popper develops in the book The Self and Its Brain a similar evolutionary argument . 
 Regarding the primary function of conscious processing , a recurring idea in recent theories is that phenomenal states somehow integrate neural activities and information @-@ processing that would otherwise be independent . This has been called the integration consensus . Another example has been proposed by Gerald Edelman called dynamic core hypothesis which puts emphasis on <unk> connections that reciprocally link areas of the brain in a massively parallel manner . Edelman also stresses the importance of the evolutionary emergence of higher @-@ order consciousness in humans from the historically older trait of primary consciousness which humans share with non @-@ human animals ( see Neural correlates section above ) . These theories of integrative function present solutions to two classic problems associated with consciousness : differentiation and unity . They show how our conscious experience can discriminate between a virtually unlimited number of different possible scenes and details ( differentiation ) because it integrates those details from our sensory systems , while the integrative nature of consciousness in this view easily explains how our experience can seem unified as one whole despite all of these individual parts . However , it remains unspecified which kinds of information are integrated in a conscious manner and which kinds can be integrated without consciousness . Nor is it explained what specific causal role conscious integration plays , nor why the same functionality cannot be achieved without consciousness . Obviously not all kinds of information are capable of being disseminated consciously ( e.g. , neural activity related to vegetative functions , reflexes , unconscious motor programs , low @-@ level perceptual analyses , etc . ) and many kinds of information can be disseminated and combined with other kinds without consciousness , as in <unk> interactions such as the ventriloquism effect . Hence it remains unclear why any of it is conscious . For a review of the differences between conscious and unconscious integrations , see the article of E. <unk> . 
 As noted earlier , even among writers who consider consciousness to be a well @-@ defined thing , there is widespread dispute about which animals other than humans can be said to possess it . Edelman has described this distinction as that of humans possessing higher @-@ order consciousness while sharing the trait of primary consciousness with non @-@ human animals ( see previous paragraph ) . Thus , any examination of the evolution of consciousness is faced with great difficulties . Nevertheless , some writers have argued that consciousness can be viewed from the standpoint of evolutionary biology as an adaptation in the sense of a trait that increases fitness . In his article " Evolution of consciousness " , John Eccles argued that special anatomical and physical properties of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness ( " [ a ] <unk> ... linked to [ a ] dendron through quantum physics " ) . Bernard <unk> proposed that once in place , this " recursive " circuitry may have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms . Peter Carruthers has put forth one such potential adaptive advantage gained by conscious creatures by suggesting that consciousness allows an individual to make distinctions between appearance and reality . This ability would enable a creature to recognize the likelihood that their perceptions are deceiving them ( e.g. that water in the distance may be a mirage ) and behave accordingly , and it could also facilitate the manipulation of others by recognizing how things appear to them for both cooperative and devious ends . 
 Other philosophers , however , have suggested that consciousness would not be necessary for any functional advantage in evolutionary processes . No one has given a causal explanation , they argue , of why it would not be possible for a functionally equivalent non @-@ conscious organism ( i.e. , a philosophical zombie ) to achieve the very same survival advantages as a conscious organism . If evolutionary processes are blind to the difference between function F being performed by conscious organism O and non @-@ conscious organism O * , it is unclear what adaptive advantage consciousness could provide . As a result , an <unk> explanation of consciousness has gained favor with some theorists that posit consciousness did not evolve as an adaptation but was an exaptation arising as a consequence of other developments such as increases in brain size or cortical rearrangement . Consciousness in this sense has been compared to the blind spot in the retina where it is not an adaption of the retina , but instead just a by @-@ product of the way the retinal axons were wired . Several scholars including Pinker , Chomsky , Edelman , and Luria have indicated the importance of the emergence of human language as an important regulative mechanism of learning and memory in the context of the development of higher @-@ order consciousness ( see Neural correlates section above ) . 
 = = = States of consciousness = = = 
 There are some brain states in which consciousness seems to be absent , including dreamless sleep , coma , and death . There are also a variety of circumstances that can change the relationship between the mind and the world in less drastic ways , producing what are known as altered states of consciousness . Some altered states occur naturally ; others can be produced by drugs or brain damage . Altered states can be accompanied by changes in thinking , disturbances in the sense of time , feelings of loss of control , changes in emotional expression , alternations in body image and changes in meaning or significance . 
 The two most widely accepted altered states are sleep and dreaming . Although dream sleep and non @-@ dream sleep appear very similar to an outside observer , each is associated with a distinct pattern of brain activity , metabolic activity , and eye movement ; each is also associated with a distinct pattern of experience and cognition . During ordinary non @-@ dream sleep , people who are awakened report only vague and sketchy thoughts , and their experiences do not cohere into a continuous narrative . During dream sleep , in contrast , people who are awakened report rich and detailed experiences in which events form a continuous progression , which may however be interrupted by bizarre or fantastic intrusions . Thought processes during the dream state frequently show a high level of irrationality . Both dream and non @-@ dream states are associated with severe disruption of memory : it usually disappears in seconds during the non @-@ dream state , and in minutes after awakening from a dream unless actively refreshed . 
 Research conducted on the effects of partial epileptic seizures on consciousness found that patients who suffer from partial epileptic seizures experience altered states of consciousness . In partial epileptic seizures , consciousness is impaired or lost while some aspects of consciousness , often automated behaviors , remain intact . Studies found that when measuring the qualitative features during partial epileptic seizures , patients exhibited an increase in arousal and became absorbed in the experience of the seizure , followed by difficulty in focusing and shifting attention . 
 A variety of psychoactive drugs and alcohol have notable effects on consciousness . These range from a simple dulling of awareness produced by sedatives , to increases in the intensity of sensory qualities produced by stimulants , cannabis , <unk> – <unk> such as MDMA ( " Ecstasy " ) , or most notably by the class of drugs known as psychedelics . LSD , mescaline , psilocybin , <unk> , and others in this group can produce major distortions of perception , including hallucinations ; some users even describe their drug @-@ induced experiences as mystical or spiritual in quality . The brain mechanisms underlying these effects are not as well understood as those induced by use of alcohol , but there is substantial evidence that alterations in the brain system that uses the chemical neurotransmitter serotonin play an essential role . 
 There has been some research into physiological changes in yogis and people who practise various techniques of meditation . Some research with brain waves during meditation has reported differences between those corresponding to ordinary relaxation and those corresponding to meditation . It has been disputed , however , whether there is enough evidence to count these as physiologically distinct states of consciousness . 
 The most extensive study of the characteristics of altered states of consciousness was made by psychologist Charles Tart in the 1960s and 1970s . Tart analyzed a state of consciousness as made up of a number of component processes , including <unk> ( sensing the external world ) ; <unk> ( sensing the body ) ; input @-@ processing ( seeing meaning ) ; emotions ; memory ; time sense ; sense of identity ; evaluation and cognitive processing ; motor output ; and interaction with the environment . Each of these , in his view , could be altered in multiple ways by drugs or other manipulations . The components that Tart identified have not , however , been validated by empirical studies . Research in this area has not yet reached firm conclusions , but a recent questionnaire @-@ based study identified eleven significant factors contributing to drug @-@ induced states of consciousness : experience of unity ; spiritual experience ; blissful state ; <unk> ; disembodiment ; impaired control and cognition ; anxiety ; complex imagery ; elementary imagery ; audio @-@ visual synesthesia ; and changed meaning of <unk> . 
 = = = Phenomenology = = = 
 Phenomenology is a method of inquiry that attempts to examine the structure of consciousness in its own right , putting aside problems regarding the relationship of consciousness to the physical world . This approach was first proposed by the philosopher Edmund Husserl , and later elaborated by other philosophers and scientists . Husserl 's original concept gave rise to two distinct lines of inquiry , in philosophy and psychology . In philosophy , phenomenology has largely been devoted to fundamental metaphysical questions , such as the nature of intentionality ( " <unk> " ) . In psychology , phenomenology largely has meant attempting to investigate consciousness using the method of introspection , which means looking into one 's own mind and reporting what one observes . This method fell into disrepute in the early twentieth century because of grave doubts about its reliability , but has been rehabilitated to some degree , especially when used in combination with techniques for examining brain activity . 
 <unk> , the world of conscious experience seems to have considerable structure . Immanuel Kant asserted that the world as we perceive it is organized according to a set of fundamental " intuitions " , which include object ( we perceive the world as a set of distinct things ) ; shape ; quality ( color , warmth , etc . ) ; space ( distance , direction , and location ) ; and time . Some of these constructs , such as space and time , correspond to the way the world is structured by the laws of physics ; for others the correspondence is not as clear . Understanding the physical basis of qualities , such as redness or pain , has been particularly challenging . David Chalmers has called this the hard problem of consciousness . Some philosophers have argued that it is intrinsically unsolvable , because qualities ( " qualia " ) are ineffable ; that is , they are " raw feels " , incapable of being analyzed into component processes . Most psychologists and neuroscientists reject these arguments . For example , research on <unk> shows that qualia are organised into a semantic @-@ like network . Nevertheless , it is clear that the relationship between a physical entity such as light and a perceptual quality such as color is extraordinarily complex and indirect , as demonstrated by a variety of optical illusions such as neon color spreading . 
 In neuroscience , a great deal of effort has gone into investigating how the perceived world of conscious awareness is constructed inside the brain . The process is generally thought to involve two primary mechanisms : ( 1 ) hierarchical processing of sensory inputs , and ( 2 ) memory . Signals arising from sensory organs are transmitted to the brain and then processed in a series of stages , which extract multiple types of information from the raw input . In the visual system , for example , sensory signals from the eyes are transmitted to the thalamus and then to the primary visual cortex ; inside the cerebral cortex they are sent to areas that extract features such as three @-@ dimensional structure , shape , color , and motion . Memory comes into play in at least two ways . First , it allows sensory information to be evaluated in the context of previous experience . Second , and even more importantly , working memory allows information to be integrated over time so that it can generate a stable representation of the world — Gerald Edelman expressed this point vividly by titling one of his books about consciousness The Remembered Present . In computational neuroscience , Bayesian approaches to brain function have been used to understand both the evaluation of sensory information in light of previous experience , and the integration of information over time . Bayesian models of the brain are probabilistic inference models , in which the brain takes advantage of prior knowledge to interpret uncertain sensory inputs in order to formulate a conscious <unk> ; Bayesian models have successfully predicted many perceptual phenomena in vision and the <unk> senses . 
 Despite the large amount of information available , many important aspects of perception remain mysterious . A great deal is known about low @-@ level signal processing in sensory systems , but the ways by which sensory systems interact with each other , with " executive " systems in the frontal cortex , and with the language system are very incompletely understood . At a deeper level , there are still basic conceptual issues that remain unresolved . Many scientists have found it difficult to reconcile the fact that information is distributed across multiple brain areas with the apparent unity of consciousness : this is one aspect of the so @-@ called binding problem . There are also some scientists who have expressed grave reservations about the idea that the brain forms representations of the outside world at all : influential members of this group include psychologist J. J. Gibson and <unk> Rodney Brooks , who both argued in favor of " intelligence without representation " . 
 = = Medical aspects = = 
 The medical approach to consciousness is practically oriented . It derives from a need to treat people whose brain function has been impaired as a result of disease , brain damage , toxins , or drugs . In medicine , conceptual distinctions are considered useful to the degree that they can help to guide treatments . Whereas the philosophical approach to consciousness focuses on its fundamental nature and its contents , the medical approach focuses on the amount of consciousness a person has : in medicine , consciousness is assessed as a " level " ranging from coma and brain death at the low end , to full alertness and purposeful responsiveness at the high end . 
 Consciousness is of concern to patients and physicians , especially neurologists and anesthesiologists . Patients may suffer from disorders of consciousness , or may need to be anesthetized for a surgical procedure . Physicians may perform consciousness @-@ related interventions such as instructing the patient to sleep , administering general anesthesia , or inducing medical coma . Also , <unk> may be concerned with the ethical implications of consciousness in medical cases of patients such as Karen Ann Quinlan , while neuroscientists may study patients with impaired consciousness in hopes of gaining information about how the brain works . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 In medicine , consciousness is examined using a set of procedures known as neuropsychological assessment . There are two commonly used methods for assessing the level of consciousness of a patient : a simple procedure that requires minimal training , and a more complex procedure that requires substantial expertise . The simple procedure begins by asking whether the patient is able to move and react to physical stimuli . If so , the next question is whether the patient can respond in a meaningful way to questions and commands . If so , the patient is asked for name , current location , and current day and time . A patient who can answer all of these questions is said to be " alert and oriented times four " ( sometimes denoted " A & <unk> " on a medical chart ) , and is usually considered fully conscious . 
 The more complex procedure is known as a neurological examination , and is usually carried out by a neurologist in a hospital setting . A formal neurological examination runs through a precisely delineated series of tests , beginning with tests for basic sensorimotor reflexes , and culminating with tests for sophisticated use of language . The outcome may be summarized using the Glasgow Coma Scale , which yields a number in the range 3 — 15 , with a score of 3 indicating brain death ( the lowest defined level of consciousness ) , and 15 indicating full consciousness . The Glasgow Coma Scale has three subscales , measuring the best motor response ( ranging from " no motor response " to " obeys commands " ) , the best eye response ( ranging from " no eye opening " to " eyes opening spontaneously " ) and the best verbal response ( ranging from " no verbal response " to " fully oriented " ) . There is also a simpler pediatric version of the scale , for children too young to be able to use language . 
 In 2013 , an experimental procedure was developed to measure degrees of consciousness , the procedure involving stimulating the brain with a magnetic pulse , measuring resulting waves of electrical activity , and developing a consciousness score based on the complexity of the brain activity . 
 = = = Disorders of consciousness = = = 
 Medical conditions that inhibit consciousness are considered disorders of consciousness . This category generally includes minimally conscious state and persistent vegetative state , but sometimes also includes the less severe locked @-@ in syndrome and more severe chronic coma . Differential diagnosis of these disorders is an active area of biomedical research . Finally , brain death results in an irreversible disruption of consciousness . While other conditions may cause a moderate deterioration ( e.g. , dementia and delirium ) or transient interruption ( e.g. , grand mal and petit mal seizures ) of consciousness , they are not included in this category . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 One of the most striking disorders of consciousness goes by the name anosognosia , a Greek @-@ derived term meaning unawareness of disease . This is a condition in which patients are disabled in some way , most commonly as a result of a stroke , but either misunderstand the nature of the problem or deny that there is anything wrong with them . The most frequently occurring form is seen in people who have experienced a stroke damaging the parietal lobe in the right hemisphere of the brain , giving rise to a syndrome known as hemispatial neglect , characterized by an inability to direct action or attention toward objects located to the right with respect to their bodies . Patients with hemispatial neglect are often paralyzed on the right side of the body , but sometimes deny being unable to move . When questioned about the obvious problem , the patient may avoid giving a direct answer , or may give an explanation that doesn 't make sense . Patients with hemispatial neglect may also fail to recognize paralyzed parts of their bodies : one frequently mentioned case is of a man who repeatedly tried to throw his own paralyzed right leg out of the bed he was lying in , and when asked what he was doing , complained that somebody had put a dead leg into the bed with him . An even more striking type of anosognosia is Anton – Babinski syndrome , a rarely occurring condition in which patients become blind but claim to be able to see normally , and persist in this claim in spite of all evidence to the contrary . 
 = = Stream of consciousness = = 
 William James is usually credited with popularizing the idea that human consciousness flows like a stream , in his Principles of Psychology of 1890 . According to James , the " stream of thought " is governed by five characteristics : " ( 1 ) Every thought tends to be part of a personal consciousness . ( 2 ) Within each personal consciousness thought is always changing . ( 3 ) Within each personal consciousness thought is sensibly continuous . ( 4 ) It always appears to deal with objects independent of itself . ( 5 ) It is interested in some parts of these objects to the exclusion of others " . A similar concept appears in Buddhist philosophy , expressed by the Sanskrit term Citta @-@ <unk> , which is usually translated as mindstream or " mental continuum " . In the Buddhist view , though , the " mindstream " is viewed primarily as a source of noise that distracts attention from a changeless underlying reality . 
 = = = Narrative form = = = 
 In the west , the primary impact of the idea has been on literature rather than science : stream of consciousness as a narrative mode means writing in a way that attempts to portray the moment @-@ to @-@ moment thoughts and experiences of a character . This technique perhaps had its beginnings in the monologues of Shakespeare 's plays , and reached its fullest development in the novels of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf , although it has also been used by many other noted writers . 
 Here for example is a passage from Joyce 's Ulysses about the thoughts of Molly Bloom : 
 Yes because he never did a thing like that before as ask to get his breakfast in bed with a couple of eggs since the City Arms hotel when he used to be pretending to be laid up with a sick voice doing his highness to make himself interesting for that old faggot Mrs Riordan that he thought he had a great leg of and she never left us a farthing all for masses for herself and her soul greatest miser ever was actually afraid to lay out 4d for her methylated spirit telling me all her ailments she had too much old chat in her about politics and earthquakes and the end of the world let us have a bit of fun first God help the world if all the women were her sort down on <unk> and <unk> of course nobody wanted her to wear them I suppose she was pious because no man would look at her twice I hope Ill never be like her a wonder she <unk> want us to cover our faces but she was a <unk> woman certainly and her <unk> talk about Mr Riordan here and Mr Riordan there I suppose he was glad to get shut of her . 
 = = Spiritual approaches = = 
 To most philosophers , the word " consciousness " connotes the relationship between the mind and the world . To writers on spiritual or religious topics , it frequently connotes the relationship between the mind and God , or the relationship between the mind and deeper truths that are thought to be more fundamental than the physical world . Krishna consciousness , for example , is a term used to mean an intimate linkage between the mind of a worshipper and the god Krishna . The mystical psychiatrist Richard Maurice <unk> distinguished between three types of consciousness : Simple Consciousness , awareness of the body , possessed by many animals ; Self Consciousness , awareness of being aware , possessed only by humans ; and Cosmic Consciousness , awareness of the life and order of the universe , possessed only by humans who are enlightened . Many more examples could be given . The most thorough account of the spiritual approach may be Ken Wilber 's book The Spectrum of Consciousness , a comparison of western and eastern ways of thinking about the mind . Wilber described consciousness as a spectrum with ordinary awareness at one end , and more profound types of awareness at higher levels . 
 = Cyclone Dina = 
 Intense Tropical Cyclone Dina was a cyclone that caused record flooding across parts of Réunion . Originating from a tropical disturbance on 15 January 2002 near the Chagos Archipelago , the precursor to Dina quickly developed within a region favoring tropical cyclogenesis . By January 17 , the system had developed enough organized convection as it moved southwestward to be declared a tropical depression . Rapid intensification occurred shortly thereafter , with the system attaining winds in excess of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) on January 18 . Dina achieved its peak intensity on January 20 as an intense tropical cyclone winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . Hours after reaching hits strength , the storm bypassed Rodrigues Island about 150 km ( 93 mi ) to its north . On January 21 , the storm brushed Mauritius and Réunion as an intense tropical cyclone before turning southward . Once on a southward course , steady weakening ensued and the system eventually transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on January 25 . The remnants of the storm accelerated southeastward and were last noted on January 28 before being absorbed into a polar trough . 
 Across Mauritius and Réunion , torrential rains and destructive winds from the cyclone resulted in extensive to " catastrophic " damage . The entire island of Mauritius lost power during the storm and widespread structural damage took place . Agricultural and property damage amounted to US $ 47 million and US $ 50 million respectively in the republic . Nine fatalities were attribute to the storm in Mauritius : five off the coast of Rodrigues Island and four on the main island . More extensive damage was seen on Réunion where up to 2 @,@ 102 mm ( 82 @.@ 8 in ) of rain fell over three days . Record to near @-@ record flooding destroyed many homes , washed out roads , and caused catastrophic agricultural damage . Destructive winds , measured up to 280 km / h ( 170 mph ) also crippled communications . In all , six people died on the island and losses were estimated at € 200 million ( US $ 190 million ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On January 15 , a tropical disturbance began organizing near the Chagos Archipelago in the South Indian Ocean convergence zone , which is an extended area of convection connected to the monsoon . The thunderstorms gradually organized , associated with a weak circulation and located within an area of moderate wind shear . A distinct low pressure area developed on January 16 , about 750 km ( 470 mi ) east of Diego Garcia . The thunderstorms were primarily located along the western periphery due to continued shear , and ordinarily would prevent significant development . The system moved to the southwest along the north side of a ridge , and despite the shear it developed into a tropical disturbance late on January 16 . Subsequently , the system rapidly organized , developing rainbands as the convection increased . 
 At 0000 UTC on January 17 , Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression , and six hours later upgraded the system further to Tropical Storm Dina . Shortly thereafter , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , and later that day initiated advisories about 425 km ( 265 mi ) south of Diego Garcia . Dina quickly intensified , and its T @-@ numbers using the Dvorak technique increased by 0 @.@ 5 every six hours during the storm 's development phase . An eye began developing late on January 17 , and at 1200 UTC on January 18 , MFR upgraded Dina to a tropical cyclone , or the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . This was only 36 hours after it was first classified as a tropical disturbance , which is much less than the five days most tropical cyclones take . About three hours earlier , the JTWC had also upgraded the storm to tropical cyclone status . 
 The small eye of Dina , only 20 km ( 12 mi ) in diameter , quickly became well @-@ defined , although it became obscured by the central dense overcast on visible satellite imagery . On January 19 , the cyclone slowed as it turned to the west @-@ southwest , after the ridge to its south intensified . The intensification rate briefly slowed , before Dina rapidly intensified late on January 19 , becoming an intense tropical cyclone early the next day . Surrounded by an eyewall of deep convection , Dina intensified to reach its peak intensity on January 20 . Based on satellite intensity estimates between 235 and 259 km / h ( 146 and 161 mph ) , the JTWC estimated peak one @-@ minute sustained winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) , about 205 km ( 127 mi ) north @-@ northeast of Rodrigues Island . At around the same time , MFR estimated peak ten @-@ minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . While at its peak , Dina had a very symmetrical structure , and gusts were estimated to have reached 300 km / h ( 190 mph ) . 
 On January 20 while near peak intensity , Dina slowed its movement further and moved more toward the west . After previously being in the projected track of the cyclone , Rodrigues Island was bypassed by the cyclone passing about 150 km ( 93 mi ) to its north . After passing by the island , Dina underwent an eyewall replacement cycle , which resulted in an outer eyewall forming and replacing the previous , smaller one . This resulted in the cyclone weakening slightly , although it retained much of its intensity while tracking toward Mauritius and Réunion . Late on January 21 , Dina passed about 65 km ( 40 mi ) north of Cape <unk> in Mauritius , with 10 @-@ minute winds estimated at 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) ; however , the strongest winds remained offshore . At the time , the storm 's eye became asymmetric with a diameter of 85 km ( 53 mi ) . Late the next day , Dina also passed about 65 km ( 40 mi ) off the north coast of Réunion , and although the island was in the forecast track , the cyclone accelerated to the west in the final hours and spared the island from the strongest winds . This abrupt shift in tract took place as the cyclone interacted with the high terrain of Réunion . Additionally , Doppler weather radar showed the highest reflectivity values to be 40 to 60 km ( 25 to 37 mi ) from the center . On January 23 , Dina weakened below intense tropical cyclone status while it accelerated to the southwest ; the change in movement was due to the ridge moving further to the southeast . Increased wind shear due to an approaching trough contributed to the weakening , and by late on January 23 the eye dissipated . The next day , Dina weakened into a tropical storm , after the convection diminished around the center . Late on January 24 , the JTWC discontinued advisories , and about 24 hours later , MFR classified Dina as an extratropical cyclone . The system accelerated to the southeast and was absorbed by a polar trough on January 28 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Mauritius = = = 
 Less than a day prior to Cyclone Dina 's arrival in Mauritius , officials in the nation closed schools , government offices , businesses , and ports . A state of alert was issued for the entire country , meaning that those at greatest risk should seek shelter . All flights to and from the nation were canceled " until further notice . " Across the island , 259 people sought refuge in shelters . According to NASA , there was potential for a 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) storm surge as the cyclone moved over the region . 
 The first island to be affected by the storm was Rodrigues . There gusts reached 122 km / h ( 76 mph ) . Rainfall was light on the island , reaching 94 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) at Roche Bon Dieu . The cyclone killed five fishermen offshore Rodrigues . Numerous areas across Mauritius recorded hurricane @-@ force winds . On the republic 's main island , gusts reached 230 km / h ( 140 mph ) at Le Morne Brabant . A station near the capital city of Port Louis reported a gust of 206 km / h ( 128 mph ) . Torrential rainfall affected much of Mauritius during Dina 's passage , with a maximum of 745 @.@ 2 mm ( 29 @.@ 34 in ) falling in Pierrefonds . This was more than the average monthly rainfall , and most of the precipitation fell in about 24 hours . A barometric pressure of 935 @.@ 9 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 64 inHg ) was recorded in Vacoas @-@ Phoenix . Flooding and mudslides greatly disrupted the public water system , with most people losing running water . 
 Power and communications across Rodrigues and the island of Mauritius were crippled by the storm , with the entirety of the former and 90 percent of the latter losing electricity . For approximately ten hours , the country was cut off from the outside world , with all communications disrupted . About 50 @,@ 000 of the nation 's 280 @,@ 000 telecommunication lines sustained serious damage , resulting in prolonged power outages . Repair crews estimated that it would take until January 27 , nearly a week after the storm 's passage , for power to be fully restored . Widespread areas also lost water on Mauritius . Schools across the region sustained significant damage and as a precautionary measure , all classes were canceled until January 29 . Agriculture sustained considerable losses as a result of the storm . Approximately 15 metric tons of flour and 20 metric tons of rice were damaged and preliminary estimates for sugarcane losses across the island reached US $ 47 million . Property damage from the storm amounted to US $ 50 million , and there were four deaths on the island ; three were caused by traffic accidents , and the other was a man who died while making storm preparations . 
 In the wake of the storm , a special mobile force was dispatched by officials to assist in relief operations . Red Cross distribution centers were set up on Mauritius and served food and clothing to more than 500 by January 25 . Despite the severity of damage , government officials declined to appeal for international aid . Although no requests for aid were made , the Government of Norway provided US $ 10 @,@ 000 worth of funds to the nation . Owing to the effects of Cyclone Dina and several other meteorological factors , the economy of Mauritius suffered significantly in 2002 as a whole . Annual growth dropped to about 1 @.@ 9 percent from approximately 5 percent in 2001 . The sugarcane industry suffered greatly from the storm , experiencing a 19 @.@ 3 percent decrease . 
 = = = Réunion = = = 
 Due to the storm 's close passage to the island , much of Réunion experienced hurricane @-@ force winds . The strongest observed gust was 280 km / h ( 170 mph ) on <unk> ; however , based on the destruction of Meteo @-@ France 's Doppler weather radar , winds could have exceeded 300 km / h ( 190 mph ) . Plaine des Cafres reported gusts of over 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) for at least 15 hours . These winds caused extensive damage , crippling communications , devastating infrastructure , and left more than 160 @,@ 000 families , about 70 percent of the island 's population , without power . Some areas were without power for nine days . Additionally , about 25 percent of the island was left without running water . Damaged transmitters interrupted radio and television broadcasts for several days . In Saint @-@ Denis , two people were seriously injured after a wall collapsed on them . Although winds were strong , the majority of damage was limited to broken windows , removed sheet metal , broken gutters , and removed siding . The most severe damage took place in exposed areas at higher elevations or where tunneling of the wind occurred . 
 Heavy rains produced by Dina triggered flash flooding and many landslides , further crippling travel and forcing at least 2 @,@ 500 people to seek refuge in public shelters . Some areas recorded more than 400 mm ( 16 in ) in a 24 ‑ hour span , notably the Bellecombe resting place ( a volcano lodge ) which measured 953 mm ( 37 @.@ 5 in ) in 24 hours as well as a two @-@ day total of 1 @,@ 360 mm ( 54 in ) . The heaviest rainfall was measured in La Plaine des <unk> at 2 @,@ 102 mm ( 82 @.@ 8 in ) . With the ground already saturated from previous rain events , the torrential rains caused numerous rivers across the island to burst their banks . The Ravine des <unk> reached an all @-@ time record flood while three other rivers reached their second @-@ highest levels , behind the flood event caused by Cyclone Firinga in 1989 . Heavy rains occurred in the typically dry western portion of the island , which resulted in significant flooding . Many ecosystems suffered from these floods with water quality greatly degraded and flow disrupted . However , in post @-@ storm surveys in July 2002 , it was found that the impact was not catastrophic and the ecosystems would eventually recover . Significant runoff also prompted fears of algae blooms that would damage coral reefs . Numerous roads were damaged or washed out by the floods , leaving approximately € 42 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 37 @.@ 6 million ) in losses . In <unk> village within the Saint @-@ Joseph department , 35 families were forced to evacuate . Many landslides took place in addition to flooding , further hampering travel and isolating hundreds of residents . 
 Catastrophic agricultural damage occurred across the island , with losses reaching an estimated € 76 million ( US $ 66 @.@ 7 million ) . The entire fruit and vegetable crop was lost during the storm while the vanilla and geranium crops sustained heavy damage . Additionally , about 15 – 20 percent of the sugarcane crop was destroyed . Horticulture sustained about 50 percent losses ; however , much of this resulted from lost work hours . Poultry farms suffered about 70 percent losses , from lost animals and destroyed buildings . Along the coast , large waves measured up to 12 @.@ 47 m ( 40 @.@ 9 ft ) caused moderate damage . Additionally , an estimated storm surge of 6 to 9 m ( 20 to 30 ft ) impacted the island . Some buildings were flooded , roads washed out , and other roads were left covered in debris . 
 In all , about 15 @,@ 000 damage claims were filed across Réunion , with a total of 3 @,@ 251 homes damaged and about 850 condemned or destroyed . Property damage from the storm amounted to € 95 million ( US $ 83 @.@ 4 million ) . Collectively , losses on the island were estimated at € 200 million ( US $ 190 million ) . Although there were no fatalities directly related to the storm , six people died in various events indirectly caused by Dina . 
 In the wake of Cyclone Dina 's devastation on January 23 , then French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin ordered a relief team of 200 personnel to be dispatched to the island . He also expressed " deep personal sympathy " to the residents of Réunion . The following day , the Catholic Relief Services released immediate funds of € 16 @,@ 000 ( US $ 14 @,@ 000 ) . An estimated 50 @,@ 000 tonnes of debris was cleaned up across the island , the majority of which was in the Northwest Department , and cost waste management crews approximately € 4 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 4 million ) to process . Initially , the national disaster program was slow to react , with funding first being available on February 5 . The first payments were made starting a month later . In the five months following the storm , the Government of France provided about € 10 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 12 million ) in aid to farmers , accounting for an overestimation of about 20 percent in needs . Based on meteorological statistics regarding wind speed and rainfall , Cyclone Dina was regarded as a 1 @-@ in @-@ 30 – 50 year event in Réunion . 
 = Royal Albion Hotel = 
 The Royal Albion Hotel ( originally the Albion Hotel ) is a 3 @-@ star hotel in the seaside resort of Brighton , part of the English city of Brighton and Hove . Built on the site of a house belonging to Richard Russell , a local doctor whose advocacy of sea @-@ bathing and seawater drinking helped to make Brighton fashionable in the 18th century , it has been extended several times , although it experienced a period of rundown and closure in the early 20th century . A fire in 1998 caused serious damage , but the hotel was restored . 
 The Classical @-@ style building is in three parts of different sizes and dates but similar appearances . Large pilasters and columns of various orders feature prominently . Amon Henry Wilds , an important and prolific local architect , took the original commission on behalf of promoter John Colbatch . Another local entrepreneur , Harry Preston , restored the hotel to its former high status after buying it in poor condition . The building took on its present three @-@ wing form in 1963 . The original part of the building was listed at Grade II * by English Heritage for its architectural and historical importance , and its western extension is listed separately at the lower Grade II . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The site itself is connected with the life and career of Richard Russell , a doctor who advocated sea water as a cure of ailments . After Russell 's death in 1759 , Old Steine developed as the centre of fashionable life in Brighton . Russell House , as it became known , was used as lodgings for visitors such as the Duke of Cumberland , and later became an entertainment venue with activities such as a puppet theatre , a camera obscura and resident jugglers . 
