 In the 1820s , it passed to entrepreneur John Colbatch , who demolished it in 1823 . The local authorities tried to arrange for the land to be kept as open space , but negotiations collapsed and Colbatch began planning the construction of a hotel . 
 = = = Construction , success , disrepair = = = 
 Colbatch commissioned young architect Amon Henry Wilds , who began planning the hotel in 1822 . Wilds , the son of Amon Wilds and an associate of Charles Busby , had been responsible for many building schemes in Brighton from about 1815 , when he and his father moved their architectural practice to Brighton . Schemes already completed by 1822 included King 's Road and Brighton Unitarian Church . The hotel was built on a corner site at the point where Old Steine met King 's Road , and like Russell House the main façade faced away from the sea , towards Old Steine . The four @-@ storey structure opened on 5 August 1826 . 
 The venture was immediately successful , and a stylistically similar five @-@ storey extension was added to the west in about 1847 . At the same time , the name was changed from the Albion Hotel . Six years earlier , one of Brighton 's most important cultural establishments was established in a ground @-@ floor room : the Albion Rooms Literary and Scientific Institution combined the functions of library , lecture theatre and museum . The venture eventually became unsustainable , and the institution 's members presented the accumulated books , artefacts and pictures to Brighton Corporation , the local authority . This led to the establishment of the Brighton Museum and Art Gallery and Brighton Library in the grounds of the Royal Pavilion . 
 The hotel fell into disrepair in the late 19th century , and was closed in 1900 . Harry Preston , owner of the nearby Royal York Hotel , bought it in 1913 for £ 13 @,@ 500 ( £ 1 @,@ 198 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , and quickly restored its fashionable reputation . The building was completely refurbished , additions were made , and well @-@ known literary figures , artists and entertainers regularly stayed . The extensions carried out around this time , in the Edwardian style typical of the period , included a sea @-@ facing lounge at the rear of the hotel , and were carried out by Brighton architectural firm Clayton & Black . Started in the 1870s by Charles Clayton and Ernest Black and continued by their sons , this firm was one of Brighton 's most prolific designers of public buildings and churches over the next 60 years . 
 In 1856 , another hotel had been built west of the Royal Albion on land previously occupied by Williams 's Royal Hot and Cold Baths , an indoor bath @-@ house . The Lion Mansion Hotel was architecturally similar to the Royal Albion , and rose to four storeys . It was later known as the Adelphi Hotel . In 1963 , it was taken over by the Royal Albion , and became physically linked to it as a west wing . 
 = = = Fire = = = 
 On the morning of 24 November 1998 , the hotel was devastated by a fire which started in the kitchen . A chef was frying eggs and sausages in a pan ; hot fat spilt and caught light , and flames were immediately sucked up a vent to the top floor . The fire spread quickly , assisted by strong winds , and all 160 people in the building were evacuated . The Public and Commercial Services Union had to cancel their annual conference , due to be held that day , because of the disruption caused to its delegates , most of whom were staying at the hotel . About 160 firefighters from all parts of East and West Sussex attended the fire from about <unk> until late in the evening , in what was later described as Brighton 's " biggest firefighting operation for nearly 30 years " . All parts of the hotel were affected by smoke , water and structural damage , but the original corner building was particularly badly affected . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 In its present form , the Royal Albion Hotel is in three linked sections , all stylistically similar . The original ( eastern ) wing is four storeys tall and has five extremely large Corinthian and Composite columns on the north face . These are flanked on both sides by large pilasters , which also run all round the east face . The top floor is an attic storey displaying Wilds 's characteristic motif : shell designs set in blank rounded tympana . Above this is a mansard roof , now mostly obscured . The centre section , dating from about 1847 , has three full storeys and two attic floors above , and is therefore taller . The façade has three bays . The theme of large pilasters and columns continues , but different styles are used : the left and right bays project slightly and have paired Tuscan pilasters , and a pair of tapering Ionic columns in the centre bay form a <unk> in <unk> composition . The centre section also has a mansard roof — apparently a later addition . The western wing ( the former Lion Mansions ) has a Tuscan @-@ columned porch on the south ( seafront ) side and a Doric @-@ style equivalent facing north to Old Steine , four Composite pilasters extending for three of the four storeys , small cast @-@ iron balconies and some <unk> @-@ style window surrounds . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The Royal Albion Hotel was listed at Grade II * on 13 October 1952 . Such buildings are defined as being " particularly important ... [ and ] of more than special interest " . In February 2001 , it was one of 70 Grade II * -listed buildings and structures , and 1 @,@ 218 listed buildings of all grades , in the city of Brighton and Hove . The west wing ( the former Lion Mansions ) was listed at Grade II on 5 August 1999 . In February 2001 , it was one of 1 @,@ 124 buildings listed at that grade in Brighton and Hove ; the status indicates that the building is considered " nationally important and of special interest " . 
 The hotel is operated by Britannia Hotels . There are 208 guest rooms , one restaurant , two bars and five rooms for conferences and meetings . Bedrooms are classified in four grades , from standard to deluxe . It has a 3 @-@ star rating . 
 = Lazarus Aaronson = 
 Lazarus Leonard Aaronson ( 18 February 1895 – 9 December 1966 ) , often published as L. Aaronson , was a British poet and a lecturer in economics . As a young man , he belonged to a group of Jewish friends who are today known as the Whitechapel Boys , many who later achieved fame as writers and artists . 
 In his twenties , Aaronson converted to Christianity and a large part of his poetry focused on his conversion and spiritual identity as a Jew and an Englishman . In total , he published three collections of poetry : Christ in the Synagogue ( 1930 ) , Poems ( 1933 ) , and The Homeward Journey and Other Poems ( 1946 ) . Although he never achieved widespread recognition , Aaronson gained a cult following of dedicated readers . 
 Though less radical in his use of language , he has been compared to his more renowned Whitechapel friend , Isaac Rosenberg , in terms of diction and verbal energy . Aaronson 's poetry is characterised as more post @-@ Georgian than modernistic , and reviewers have traced influences from both the English poet John Keats , and Hebrew poets such as Shaul <unk> and Zalman <unk> in his writings . 
 Aaronson lived most of his life in London and spent much of his working life as a lecturer in economics at the City of London College . Upon retiring , he moved to Harpenden , Hertfordshire , where he died from heart failure and coronary heart disease on 9 December 1966 . His poetry was not widely publicised , and he left many unpublished poems at his death . 
 = = Life = = 
 Aaronson was born on 18 February 1895 at 34 Great Pearl Street , Spitalfields in the East End of London to impoverished Orthodox Jewish parents who had immigrated from Vilna in the Pale of Settlement in Eastern Europe . His father was Louis Aaronson , a master <unk> , and his mother was Sarah Aaronson , née Kowalski . The young Aaronson attended Whitechapel City Boys ' School and later received a scholarship to attend Hackney Downs grammar school . 
 His father emigrated to New York in 1905 , and in 1912 , the rest of his family followed except for 17 @-@ year old Lazarus who remained in London . From then on , he lived with the family of Joseph <unk> at 292 Commercial Road in the East End of London . At the time , the area was a hub of the Jewish diaspora and at the turn of the 20th century , a quarter of its population were Jews from Central and Eastern Europe . Growing up in the East End , Aaronson was part of a group of friends who are today referred to as the Whitechapel Boys , all of whom were children of Jewish immigrants and shared literary and artistic ambitions . Others in the group who , like Aaronson , later achieved distinction included John Rodker , Isaac Rosenberg , Joseph Leftwich , Samuel Winsten , Clara Birnberg , David Bomberg , and the brothers Abraham and Joseph Fineberg . Aaronson was also involved in the Young Socialist League , where he and other Whitechapel Boys helped organise educational meetings on modern art and radical politics . Aaronson remained a committed socialist throughout adulthood . 
 Having been diagnosed with tuberculosis and diabetes , Aaronson did not serve in the military during the First World War . Between 1913 and 1915 , and again between 1926 and 1928 , he studied economics at the London School of Economics , but never completed his degree . 
 Aaronson was married three times . His first wife was the actress Lydia Sherwood , ( 1906 – 1989 ) whom he was married to between 1924 and 1931 . He filed for divorce on grounds of her adultery with the theatre producer Theodore Komisarjevsky , and the suit was undefended . His second marriage , which took place on 9 July 1938 , to Dorothy Beatrice <unk> ( 1915 – 2005 ) , also ended in divorce . On 14 January 1950 , Aaronson married Margaret Olive <unk> ( 1920 – 1981 ) , with whom he had one son , David , who was born in 1953 . 
 To friends and family , Lazarus Aaronson was known as Laz . He was friends with novelist Stephen Hudson , sculptor Jacob Epstein , media mogul Sidney Bernstein , artists Mark Gertler and Matthew Smith and poets Harold Monro and Samuel Beckett . 
 Around 1934 , he began working as a lecturer in economics at the City of London College . Upon his retirement from the university in 1958 , Aaronson was made a Member of the Order of the British Empire in the 1959 New Year Honours , in recognition of his more than twenty @-@ five years of service . He then moved with his family from London to Harpenden , Hertfordshire , where he later died from heart failure and coronary heart disease on 9 December 1966 , at the age of 71 . He was buried in the Westfield Road Cemetery in Harpenden . 
 = = Poetry = = 
 Aaronson had literary ambitions from an early age and by 1914 , he was a contributing writer for the influential left @-@ leaning weekly The New Age . He was often published under the name L. Aaronson . In the 1920s , he converted to Christianity . His first collection of poems , Christ in the Synagogue , published by V. Gollancz in 1930 , dealt to a large extent with his conversion and spiritual identity as both a Jew and an Englishman . This subject would become a recurring theme in his numerous mystical poems . Christ in the Synagogue reached only a small audience and received less than a dozen reviews , but The Manchester Guardian , The Nation and Athenaeum , The Times Literary Supplement , and The New Age wrote favourably of it . 
 Notwithstanding Aaronson 's small readership , V. Gollancz published a second verse collection in 1933 , titled Poems . Despite being little known to the general public , Aaronson gained a cult following of dedicated readers . His third collection , The Homeward Journey and Other Poems , was published by Christophers in 1946 . Some of his works also appeared in journals and anthologies such as the 1953 Faber Book of Twentieth Century Verse . 
 Since Aaronson 's poetry does not display formal innovation , literature professor William Baker , characterises him as " A post @-@ Georgian rather than a modernist [ poet ] " . Baker further notes that Aaronson 's poetry deals with several issues of his time , such as the rise of fascism and the Second World War , but points out that Aaronson did not directly write about the Holocaust . Upon Aaronson 's death , the poet Arthur Chaim Jacobs , compared him with Isaac Rosenberg , the more celebrated poet of the same Anglo @-@ Jewish generation . According to Jacobs , Aaronson was " clearly influenced by him in terms of diction , and in a kind of verbal energy which runs through a lot of his poetry . But he was less radical than Rosenberg in his use of language , and tended towards Keatsian luxuriance and sweetness . " Although much of Aaronson 's writings centred on his conversion to Christianity , Jacobs traces a continuing Hebraic mood in his poetry , writing that " His Christianity was hardly familiarly Anglican , and there is in his work an avowed sensuality which could in some ways be compared to that of modern Hebrew poets like <unk> or <unk> , or later , Avraham <unk> . " 
 Aaronson 's poetry was not widely publicised , and he left many unpublished poems at his death . Little scholarly attention has been paid to his life and poetry . In 1967 , Jacobs stated that " Further assessment of his work awaits more substantial publication " and about 40 years later Baker , who has written most extensively on Aaronson , named him among the Whitechapel intellectual writers and artists " today consigned to oblivion " . 
 = Benjamin Harrison = 
 Benjamin Harrison ( August 20 , 1833 – March 13 , 1901 ) was the 23rd President of the United States ( 1889 – 93 ) ; he was the grandson of the ninth president , William Henry Harrison . Before ascending to the presidency , Harrison established himself as a prominent local attorney , Presbyterian church leader and politician in Indianapolis , Indiana . During the American Civil War , he served the Union as a colonel and on February 14 , 1865 was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a brevet brigadier general of volunteers to rank from January 23 , 1865 . After the war , he unsuccessfully ran for the governorship of Indiana . He was later elected to the U.S. Senate by the Indiana legislature . 
 A Republican , Harrison was elected to the presidency in 1888 , defeating the Democratic incumbent Grover Cleveland . Hallmarks of his administration included unprecedented economic legislation , including the McKinley Tariff , which imposed historic protective trade rates , and the Sherman Antitrust Act ; Harrison facilitated the creation of the National Forests through an amendment to the Land Revision Act of 1891 . He also substantially strengthened and modernized the Navy , and conducted an active foreign policy . He proposed , in vain , federal education funding as well as voting rights enforcement for African Americans during his administration . 
 Due in large part to surplus revenues from the tariffs , federal spending reached one billion dollars for the first time during his term . The spending issue in part led to the defeat of the Republicans in the 1890 mid @-@ term elections . Harrison was defeated by Cleveland in his bid for re @-@ election in 1892 , due to the growing unpopularity of the high tariff and high federal spending . He then returned to private life in Indianapolis but later represented the Republic of Venezuela in an international case against the United Kingdom . In 1900 , he traveled to Europe as part of the case and , after a brief stay , returned to Indianapolis . He died the following year of complications from influenza . Although many have praised Harrison 's commitment to African Americans ' voting rights , scholars and historians generally regard his administration as below @-@ average , and rank him in the bottom half among U.S. presidents . Historians , however , have not questioned Harrison 's commitment to personal and official integrity . 
 = = Family and education = = 
 Harrison 's paternal ancestors were the Virginia Harrisons . Their immigrant ancestor was Benjamin Harrison , who arrived in Jamestown , Virginia , in 1630 . The future president Benjamin was born on August 20 , 1833 , in North Bend , Ohio , as the second of eight children to John Scott Harrison and Elizabeth Ramsey ( Irwin ) . Benjamin was a grandson of President William Henry Harrison and the great @-@ grandson of Benjamin Harrison V , a Virginia governor and signer of the Declaration of Independence . Harrison was seven years old when his grandfather was elected President , but he did not attend the inauguration . Although Harrison 's family was distinguished , his parents were not wealthy . John Scott Harrison spent much of his farm income on his children 's education . Despite the family 's meager resources , Harrison 's boyhood was enjoyable , much of it spent outdoors fishing or hunting . 
 Benjamin Harrison 's early schooling took place in a one @-@ room schoolhouse near his home , but his parents later arranged for a tutor to help him with college preparatory studies . Harrison and his brother Irwin enrolled in Farmer 's College near Cincinnati , Ohio in 1847 . He attended the college for two years and while there met his future wife , Caroline Lavinia Scott , one of the daughters of the science professor , John Witherspoon Scott . 
 In 1850 , Harrison transferred to Miami University in Oxford , Ohio and graduated in 1852 . He joined the fraternity Phi Delta Theta , which he used as a network for much of his life . He was also a member of Delta Chi , a law fraternity which permitted dual membership . Classmates included John Alexander Anderson , who became a six @-@ term congressman , and Whitelaw Reid who ran as Harrison 's vice presidential candidate in his presidential reelection campaign . At Miami , Harrison was strongly influenced by history and political economy professor Robert Hamilton Bishop . Harrison joined a Presbyterian church at college and , like his mother , became a lifelong member . 
 After completing college , Harrison took up the study of law as a legal apprentice in the Cincinnati law office of Storer & Gwynne . 
 = = Marriage and early career = = 
 Before completing his law studies , Harrison returned to Oxford to marry Caroline Scott . On October 20 , 1853 , Caroline 's father , also a Presbyterian minister , performed the ceremony . 
 The Harrisons had two children , Russell Benjamin Harrison ( August 12 , 1854 – December 13 , 1936 ) , and Mary " Mamie " Scott Harrison ( April 3 , 1858 – October 28 , 1930 ) . 
 Harrison returned to live on his father 's farm while finishing his law studies . That same year , he inherited $ 800 after the death of an aunt , and used the funds to move with Caroline to Indianapolis , Indiana , in 1854 . He was admitted to the bar and began practicing law in the office of John H. Ray . The same year he became a crier for the Federal Court in Indianapolis , for which he was paid $ 2 @.@ 50 per day . Harrison became a founding member and first president of both the University Club , a private gentlemen 's club and the Phi Delta Theta Alumni Club . Harrison and his wife joined and assumed leadership positions at the First Presbyterian Church . 
 Having grown up in a Whig household , he favored that party 's politics while young . He joined the Republican Party shortly after its formation in 1856 , and that year campaigned on behalf of the Republican presidential candidate John C. Frémont . Harrison was elected as the Indianapolis City Attorney that year , a position that paid an annual salary of $ 400 . 
 In 1858 , Harrison entered into a law partnership with William Wallace and they opened their office called Wallace & Harrison . Two years later , Harrison successfully ran as the Republican candidate for reporter of the Indiana Supreme Court . He was an active supporter of his party 's platform , and served as Republican State Committee Secretary . His law partner Wallace was elected as county clerk in 1860 ; Harrison established a new firm with William Fishback , named Fishback & Harrison . They worked together until he entered the Army after the start of the American Civil War . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 In 1862 , President Abraham Lincoln issued a call for more recruits for the Union Army ; Harrison wanted to enlist , but worried about how to support his young family . While visiting Governor Oliver Morton , Harrison found him distressed over the shortage of men answering the latest call . Harrison told the governor , " If I can be of any service , I will go " . 
 Morton asked Harrison if he could help recruit a regiment , although he would not ask him to serve . Harrison recruited throughout northern Indiana to raise a regiment . Morton offered him the command , but Harrison declined , as he had no military experience . He was initially commissioned as a captain and company commander on July 22 , 1862 . Governor Morton commissioned Harrison as a colonel on August 7 , 1862 , and the newly formed 70th Indiana was mustered into Federal service on August 12 , 1862 . Once mustered , the regiment left Indiana to join the Union Army at Louisville , Kentucky . 
 For much of its first two years , the 70th Indiana performed reconnaissance duty and guarded railroads in Kentucky and Tennessee . In 1864 , Harrison and his regiment joined William T. Sherman 's Atlanta Campaign and moved to the front lines . On January 2 , 1864 , Harrison was promoted to command the 1st Brigade of the 1st Division of the XX Corps . He commanded the brigade at the battles of Resaca , <unk> , New Hope Church , Lost Mountain , Kennesaw Mountain , Marietta , Peachtree Creek and Atlanta . When Sherman 's main force began its March to the Sea , Harrison 's brigade was transferred to the District of <unk> and participated in the Battle of Nashville . 
 On January 23 , 1865 , President Lincoln nominated Harrison to the grade of brevet brigadier general of volunteers , to rank from that date , and the Senate confirmed the nomination on February 14 , 1865 . He rode in the Grand Review in Washington , D.C. before mustering out on June 8 , 1865 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = Indiana politics = = = 
 While serving in the army in October 1864 , Harrison was reelected reporter of the Supreme Court of Indiana and served four more years . Although not politically powerful , the position provided Harrison a steady income . President Grant appointed him to represent the federal government in a civil claim brought by <unk> P. Milligan , whose wartime conviction for treason had been reversed by the Supreme Court . Due to Harrison 's advocacy , the damages awarded against the government were minimal . 
 With his increasing reputation , local Republicans urged Harrison to run for Congress . He initially confined his political activities to speaking on behalf of other Republican candidates , a task for which he received high praises from his colleagues . 
 In 1872 , Harrison campaigned for the Republican nomination for governor of Indiana . Former governor Oliver Morton favored his opponent , Thomas M. Browne , and Harrison lost his bid for statewide office . He returned to his law practice and , despite the Panic of 1873 , he was financially successful enough to build a grand new home in Indianapolis in 1874 . He continued to make speeches on behalf of Republican candidates and policies . 
 In 1876 , the original Republican nominee for governor dropped out of the race and Harrison accepted the Republicans ' invitation to take his place on the ticket . He centered his campaign on economic policy and favored deflating the national currency . He was ultimately defeated in a plurality by James D. Williams , losing by 5 @,@ 084 votes out of a total 434 @,@ 457 cast . Following his defeat , Harrison was able to build on his new prominence in the state . When the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 reached Indianapolis , he helped to mediate between the workers and management and to preserve public order . 
 When United States Senator Morton died in 1878 , the Republicans nominated Harrison to run for the seat , but the party failed to gain a majority in the state legislature , which at that time elected senators ; the Democratic majority elected Daniel W. Voorhees instead . In 1879 President Hayes appointed Harrison to the Mississippi River Commission , which worked to develop internal improvements on the river . As a delegate to the 1880 Republican National Convention the following year , he was instrumental in breaking a deadlock on candidates , and James A. Garfield won the nomination . 
 = = = United States Senator = = = 
 After Harrison led the Republican delegation at the National Convention , he was considered a presumptive Senate candidate . He gave speeches in favor of Garfield in Indiana and New York , further raising his profile in the party . When the Republicans retook the state legislature , Harrison 's election to the Senate was threatened by his intra @-@ party rival Judge Walter Q. Gresham , but Harrison was ultimately chosen . After Garfield 's election as president in 1880 , his administration offered Harrison a cabinet position which he declined in favor of continued service as senator . 
 Harrison served in the Senate from March 4 , 1881 , to March 4 , 1887 and chaired the U.S. Senate Committee on Transportation Routes to the Seaboard ( 47th Congress ) and the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories ( 48th and 49th Congresses ) . 
 In 1881 , the major issue confronting Senator Harrison was the budget surplus . Democrats wished to reduce the tariff and limit the amount of money the government took in ; Republicans instead wished to spend the money on internal improvements and pensions for Civil War veterans . Harrison took his party 's side and advocated for generous pensions for veterans and their widows . He also supported , unsuccessfully , aid for education of Southerners , especially the children of the freedmen ; he believed that education was necessary to help the black population rise to political and economic equality with whites . Harrison opposed the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 , which his party supported , as he thought it violated existing treaties with China . 
 In 1884 , Harrison and Gresham competed for influence at the 1884 Republican National Convention . ; the delegation ended up supporting James G. Blaine , the eventual nominee . In the Senate , Harrison achieved passage of his Dependent Pension Bill , only to see it vetoed by President Grover Cleveland . His efforts to further the admission of new western states were stymied by Democrats , who feared that the new states would elect Republicans to Congress . 
 In 1885 , the Democrats redistricted the Indiana state legislature , which resulted in an increased Democratic majority in 1886 , despite an overall Republican majority statewide . Harrison was thereby defeated in his bid for reelection ; this resulted after a deadlock in the state senate , with the legislature eventually choosing Democrat David <unk> . Harrison then returned to Indianapolis and his law practice , but stayed active in state and national politics . 
 = = Election of 1888 = = 
 = = = Nomination = = = 
 The initial favorite for the Republican nomination was the previous nominee , James G. Blaine of Maine . After Blaine wrote several letters denying any interest in the nomination , his supporters divided among other candidates , with John Sherman of Ohio as the leader among them . Others , including Chauncey Depew of New York , Russell Alger of Michigan , and Harrison 's old nemesis Walter Q. Gresham , now a federal appellate court judge in Chicago , also sought the delegates ' support at the 1888 Republican National Convention . Blaine did not publicly endorse any of the candidates as a successor ; however , on March 1 , 1888 he privately wrote that " the one man remaining who in my judgment can make the best one is Benjamin Harrison . " 
 Harrison placed fourth on the first ballot , with Sherman in the lead , and the next few ballots showed little change . The Blaine supporters shifted their support among candidates they found acceptable , and when they shifted to Harrison , they found a candidate who could attract the votes of many other delegations . He was nominated as the party 's presidential candidate on the eighth ballot , by a count of 544 to 108 votes . Levi P. Morton of New York was chosen as his running mate . 
 = = = Election over Cleveland = = = 
 Harrison 's opponent in the general election was incumbent President Grover Cleveland . He reprised a more traditional front @-@ porch campaign , abandoned by his immediate predecessors ; he received visiting delegations to Indianapolis and made ninety plus pronouncements from his home town . The Republicans campaigned heavily in favor of protective tariffs , turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North . The election focused on the swing states of New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , and Harrison 's home state of Indiana . Harrison and Cleveland split these four states , with Harrison winning in New York and Indiana . Voter turnout was 79 @.@ 3 % , reflecting a large interest in the campaign ; nearly eleven million votes were cast . Although Harrison received 90 @,@ 000 fewer popular votes than Cleveland , he carried the Electoral College 233 to 168 . Allegations were made against Republicans for engaging in irregular ballot practices ; an example was described as Blocks of Five . On October 31 the Indiana Sentinel published a letter allegedly written by Harrison 's friend and supporter , William Wade Dudley , to bribe voters in " blocks of five " to ensure Harrison 's election . Harrison neither defended nor repudiated Dudley , but allowed him to remain on the campaign for the remaining few days . After the election Harrison never spoke to Dudley again . 
 Although he had made no political bargains , his supporters had given many pledges upon his behalf . When Boss Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania , who rebuffed for a Cabinet position for his political support during the convention , heard that Harrison ascribed his narrow victory to Providence , Quay exclaimed that Harrison would never know " how close a number of men were compelled to approach ... the penitentiary to make him President . " Harrison was known as the Centennial President because his inauguration celebrated the centenary of the first inauguration of George Washington in 1789 . In congressional elections , the Republicans increased their membership in the House of Representatives by nineteen seats . 
 = = Presidency 1889 – 1893 = = 
 = = = Inauguration and cabinet = = = 
 Harrison was sworn into office on Monday , March 4 , 1889 by Chief Justice Melville Fuller . At 5 ' 6 " tall , he was only slightly taller than Madison , the shortest president , but much heavier ; he was the fourth ( and last ) president to sport a full beard Harrison 's Inauguration ceremony took place during a rainstorm in Washington D.C .. Outgoing U.S. President Grover Cleveland attended the ceremony and held an umbrella over Harrison 's head as he took the oath of office . 
 His speech was brief – half as long as that of his grandfather , William Henry Harrison , whose speech holds the record for the longest inaugural address of a U.S. president . In his speech , Benjamin Harrison credited the nation 's growth to the influences of education and religion , urged the cotton states and mining territories to attain the industrial proportions of the eastern states and promised a protective tariff . Concerning commerce , he said , " If our great corporations would more scrupulously observe their legal obligations and duties , they would have less call to complain of the limitations of their rights or of interference with their operations . " Harrison also urged early statehood for the territories and advocated pensions for veterans , a statement that was met with enthusiastic applause . In foreign affairs , Harrison reaffirmed the Monroe Doctrine as a mainstay of foreign policy , while urging modernization of the Navy and a merchant marine force . He gave his commitment to international peace through noninterference in the affairs of foreign governments . 
 John Philip Sousa 's Marine Corps band played at the Inaugural Ball inside the Pension Building with a large crowd attending . After moving into the White House , Harrison noted , quite prophetically , " There is only a door – one that is never locked – between the president 's office and what are not very accurately called his private apartments . There should be an executive office building , not too far away , but wholly distinct from the dwelling house . For everyone else in the public service there is an unroofed space between the bedroom and the desk . " 
 Harrison acted quite independently in selecting his cabinet , much to the dismay of the Republican bosses . He began by delaying the presumed nomination of James G. Blaine as Secretary of State so as to preclude Blaine 's involvement in the formation of the administration , as had occurred in President Garfield 's term . In fact , other than Blaine , the only Republican boss initially nominated was Redfield Proctor , as Secretary of War . Senator Shelby Cullom 's comment symbolizes Harrison 's steadfast aversion to use federal positions for patronage : " I suppose Harrison treated me as well as he did any other Senator ; but whenever he did anything for me , it was done so <unk> that the concession tended to anger rather than please . " Harrison 's selections shared particular alliances – such as their service in the Civil War , Indiana citizenship and membership in the Presbyterian Church . Nevertheless , Harrison with these choices had alienated pivotal Republican operatives from New York to Pennsylvania to Iowa and prematurely compromised his political power and future . Harrison 's normal schedule provided for two full cabinet meetings per week , as well as separate weekly one @-@ on @-@ one meetings with each cabinet member . 
 In June 1890 , Harrison 's Postmaster General John Wanamaker and several Philadelphia friends , purchased a large new cottage at Cape May Point , for Harrison 's wife Caroline . Many believed the cottage gift appeared to be improper and amounted to a bribe for a cabinet position . Harrison made no comment on the matter until after two weeks when he said he had always intended to purchase the cottage once Caroline gave approval . On July 2 , perhaps a little <unk> to avoid suspicion , Harrison gave Wanamaker a check for $ 10 @,@ 000 to pay for the cottage . 
 = = = Civil service reform and pensions = = = 
 Civil service reform was a prominent issue following Harrison 's election . Harrison had campaigned as a supporter of the merit system , as opposed to the spoils system . Although some of the civil service had been classified under the Pendleton Act by previous administrations , Harrison spent much of his first months in office deciding on political appointments . Congress was widely divided on the issue and Harrison was reluctant to address the issue in hope of preventing the alienation of either side . The issue became a political football of the time and was immortalized in a cartoon captioned " What can I do when both parties insist on kicking ? " Harrison appointed Theodore Roosevelt and Hugh Smith Thompson , both reformers , to the Civil Service Commission , but otherwise did little to further the reform cause . 
 Harrison quickly saw the enactment of the Dependent and Disability Pension Act in 1890 , a cause he had championed while in Congress . In addition to providing pensions to disabled Civil War veterans ( regardless of the cause of their disability ) , the Act depleted some of the troublesome federal budget surplus . Pension expenditures reached $ 135 million under Harrison , the largest expenditure of its kind to that point in American history , a problem exacerbated by Pension Bureau commissioner James R. Tanner 's expansive interpretation of the pension laws . An investigation into the Pension Bureau by Harrison 's Secretary of Interior John W. Noble found evidence of lavish and illegal handouts under Tanner . Harrison , who privately believed that appointing Tanner had been a mistake , due to his apparent loose management style and tongue , asked Tanner to resign and replaced him with Green B. Raum . Raum was also accused of accepting loan payments in return for expediting pension cases . Harrison , having accepted a dissenting Congressional Republican investigation report that exonerated Raum , kept him in office for the rest of his administration . 
 One of the first appointments Harrison was forced to reverse was that of James S. Clarkson as an assistant postmaster . Clarkson , who had expected a full cabinet position , began sabotaging the appointment from the outset , gaining the reputation for " decapitating a fourth class postmaster every three minutes " . Clarkson himself stated , " I am simply on detail from the Republican Committee ... I am most anxious to get through this task and leave . " He resigned in September 1890 . 
 = = = Tariff = = = 
 The tariff levels had been a major political issue since before the Civil War , and they became the most dominant matter of the 1888 election . The high tariff rates had created a surplus of money in the Treasury , which led many Democrats ( as well as the growing Populist movement ) to call for lowering them . Most Republicans preferred to maintain the rates , spend the surplus on internal improvements and eliminate some internal taxes . 
 Representative William McKinley and Senator Nelson W. Aldrich framed the McKinley Tariff that would raise the tariff even higher , including making some rates intentionally prohibitive . At Secretary of State James Blaine 's urging , Harrison attempted to make the tariff more acceptable by urging Congress to add reciprocity provisions , which would allow the President to reduce rates when other countries reduced their rates on American exports . The tariff was removed from imported raw sugar , and sugar growers in the United States were given a two cent per pound subsidy on their production . Even with the reductions and reciprocity , the McKinley Tariff enacted the highest average rate in American history , and the spending associated with it contributed to the reputation of the Billion @-@ Dollar Congress . 
 = = = Antitrust laws and the currency = = = 
 Members of both parties were concerned with the growth of the power of trusts and monopolies , and one of the first acts of the 51st Congress was to pass the Sherman Antitrust Act , sponsored by Senator John Sherman of Ohio . The Act passed by wide margins in both houses , and Harrison signed it into law . The Sherman Act was the first Federal act of its kind , and marked a new use of federal government power . While Harrison approved of the law and its intent , his administration was not particularly vigorous in enforcing it . However , the government successfully concluded a case during Harrison 's time in office ( against a Tennessee coal company ) , and had initiated several other cases against trusts . 
 One of the most volatile questions of the 1880s was whether the currency should be backed by gold and silver , or by gold alone . The issue cut across party lines , with western Republicans and southern Democrats joining together in the call for the free coinage of silver , and both parties ' representatives in the northeast holding firm for the gold standard . Because silver was worth less than its legal equivalent in gold , taxpayers paid their government bills in silver , while international creditors demanded payment in gold , resulting in a depletion of the nation 's gold supply . Owing to worldwide deflation in the late 19th century , however , a strict gold standard had resulted in reduction of incomes without the equivalent reduction in debts , pushing debtors and the poor to call for silver coinage as an inflationary measure . 
 The silver coinage issue had not been much discussed in the 1888 campaign and Harrison is said to have favored a <unk> position . However , his appointment of a silverite Treasury Secretary , William Windom , encouraged the free silver supporters . Harrison attempted to steer a middle course between the two positions , advocating a free coinage of silver , but at its own value , not at a fixed ratio to gold . This failed to facilitate a compromise between the factions . In July 1890 , Senator Sherman achieved passage of a bill , the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , in both houses . Harrison thought that the bill would end the controversy , and he signed it into law . The effect of the bill , however , was the increased depletion of the nation 's gold supply , a problem that would persist until the second Cleveland administration resolved it . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 After regaining the majority in both Houses of Congress , some Republicans , led by Harrison , attempted to pass legislation to protect black Americans ' civil rights . Harrison 's Attorney General , William H. H. Miller , through the Justice Department , ordered the prosecutions for violation of voting rights in the South ; however , white juries often failed to convict or indict violators . This prompted Harrison to urge Congress to pass legislation that would " secure all our people a free exercise of the right of suffrage and every other civil right under the Constitution and laws . " Harrison endorsed the proposed Federal Elections Bill written by Representative Henry Cabot Lodge and Senator George Frisbie Hoar in 1890 , but the bill was defeated in the Senate . Following the failure to pass the bill , Harrison continued to speak in favor of African American civil rights in addresses to Congress . Most notably , on December 3 , 1889 , Harrison had gone before Congress and stated : 
 The colored people did not intrude themselves upon us ; they were brought here in chains and held in communities where they are now chiefly bound by a cruel slave code ... when and under what conditions is the black man to have a free ballot ? When is he in fact to have those full civil rights which have so long been his in law ? When is that quality of influence which our form of government was intended to secure to the electors to be restored ? ... in many parts of our country where the colored population is large the people of that race are by various devices deprived of any effective exercise of their political rights and of many of their civil rights . The wrong does not expend itself upon those whose votes are suppressed . Every constituency in the Union is wronged . 
 He severely questioned the states ' civil rights records , arguing that if states have the authority over civil rights , then " we have a right to ask whether they are at work upon it . " Harrison also supported a bill proposed by Senator Henry W. Blair , which would have granted federal funding to schools regardless of the students ' races . He also endorsed a proposed constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court ruling in the Civil Rights Cases ( 1883 ) that declared much of the Civil Rights Act of 1875 unconstitutional . None of these measures gained congressional approval . 
 = = = National forests = = = 
 In March 1891 Congress enacted and Harrison signed the Land Revision Act of 1891 . This legislation resulted from a bipartisan desire to initiate reclamation of surplus lands that had been , up to that point , granted from the public domain , for potential settlement or use by railroad syndicates . As the law 's drafting was finalized , Section 24 was added at the behest of Harrison by his Secretary of the Interior John Noble , which read as follows : 
 That the President of the United States may , from time to time , set apart and reserve , in any State or Territory having public land bearing forests , in any part of the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth , whether of commercial value or not , as public reservations , and the President shall , by public proclamation , declare the establishment of such reservations and the limits thereof . 
 Within a month of the enactment of this law Harrison authorized the first forest reserve , to be located on public domain adjacent to Yellowstone Park , in Wyoming . Other areas were so designated by Harrison , bringing the first forest reservations total to 22 million acres in his term . 
 = = = Native American policy = = = 
 During Harrison 's administration , the Lakota Sioux , previously confined to reservations in South Dakota , grew restive under the influence of <unk> , a medicine man , who encouraged them to participate in a spiritual movement called the Ghost Dance . Many in Washington did not understand the predominantly religious nature of the Ghost Dance , and thought it was a militant movement being used to rally Native Americans against the government . On December 29 , 1890 , troops from the Seventh Cavalry clashed with the Sioux at Wounded Knee . The result was a massacre of at least 146 Sioux , including many women and children ; the dead Sioux were buried in a mass grave . In reaction Harrison directed Major General Nelson A. Miles to investigate and ordered 3500 federal troops to South Dakota ; the uprising was brought to an end . Wounded Knee is considered the last major American Indian battle in the 19th century . Harrison 's general policy on American Indians was to encourage assimilation into white society and , despite the massacre , he believed the policy to have been generally successful . This policy , known as the allotment system and embodied in the Dawes Act , was favored by liberal reformers at the time , but eventually proved detrimental to American Indians as they sold most of their land at low prices to white speculators . 
 = = = Technology and naval modernization = = = 
 During Harrison 's time in office , the United States was continuing to experience advances in science and technology . Harrison was the earliest President whose voice is known to be preserved . That thirty @-@ six @-@ second recording was originally made on a wax phonograph cylinder in 1889 by Gianni Bettini . Harrison also had electricity installed in the White House for the first time by Edison General Electric Company , but he and his wife would not touch the light switches for fear of electrocution and would often go to sleep with the lights on . 
 Over the course of his administration Harrison marshaled the country 's technology to clothe the nation with a credible naval power . When he took office there were only two commissioned warships in the Navy . In his inaugural address he said , " construction of a sufficient number of warships and their necessary armaments should progress as rapidly as is consistent with care and perfection . " Harrison 's Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy spearheaded the rapid construction of vessels , and within a year congressional approval was obtained for building of the warships Indiana , Texas , Oregon and Columbia . By 1898 , with the help of the Carnegie Corporation , no less than ten modern warships , including steel hulls and greater displacements and armaments , had transformed the United States into a legitimate naval power . Seven of these had begun during the Harrison term . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = Latin America and Samoa = = = = 
 Harrison and Secretary of State Blaine were often not the most cordial of friends , but harmonized in an aggressive foreign policy and commercial reciprocity with other nations . Blaine 's persistent medical problems warranted more of a hands @-@ on effort by Harrison in the conduct of foreign policy . In San Francisco , while on tour of the United States in 1891 , Harrison proclaimed that the United States was in a " new epoch " of trade and that the expanding navy would protect oceanic shipping and increase American influence and prestige abroad . The First International Conference of American States met in Washington in 1889 ; Harrison set an aggressive agenda including customs and currency integration and named a bipartisan delegation to the conference , led by John B. Henderson and Andrew Carnegie . The conference failed to achieve any diplomatic breakthrough , due in large part to an atmosphere of suspicion fostered by the Argentinian delegation . It did succeed in establishing an information center that became the Pan American Union . In response to the diplomatic bust , Harrison and Blaine pivoted diplomatically and initiated a crusade for tariff reciprocity with Latin American nations ; the Harrison administration concluded eight reciprocity treaties among these countries . On another front , Harrison sent Frederick Douglass as ambassador to Haiti , but failed in his attempts to establish a naval base there . 
 In 1889 , the United States , the United Kingdom and Germany were locked in a dispute over control of the Samoan Islands . Historian George H. Ryden 's research indicates Harrison played a key role in determining the status of this Pacific outpost by taking a firm stand on every aspect of Samoa conference negotiations ; this included selection of the local ruler , refusal to allow an indemnity for Germany , as well as the establishment of a three power protectorate , a first for the U.S .. These arrangements facilitated the future dominant power of the U.S. in the Pacific ; Secretary of State Blaine was absent due to complication of lumbago . 
 = = = = European embargo of U.S. pork = = = = 
 Throughout the 1880s various European countries had imposed a ban on importation of United States pork out of an unconfirmed concern of trichinosis ; at issue was over one billion pounds of pork products with a value of $ 80 million ( annually ) . Harrison engaged Whitelaw Reid , minister to France , and William Walter Phelps , minister to Germany , to restore these exports for the country without delay . Harrison also successfully asked the congress to enact the Meat Inspection Act to eliminate the accusations of product compromise . The president also partnered with Agriculture Secretary Rusk to threaten Germany with retaliation – by initiating an embargo in the U.S. against Germany 's highly demanded beet sugar . By September 1891 Germany relented , and was soon followed by Denmark , France and Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 = = = = Crises in Aleutian Islands and Chile = = = = 
 The first international crisis Harrison faced arose from disputed fishing rights on the Alaskan coast . Canada claimed fishing and sealing rights around many of the Aleutian Islands , in violation of U.S. law . As a result , the United States Navy seized several Canadian ships . In 1891 , the administration began negotiations with the British that would eventually lead to a compromise over fishing rights after international arbitration , with the British government paying compensation in 1898 
 In 1891 , a diplomatic crisis emerged in Chile , otherwise known as the Baltimore Crisis . The American minister to Chile , Patrick Egan , granted asylum to Chileans who were seeking refuge during the 1891 Chilean Civil War . Egan , previously a militant Irish immigrant to the U.S. , was motivated by a personal desire to thwart Great Britain 's influence in Chile ; his action increased tensions between Chile and the United States , which began in the early 1880s when Secretary Blaine had alienated the Chileans in the War of the Pacific . 
 The crisis began in earnest when sailors from the USS Baltimore took shore leave in Valparaiso and a fight ensued , resulting in the deaths of two American sailors and the arrest of three dozen others . The Baltimore 's captain , Winfield Schley , based on the nature of the sailors ' wounds , insisted the sailors had been bayonet @-@ attacked by Chilean police without provocation . With Blaine incapacitated , Harrison drafted a demand for reparations . The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs Manuel Matta replied that Harrison 's message was " erroneous or deliberately incorrect , " and said that the Chilean government was treating the affair the same as any other criminal matter . 
 Tensions increased to the brink of war – Harrison threatened to break off diplomatic relations unless the United States received a suitable apology , and said the situation required , " grave and patriotic consideration " . The president also remarked , " If the dignity as well as the prestige and influence of the United States are not to be wholly sacrificed , we must protect those who in foreign ports display the flag or wear the colors . " The Navy was also placed on a high level of preparedness . A recuperated Blaine made brief conciliatory overtures to the Chilean government which had no support in the administration ; he then reversed course , joined the chorus for unconditional concessions and apology by the Chileans , who ultimately obliged , and war was averted . Theodore Roosevelt later applauded Harrison for his use of the " big stick " in the matter . 
 = = = = Annexation of Hawaii = = = = 
 In the last days of his administration , Harrison dealt with the issue of Hawaiian annexation . Following a coup d 'état against Queen Liliuokalani , the new government of Hawaii led by Sanford Dole petitioned for annexation by the United States . Harrison was interested in expanding American influence in Hawaii and in establishing a naval base at Pearl Harbor but had not previously expressed an opinion on annexing the islands . The United States consul in Hawaii John L. Stevens recognized the new government on February 1 , 1893 and forwarded their proposals to Washington . With just one month left before leaving office , the administration signed a treaty on February 14 and submitted it to the Senate the next day with Harrison 's recommendation . The Senate failed to act , and President Cleveland withdrew the treaty shortly after taking office . 
 = = = Cabinet = = = 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 = = = = Supreme Court = = = = 
 Harrison appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States . The first was David Josiah Brewer , a judge on the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit . Brewer , the nephew of Justice Field , had previously been considered for a cabinet position . Shortly after Brewer 's nomination , Justice Matthews died , creating another vacancy . Harrison had considered Henry Billings Brown , a Michigan judge and admiralty law expert , for the first vacancy and now nominated him for the second . For the third vacancy , which arose in 1892 , Harrison nominated George Shiras . Shiras 's appointment was somewhat controversial because his age — sixty — was older than usual for a newly appointed Justice . Shiras also drew the opposition of Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania because they were in different factions of the Pennsylvania Republican party , but his nomination was nonetheless approved . Finally , at the end of his term , Harrison nominated Howell Edmunds Jackson to replace Justice Lamar , who died in January 1893 . Harrison knew the incoming Senate would be controlled by Democrats , so he selected Jackson , a respected Tennessee Democrat with whom he was friendly to ensure his nominee would not be rejected . Jackson 's nomination was indeed successful , but he died after only two years on the Court . 
 = = = = Other courts = = = = 
 In addition to his Supreme Court appointments , Harrison appointed ten judges to the courts of appeals , two judges to the circuit courts , and 26 judges to the district courts . Because Harrison was in office when Congress eliminated the circuit courts in favor of the courts of appeals , he and Grover Cleveland were the only two Presidents to have appointed judges to both bodies . 
 = = = States admitted to the Union = = = 
 When Harrison took office , no new states had been admitted in more than a decade , owing to Congressional Democrats ' reluctance to admit states that they believed would send Republican members . Early in Harrison 's term , however , the lame duck Congress passed bills that admitted four states to the union : North Dakota and South Dakota on November 2 , 1889 , Montana on November 8 , and Washington on November 11 . The following year two more states held constitutional conventions and were admitted – Idaho on July 3 and Wyoming on July 10 , 1890 . The initial Congressional delegations from all six states were solidly Republican . More states were admitted under Harrison 's presidency than any other since George Washington 's . 
 = = = Vacations and travel = = = 
 Harrison attended the three @-@ day grand Centennial Celebration of the country in New York City on April 30 , 1889 . He made the following remarks " We have come into the serious but always inspiring presence of Washington . He was the incarnation of duty and he teaches us today this great lesson : that those who would associate their names with events that shall outlive a century can only do so by high consecration to duty . Self @-@ seeking has no public observance or anniversary . " 
 The Harrisons made many trips out of the capital , which included speeches at most stops – including Philadelphia , New England , Indianapolis and Chicago . The President typically made his best impression speaking before large audiences , as opposed to more intimate settings . The most notable of his presidential trips , theretofore unequaled , was a five @-@ week tour of the west in the spring of 1891 , aboard a lavishly outfitted train . Harrison enjoyed a number of short trips out of the capital — usually for hunting — to nearby Virginia or Maryland . 
 During the hot Washington summers , the Harrisons took refuge in Deer Park , Maryland and Cape May Point , New Jersey . In 1890 , John Wanamaker joined with other Philadelphia devotees of the Harrisons and made a gift to them of a summer cottage at Cape May . Harrison , though appreciative , was uncomfortable with the appearance of impropriety ; a month later , he paid Wanamaker $ 10 @,@ 000 as reimbursement to the donors . Nevertheless , Harrison 's opponents made the gift the subject of national ridicule , and Mrs. Harrison and the president were vigorously criticized . 
 = = = Reelection campaign in 1892 = = = 
 The treasury surplus had evaporated and the nation 's economic health was worsening – precursors to the eventual Panic of 1893 . Congressional elections in 1890 had gone against the Republicans ; and although Harrison had cooperated with Congressional Republicans on legislation , several party leaders withdrew their support for him because of his adamant refusal to give party members the nod in the course of his executive appointments . Specifically , Thomas C. Platt , Mathew S. Quay , Thomas B. Reed and James Clarkson quietly organized the Grievance Committee , the ambition of which was to initiate a dump @-@ Harrison offensive . They solicited the support of Blaine , without effect however , and Harrison in reaction resolved to run for re @-@ election – seemingly forced to choose one of two options – " become a candidate or forever wear the name of a political coward " . 
 It was clear that Harrison would not be re @-@ nominated unanimously . Many of Harrison 's detractors persisted in pushing for an incapacitated Blaine , though he announced that he was not a candidate in February 1892 . Some party leaders still hoped to draft Blaine into running , and speculation increased when he resigned at the 11th hour as Secretary of State in June . At the convention in Minneapolis , Harrison prevailed on the first ballot , but encountered significant opposition . 
 The Democrats renominated former President Cleveland , making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier . The tariff revisions of the past four years had made imported goods so expensive that now many voters shifted to the reform position . Many westerners , traditionally Republican voters , defected to the new Populist Party candidate , James Weaver , who promised free silver , generous veterans ' pensions , and an eight @-@ hour work day . The effects of the suppression of the Homestead Strike rebounded against the Republicans as well , although the federal government did not take action . 
 Harrison 's wife Caroline began a critical struggle with tuberculosis earlier in 1892 and two weeks before the election , on October 25 , it took her life . Their daughter Mary Harrison McKee assumed the role of First Lady after her mother 's death . Mrs. Harrison 's terminal illness and the fact that both candidates had served in the White House called for a low key campaign , and resulted in neither of the candidates actively campaigning personally . 
 Cleveland ultimately won the election by 277 electoral votes to Harrison 's 145 , and also won the popular vote by 5 @,@ 556 @,@ 918 to 5 @,@ 176 @,@ 108 ; this was the most decisive presidential election in 20 years . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency and death = = 
 After he left office , Harrison visited the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in June 1893 . After the Expo , Harrison returned to his home in Indianapolis . Harrison had been elected a companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in 1882 , and was elected as commander ( president ) of the Ohio Commandery on May 3 , 1893 . 
 For a few months in 1894 , Harrison lived in San Francisco , California , where he gave law lectures at Stanford University . In 1896 some of Harrison 's friends in the Republican party tried to convince him to seek the presidency again , but he declined . He traveled around the nation making appearances and speeches in support of William McKinley 's candidacy for president . 
 From July 1895 to March 1901 Harrison served on the Board of Trustees of Purdue University , where Harrison Hall , a dormitory , was named in his honor . He wrote a series of articles about the Federal government and the presidency which were republished in 1897 as a book titled This Country of Ours . In 1899 Harrison attended the First Peace Conference at The Hague . 
 In 1896 , Harrison at age 62 remarried , to Mary Scott Lord Dimmick , the widowed 37 @-@ year @-@ old niece and former secretary of his deceased wife . Harrison 's two adult children , Russell , 41 years old at the time , and Mary ( Mamie ) McKee , 38 , disapproved of the marriage and did not attend the wedding . Benjamin and Mary had one child together , Elizabeth ( February 21 , 1897 – December 26 , 1955 ) . 
 In 1900 , Harrison served as an attorney for the Republic of Venezuela in their British Guiana boundary dispute with the United Kingdom . An international trial was agreed upon ; he filed an 800 @-@ page brief and traveled to Paris where he spent more than 25 hours in court on their behalf . Although he lost the case , his legal arguments won him international renown . 
 Harrison developed what was thought to be influenza ( then referred to as <unk> ) in February 1901 . He was treated with steam vapor inhalation and oxygen , but his condition worsened . He died from pneumonia at his home on Wednesday , March 13 , 1901 , at the age of 67 . Harrison is interred in Indianapolis 's Crown Hill Cemetery , next to Caroline . After her death , Mary Dimmick Harrison was buried next to him . 
 = = Historical reputation and memorials = = 
 According to historian R. Hal Williams , Harrison had a " widespread reputation for personal and official integrity " . Closely scrutinized by Democrats , <unk> 's reputation was largely intact when he left the White House . Having an advantage few 19th Century Presidents had , Harrison 's own party , the Republicans , controlled Congress , while his administration actively advanced a Republican program of a higher tariff , moderate control of corporations , protecting African American voting rights , a generous Civil War pension , and compromising over the controversial silver issue . Historians have not raised " serious questions about Harrison 's own integrity or the integrity of his administration . " 
 Following the Panic of 1893 , Harrison became more popular in retirement . His legacy among historians is scant , and " general accounts of his period inaccurately treat Harrison as a cipher " . More recently , 
 historians have recognized the importance of the Harrison administration — and Harrison himself — in the new foreign policy of the late nineteenth century . The administration faced challenges throughout the hemisphere , in the Pacific , and in relations with the European powers , involvements that would be taken for granted in the twentieth century . 
 Harrison 's presidency belongs properly to the 19th century , but he " clearly pointed the way " to the modern presidency that would emerge under William McKinley . The bi @-@ partisan Sherman Anti @-@ Trust Act signed into law by Harrison remains in effect over 120 years later and was the most important legislation passed by the Fifty @-@ first Congress . Harrison 's support for African American voting rights and education would be the last significant attempts to protect civil rights until the 1930s . Harrison 's tenacity at foreign policy was emulated by politicians such as Theodore Roosevelt . 
 Harrison was memorialized on several postage stamps . The first was a 13 @-@ cent stamp issued on November 18 , 1902 . The engraved likeness of Harrison was modeled after a photo provided by Harrison 's widow . In all Harrison has been honored on six U.S. Postage stamps , more than most other U.S. Presidents . Harrison also was featured on the five @-@ dollar National Bank Notes from the third charter period , beginning in 1902 . 
 In 1908 , the people of Indianapolis erected the Benjamin Harrison memorial statue , created by Charles Niehaus and Henry Bacon , in honor of Harrison 's lifetime achievements as military leader , U.S. Senator , and President of the United States . The statue occupies a site in University Park overlooking the Birch Bayh Federal Building and United States Courthouse across New York Avenue . 
 In 1942 , a Liberty Ship , the SS Benjamin Harrison , was named in his honor . In 1951 , Harrison 's home was opened to the public as a library and museum . It had been used as a dormitory for a music school from 1937 to 1950 . The house was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1964 . In 2012 , a dollar coin with his image , part of the Presidential $ 1 Coin Program , was issued . 
 Fort Benjamin Harrison , located in Lawrence , Indiana , a northeastern suburb of Indianapolis , was constructed in 1903 to 1908 and named in his honor . The base was closed in 1991 and the site has been redeveloped to include residential neighborhoods , a golf course , and Fort Harrison State Park . 
 = Pseudoplectania nigrella = 
 Pseudoplectania nigrella , commonly known as the ebony cup , the black false <unk> , or the hairy black cup , is a species of fungi in the family Sarcosomataceae . The fruit bodies of this saprobic fungus are small blackish cups , typically up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) broad , that grow in groups on soil , often amongst pine needles and short grass near coniferous trees . Pseudoplectania nigrella has a worldwide distribution , and has been found in North America , the Caribbean , Britain , Europe , India , Madagascar , New Zealand , and Japan . The fungus produces a unique chemical compound , plectasin , that has attracted research interest for its ability to inhibit the growth of the common human pathogenic bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 Christian Hendrik Persoon named the species Peziza nigrella in his Systema Mycologia in 1801 , and it was sanctioned under this name in Elias Magnus Fries ' Systema Mycologicum in 1821 . In 1870 , German mycologist Fuckel transferred it to his newly described genus Pseudoplectania , and made it the type species . The species was <unk> placed in <unk> by Friedrich August <unk> von <unk> , and in Plectania by Petter Karsten ( 1885 ) , but neither placement is considered correct . 
 The fungus is commonly known as the " ebony cup " , the " black false <unk> " , or the " hairy black cup " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies ( technically called apothecia ) typically grow in groups , or sometimes crowded closely together , with small stems or missing them entirely . Initially , the fruit bodies are closed and roughly spherical , but as they develop they expand to become cup @-@ shaped , or almost flat . The inner surface of the cups bear the reproductive spore @-@ bearing layer , or hymenium ; it is brownish @-@ black , with an edge that is often wavy and curved slightly inwards , and covered with fine hairs . The cups may reach up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter . The hairs are long but usually closely coiled and twisted , which gives to the exterior of the cup a slightly tomentose appearance of nearly uniform thickness throughout their entire length . They are pale brown and 4 – 6 µm in diameter . 
 The asci are roughly cylindrical with a long stem @-@ like base ; the entire ascus is often as long as 300 – 325 µm and about 15 µm in diameter at the thickest point . The spores are round , smooth , translucent ( hyaline ) , and have diameters of about 12 – 14 µm . They are filled with many small oil droplets . The paraphyses ( sterile filamentous hyphae in the hymenium ) are enlarged at their tips and filled with brown colored matter , about 4 µm thick . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Pseudoplectania <unk> resembles P. nigrella , but has a more deeply and persistently cup @-@ shaped fruit body , a short but distinct stem , and only grows amongst sphagnum moss . Plectania <unk> has elliptical to spindle @-@ shaped spores measuring 20 – 28 by 8 – 12 µm , while P. milleri has elliptical spores , and the margin of its cups have star @-@ shaped points . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Pseudoplectania nigrella is considered inedible . It has no distinctive taste or odor . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This species is saprobic , and is found growing in groups on the ground or on moss @-@ covered decaying wood , especially amongst fallen pine needles . In North America , fruit bodies appear in the spring and summer , and are fairly common ; in Britain , the fungus fruits from winter to spring , and is rare . Its small size and dark color makes it easy to overlook . 
 Pseudoplectania nigrella has a worldwide distribution , and has been found in North America , the Caribbean , Europe , India , Madagascar , New Zealand , Israel , and Japan . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 <unk> are antibiotics made from peptides and are typically found in animals and higher plants . Plectasin , found in Pseudoplectania nigrella , is the first defensin to be isolated from a fungus . Plectasin has a chemical structure resembling defensins found in spiders , scorpions , dragonflies and mussels . In general , defensins have commonalities in their molecular structure , such as cysteines in the peptide stabilized with disulfide bonds . In particular , defensins from P. nigrella , invertebrates , and plants and share a conformation that has been named the <unk> motif . In laboratory tests , plectasin was especially active in inhibiting the growth of the common human pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae , including strains resistant to conventional antibiotics . Plectasin has a low toxicity in mice , and cured them of peritonitis and pneumonia caused by S. pneumoniae as efficiently as vancomycin and penicillin , suggesting that it may have therapeutic potential . In 2010 , Chinese scientists announced a method for high @-@ level production of plectasin using an E. coli protein expression system . 
 = New York Dolls ( album ) = 
 New York Dolls is the debut studio album by American hard rock band the New York Dolls . It was released on July 27 , 1973 , by Mercury Records . The band formed in 1971 and developed a following while playing regularly in lower Manhattan . However , they were unappealing to record companies because of their onstage cross @-@ dressing and vulgarity , while most record producers were reluctant to work with them . For shock value , the band was photographed in exaggerated drag on the album cover . 
 After signing a two @-@ record deal with Mercury , the New York Dolls recorded their self @-@ titled first album at The Record Plant in New York City with producer Todd Rundgren , who was known for his sophisticated pop sound and held a lukewarm opinion of the band . They incorporated carefree rock and roll and Brill Building pop influences in the album 's hard rock songs , while the lyrics were written mostly by lead singer David Johansen and touched on themes such as urban youth , teen alienation , adolescent romance , and authenticity . 
 New York Dolls received widespread acclaim from critics when it was first released but sold poorly and had a divisive effect on listeners . The band toured the United States to promote the record , but they were difficult to market and developed a reputation for rock @-@ star excesses . Despite its commercial failure , the album was an influential precursor to the 1970s punk rock movement and has since been named in various publications as one of the greatest debut records in rock music and one of the greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1971 , vocalist David Johansen formed the New York Dolls with guitarists Johnny Thunders and Rick Rivets , bassist Arthur Kane , and drummer Billy Murcia ; Rivets was replaced by Sylvain Sylvain in 1972 . The band was meant to be a temporary project for the members , who were club @-@ going youths that had gone to New York City with different career pursuits . As Sylvain recalled , " We just said ' Hey , maybe this will get us some chicks . ' That seemed like a good enough reason . " He and Murcia originally planned to work in the clothing business and opened a boutique on Lexington Avenue that was across the street from a toy repair shop called the New York Dolls Hospital , which gave them the idea for their name . The group soon began playing regularly in lower Manhattan and earned a cult following within a few months with their reckless style of rock music . Nonetheless , record companies were hesitant to sign them because of their onstage cross @-@ dressing and blatant vulgarity . In October 1972 , they garnered the interest of critics when they opened for English rock band the Faces at the Empire Pool in Wembley . However , on the New York Dolls ' first tour of England that year , Murcia died after consuming a lethal combination of alcohol and <unk> . They enlisted Jerry Nolan as his replacement , while managers Marty Thau , Steve Leber , and David Krebs still struggled to find the band a record deal . 
 After returning to New York , the New York Dolls played to capacity crowds at venues such as Max 's Kansas City and the Mercer Arts Center in what Sylvain called a determined effort to " fake it until they could make it " : " We had to make ourselves feel famous before we could actually become famous . We acted like we were already rock stars . Arthur even called his bass ' Excalibur ' after King Arthur . It was crazy . " Their performance at the Mercer Arts Center was attended by journalist and Mercury Records publicity director Bud Scoppa , and Paul Nelson , an A & R executive for the label . Scoppa initially viewed them as an amusing but inferior version of the Rolling Stones : " I split after the first set . Paul stuck around for the second set , though , and after show he called me and said , ' You should have stayed . I think they 're really special . ' Then , after that , I fell in love with them anyway . " In March 1973 , the group signed a two @-@ album deal with a US $ 25 @,@ 000 advance from Mercury . According to Sylvain , some of the members ' parents had to sign for them because they were not old enough to sign themselves . 
 For the New York Dolls ' debut album , Mercury wanted to find a record producer who could make the most out of the group 's sound and the hype they had received from critics and fans in New York . At the band 's first board meeting in Chicago , Johansen fell asleep in Mercury 's conference room while record executives discussed potential producers . He awoke when they mentioned Todd Rundgren , a musician and producer who by 1972 had achieved unexpected rock stardom with his double album Something / Anything ? and its hit singles " I Saw the Light " and " Hello It 's Me " . Rundgren had socialized at venues such as Max 's Kansas City and first saw the New York Dolls when his girlfriend at the time , model Bebe Buell , brought him there to see them play . 
 Known for having refined pop tastes and technologically savvy productions , Rundgren had become increasingly interested in progressive rock sounds by the time he was enlisted to produce the New York Dolls ' debut album . Consequently , his initial impression of the group was that of a humorous live act who were technically competent only by the standards of other unsophisticated New York bands . " The Dolls weren 't out to expand any musical horizons " , said Rundgren , although he enjoyed Thunders ' " attitude " and Johansen 's charismatic antics onstage . Johansen referred to Rundgren as " an expert on second rate rock ' n ' roll " , but also said the band was " kind of persona non grata , at the time , with most producers . They were afraid of us , I don 't know why , but Todd wasn 't . We all liked him from Max 's ... Todd was cool and he was a producer . " Sylvain , on the other hand , felt the decision to enlist him was based on availability , time , and money : " It wasn 't a long list . Todd was in New York and seemed like he could handle the pace . " Upon being hired , Rundgren declared that " the only person who can produce a New York record is someone who lives in New York " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Mercury booked the New York Dolls at The Record Plant in New York City , where they recorded their self @-@ titled debut album in April 1973 . Rundgren was originally concerned that they had taken " the worst sounding studio in the city at that time " because it was the only one available to them with the short time given to record and release the album . He later said that expectations for the band and the festive atmosphere of the recording sessions proved to be more of a problem : " The Dolls were critics ' darlings and the press had kind of adopted them . Plus , there were lots of extra people around , socializing , which made it hard to concentrate . " New York Dolls was recorded in eight days on a budget of only $ 17 @,@ 000 . With a short amount of studio time and no concept in mind for the album , the band chose which songs to record based on how well they had been received at their live shows . In Johansen 's own words , " we went into a room and just recorded . It wasn 't like these people who conceptualize things . It was just a document of what was going on at the time . " 
 In the studio , the New York Dolls dressed in their usual flashy clothes . Rundgren , who did not approve of their raucous sound , at one point yelled at them during the sessions to " get the glitter out of your asses and play " . Sylvain recalled Rundgren inviting Buell and their Chihuahua to the studio and putting the latter atop an expensive mixing console , while Johansen acknowledged that his recollections of the sessions have since been distorted by what he has read about them : " It was like the 1920s , with palm tree décor and stuff . Well , that 's how I remember it , anyway . " He also said Rundgren directed the band from the control room with engineer Jack Douglas and hardly spoke to them while they recorded the album . According to <unk> , the group 's carefree lifestyle probably conflicted with Rundgren 's professional work ethic and schedule : " He doesn 't put up with bullshit . I mean , [ the band ] rarely started their live sets before midnight , so who knows ? Todd was very much in charge in the studio , however , and I got the impression that everybody was looking to him . " 
 Although Sylvain said Rundgren was not an interfering producer , he occasionally involved himself to improve a take . Sylvain recalled moments when Rundgren went into the isolation booth with Murcia when he struggled keeping a beat and drummed out beats on a cowbell for him to use as a click track . During another session , he stopped a take and walked out of the control room to plug in Kane 's bass cabinet . Scoppa , who paid afternoon visits to the studio , overheard Rundgren say , " Yeah , that 's all you needed . Okay , let 's try it again ! " , and ultimately found the exchange funny and indicative of Rundgren 's opinion of the band : " Todd was such a ' musician ' while they were just getting by on attitude and energy . But as disdainful as he appeared to be at some points he got the job done really well . " Rundgren felt Johansen 's wild singing often sounded screamed or drunken but were eloquent in the sense that Johansen demonstrated a " propensity to incorporate certain cultural references into the music " , particularly on " Personality Crisis " . While recording the song , Johansen walked back into the control room and asked Rundgren if his vocals sounded " ludicrous enough " . 
 Because the New York Dolls had little money , Sylvain and Thunders played the austerely designed and affordable Gibson Les Paul Junior guitars on the record . They jokingly referred to them as " automatic guitars " due to their limited sound shaping features . To amplify their guitars , they ran a Marshall <unk> standalone amplifier through the speaker cabinets of a Fender Dual Showman , and occasionally used a Fender Twin Reverb . Some songs were embellished with additional instruments , including Buddy Bowser 's brassy saxophone on " Lonely Planet Boy " . Johansen sang into distorted guitar pickups for additional vocals and overdubbed them into the song . He also played an Asian gong for " Vietnamese Baby " and harmonica on " Pills " . For " Personality Crisis " , Sylvain originally played on The Record Plant 's Yamaha grand piano before Rundgren added his own piano flourishes to both that song and " Private World " . Rundgren also contributed to the background vocals heard on " Trash " and played synthesizers on " Vietnamese Baby " and " Frankenstein ( Orig . ) " , which Sylvain recalled : " I remember him getting those weird sounds from this beautiful old Moog synthesizer he brought in . He said it was a model that only he and The Beatles had . " 
 New York Dolls was mixed in less than half a day . Rundgren felt the band seemed distracted and disinterested at that point , so he tried unsuccessfully to ban them from the mixing session . For the final mix , he minimized the sound of Nolan 's drumming . In retrospect , Rundgren said the quality of the mix was poor because the band had hurried and questioned him while mixing the record : " It 's too easy for it to become a free @-@ for @-@ all , with every musician only hearing their own part and not the whole . They all had other places to be , so rather than split , they rushed the thing and if that wasn 't enough they took it to the crappy mastering lab that Mercury had put them in . " Thunders famously complained to a journalist that Rundgren " fucked up the mix " on New York Dolls , adding to stories that the two had clashed during the album 's recording . Both Johansen and Scoppa later said they did not see any conflict between the two and that Thunders ' typically foolish behavior was misinterpreted . Johansen later praised Rundgren for how he enhanced and equalized each instrument , giving listeners the impression that " [ they 're ] in a room and there 's a band playing " , while Sylvain said his mix accurately captured how the band sounded live . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 New York Dolls features 10 original songs and 1 cover — the 1963 Bo Diddley song " Pills " . Johansen described the album as " a little jewel of urban folk art " . Rundgren , on the other hand , said the band 's sensibilities were different from " the urban New York thing " because they had been raised outside Manhattan and drew on carefree rock and roll and Brill Building pop influences such as the Shangri @-@ Las : " Their songs , as punky as they were , usually had a lot to do with the same old boy @-@ girl thing but in a much more inebriated way . " Johansen quoted the lyric " you 'd best believe I 'm in love L @-@ U @-@ V " from the Shangri @-@ Las ' " Give Him a Great Big Kiss " ( 1964 ) when he opened " Looking for a Kiss " , which tells a story of adolescent romantic desire hampered by peers who use drugs . On " Subway Train " , he used lyrics from the American folk standard " Someone 's in the Kitchen with Dinah " . In the opinion of critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine , the album 's rowdy hard rock songs also revamped riffs from Chuck Berry and the Rolling Stones , resulting in music that sounded edgy and threatening in spite of the New York Dolls ' wittingly kitsch and camp sensibilities . " Personality Crisis " featured raunchy dual guitars , boogie @-@ woogie piano , and a histrionic pause , while " Trash " was a punky pop rock song with brassy singing . 
 Several songs on New York Dolls function as what Robert Hilburn deemed " colorful , if exaggerated , expressions of teen alienation " . Robert Christgau remarked that because many of Manhattan 's white youths were wealthy and somewhat artsy , only ill @-@ behaved young people from the outer boroughs such as the band members could " capture the oppressive excitement Manhattan holds for a half @-@ formed human being " . " Private World " , an escapist plea for stability , was co @-@ written by Kane , who rarely contributed as a songwriter and felt overwhelmed as a young adult in the music business . Johansen , the band 's main lyricist , said " Frankenstein ( Orig . ) " was about " how kids come to Manhattan from all over , they 're kind of like whipped dogs , they 're very repressed . Their bodies and brains are disoriented from each other ... it 's a love song . " According to critic Frank Kogan , the titular monster in the song was the personification of New York City and its ethos — " the ostentation and the terror , the dreams and the fear " — while Johansen asking listeners if they " could make it with Frankenstein " involved more than sexual slang : " David was asking if you — if I — could make it with the monster of life , whether I could embrace life in all its pain and dreams and disaster . " Sylvain jokingly said " Frankenstein ( Orig . ) " was titled with a qualifier because rock musician Edgar Winter had released his 1973 song of the same name before the band could record their own : " Our song ' Frankenstein ' was a big hit in our live show ... Now , his thing didn 't sound at all like ours , but I 'm sure he stole our title . " 
 Although the New York Dolls exhibited tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek qualities , Gary Graff observed a streetwise realism in the album 's songs . In Christgau 's opinion , Johansen 's colloquial and morally superior lyrics were imbued with humor and a sense of human limits in songs whose fundamental theme was authenticity . This theme was explored in stories about lost youths , as on " Subway Train " , or in a study of a specific subject , such as the " <unk> <unk> " on " Personality Crisis " . He argued that beneath the band 's decadent and campy surface were lyrics about " the modern world ... one nuclear bomb could blow it all away . Pills and personality crises weren 't evils — easy , necessary , or whatever . They were strategies and <unk> and positive pleasures " . According to journalist Steve Taylor , " Vietnamese Baby " dealt with the impact of the Vietnam War at the time on everyday activities for people , whose fun was undermined by thoughts of collective guilt . 
 On songs such as " Subway Train " and " Trash " , Johansen used ambiguity as a lyrical mode . In Kogan 's opinion , Johansen sang in an occasionally unintelligible manner and wrote in a perplexing , fictional style that was lazy yet ingenious , as it provided his lyrics an abundance of " emotional meaning " and interpretation : " David never provides an objective framework , he 's always jumping from voice to voice , so you 're hearing a character addressing another character , or the narrator addressing the character , or the character or the narrator addressing us , all jammed up together so you 're hearing bits of conversation and bits of subjective description in no kind of chronological order . But as someone says in ' Vietnamese Baby ' : ' Everything connects . ' " In " Trash " , Johansen undercut his vaguely pansexual beliefs with the possibility of going to " fairyland " if he took a " lover 's leap " with the song 's subject . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 New York Dolls was released on July 27 , 1973 , in the United States and on October 19 in the United Kingdom . Its controversial cover featured the band dressed in exaggerated drag , including high wigs , messy make @-@ up , high heels , and garters . The photo was used for shock value , and on the back of the album , the band is photographed in their usual stage wear . To announce the album 's release , Mercury published an advertisement slogan that read " Introducing The New York Dolls : A Band You 're Gonna Like , Whether You Like It Or Not " , while other ads called them " The Band You Love to Hate " . Two double A @-@ sided , 7 " singles were released — " Trash " / " Personality Crisis " in July and " Jet Boy " / " Vietnamese Baby " in November 1973 — neither of which charted . 
 New York Dolls was not a success with consumers and only reached number 116 on the American Top LPs , while in the UK , it failed to chart altogether . The record sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies at the time and fell well short of expectations in the press . According to Rolling Stone in 2003 , it ultimately sold fewer than 500 @,@ 000 copies . Music journalist Phil Strongman said that its commercial failure could be attributed to the New York Dolls ' divisive effect on listeners , including writers from the same magazine . In a feature story on the band for Melody Maker , Mark Plummer dismissed their playing as the poorest he had ever seen , while the magazine 's reporter Michael Watts viewed them as an encouraging , albeit momentary , presence in what he felt was a lifeless rock and roll scene at the time . In Creem magazine 's readers poll , the album earned the band awards in the categories of " Best New Group of the Year " and " Worst New Group of the Year " . 
 New York Dolls nonetheless received widespread acclaim from contemporary critics . In a rave review for NME , Nick Kent said the band 's raunchy style of rock and roll was vividly recorded by Rundgren on an album that , besides Iggy and the Stooges ' Raw Power ( 1973 ) , served as the only one " so far to fully define just exactly where 1970s rock should be coming from " . Trouser Press founder and editor Ira Robbins viewed New York Dolls as an innovative record and found the band 's music brilliantly chaotic and well produced by Rundgren . Ellen Willis , writing for The New Yorker , said it was by far the year 's most compelling hard rock album and that at least half of its songs were immediate classics , particularly " Personality Crisis " and " Trash " , which she called " transcendent " . In Newsday , Christgau hailed the New York Dolls as " the best hard rock band in the country and maybe the world right now " , writing that their " special genius " was combining the shrewd songwriting savvy of early @-@ 1960s popular music with the anarchic sound of late @-@ 1960s heavy metal . He believed the record 's frenzied approach , various emotions , and wild noise conveyed Manhattan 's harsh , deviant thrill better than the Velvet Underground . In a less enthusiastic review , Rolling Stone critic Tony Glover believed the band 's impressive live sound was mostly preserved on the album , but he was slightly critical of production flourishes and overdubs , feeling they made some lyrics incomprehensible and some choruses too sonorous . Although he was surprised Rundgren 's production worked well with the group 's raunchy sound on most of the songs , Glover ultimately asked whether or not " the record alone will impress as much as seeing them live ( they 're a highly watchable group ) . " 
 After the album 's release , the New York Dolls toured the US as a supporting act for English rock band Mott the Hoople . Reviews complimented their songwriting , Thunders and Sylvain 's guitar interplay , and noted their campy fashion and the resemblance of Johansen and Thunders to Mick Jagger and Keith Richards . However , some critics panned them as an unserious group of amateurs who could not play or sing . During their appearance on The Old Grey Whistle Test in England , the show 's host Bob Harris dismissed their music as " mock rock " in his on @-@ air comments . They also developed a reputation for rock @-@ star excesses , including drugs , groupies , trashed hotel rooms , and public disturbances , and according to Ben Edmonds of Creem , became " the most walked @-@ out @-@ on band in the history of show business " . Strongman wrote that the band and the album were difficult to market because of their kitschy style and how Murcia 's death had exacerbated their association with hard drugs , which " wasn 't altogether true in the early days " . Nonetheless , they remained the most popular band in New York City , where their Halloween night concert at the Waldorf Astoria in 1973 drew hundreds of young fans and local television coverage . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 New York Dolls has since been often cited as one of the greatest debut albums in rock music , one of the genre 's most popular cult records , and a foundational work for the late 1970s punk rock movement . It was a pivotal influence on many of the rock and roll , punk , and glam rock groups that followed , including the Ramones , Kiss , the Sex Pistols , The Damned , and Guns N ' Roses . According to The Mojo Collection ( 2007 ) , the record ignited punk rock and could still inspire more movements because of the music 's abundant attitude and passion , while Encyclopedia of Popular Music writer Colin Larkin deemed it " a major landmark in rock history , oozing attitude , vitality and controversy from every note " . Chuck Eddy named it one of the records crucial to the evolution of rock music . In 101 Albums That Changed Popular Music ( 2009 ) , Chris Smith wrote that the New York Dolls pioneered punk 's aesthetic of amateurish musicianship on the album , which undermined the musical sophistication that had developed over the past decade in popular music and had been perfected months earlier on Pink Floyd 's The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) . In The Guardian 's list of " 1000 albums to hear before you die " , the newspaper credited the record for serving as " an efficacious antidote to the excesses of prog rock " . 
 In a retrospective review for AllMusic , Erlewine — the website 's senior editor — claimed that New York Dolls was a more quintessential proto @-@ punk album than any of the Stooges ' releases because of how it " plunders history while celebrating it , creating a sleazy urban mythology along the way " . David Fricke argued that it was a more definitive glam rock album than David Bowie 's Ziggy Stardust ( 1972 ) or anything by Marc Bolan because of how the band " captured both the glory and sorrow of glam , the high jinx and wasted youth , with electric <unk> " . In The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Joe Gross called it an " absolutely essential " record and " epic sleaze , the sound of five young men shaping the big city in their own scuzzy image " . Sylvain attributed its influence on punk rock to how Rundgren recorded his guitar through the left speaker and Thunders ' guitar on the right side , an orientation which he said younger bands such as the Ramones and the Sex Pistols adopted . Rundgren was amused by how the record became considered a precursor to the punk movement : " The irony is that I wound up producing the seminal punk album , but I was never really thought of as a punk producer , and I never got called by punk acts . They probably thought I was too expensive for what they were going for . But the Dolls didn 't really consider themselves punk . " 
 New York Dolls has frequently been named one of the greatest albums of all @-@ time ; according to Acclaimed Music , it is the 155th most ranked record on critics ' all @-@ time lists . In 1978 , it was ranked as the 199th greatest record ever in Paul Gambaccini 's book Rock Critics ' Choice : The Top 200 Albums , which polled a number of leading music journalists and record collectors . Christgau , one of the critics polled , named it the 15th best album of the 1970s in The Village Voice the following year . New York Dolls was included in Neil Strauss 's 1996 list of the 100 most influential alternative records , and the Spin Alternative Record Guide ( 1995 ) named it the 70th best alternative album . In 2002 , it was included on a list published by Q of the 100 best punk records , while Mojo named it both the 13th greatest punk album and the 49th greatest album of all time . In 2003 , Rolling Stone placed the record at number 213 on its 500 greatest albums list and " Personality Crisis " at number 271 on its 500 greatest songs list . In 2007 , Mojo polled a panel of prominent recording artists and songwriters for the magazine 's list of " 100 Records That Changed the World " , in which New York Dolls was voted the 39th most influential and inspirational record ever . English singer Morrissey named it his favorite album in a list for The Quietus in 2010 . According to Paul Myers , the record " struck such a chord with Morrissey that he was not only moved to form his own influential group , The Smiths ... but would eventually convince the surviving Dolls to reunite [ in 2004 ] " . In 2013 , New York Dolls was placed at number 355 on NME 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = New York Dolls = = = 
 David Johansen – gong , harmonica , vocals 
 Arthur " Killer " Kane – bass guitar 
 Jerry Nolan – drums 
 Sylvain Sylvain – piano , rhythm guitar , vocals 
 Johnny Thunders – lead guitar , vocals 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Buddy Bowser – saxophone 
 Jack Douglas – engineering 
 David Krebs – executive production 
 Steve Leber – executive production 
 Paul Nelson – executive production 
 Dave O 'Grady – makeup 
 Todd Rundgren – additional piano , Moog synthesizer , production 
 Ed Sprigg – engineer 
 Alex <unk> – piano 
 Marty Thau – executive production 
 Toshi – photography 
 = = Release history = = 
 Information is adapted from Nina Antonia 's Too Much Too Soon : The New York Dolls ( 2006 ) . 
 = Harold Davidson = 
 Harold Francis Davidson ( 14 July 1875 – 30 July 1937 ) , generally known as the Rector of Stiffkey , was a Church of England priest who in 1932 , after a public scandal , was convicted of immorality by a church court and defrocked . Davidson strongly protested his innocence and to raise funds for his reinstatement campaign he exhibited himself in a barrel on the Blackpool seafront . He performed in other sideshows of a similar nature , and died after being attacked by a lion in whose cage he was appearing in a seaside spectacular . 
 Before his ordination in 1903 , Davidson had a brief career on the London stage as an entertainer . As a young curate he became actively involved with charitable activity among London 's poor , an interest he maintained following his appointment in 1906 as rector of the rural Norfolk parish of Stiffkey . After the First World War , in which he served as a naval chaplain , he devoted himself primarily to his London work . Styling himself the " Prostitutes ' Padre " , his declared mission was the rescue of young girls he considered in danger of falling into vice . In this role he approached and befriended hundreds of girls and , although there was little direct evidence of improper behaviour , Davidson was frequently found in compromising situations . His neglect of his local duties over many years strained relations with his parishioners in Stiffkey ; after a formal complaint , the Bishop of Norwich instituted disciplinary proceedings through a consistory court . Davidson 's defence was severely compromised by his eccentric conduct , and was damaged beyond repair when the prosecution produced a photograph of him with a near @-@ naked teenage girl . 
 Davidson 's later career as a showman earned him much notoriety but little money . His attempts at legal redress were unsuccessful , despite recognition even in church circles that he had not been fairly treated by the consistory court . After his death the case continued to attract public interest for decades , through fictional , stage and screen versions of the story . His descendants have continued to assert his innocence of any wrongdoing , and later commentators have generally accepted that however unwise and inappropriate his behaviour , his basic motives were genuine and that he did not deserve the humiliations he endured . 
 = = Family background and childhood = = 
 Harold Davidson was born on 14 July 1875 in Sholing , near the south coast port of Southampton , to the Reverend Francis Davidson and his wife Alice . Francis Davidson was the vicar of St Mary 's , Sholing , a post he had held since 1866 ; as many as 27 members of the Davidson family were or had been Anglican clergy . Alice Davidson , née Hodgskin , was a great @-@ niece of the educationist and Rugby School headmaster Thomas Arnold . Sholing was a poor parish , with a mixed population of dock labourers and itinerant workers many of whom had little interest in churchgoing . Francis Davidson , described by Harold Davidson 's earliest biographer , Tom Cullen , as " a tiny man ... with a luxuriant beard that gave him the appearance of a gnome " , served the parish for 48 years . Although he could be pugnacious when necessary , according to a former parishioner he was a true pastor , willing to offer help whatever the circumstances . 
 Davidson 's family assumed that he would follow his father in becoming a priest and he was brought up strictly . When he was six he began attending Banister Court School in Southampton , an establishment founded initially for the sons of Merchant Navy officers . In 1890 Harold was sent to live with two maiden aunts in Croydon while he attended the Whitgift School . Here he became an enthusiastic amateur actor , encouraged by his friendship with a fellow @-@ pupil , Leon Quartermaine , who later won recognition on the stage and in films . In February 1894 the pair appeared together in a school production of the farce Sent to the Tower . Under his aunts ' influence , Davidson became a part @-@ time worker at Toynbee Hall , an East End charity founded by Samuel and Henrietta Barnett which attracted many volunteers from schools and universities . Because of these distractions he neglected his school work and failed to win a scholarship that would enable him to attend Oxford University and study for holy orders . In the face of his father 's disapproval , he decided to pursue a career as a stage comedian . 
 = = Theatre , Oxford and ordination = = 
 Davidson 's principal theatrical genre was that of the " drawing @-@ room entertainer " ; Cullen describes this kind of performance as " [ a ] n answer to the demand of a rising middle class which was neither cultured nor resourceful , but which wanted desperately to be diverted " . Within a few months of leaving Whitgift in 1894 , Davidson appeared on the London stage , at Steinway Hall in Lower Seymour Street , performing a comic routine . He was reasonably successful and in the next few years found provincial engagements with Masonic lodges , literary societies and similar social organisations . Cullen suggests that his greatest triumph was as a comic actor in a touring production of Brandon Thomas 's popular farce Charley 's Aunt . Davidson played the part of Lord Fancourt <unk> , who masquerades as the rich aunt of a fellow @-@ Oxford undergraduate — a frenetic role for which Cullen believes Davidson was eminently suitable . 
 During his theatrical days , Davidson maintained high standards of personal morality , observed strict teetotalism and gave regular Bible readings to the elderly in the towns in which he performed on tour . He later gave an account of an incident from November 1894 when he was performing in London . While walking along the Thames Embankment in a thick fog , he said , he encountered a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl who was about to throw herself into the Thames . After preventing her suicide attempt , Davidson learned that she had run away from home near Cambridge , was penniless and without shelter . He paid her fare home : " Her pitiful story made a tremendous impression on me ... I have ever since ... kept my eyes open for opportunities to help that kind of girl . " 
 In 1898 Davidson finally bowed to his father 's wish that he should study for holy orders , after the intervention of the Reverend Basil Wilberforce , grandson of the abolitionist William Wilberforce and a friend of the Davidson family . Wilberforce was an alumnus of Exeter College , Oxford , and used his influence to secure Davidson a place there despite the latter 's lack of qualifications . At Oxford , Davidson 's behaviour was notably eccentric ; he displayed considerable energy but disregarded rules , was persistently <unk> and regularly failed his examinations . He continued to appear on the stage when he could , and decorated the walls of his rooms with autographed pictures of actresses . By 1901 his academic inadequacies were such that he was required to leave Exeter College , although he was allowed to continue studying for his degree at Grindle 's Hall , a cramming establishment . He finally passed his examinations in 1903 , at the age of 28 , and that year was ordained by the Bishop of Oxford — after some reluctance on the part of the bishop to accept so unpromising a candidate . 
 In 1901 , when Annie Horniman 's travelling theatrical company visited Oxford , Davidson fell in love with one of the company 's leading actresses , <unk> ( " Molly " ) Cassandra <unk> , an attractive blonde and blue @-@ eyed woman from County Meath in Ireland . The couple were quickly engaged , but the relationship was stormy and was several times broken off . There was no question of marriage until Davidson was fully established in his new profession . His first church appointment was a curacy at Holy Trinity Church , Windsor , Berkshire , with an additional role as assistant chaplain to the Household Cavalry at Combermere Barracks . In 1905 he was transferred to London as curate at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , where his enthusiasm and industry drew approving comments . 
 = = Rector of Stiffkey = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Davidson 's appointment in 1906 as rector of the Norfolk parish of Stiffkey with Morston came through the patronage of the 6th Marquess Townshend , whose family had a long history of public and political service in the county .. The appointment was probably given in recognition of Davidson 's role in reconciling the fierce opposition of the Townshend family to the marquess 's proposed marriage to Gladys Sutherst , the daughter of a bankrupt Yorkshire businessman ; as curate of St Martin 's , Davidson had officiated at the wedding on 8 August 1905 . The Stiffkey living was highly desirable , with 60 acres ( 24 ha ) of glebe land , a large Georgian rectory , and an income in 1906 of £ 503 per annum , rising during Davidson 's incumbency to £ 800 . 
 Stiffkey , close to the northern Norfolk coast , lies on both sides of the River Stiffkey , with extensive salt marshes on its seaward side . At the time of Davidson 's arrival in 1906 the village , with a population of around 350 , was generally impoverished although , according to Davidson 's 2007 biographer Jonathan Tucker , it was well supplied with shops and public houses . Davidson was quickly on good terms with most of the villagers , who referred to him with affection as " Little Jimmy " — he was only 5 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 60 metres ) tall . He was less well regarded by the local gentry , including the main landowner , Colonel Groom , who fell out with Davidson after the priest rebuked him for keeping a mistress . 
 On 9 October 1906 , now settled into a prosperous living , Davidson married Molly <unk> . The Stiffkey rectory became a family home , as children were born at regular intervals . Notwithstanding his parochial and domestic responsibilities , Davidson quickly adopted the habit of spending much of the week in London , engaged in various kinds of social work . Through his friendship with Reginald Kennedy @-@ Cox , whom he had met at Oxford , Davidson became involved with the Malvern Mission , forerunner of the Dockland Settlements , of which he later became a trustee . He also became chaplain to the Actors ' Church Union , based at St Paul 's , Covent Garden , and was frequently to be found backstage in London 's theatres , ministering to the needs of showgirls — sometimes with an <unk> degree of persistence . Between 1910 and 1913 he expanded this work to Paris , to which he made regular visits , sometimes acting as a chaperone for dancers recruited by the Folies Bergère . Many out @-@ of @-@ work and would @-@ be actresses were invited to stay at the Stiffkey rectory , sometimes as many as 20 at a time , to the consternation of Molly Davidson and of some of the local establishment who feared for the morals of local farmhands . Among those most disapproving of Davidson 's conduct was Major Philip Hamond , a churchwarden at Morston , who later became Davidson 's principal adversary . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Davidson was 39 years old at the outbreak of war in 1914 . In October 1915 , possibly to escape the increasingly turbulent atmosphere in the Stiffkey rectory , he joined the Royal Navy as a chaplain . He began his service on HMS Gibraltar , a depot ship based in the Shetland Islands , where he irritated his shipmates by calling church parades every time another ship visited the anchorage ; he had the full approval of the base commander , Vice Admiral Sir Reginald Tupper , who was known as " Holy Reggie " . Davidson 's service report from Gibraltar 's captain records that " he performs his duties in a perfunctory manner . Not on good terms with <unk> , disregards mess rules and regulations " . In October 1916 Davidson joined HMS Fox in the Middle East , and shortly afterwards was arrested by the naval police during a raid on a Cairo brothel . He explained that he was looking for a diseased prostitute who had been infecting his men . Again his commanding officer 's reports were negative ; however , Davidson remained with the Fox until August 1918 when he was posted to HMS Leviathan in the northern Atlantic . Here , his commander was slightly more complimentary ; he found Davidson " a clever writer and entertainer [ who ] pays attention to duty " . Davidson left the Navy in March 1919 . 
 = = = " Prostitutes ' Padre " = = = 
 When Davidson returned home he found that Molly was six months ' pregnant . The dates of his service leave during 1918 made it apparent that he was not the father . A daughter was born on 21 June 1919 ; the likely father was a Canadian army colonel , Ernest <unk> , a friend from Davidson 's schooldays who had lodged at the rectory in the latter part of 1918 . Although deeply upset by his wife 's infidelity , Davidson accepted the child — who bore some resemblance to him — as his own . To escape the poisoned atmosphere in Stiffkey he applied for a year 's posting as chaplain to a hill station at Simla in India , but the opportunity fell through . Instead , Davidson resumed his pre @-@ war routine of spending his weeks in London , departing early on Monday morning and returning late on Saturday . Sometimes , through a missed rail connection or other mishap , he was barely in time for the Sunday morning service at Stiffkey , and sometimes he would fail to arrive at all . 
 Davidson , perhaps on the basis of his youthful Thames @-@ side rescue , had convinced himself that nearly all young girls alone in London were in need of rescue from a life of vice . Typical of these was Rose Ellis , whom he met in Leicester Square in September 1920 . Twenty years old and living precariously from part @-@ time prostitution , she was homeless and had no money . Davidson gave her cash for a room , and arranged to meet her the following week . Thus began a friendship that endured for more than a decade . Davidson brought her to the rectory , where she worked for a time in the gardens . He also tried to get her a job with a touring theatre company , took her to Paris to find employment as an au pair , kept her supplied with small sums of money , and paid her medical bills when she was suffering from venereal disease . 
 According to his own estimate , Davidson approached around 150 to 200 girls a year over a period of 12 years ( he later modified these figures to an overall total of between 500 and 1000 ) . His activities usually centred on the innumerable Lyons , ABC and Express Dairies teashops and their staffs of waitresses . Davidson was mesmerised , says Blythe , by " the ineffable harmonies created by starched linen crackling over young breasts and black @-@ <unk> calves in chubby conference just below the hem of the <unk> 's frock " . Many rejected his advances ; a number of teashops considered him a pest and barred him . <unk> took exception to his habit of visiting their female tenants at all hours of the night . Commentators have found little evidence that he behaved indecently , or molested the girls ; he bought them tea , found them rooms , listened to their problems and sometimes found them work on the stage or in domestic service . He styled himself the " Prostitutes ' Padre " , and asserted to his bishop that this was " the proudest title that a true priest of Christ can hold " . 
 = = = Financial problems = = = 
 To meet the costs of his lifestyle , Davidson needed more money than his Stiffkey living could provide . He sought to improve his financial position when , in about 1920 , he met Arthur John Gordon , supposedly a wealthy American company promoter but in reality an undischarged bankrupt and confidence trickster . Gordon not only persuaded Davidson to invest his savings in a range of dubious schemes , but also got him to solicit funds from other investors . Davidson borrowed heavily to increase his investment and by 1925 was in serious financial difficulties . In February that year he failed to pay his local rates and was threatened with imprisonment . He avoided this by borrowing from moneylenders at exorbitant interest rates , but in October was forced to file a petition of bankruptcy with debts totalling £ 2 @,@ 924 . Eventually a settlement was reached , whereby around half of his Stiffkey stipend was applied to the reduction of his debts . Somehow , however , Davidson managed to continue his London life . He never stopped believing in Gordon 's essential honesty , and was certain that one day his investments would pay off . Much of his time in London was spent , not in pursuit of girls , but looking for Gordon . 
 = = Downfall and deposition = = 
 = = = Complaints and investigations = = = 
 Although many of Davidson 's parishioners accepted that his London rescue mission was entirely honourable , some , including Major Hamond , were less convinced . Hamond was suspicious of the stream of visitors that Davidson brought to the Stiffkey rectory and thought he was neglecting his parochial duties . In 1927 relations between the two men worsened when Davidson , in a letter which Tucker describes as " breathless in its rudeness and insensitivity " , upbraided the major for clearing the ground in the Morston churchyard alongside his recently deceased wife 's grave : " Morston Churchyard is the private freehold property of the Rector of Morston ... you have no possible right to interfere with it in any way without my permission any more than I have the right to come and annex a part of your garden . " On one occasion , Davidson arrived late at Morston to officiate at a communion service , having forgotten the bread and wine ; enraged , Hamond ordered him back to the rectory to collect it . An even greater lapse , in Hamond 's eyes , was Davidson 's failure to return to Stiffkey in time to officiate at the 1930 Armistice Day ceremony at the local war memorial . 
 Early in 1931 , advised by a cousin who was a priest , Hamond made a formal complaint against Davidson to the Bishop of Norwich , the Right Reverend Bertram Pollock , citing the rector 's supposed behaviour with women in London . Under the provisions of the Clergy Discipline Act of 1892 , members of the clergy could be prosecuted in a consistory court for " immoral acts " and , if convicted , face punishments ranging from temporary suspension to full deposition — " defrocking " — from holy orders . Pollock was initially reluctant to prosecute Davidson , but was advised by his legal counsel Henry Dashwood that the case should proceed . In search of evidence , Dashwood hired a private enquiry agent , who soon found Rose Ellis and persuaded her to sign a statement detailing her ten @-@ year association with Davidson . The statement — which was immediately retracted by Ellis and never presented in court — contained little indication of any intimate relationship other than that she had once lanced a boil on Davidson 's bottom . 
 Enquiries continued for many months . The bishop was initially reluctant to pursue the case — Davidson thought he might be prepared to replace the charges with a lesser one of indiscipline . In February 1932 Dashwood advised Pollock that the matter could not be suppressed in this way ; allegations had been printed in the Evening News on 1 February , and the story had been picked up by other papers whose lurid headlines had created much public interest . On 7 February the bishop received a letter from a 17 @-@ year @-@ old girl , Barbara Harris , which contained specific allegations of immoral conduct against Davidson and promised more : " I know lots of things against him that might help you ... He has the keys of a lot of girls ' flats and front doors . " This letter is described by Matthew Parris in his account of the case as " a masterpiece of vituperation " ; Davidson 's lawyers failed to identify some obvious differences between the handwriting in the letter and other examples of Harris 's writing , a factor which might have affected the impact of her subsequent testimony to the court . 
 = = = Consistory court hearing = = = 
 A consistory court was convened for 29 March 1932 , under the presidency of the Norwich diocesan chancellor , F. Keppel North . Davidson was accused of associating with " women of loose character " , and " accosting , molesting , and importuning young females for immoral purposes " . The prosecution 's case was in the hands of a high @-@ profile legal team , headed by Roland Oliver KC and including the future cabinet minister Walter Monckton . Davidson , meanwhile , engaged experienced lawyers to defend him , funding this partly through the sale of newspaper stories . Because of the level of press interest , and the number of London @-@ based witnesses involved , the court sat in Church House , Westminster , rather than in Norwich . 
 After Oliver provided a summary account of Davidson 's life in London , Barbara Harris gave evidence . Cullen likens her evidence to " a whip of scorpions " that Davidson took full in the face . Davidson had first met Harris in September 1930 , when she was 16 . He had used a favoured ploy — affecting to confuse her with a well @-@ known film actress — to persuade her to take a meal with him . He then began regular visits to her lodgings , gave her small sums of money and promised to find her work . From time to time he shared rooms with her : " At first he kept to the chair " , Harris wrote , " but after the first few nights he did not " . In her evidence to the court she said she had not had intercourse with Davidson , though he had attempted this on several occasions ; when she had repulsed his advances , she claimed that he had " relieved himself " . 
 Other aspects of the odd relationship were revealed during Harris ' lengthy examination and cross @-@ examination : her visit to the Stiffkey rectory where she had been made to work as an unpaid <unk> and given only a chair to sleep in ; Davidson 's repeated promises to divorce his wife and marry Harris ; an incident when she and another girl , the latter in a nightgown , had danced in front of Davidson , supposedly so that he could judge their dancing abilities . The picture that Harris ' letter and evidence presented , if true , Tucker says , was that of " a man who is out of control ... running around London entertaining teenage girls ... adopting the guise of a kindly priest to ingratiate himself " . 
 Harris was followed into the witness @-@ box by a succession of landladies , waitresses and other women , all of whom confirmed Davidson 's habitual pestering without making any serious accusation of misconduct . When Davidson himself took to the stand , on 25 May , his light @-@ hearted , even flippant , manner created , says Tucker , " the flavour of a comedy routine with the rector 's counsel as straight man " . Davidson 's disastrous finances were aired — he took great offence when his association with Gordon was presented as a " partnership in crime " . He caused disbelief and amusement in the court when , questioned about the boil @-@ lancing incident with Rose Ellis , he professed not to know what a " buttock " was , claiming : " It is a phrase I have honestly never heard . So far as I remember it is a little below the waist . " At this stage , only Harris 's largely uncorroborated testimony had provided specific allegations of immorality ; the rest of the evidence was inconclusive and it seemed that the prosecution might fail . Davidson 's cause was severely damaged , however , when Oliver produced a photograph of him , taken on 28 March 1932 , with a nearly naked girl . She was Estelle Douglas , the 15 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of one of Davidson ' oldest friends . Davidson explained that the picture had been intended as a publicity shot to help the girl find work as an actress . He protested that he had been set up , and did not know she was naked under her shawl ; he thought she was wearing a bathing suit , as she had been in an earlier photograph . On 6 June , after closing speeches from both sides , the court adjourned until 8 July to allow the chancellor , who alone would determine the outcome , to consider the evidence . 
 = = = Verdict , sentence , defrocking = = = 
 During the court proceedings Davidson continued to officiate at Stiffkey and Morston , although his erratic attendance meant that substitutes often had to be arranged . On 12 June 1932 the Reverend R.H. Cattell arrived to officiate at the evening service in Stiffkey . He had just begun when Davidson entered the church and attempted to seize the Bible . The two priests wrestled with the book for some seconds before Cattell yielded , telling the congregation : " As nothing short of force will prevent Mr Davidson from taking part , I can see nothing left to do but to withdraw . " The crowds of reporters and sightseers at weekends led the Archdeacon of Lynn to issue a statement deploring the " media circus " and asking that " the full spirit of worship " be restored to Sunday services . 
 On 8 July 1932 Keppel North announced his verdict ; Davidson was guilty on five counts of immorality . The sentence would be determined by the bishop ; in the meantime , Davidson was entitled to seek leave to appeal to the Privy Council . <unk> in need of funds to meet his continuing legal expenses , Davidson reverted to his early career as a stage entertainer . On 18 July he made his debut with a variety act at the Prince 's Cinema in Wimbledon and later toured in the provinces until , possibly dissuaded by pressure from church authorities , theatres declined to book him . He then continued his public performances by appearing in a barrel on the Blackpool sea front , or " Golden Mile " , where thousands paid to observe him through a small window . Not everyone was impressed ; one customer , recalling the event years later , said : " He was very tatty and the place stank . " He shared his seafront billing with , among other attractions , " Mariana the Gorilla Girl " , the " Bearded Lady from Russia " and Dick Harrow , " the world 's fattest man " . 
 To the consternation of Hamond and some other parishioners , the bishop delayed issuing an instruction forbidding Davidson to preach . When Hamond locked the Morston church against him , the rector preached to a large congregation on the grass outside the church . In August , Davidson 's licence to minister as a priest was revoked ; his last service was morning worship at Stiffkey on 21 August 1932 , when around 1 @,@ 000 people congregated outside the church . That afternoon he demanded the Morston church keys from Hamond , who sent him away by turning him round and administering a substantial kick . Hamond was later fined for this assault . 
 In July and again in October , Davidson was refused leave to appeal to the Privy Council on grounds of either fact or law . The consistory court reconvened for sentencing in Norwich Cathedral on 21 October . Davidson was allowed briefly to address the court ; he admitted that his behaviour had been indiscreet , but regretted none of his actions and proclaimed his innocence " of any of the graver charges that have been made against me " . Then , in what Blythe describes as a " horrible little ceremony " , Bishop Pollock delivered the most severe sentence available — that of deposition : " Now therefore we , Bertram ... do thereby pronounce decree and declare that the said Reverend Harold Francis Davidson being a priest and deacon ought to be entirely removed , deposed and degraded from the said offices . " Davidson was thus defrocked . As the ceremony ended he made a furious impromptu speech , denouncing the sentence and declaring his intention to appeal to the Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 = = Campaigning for reinstatement = = 
 = = = Blackpool showman = = = 
 The consistory court had awarded the prosecution 's costs against Davidson , who now faced enormous legal bills and had no regular source of income . His only recourse was to return to Blackpool and resume his career as a showman ; this became his milieu for the next four years , interrupted by occasional prosecutions for obstruction and a nine @-@ day spell in prison in 1933 , for non @-@ payment of rent owing to one of his former London landladies . He informed the press : " While I am in the barrel I shall be occupied in preparing my case " . Although the barrel act remained his staple performance , he introduced variations over the years : freezing in a refrigerated chamber , or being roasted in a glass @-@ fronted oven while a mechanised devil prodded him with a pitchfork . In August 1935 the freezing routine led to Davidson 's arrest and prosecution for attempted suicide ; he won the case and was awarded £ 382 damages for false imprisonment . How much money Davidson made from his various acts is uncertain ; Tucker believes that the main financial beneficiary was his agent , Luke Gannon . 
 Molly Davidson had managed to acquire a small house in South Harrow , where Davidson spent his winters . Off @-@ season he worked sporadically , at one time as a door @-@ to @-@ door book salesman and on other as a porter at St Pancras railway station . He could not avoid press attention ; in November 1936 he was arrested and fined for pestering two 16 @-@ year @-@ old girls at Victoria station — he had approached them offering auditions for a leading role in a West End show . That same month he interrupted a Church Assembly at Central Hall , Westminster , at which the Archbishop of Canterbury was present . Davidson was prevented from addressing the meeting , at which he dropped numerous copies of a mimeographed pamphlet titled " I <unk> " , in which he listed his grievances and castigated the Church 's hierarchy . 
 = = = Death in Skegness = = = 
 By 1937 interest in Davidson 's Blackpool sideshows was waning and , for that summer , he accepted an invitation to join the self @-@ styled " Captain " Fred Rye 's animal @-@ themed show in the east coast resort of Skegness . He considered this a step upwards from what he termed " the blatant vulgarities of Blackpool " . Davidson 's act consisted of a 10 @-@ minute address delivered outside a cage containing two lions , after which he would enter the cage and spend a few minutes with the lions . This required courage on Davidson 's part , because he was fearful of animals . A 16 @-@ year @-@ old tamer , Irene Somner , supervised proceedings . The act was billed as " Daniel in a modern lion 's den " , and attracted large audiences , including a significant number of clergy . 
 On 28 July 1937 , at the evening performance , Davidson gave his usual speech before entering the cage in which two lions , Freddie and Toto , were sitting quietly . Then , according to Blythe : " in scarcely credible terms , the little clergyman from Norfolk and the lion acted out the classical Christian martyrdom to the full " . Eyewitnesses later reported that after Davidson had cracked his whip and shouted , Freddie became agitated and knocked Davidson over , before seizing him by the neck and running with him around the cage . Somner struggled to pacify the snarling Freddie , who eventually dropped the unconscious Davidson , enabling her to drag him to safety ; he was badly gashed , and had suffered a broken bone in his neck . An uncorroborated story circulated that while waiting for the ambulance , Davidson asked that the London newspapers be alerted in time for next day 's first editions . According to some press reports he sat up in hospital and asked visitors for their impressions of his ordeal in the cage . Most historians of the affair , however , believe that Davidson never recovered consciousness . He died on 30 July , his death possibly hastened by an insulin injection administered by a doctor who believed that Davidson was a diabetic . The coroner 's verdict was death by misadventure . 
 Friends and well @-@ wishers covered the expenses of the funeral , which took place on 3 August in Stiffkey churchyard . A large crowd — around 3 @,@ 000 according to Tucker — was in attendance including , from Davidson 's distant past , the Marchioness Townshend . Onlookers unable to get into the churchyard found vantage points on nearby walls , roofs and in trees . When the headstone was put in place it contained a line from Robert Louis Stevenson : " For on faith in man and genuine love of man all searching after truth must be founded . " 
 = = Aftermath and appraisal = = 
 In Skegness , Rye saw Davidson 's death as a business opportunity ; crowds flocked to see " The Actual Lion that <unk> and Caused the Death of the Ex @-@ Rector of Stiffkey " . By contrast , Molly Davidson 's financial situation was desperate . When her family applied to the church authorities for help , Archbishop Lang acted on her behalf behind the scenes and eventually she received grants from two church charities . She died in a Dulwich nursing home in 1955 . Of the other major participants in the legal case , Pollock remained as Bishop of Norwich until his resignation in 1942 , a year before his death . Davidson 's girls — Rose Ellis , Barbara Harris , Estelle Douglas and the rest — disappeared from public view after the 1932 trial , although a 1934 letter from Davidson indicates that Harris was then working at the London store Selfridges , under the name " Babs Simpson " . When announcing a 2010 book about the war artist Leslie Cole , The Fleece Press revealed that Harris had married Cole after changing her name and had thereafter successfully concealed her true identity from all enquirers . Even her husband may not have known of her past . 
 After Davidson 's death and burial , press attention withered as newspapers concentrated on more significant events in the years before the Second World War . In the decades after the war interest in the affair was periodically revived . In 1963 Blythe , deemed by Parris to be the affair 's " best historian " , published his account . Later in the 1960s , two stage musical versions were produced : The Stiffkey Scandals of 1932 , which appeared in Edinburgh in 1967 and London in 1968 , and God Made the Little Red Apple , staged in Manchester in 1969 . Neither of these productions was commercially successful ; when the former was adapted for television , The Daily Telegraph 's critic questioned the artistic justification for a musical about " so sad and peculiar a person " . In the 1970s Davidson 's case was the subject of a radio documentary , A Proper Little Gent , and in 1994 an episode of BBC Television 's Matter of Fact series examined the affair . Cullen 's full @-@ length biography of Davidson in 1975 posits a theory that multiple personalities led him to behave in different ways in differing circumstances . Robert Brown , in a biographical sketch for the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , suggests that what really motivated Davidson will never be known . In 2007 John Walsh published a fictionalised account of Davidson 's life , Sunday at the Cross Bones ( Fourth Estate ) , in which , according to a review in The Guardian , Davidson is depicted as " well @-@ meaning but ineffectual , bewildered by the world 's wickedness and his own barely acknowledged desires " . 
 The question of Davidson 's treatment by the consistory court was first raised by the Church Times immediately after the trial . A leading article argued that , although Davidson 's conduct had been " foolish and eccentric " , his intentions at least at the start of his ministry had been guided by idealism . Chancellor North was criticised both for lacking compassion and for the general conduct of the proceedings : " No experienced criminal solicitor could conceivably have blundered so badly and consistently . " In 2006 Davidson 's granddaughter , <unk> Collier , privately published a brief biography , The Rector of Stiffkey : His Life and Trial , in which she maintains the innocence of all the charges against him . Tucker argues that " Harold Davidson probably deserved to be quietly defrocked for his shortcomings as a priest " , but nevertheless believes that he was not an immoral man . He also highlights the incompetent presentation of Davidson 's case by his legal team , particularly their failure to question the provenance of the Barbara Harris letter . Tucker concludes that since the proceedings were flawed and the evidence of immorality flimsy , the Church of England owes it to the Davidson family to re @-@ examine the original findings . 
 The writer @-@ historian A. N. Wilson summarises Davidson as a " Tragic buffoon cum Christian Martyr " . In his history of Britain in the inter @-@ war years , A. J. P. Taylor writes that " Davidson offered a parable of the age . He attracted more attention than , say , Cosmo Gordon Lang , archbishop of Canterbury . Which man deserves a greater place in the history books ? " 
 = Skylon ( spacecraft ) = 
 Skylon is a design for a single @-@ stage @-@ to @-@ orbit spaceplane by the British company Reaction Engines Limited ( REL ) , using SABRE , a combined @-@ cycle , air @-@ breathing rocket propulsion system , potentially reusable for 200 flights . In paper studies , the cost per kilogram of payload carried to low Earth orbit in this way is hoped to be reduced from the current £ 1 @,@ 108 / kg ( as of December 2015 ) , including research and development , to around £ 650 / kg , with costs expected to fall much more over time after initial expenditures have <unk> . In 2004 , the developer estimated the total lifetime cost of the programme to be about $ 12 billion . 
 The vehicle design is for a hydrogen @-@ fuelled aircraft that would take off from a purpose @-@ built runway , and accelerate to Mach 5 @.@ 4 at 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) altitude using the atmosphere 's oxygen before switching the engines to use the internal liquid oxygen ( LOX ) supply to take it into orbit . Once in orbit it would release its payload ( of up to 15 tonnes ) . The vehicle will be unpiloted , but also be certified to carry passengers . All payloads could be carried in a standardised container compartment . The relatively light vehicle would then re @-@ enter the atmosphere and land on a runway , being protected from the conditions of re @-@ entry by a ceramic composite skin . When on the ground , it would undergo inspection and necessary maintenance . If the design goal is achieved , it should be ready to fly again within two days . 
 As of 2012 , only a small portion of the funding required to develop and build Skylon had been secured . The research and development work on the SABRE engine design is proceeding under a small European Space Agency ( ESA ) grant . In January 2011 , REL submitted a proposal to the British government to request additional funding for the project and in April REL announced that they had secured $ 350 million of further funding contingent on a test of the engine 's precooler technology being successful . Testing of the key technologies was successfully completed in November 2012 , allowing Skylon 's design to advance to its final phase . On 16 July 2013 the British government pledged £ <unk> to the project : this investment will provide support at a " crucial stage " to allow a full @-@ scale prototype of the SABRE engine to be built . 
 If all goes to plan , the first ground @-@ based engine tests could happen in 2019 , and Skylon could be performing unmanned test flights by 2025 . It could carry 15 tonnes of cargo to a 300 km equatorial orbit on each trip , and up to 11 tonnes to the International Space Station , almost 45 % more than the capacity of the European Space Agency 's ATV vehicle . 
 = = Research and development programme = = 
 = = = Background and early work = = = 
 Skylon is based on a previous project of Alan Bond , known as HOTOL . The development of HOTOL began in 1982 , at a time when space technology was moving towards reusable launch systems such as the Space Shuttle . In conjunction with British Aerospace and Rolls @-@ Royce , a promising design emerged to which the British government contributed £ 2 million . However , in 1988 , the government withdrew further funding , and development was terminated . Following this setback , Bond decided to set up his own company , Reaction Engines Limited , with the hope of continuing development with private funding . 
 After securing more funding in the 1990s , the initial design underwent radical revision and , since 2000 , Reaction Engines has been working with the University of Bristol to develop an engine design vital to the success of Skylon . The <unk> / <unk> designs resulting from this programme were deemed a great success . The next stage of development will be to construct a full @-@ sized working prototype of the SABRE Engine . 
 There are several differences compared with HOTOL . Whereas HOTOL would have launched from a rocket sled , to save weight , Skylon uses a conventional retractable undercarriage . Skylon 's revised engine design , the SABRE engine , is expected to offer higher performance . HOTOL 's rear mounted engine gave the vehicle intrinsically poor in @-@ flight stability . Early attempts to fix this problem had ended up sacrificing much of HOTOL 's payload potential , and contributed to the failure of the project . Skylon solves this by placing engines at the end of its wings , but further forward and much closer to the vehicle 's centre of mass longitudinally . 
 = = = Project brief = = = 
 REL intends ultimately to operate as a for @-@ profit commercial enterprise , manufacturing Skylon vehicles for multiple international customers ; these customers will operate their fleets directly , with support from REL . While REL intends to manufacture some components directly , such as the engine precooler , other components have been designed by partner companies and a consortium of various aerospace firms is expected to handle full production of Skylon . According to Management Today , Skylon has been discussed as a possible replacement for NASA 's Space Shuttle . 
 In service , Skylon could potentially lower satellite launch costs from the current £ 15 @,@ 000 / kg to £ 650 / kg , according to evidence submitted to the UK parliament by Reaction Engines Ltd . Funding for the project from the British government has often been difficult to obtain . Speaking on the topic of Skylon in 2011 , David Willetts , the UK Minister of State for Universities and Science , stated : 
 The European Space Agency is funding proof of concept work for Skylon from UK contributions . This work is focusing on demonstrating the viability of the advanced British engine technology that would underpin the project . Initial work will be completed in mid 2011 and if the trial is successful , we will work with industry to consider next steps . 
 = = = Funding and engine development = = = 
 An unsuccessful request for funding from the British government was issued in 2000 . This involved a proposal offering a potentially large return on investment . Subsequent discussions with the British National Space Centre ( which later became the UK Space Agency ) led to a major funding agreement in February 2009 between the British National Space Centre , European Space Agency ( ESA ) and REL for € 1 million ( $ 1 @.@ 28 million ) to produce a demonstration engine for Skylon by 2011 . 
 The Technology Demonstration Programme will last approximately 2 @.@ 5 years and will benefit from another € 1 million from ESA . This programme will take Reaction Engines Ltd from a Technology Readiness Level ( TRL ) of 2 / 3 up to 4 / 5 . The former UK Minister for Science and Innovation in 2009 , Lord Drayson , commented on Skylon in a speech : " This is an example of a British company developing world @-@ beating technology with exciting consequences for the future of space . " 
 As of 2012 , the funding required to develop and build the entire craft has not yet been secured , and so current research and development work is focused on the engines , under an ESA grant of € 1 million . In January 2011 , REL submitted a proposal to the British Government requesting additional funding for the Skylon project . On 13 April 2011 , REL announced that the Skylon design had passed several rigorous independent reviews . On 24 May 2011 , ESA publicly declared the design to be feasible , having found " no impediments or critical items " in the proposal . 
 The major milestone of the commencement of static testing of the engine precooler and the SABRE engine was achieved in June 2011 , marking the start of Phase 3 in the Skylon development programme . An REL spokesperson announced that they had secured $ 350 million of further funding , contingent on successful completion of the full @-@ sized precooled jet engine test in June 2011 . Engine testing was initiated in June 2011 , and was expected to continue to the end of that year . However , testing was delayed until April 2012 . 
 On 9 May 2011 , REL stated that a preproduction prototype of the Skylon could be flying by 2016 , and the proposed route would be a suborbital flight between the Guiana Space Centre near <unk> in French Guiana and the North European Aerospace Test Range , located in northern Sweden . Pre @-@ orders are expected in the 2011 – 2013 time frame coinciding with the formation of the manufacturing consortium . On 8 December 2011 , Alan Bond , speaking at the 7th Appleton Space Conference , stated that Skylon would enter into service by 2021 @-@ 2022 instead of 2020 as previously envisaged . 
 In April 2012 , REL announced that the first phase of the precooler test programme had been successfully completed . On 10 July 2012 , REL announced that the second of three series of tests has been completed successfully . The test facilities underwent upgrades to allow the third and final phase of testing to proceed . On 13 July 2012 , ESA Director @-@ General Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> told Space News that ESA would hold talks with REL to develop a further " technical understanding " . 
 Following a successful propulsion system test that was audited by ESA 's propulsion division in mid @-@ 2012 , the company announced that it would begin a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year project to develop and build a test rig of the Sabre engine to prove the engine 's performance across its air @-@ breathing and rocket modes . In November 2012 , it was announced that a key test of the engine precooler had been successfully completed , and that ESA had verified the precooler 's design . The project 's development is now allowed to advance to its next phase , which involves the construction and testing of a full @-@ scale prototype engine . In June 2013 , George Osborne , The Chancellor of the Exchequer stated on his Twitter account that the British government would be giving £ 60 million towards the further development of the SABRE engine . Osborne 's tweet stated : " Just seen SABRE -a rocket engine that cools air from 1000 degrees to <unk> in fraction of a second . We 're backing the future with £ 60m funding " . The first grant of £ 50 million was approved by the European Commission in August 2015 . The second grant of £ 10 million was approved by the European Space Agency in July 2016 . 
 In October 2015 , BAE Systems entered into an agreement with Reaction Engines where it would invest £ 20 @.@ 6 million in Reaction Engines to acquire 20 % of its share capital and help develop the SABRE engine . 
 = = Technology and design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Skylon is a fully reusable single stage to orbit ( SSTO ) vehicle , able to achieve orbit without staging . Proponents of SSTO claim that staging causes a number of problems due to its complexity that includes being difficult or impossible to recover and reuse many parts , leading to great expense , and therefore believe that SSTO designs hold the promise of reducing the cost of space @-@ flight . It is intended for Skylon to take off from a specially strengthened runway , fly to low earth orbit , re @-@ enter the atmosphere , and land upon a runway like a conventional aeroplane . 
 The design of the Skylon C2 features a large cylindrical payload bay , 13 m ( 42 ft 8 in ) long and 4 @.@ 8 m ( 15 ft 9 in ) in diameter . It is designed to be comparable with current payload dimensions , and able to support the containerisation of payloads that Reaction Engines hopes for in the future . To an equatorial orbit , Skylon could deliver 15 t ( 33 @,@ 000 lb ) to a 300 km ( 190 mi ) altitude or 11 t ( 24 @,@ 000 lb ) to an 800 km ( 500 mi ) altitude . Using interchangeable payload containers , Skylon could be fitted to carry satellites or fluid cargo into orbit , or , in a specialised habitation module , up to 30 astronauts in one launch . 
 Because the engine uses the atmosphere as reaction mass at low altitude , it will have a high specific impulse ( around 2 @,@ 800 seconds ) , and burn about one fifth of the propellant that would have been required by a conventional rocket . Therefore , it would be able to take off with much less total propellant than conventional systems . This , in turn , means that it does not need as much lift or thrust , which permits smaller engines , and allows conventional wings to be used . While in the atmosphere , using wings to counteract gravity drag is more fuel @-@ efficient than simply expelling propellant ( as in a rocket ) , again reducing the total amount of propellant needed . 
 The payload fraction would be significantly greater than normal rockets and the vehicle should be fully reusable ( 200 times or more ) . 
 = = = SABRE engines = = = 
 One of the most significant features of the Skylon design is the engine , called SABRE . The engines are designed to operate much like a conventional jet engine to around Mach 5 @.@ 5 ( 1 @,@ 700 m / s ) , 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) altitude , beyond which the air inlet closes and the engine operates as a highly efficient rocket to orbital speed . The proposed SABRE engine is not a <unk> , but a jet engine running combined cycles of a precooled jet engine , rocket engine and ramjet . Originally the key technology for this type of precooled jet engine did not exist , as it required a heat exchanger that was ten times lighter than the state of the art . Research conducted since then has achieved the necessary performance . 
 Operating an air @-@ breathing jet engine at velocities of up to Mach 5 @.@ 5 poses numerous engineering problems . Several previous engines proposed by other designers worked well as jet engines but performed poorly as rockets . This engine design aims to be a good jet engine within the atmosphere , as well as being an excellent rocket engine outside . The problem with operating at Mach 5 @.@ 5 has been that the air coming into the engine rapidly heats up as it is compressed into the engine ; due to certain thermodynamic effects , this greatly reduces the thrust that can be produced by burning fuel . Attempts to avoid these issues typically make the engine much heavier ( <unk> / ramjets ) or greatly reduce the thrust ( conventional turbojets / ramjets ) . In either case the end result is an engine that has a poor thrust to weight ratio at high speeds , resulting in an engine that is too heavy to assist much in reaching orbit . 
 The SABRE engine design aims to avoid this by using some of the liquid hydrogen fuel to cool helium in a closed @-@ cycle precooler , which quickly reduces the temperature of the air at the inlet . The air is then used for combustion much like in a conventional jet , and once the helium has left the pre @-@ cooler it is further heated by the products of the pre @-@ burner , giving it enough energy to drive the turbine and the liquid hydrogen pump . Because the air is cooled at all speeds , the jet can be built of light alloys and the weight is roughly halved . Additionally , more fuel can be burnt at high speed . Beyond Mach 5 @.@ 5 , the air would become <unk> hot despite the cooling , so the air inlet closes and the engine relies solely on on @-@ board liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel as in a normal rocket . 
 = = = Fuselage and structure = = = 
 The fuselage of Skylon is expected to be a carbon @-@ fiber @-@ reinforced polymer space frame ; a light and strong structure that supports the weight of the aluminium fuel tanks and to which the ceramic skin is attached . Multiple layers of reflective foil thermal insulation fill the spaces of the frame . 
 The currently proposed Skylon model C2 will be a large vehicle , with a length of 82 metres ( 269 ft ) and a diameter of 6 @.@ 3 metres ( 21 ft ) . Because it will use a low @-@ density fuel , liquid hydrogen , a great volume is needed to contain enough energy to reach orbit . The propellant is intended to be kept at low pressure to minimise stress ; a vehicle that is both large and light has an advantage during atmospheric reentry compared to other vehicles due to a low ballistic coefficient . Because of the low ballistic coefficient , Skylon would be slowed at higher altitudes where the air is thinner . As a result , the skin of the vehicle would reach only 1 @,@ 100 K ( 830 ° C ) . In contrast , the smaller Space Shuttle was heated to 2 @,@ 000 K on its leading edge , and so employed an extremely heat @-@ resistant but fragile silica thermal protection system . The Skylon design does not require such a system , instead opting for using a far thinner yet durable reinforced ceramic skin . However , due to turbulent flow around the wings during re @-@ entry , some parts of Skylon would need to be actively cooled . 
 = = = = Wheels and runway = = = = 
 At a gross takeoff weight of 275 tonnes , of which 220 tonnes is propellant , the vehicle is capable of placing 12 tonnes into an equatorial low Earth orbit . A reinforced runway will be needed to tolerate the high equivalent single wheel load . It will possess a retractable undercarriage with high pressure tyres and water @-@ cooled brakes . If problems were to occur just before a take @-@ off the brakes would be applied to stop the vehicle , the water boiling away to dissipate the heat . Upon a successful take @-@ off , the water would be jettisoned , thus reducing the weight of the undercarriage , in the C1 design 1200 kg of water allows the weight of the brakes alone to be reduced from over 3000 kg to around 415 kg . During landing , the empty vehicle would be far lighter , and hence the water would not be needed . 
 = = Specifications ( Skylon D1 ) = = 
 Data from the Skylon User Manual 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : None , remote controlled from ground 
 The proposed Skylon Personnel / Logistics Module ( SPLM ) has provision for a Captain . 
 Capacity : 0 
 up to 24 passengers in the SPLM 
 Potential for up to 30 passengers ( in a special passenger module ) 
 Payload : 15 @,@ 000 kg nominal ( 33 @,@ 000 lb nominal ) 17 @,@ 000 kg ( 37 @,@ 000 lb ) to equatorial 160 km ( 99 mi ) orbit from equatorial launch site 
 approx 2 @,@ 800 kg ( 6 @,@ 200 lb ) to 98 ° ( sun @-@ synchronous ) 600 km ( 373 mi ) orbit from equatorial launch site 
 Length : 83 @.@ 133 m ( 272 @.@ 75 ft ) 
 Wingspan : 26 @.@ 818 m ( 87 @.@ 99 ft ) 
 Height : approx 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft ) 
 Empty weight : 53 @,@ 400 kg ( 117 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 325 @,@ 000 kg ( 717 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × SABRE 4 synergistic combined cycle rocket engine , 2 @,@ 000 kN ( 450 @,@ 000 lbf ) each 
 Fuselage diameter : 6 @.@ 3 m ( 20 @.@ 67 ft ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Orbital ( air @-@ breathing Mach 5 @.@ 14 , rocket Mach 27 @.@ 8 ) 
 Service ceiling : 28 @,@ 500 m air @-@ breathing , 90 km SABRE ascent , 600 km exoatmospheric ( 93 @,@ 500 ft air breathing , 56 mi rocket ascent , 373 mi exoatmospheric ) 
 Specific impulse : 4 @,@ 100 seconds ( 40 @,@ 000 N @-@ s / kg ) <unk> seconds ( 90 @,@ 000 N @-@ s / kg ) air @-@ breathing , 460 seconds ( 4 @,@ 500 N @-@ s / kg ) rocket , 465 @.@ 2 seconds ( 4 @,@ 562 N @-@ s / kg ) orbital 
 SABRE engine thrust / weight ratio : up to 14 atmospheric 
 = Janet ( album ) = 
 Janet ( stylized as janet . ) is the fifth studio album by American recording artist Janet Jackson , released on May 18 , 1993 , by Virgin Records America . Prior to its release , Jackson was at the center of a high @-@ profile bidding war over her recording contract . In 1991 , her original label A & M sought to renew her contract , while others , such as Atlantic , Capitol , and Virgin all vied to sign her . After meeting with Virgin owner Richard Branson , she signed with the label for a $ 40 million contract , making her the world 's then @-@ highest paid musical act . 
 Criticism that her success in the music industry was attributed to being a member of the Jackson family and a producer @-@ dependent artist led her to write all lyrics for the album , in addition to co @-@ producing every song and co @-@ writing each of their arrangements with the songwriting / production duo Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . Its title , read " Janet , period . " , is meant to disassociate her public image from her family , dropping her surname . While pop and R & B had been standard components in her music , she broadened her compositions by incorporating hip hop , opera , house and jazz , eliminating the rigid , industrial sound of her previous records . Although she earned a reputation as an advocate for sexual abstinence with her 1986 single " Let 's Wait Awhile " , the theme of Janet is sexual intimacy — an abrupt departure from her conservative image . Much of the acclaim for the album focused on her lyrics that emphasized the female perspective on sexuality and the demand for practicing safe sex . Academics have argued the erotic imagery in her music videos released to promote the album 's singles have contributed to a higher degree of sexual freedom among women . 
 The album topped the record charts in the United States , Australia , New Zealand and the UK . In the US , it became the singer 's third consecutive album to top the Billboard 200 and her first to debut at number one . Selling 350 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , it set a record for the highest first week sales for a female artist at that time . Certified sixfold platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , it has sold over seven million copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan and an estimated 20 million copies worldwide . It cemented her as an international icon and sex symbol , and is listed by the National Association of Recording Merchandisers and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as one of the 200 Definitive Albums of All Time . 
 Producing six top ten hits on the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart , Janet remains one of only seven albums in the chart 's history to achieve that feat , and being the third consecutive album to produce five or more singles on top 10 , making her the only artist in history to have three albums with 5 or more singles in the top 10 . " That 's the Way Love Goes " became Jackson 's most successful single in the US , staying atop the Hot 100 for eight weeks , as well as topping the singles charts in Australia , Canada , and New Zealand . It received two Grammy Award nominations in 1994 , winning Best R & B Song . Her ballad " Again " — written for the 1993 feature film Poetic Justice — also topped the Hot 100 and garnered nominations for the Golden Globe and Academy Award for Best Original Song . The MTV @-@ sponsored Janet World Tour supporting the album received critical acclaim for Jackson 's elaborate stage performances , reinforcing her reputation as one of the preeminent artists of the MTV generation . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rumors of a multimillion @-@ dollar bidding war over Jackson 's recording contract began to circulate in spring 1991 . Jet magazine reported : " A recording company has offered in excess of $ 50 million to sign superstar Janet Jackson to a recording contract , making the 24 @-@ year @-@ old singer / songwriter / dancer / actress the key player in one of the hottest bidding wars among today 's major record companies . " Reports indicated that Capitol , Virgin and Atlantic were all bidding for Jackson 's contract , as her ties to A & M would soon expire ; by March , she had signed with Virgin . The New York Times declared " Janet Jackson has signed what is believed to be the most lucrative contract in the history of recording . The 24 @-@ year @-@ old singer , songwriter and actress signed an exclusive contract with Virgin Records it was announced yesterday . " Her new contract guaranteed a twenty @-@ two percent royalty payment , in addition to her then @-@ historic signing bonus . Chuck Philips of the Los Angeles Times reported that it had been the largest bidding war in recent memory and that " [ o ] ne reason the bidding was so heavy , various industry observers have noted , was that Jackson @-@ at just 24 @-@ is still a relatively fresh face on the pop scene and that her dance @-@ pop style is ideal for today 's pop / video climate . " In addition , her potential as an international superstar proved to be the primary motivation for the label 's investment . Jeff Ayeroff , co @-@ managing director of Virgin in the US stated : " Janet is a world @-@ class artist and we expect her growth to be enormous . " Chairman Richard Branson spoke with Jackson privately to seal the deal . He commented : " A Rembrandt rarely becomes available ... When it does , there are many people who are determined to get it . I was determined . " 
 Stephen Holden of The New York Times criticized the contract amount , considering it a gamble for Virgin . He stated that Jackson " is a producer @-@ dependent artist — i.e. , someone who relies on others to make her sound interesting and trendy . She also lacks a sharply defined personality , both as an artist and celebrity . Where singers like Ms. Houston and Mariah Carey have commanding vocal power , Ms. Jackson 's is a relatively indistinguishable studio voice . " Richard Branson rebutted this argument stating " Ms. Jackson has met with great success working with the production team of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , just as her brother Michael Jackson has experienced his greatest successes with the producer Quincy Jones . It is interesting that Mr. Holden doesn 't mention this similar ' liability ' when discussing Michael Jackson . To say that Ms. Jackson is ' dependent ' on her producer is a shortsighted observation . She is a formidable talent who stands on her own . " Michael Jackson would break his sister 's record only days later , when he signed a $ 60 million contract with Sony Music Entertainment . Both sibling 's contracts garnered considerable criticism . Los Angeles Times reported that " A & M Records President Al <unk> , whose company lost the fierce bidding battle over Janet Jackson to Virgin Records , said record companies may be vesting too much importance in individual performers " as the funds used as advances to the Jacksons could have launched recording careers for numerous unknown talents . Cliff Burnstein of Q @-@ Prime management commented that recording artists demands for advances upon signing would begin to escalate from that point forward . 
 Prior to her first release with Virgin , Jackson was asked by Jam and Lewis to record a song for the sound track to the feature film Mo ' Money , released in 1992 by their label Perspective Records . Jon Bream of the Star Tribune reported : " For most movie soundtracks , producers negotiate with record companies , managers and lawyers for the services of big @-@ name singers . Like the Hollywood outsiders that they are , Edina @-@ based Jam and Lewis went directly to such stars as Janet Jackson , Michael Jackson , Luther Vandross , Bell Biv Devoe , Color Me Badd and Johnny Gill . " Jackson , Jackson and Vandross recorded the duet or trio " The Best Things in Life Are Free " , which peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Hot R & B Singles chart . Shortly afterward , Jackson began filming for her first feature length role in John Singleton 's Poetic Justice . Although she was encouraged by a major studio executive to take on a film in which she could portray a singer , she insisted on finding a different role . She explained : " About that same time John Singleton asked me to read his new script . John and I became buddies — I loved Boyz N the Hood — so I thought he was just asking my advice . I was shocked and honored to learn the screenplay had been written with me in mind . ' Would you play Justice ? ' he wanted to know . Yes ! I 'd finally found a role — a dramatic nonsinging role — that was right . " Released in July 1993 , Poetic Justice debuted at number one at the box office , grossing $ 11 @,@ 728 @,@ 455 ; it grossed a grand total of $ 27 @,@ 515 @,@ 786 . 
 = = Conception = = 
 After writing songs with themes of independence for Control and social injustice for Rhythm Nation 1814 , Jackson desired to devote her new album to love and relationships , describing the theme of her new album as " intimacy " and that " [ s ] <unk> communication is the name of the game . " She stated in an interview with David Wild for Rolling Stone that " [ w ] hile I was doing Rhythm Nation , I was thinking about how things were so hard , so regimented and so black and white ... I thought I 'd do something on the sexy side — which is hard for me since I grew up as a tomboy and don 't really think of myself that way . But I think this album is more on the feminine tip . " She also commented on how her experience acting in Poetic Justice played a role in taking a new direction with her music . Speaking with biographer David Ritz , she stated that " Rhythm Nation was a heavy record , and Poetic Justice was a heavy movie . I wanted to do something lighter but also daring ... When I wrote the album , I was still in a poetic frame of mind , inspired by Maya 's beautiful language . You can hear that inspiration or the interludes and especially on the song ' New Agenda . ' This time I felt much freer expressing myself . " 
 = = Titling = = 
 Despite the critical and commercial success of her two previous albums , Jackson continued to receive numerous comparisons to her brother Michael , often with doubts that she held staying power in the music industry . When Edna Gundersen of USA Today questioned her about the subject , she responded : " Certain people feel I 'm just riding on my last name ... That 's why I just put my first name on janet. and why I never asked my brothers to write or produce music for me . " Virgin Records expressed the album title " punctuates the declaration of strength the singer , songwriter and producer boldly expresses on this moving collection of songs which explore love , sensuality , the power of sisterhood and her own evolving self @-@ identity . " Thomas Harrison , author of Music of the 1990s ( 2011 ) wrote that " [ t ] he conscious decision was made , by the company and / or Jackson , to put her into the same league as other one @-@ named artists , such as Madonna , Bono , and Prince , or at least to put her on the same standing as others in the industry who are often called by one name , such as Whitney , Mariah , Diana , Dolly , and Garth among others . Jackson could now , in a sense , stand on her own and not be seen as a product of the family entertainment machine . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant magazine recounted the title of the album ultimately " announced the singer as completely independent of her male @-@ dominated family [ and ] it positioned her as the person in charge of her sound . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The album was produced at Flyte Tyme studios in Edina , Minnesota . Songs on the album , with the exception of " What 'll I Do " , were written by Janet Jackson , Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , and mixed by Steve Hodge and Dave Rideau ; " What 'll I Do " was written and produced by Jackson and Jellybean Johnson . Jackson took a larger role in songwriting and production than she did on her previous albums . She explained that " [ a ] ll my records are personal , and janet , is the most personal of them all . That 's why this time around it was important for me to write all the lyrics and half of the melodies . " Jam described the record as being " a more mature album musically . " David Ritz noted that Jackson and her producers took risks by experimenting with musical influences that had not appeared in their previous work . He explained : " She asked Kathleen Battle and Public Enemy 's Chuck D to contribute — an opera diva and a hardcore rapper , two artists one would not associate with Janet — and somehow pulled if off . Beyond Jam and Lewis , there 's now a recognizable Janet Jackson production style that 's gutsy and , in some cases , even eccentric . " 
 " That 's The Way Love Goes " contains a sample loop of " Papa Don 't Take No Mess " written by James Brown , Fred Wesley , Charles <unk> , and John Starks . The song " Again " , was originally just an experimental sound the production duo was considering . While Jackson found its melody compelling , the trio did not give the song serious contemplation until the film producers from Poetic Justice requested a ballad for the film 's soundtrack . Jackson subsequently wrote the lyrics for " Again " and shaped them around Jam 's melody . The song was arranged by Lee <unk> and accompanied by members of the Minnesota Orchestra and the St. Paul Chamber Orchestra . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 = = = Rolling Stone cover = = = 
 In September 1993 , Jackson appeared topless on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine with the hands of her then @-@ husband René Elizondo , Jr. covering her breasts . The photograph is the original full @-@ length version of the cropped image used on the cover of the Janet album , shot by Patrick Demarchelier . In the cover story , " Sexual Healing " by David Ritz , Jackson explained , " sex has been an important part of me for several years . But it just hasn 't blossomed publicly until now . I 've had to go through some changes and shed some old attitudes before feeling completely comfortable with my body . Listening to my new record , people intuitively understand the change in me " . Ritz likened Jackson 's transformation to Marvin Gaye as he stated , " just as Gaye moved from What 's Going On to Let 's Get It On , from the austere to the ecstatic , Janet , every bit as serious @-@ minded as Marvin , moved from Rhythm Nation to Janet , her statement of sexual liberation " . 
 The image was cropped to show only Jackson 's face on the album cover , and midriff in the interior booklet . The full version appears as the cover of the limited edition double disc edition of the album , as well as the video compilation Janet released later that year . Sonia Murray of The Vancouver Sun later reported , " Jackson , 27 , remains clearly established as both role model and sex symbol ; the Rolling Stone photo of Jackson ... became one of the most recognizable , and most lampooned , magazine covers of the year " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " That 's the Way Love Goes " , the album 's lead single entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number fourteen and peaked at number one . The single was certified gold by the RIAA on November 12 , 1993 . Virgin records intended for " If " to be the lead single for the album , but Jackson , Jam and Lewis disagreed . " That 's the Way Love Goes " remained at number one for eight weeks — the most successful chart performance of any member of the Jackson family . The single earned a Grammy Award for Best R & B Song . " If " was released as the album 's second single and peaked at number four on the Hot 100 , receiving gold certification on September 28 , 1993 . " Again " , peaked at number one on the Hot 100 on December 11 , 1993 and topped the chart for two weeks . The single was certified gold and then doubled to platinum by the RIAA on December 17 , 1993 . The single earned a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . " Because of Love " reached number ten , but was not certified by the RIAA . " Any Time , Any Place " peaked at number two on the Hot 100 and was certified gold on July 11 , 1994 . " You Want This " , the album 's final commercial single for the United States , peaked at number eight on the Hot 100 and was awarded gold certification on December 6 , 1994 . The album has a hidden track , " Whoops Now " , which was released as a single in selected territories in 1995 . 
 = = = Videography = = = 
 Jackson 's music video for " If " was staged as a futuristic Asian nightclub , with spy cameras monitoring the intimate interactions of patrons within their private <unk> . The video is an elaborate metaphor for the single 's message of sexual fantasy , desire and voyeurism . The video was directed by Dominic Sena , who previously worked with Jackson on music videos for Rhythm Nation 1814 . René Elizondo , Jr. directed the videos for " That 's The Way Love Goes " , and " Again " . Videos for " Any Time , Any Place " and " You Want This " were directed by Keir McFarlane . 
 = = = Janet World Tour = = = 
 Jackson embarked on her second world tour in support of her debut album with the Virgin Records label . Costumes and wardrobe for the tour were designed by stylist Tanya Gill , with outfits " rang [ ing ] from <unk> vests with high @-@ heeled moccasin boots to zoot suits top @-@ hats to circus @-@ ringmaster bustiers . " With a show encompassing over 100 costumes , a team of over 50 costume makers was led by wardrobe supervisor , Helen Hiatt . The tour 's debut concert was held on November 24 , 1993 in Cincinnati , Ohio . Jackson held a four show engagement at Madison Square Garden which began on December 17 , 1993 , with the final performance held on New Year 's Eve . Michael Snyder of the San Francisco Chronicle described Jackson 's stage performance at the San Jose Arena in February 1994 , as what erased the line between " stadium @-@ size pop music concerts and full @-@ scale theatrical extravaganzas " . 
 The one @-@ hour @-@ and @-@ 45 @-@ minute performance was so tightly choreographed — down to two built @-@ in pauses for " tears " at overwhelming waves of crowd adoration and a contrived bit of seductive repartee with a handsome , buffed hunk plucked from the front row for the ode to lust , " Any Time , Any Place " — that it breezed by like a glitzy Vegas revue or a television variety show . 
 Her performances also garnered criticism . Renee Graham of The Boston Globe commented that her stage show at Great Woods Center for the Performing Arts on June 20 , 1994 , proved her limited vocal range as " [ t ] he numerous costume changes , pyrotechnics and the dancing all but overshadowed her razor @-@ sharp seven @-@ piece band and three back @-@ up singers " , asserting Jackson was a better performer and entertainer than she was a vocalist . However , the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch 's Steve Pick observed Jackson 's stage show at the Riverport Amphitheatre on July 12 , 1994 , made the Janet album 's numerous hit singles more effective with her " larger @-@ than @-@ life stage persona " . 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 A limited 2 disc edition of the album was released shortly after the album 's release , the limited edition is in the form of a hard @-@ covered book . The book 's cover is an unedited version of the album 's cover art , the book contains pictures of Jackson and lyrics of the songs from the album . The end of the book contains 2 CD 's , the second CD is a compilation of rare remixes of songs from the album 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Janet debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums charts , it was the first time in history a female artist debuted at number one of the SoundScan era ; with the largest first week sales in history for a female artist at the time with 350 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week . The album also gained much success worldwide , debuting at number one in the United Kingdom , New Zealand , and Australia . It also debuted in the top 10 in Sweden , The Netherlands , Canada ( with 65 @,@ 000 copies sold at the first week ) and Switzerland . 
 Janet was first certified gold by the RIAA on August 8 , 1993 denoting 500 @,@ 000 units shipped within the United States . The same day , the album 's certification was raised to 3 × platinum , denoting 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units shipped . On November 17 , 1993 , Janet received 4 × platinum certification and was later awarded 5 × platinum on December 17 , 1993 . The following year on April 12 , 1994 , the album was certified 6 × platinum . Other certifications include a Double Gold certification in Finland , a 2 × Platinum certification in the UK And Australia , a Platinum in New Zealand and a Gold certification in Norway . 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , the album has sold 7 @,@ 035 @,@ 000 million copies in the United States since its release , and has achieved worldwide sales of 20 million copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rolling Stone magazine declared " [ a ] s princess of America 's black royal family , everything Janet Jackson does is important . Whether proclaiming herself in charge of her life , as she did on Control ( 1986 ) , or commander in chief of a rhythm army dancing to fight society 's problems ( Rhythm Nation 1814 , from 1989 ) , she 's influential . And when she announces her sexual maturity , as she does on her new album , Janet . , it 's a cultural moment . " Claiming the album should bring her critical praise , the magazine concludes its review with the statement " [ t ] he princess of America 's black royal family has announced herself sexually mature and surrendered none of her crown 's luster in the process . Black women and their friends , lovers and children have a victory in Janet . " Robert Christgau originally gave the album an " honorable mention " in consumer guide for The Village Voice , wherein he complimented its erotic songs and cited " Funky Big Band " , " Throb " , and " Be a Good Boy " as highlights . Billboard magazine gave a positive review , stating " [ d ] <unk> to be an instant smash , Ms. Jackson 's latest is a glamorous assortment of styles — pop , dance , R & B , rock , jazz , rap — each delivered with consummate skill and passion . Janet is described as " a career @-@ defining record earning Janet the right to operate on a first @-@ name basis . " 
 Michael Snyder of the San Francisco Chronicle lauded the album 's content , stating " [ t ] his 75 @-@ minute opus , her first effort under a <unk> contract with the Virgin label , could be the make @-@ out album of the ' 90s ... a silken soul odyssey , charting one woman 's journey to emotional and sexual fulfillment through 10 songs and a series of spoken @-@ word and ambient snippets . " Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian declared the album 's " luxuriant collection of house , soul and pop is her best yet . Cod @-@ Madonna throwaways like Throb aside , there are surprises all over the place . Public Enemy 's Chuck D counterweights Jackson 's sugared vocal to stunning effect on a black @-@ pride anthem , New Agenda ; soprano Kathleen Battle turns the heavyweight funk of This Time into something eerie and beautiful . " 
 Robert Johnson of San Antonio Express @-@ News praised Jackson and her producers for taking a chance on a new sound . He wrote : " Under the enormous pressure of her $ 40 million deal with Virgin Records , Jackson had to deliver something big enough to put her on a first @-@ name basis with the world ... ' janet . ' isn 't perfect , but it should be enough to make her the Queen of Pop . " " Dammit , Janet ! , " marveled Melody Maker . " The last Jackson hero ( ine ) has carried peacock feathers to the dance . Holier than Mahalia . " " janet. will please most people , " remarked The Daily Telegraph , " because it is crammed with the sort of tender , joyous pop music that lingers long after smarter records have been forgotten . " 
 Steve Pick of St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch stated that although Jackson may not be the greatest singer or songwriter , but she has nonetheless " created and projected a persona that is irresistible . Part of it is a sexual allure , but more of it is the way she demands and receives attention . " John Mackie with The Vancouver Sun reported the album gives Jackson an " incredible style " , proclaiming Janet as " the best commercial album so far this year , an album that could well vault her past the stumbling Madonna as Queen of the charts . Heck , she might even outsell Michael with this one . " " While her brother loops the loop on Planet Pepsi , it 's hard to imagine the spotlight ever shifting to his sassy sis , " remarked NME , " but this modern hunk of an album should redress some of the balance . " 
 Jay Cocks of TIME magazine offered a mixed review , stating " [ f ] or all its sass , there is something a little too careful about this album : the rhythms are too studied and <unk> , the sexiness slightly forced . It 's as if Jackson , aware that this was her premier effort under a new , $ 40 million record deal , felt weighed down by the burden of proving herself . When , however , she kicks loose on What 'll I Do , a nifty , ' 60s @-@ style soul <unk> , it 's clear that Jackson 's got nothing to prove to anyone , including herself . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times compares Jackson to her brother Michael and Madonna , stating " Jackson 's real strength , abetted by Jam and Lewis , is the way she tops dance @-@ club rhythms with pop melodies . Less up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ second than Madonna but still effective , the Jackson team has obviously been listening to the competition . Madonna 's ' Justify My Love ' echoes in ' That 's the Way Love Goes , ' and ' If ' resembles Michael Jackson 's ' Why You Wanna Trip on Me , ' starting with screaming guitar and a chanted verse , rising to a sweet melody . " He also comments that despite its shortcomings , " [ t ] he album 's not about being real ; it 's about <unk> and ingenuity , about giving the public something it can use . For a superstar , Jackson is downright selfless , but she gets the job done . " 
 Chris Willman of the Los Angeles Times gave an unfavorable review . Although sex in popular music is considered a standard concept , Willman states the only reason the album would cause a reaction is because of Jackson 's well @-@ known conservative nature . He comments : " So be it . Jackson 's first album in four years is destined for a long ride at No. 1 , not because it 's any great piece of work , but largely for its <unk> aspirations . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly stated that " [ i ] f musical variety and daring lyrics were all that mattered , janet. would make the grade . But the album has a lot to prove . It is the first delivery under her $ 40 million contract with Virgin , and its title — which translates as ' Janet , period ' — is meant as a declaration of independence from her oddball siblings ... She still sounds like a young woman from a male @-@ dominated family who is searching for her identity and voice . Mostly , though , janet. sounds like a mess — period . " David Sinclair of The Times wrote : " In the steamy , post @-@ Madonna climate of the 1990s , Jackson is not about to let thoughts of love get in the way of the mechanics of lust , and like many of her superstar contemporaries she tends to confuse sex with soul . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Jackson received five nominations for the 1994 American Music Awards : Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist , Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist , Favorite Pop / Rock Album and Favorite Soul / R & B Album for Janet , and Favorite Soul / R & B Single for " That 's the Way Love Goes " . The same year she received two Grammy Award nominations — Best R & B Vocal Performance , Female and Best R & B Song for " That 's The Way Love Goes " — winning Best R & B Song . Several critics asserted she was unjustly overlooked in the Grammy 's three major categories : Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Album of the Year . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune stated , " Jackson again was denied a nomination for album of the year , even though ' janet ' ( Virgin ) has remained in the Top 10 since its release last summer and has been critically acclaimed . " He adds that " the oversight is doubly vexing , because [ Jackson ] — in a songwriting and production partnership with Jimmy Jam ( aka James Harris III ) and Terry Lewis — is not just a multiplatinum pop act but an artist who has reshaped the sound and image of rhythm and blues over the last decade . " Kot laid blame to the oversight on the fact that many believed her to be a producer @-@ dependent artist — an opinion he found to be in error . Similarly , producer Jimmy Jam stated : " It 's easy to say that the two albums she did before she met us weren 't successful and when she got with us she became successful ... ' Control ' was the first album she actually had input . I think that 's just as significant as the fact we ( Jam and Lewis ) did the record . " 
 = = = Retrospective reviews = = = 
 Later reviews were generally positive . In a retrospective review , Christgau gave Janet an " A – " and said that although the costly production by Jam & Lewis makes the music sound " more pornographic than obscene " , " this achievement is Janet 's , period ... Better nose than Michael , better navel than Madonna , better sex than either . " Laura Sinagra wrote in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) that with janet , Jackson " took more risks " lyrically than on her previous albums . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine notes that the album " was at the forefront of the increasingly popular sampling trend in the ' 90s , with one song even employing three different samples as its foundation . Some make perfect sense on a thematic as well as sonic level , like Kool & the Gang 's " Kool It ( Here Comes the Fuzz ) " and Stevie Wonder 's " Superwoman , Where Were You When I Needed You " on " New Agenda , " or the orchestral flourish from Diana Ross & the Supremes ' " Someday We 'll Be Together " on " If , " which seems to exist for the sole purpose of providing the impetus behind one of the greatest dance @-@ break routines in music video history . " Commenting on the album 's broad range , he states : " The mother of eclectic , genre @-@ hopping records by Christina Aguilera , Gwen Stefani , and Fergie , janet. incorporates new jack swing , house , pop , rock , hip @-@ hop , jazz , and even opera , but the album 's range of styles isn 't jarring in the least ... Janet has never been one thing and janet. is a feminist statement , to be sure . " Alex Henderson of Allmusic offered a positive review , saying " [ a ] nyone who expected Jackson to top Rhythm Nation — her crowning achievement and an incredibly tough act to follow — was being unrealistic . But with janet . , she delivered a respectable offering that , although not as strong as either Control or Nation , has many strong points . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Jackson has reached superstar status in the United States , she has yet to achieve the same level of response internationally . According to <unk> Berry , vice chairman of Virgin Records , Janet marked the first time the label " had centrally coordinated and strategized a campaign on a worldwide basis " which ultimately brought her to a plateau of global recognition . Her historic multimillion @-@ dollar contract made her the highest @-@ paid artist in history , until brother Michael renegotiated his contract with Sony Music Entertainment only days later . Sonia Murry noted that she remained " the highest @-@ paid female in pop ... a whirlwind of fashion , personality and slick musical packaging rivaled only by Madonna and Whitney Houston in today 's pop pantheon . " James Robert Parish , author of Today 's Black Hollywood ( 1995 ) wrote : " She confirmed her status as today 's Queen of Pop when , not long ago , she signed a $ 35- $ 40 million recording contract with Virgin Records . " Music critic Nelson George noted that while surpassing Michael would be next to impossible , Janet had assuredly reached iconic status . He explained : " What worked for Michael 10 years ago is working for her now ... Michael was clearly the voice of the ' 80s , those that grew up with him since Motown . And with the themes ( independence , social consciousness and up @-@ front yet responsible sexuality ) that she 's addressing in her albums and the popularity she 's enjoying , she could very well be the voice of the ' 90s . " 
 Rolling Stone 's The ' 90s : The Inside Stories from the Decade That Rocked ( 2010 ) documented that she had achieved some level of growth with each of her records , and that with Janet , " [ u ] sing soul , rock and dance elements , as well as opera diva Kathleen Battle , [ she ] unleashed her most musically ambitious record , guided as always , by producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . " Richard J. Ripani author of The New Blue Music : Changes in Rhythm & Blues , 1950 @-@ 1999 ( 2006 ) noted that she had led the incorporation of rap into mainstream R & B with a select group of artists , in that " rap music no longer sounded so musically distant to many R & B listeners because many of its traits were commonly heard in songs by mainstream artists such as Janet Jackson , Mary J. Blige , Keith Sweat , and others . " Vibe magazine observed that " R & B was omnipresent in 1993 . It was a year in which Janet Jackson , at 27 , topped the Billboard pop album charts for six straight summer weeks , with her critically lauded , six @-@ times @-@ platinum janet . " It became one of only five albums in the history of the Billboard 200 — along with Whitney Houston 's Whitney ( 1987 ) , Norah Jones 's Feels Like Home ( 2004 ) , Taylor Swift 's Fearless ( 2008 ) , and Susan Boyle 's I Dreamed a Dream ( 2009 ) — to debut at number one and remain at the top of the chart for a minimum of six consecutive weeks . It is also only one of seven albums — including Michael Jackson 's Thriller ( 1982 ) and Bad ( 1987 ) , Bruce Springsteen , Born in the U.S.A. ( 1984 ) , George Michael 's , Faith ( 1987 ) , Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 ( 1989 ) and Katy Perry 's , Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) to yield a minimum of six top ten hit singles on the Hot 100 . 
 The release of Janet signaled the singer 's transformation from conservative teen role model to adult sex symbol . In You 've Come A Long Way , Baby : Women , Politics , and Popular Culture ( 1996 ) , Lilly J. Goren observed that " [ Her ] 1993 album Janet moved away from politically driven lyrics to songs about love and sex @-@ lyrics that could capitalize on her new sexy , more scantily clad image in MTV music videos . Jackson 's evolution from politically aware musician to sexy diva marked the direction that society and the music industry were encouraging the dance @-@ rock divas to pursue . " Reporter Edna Gunderson commented : " The woman whose hourglass torso and sensual gyrating have made her MTV 's reigning sex kitten is today a vision of wholesome beauty . " Professor and social critic Camille Paglia expressed : " Janet 's unique persona combines bold , brash power with quiet sensitively and womanly mystery . Her latest music is lightning and <unk> . " 
 Her music videos contributed to a higher degree of sexual freedom among young women , as Jean M. Twenge , author of Generation Me : Why Today 's Young Americans are More Confident , Assertive , Entitled — and More Miserable Than Ever Before ( 2007 ) wrote : " In Alfred Kinsey 's studies in the 1950s , only 3 % of the young women had received oral sex from a man . By the mid @-@ 1990s , however , 75 % of women aged 18 @-@ 24 had experienced cunnilingus . Music videos by female artists have contributed to the trend , with both Mary J. Blige and Janet Jackson heavily implying male @-@ on @-@ female oral sex in music videos by pushing down on a man 's head until he 's in exactly the right position . " Similarly , Paula Kamen in Her Way : Young Women Remake the Sexual Revolution ( 2000 ) states that " [ i ] n the early to mid @-@ 1990s , oral sex even reached mainstream music as politically charged demand of truly liberated women , " citing TLC , Mary J. Blige and Janet Jackson as examples of female artists simulating cunnilingus in their videos . Rolling Stone wrote that " she celebrated becoming an erotic being ... [ showing ] young women a way to have their sexual freedom and their dignity , to have their cake and eat it too . " She was named Best Female Singer and Female Sex Symbol by Rolling Stone for the year 1993 in pop music . Goren adds that later pop stars such as Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera and Pink would rely on image , sex appeal and choreography as much as musical talent . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " That 's the Way Love Goes " contains samples from " Papa Don 't Take No Mess " , written by James Brown , Fred Wesley , Charles <unk> and John Starks and performed by J. Brown . 
 " You Want This " contains samples from : 
 " Love Child " , written by R. Dean Taylor , Frank Wilson , Pam Sawyer , Deke Richards and performed by Diana Ross & the Supremes . 
 " Jungle Boogie " , written by Robert Bell , Ronald Bell , <unk> Smith , Robert Mickens , Donald Boyce , Richard Allen Westfield , Dennis Thomas and George Brown and performed by Kool & the Gang . 
 " If " contains samples from " Someday We 'll Be Together " , written by Johnny Bristol , Harvey Fuqua and Jackey Beavers and performed by Diana Ross & the Supremes . 
 " New Agenda " contains samples from : 
 " School Boy Crush " , written by Hamish Stuart , <unk> McIntyre , Alan Gorrie , Steve <unk> , Molly Duncan and Roger Bell and performed by Average White Band . 
 " Kool It ( Here Comes the Fuzz ) " , written by Gene Redd , Woodrow Sparrow , Robert Bell , Ronald Bell , Westfield , Mickens , G. Brown , Thomas and Smith and performed by Kool & the Gang . 
 " Superwoman ( Where Were You When I Needed You ) " , written and performed by Stevie Wonder . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = = End of decade charts = = = 
 = = = Chart procession = = = 
 = Calvin Johnson = 
 Calvin Johnson Jr . ( born September 29 , 1985 ) is a retired American football wide receiver who played his entire career for the Detroit Lions of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was drafted by the Lions second overall in the 2007 NFL Draft . He played college football at Georgia Tech , where he was recognized as an All @-@ American twice . 
 On March 14 , 2012 , Johnson signed an eight @-@ year , US $ 132 million contract extension with the Lions , one of the largest sports contracts ever . Johnson has a rare combination of size ( 6 ft 5 in and 239 lb ) , hands , speed ( 40 @-@ yard dash in 4 @.@ 35 seconds ) , strength , leaping ability , body control and hand @-@ eye coordination . His nickname " Megatron , " a Transformers character , was given to him by former Lions wide receiver Roy Williams , and the name caught on with fans . 
 On December 22 , 2012 , Johnson broke Jerry Rice 's single @-@ season record for receiving yards , which had previously been 1 @,@ 848 , and Johnson finished the 2012 season with 1 @,@ 964 yards , an average of almost 123 yards per game . In that same game versus the Atlanta Falcons , Johnson also set the NFL records for consecutive 100 @-@ yard games ( 8 ) and consecutive games with 10 or more receptions ( 4 ) . He also tied Hall of Famer Michael Irvin 's record for most 100 @-@ yard games in a season with 11 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Johnson was born to Calvin and Arica Johnson on September 29 , 1985 in Newnan , Georgia . Johnson was 6 feet tall in middle school , and 6 feet 4 inches in 10th grade . He attended Sandy Creek High School in Tyrone , Georgia and was a student , a letterman in football , and a baseball standout . In football , he was a three @-@ year starter as a wide receiver . As a sophomore , he made 34 receptions for 646 yards and 10 touchdowns . As a junior , Johnson caught 40 passes for 736 yards and eight touchdowns . His number , 81 , was retired on October 22 , 2010 . 
 Johnson was rated among the nation 's top 10 wide receivers and top 100 players by virtually every recruiting analyst . He was tabbed the No. 4 wide receiver and No. 15 player in the nation by <unk> , and named to the Super Southern 100 by the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , the Rivals 100 by Rivals.com , <unk> Hot 100 , the SuperPrep All @-@ America 275 and the Prep Star Top 100 Dream Team . 
 He was also rated the No. 1 player in Georgia , No. 12 in the Southeast and No. 37 in the nation by Rivals.com , the No. 7 wide receiver in the nation by SuperPrep , and first @-@ team all @-@ state selection ( Class AAAA ) by the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution . Finally , he was tabbed to the AJC 's preseason Super 11 . By the time he was a junior , he was ranked as within the top 10 wide receivers and the top 100 players in the nation by almost every writer . 
 = = College career = = 
 Johnson attended the Georgia Institute of Technology , where he played for coach Chan Gailey 's Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets football team from 2004 to 2006 . Despite Georgia Tech being interested in his playing both football and baseball , Johnson 's mother refused to allow Johnson to play both sports after determining that the year @-@ round athletic schedule would be too demanding . In his career at Georgia Tech wearing number 21 , Johnson made a case for being the greatest Georgia Tech player of all time . Johnson had 178 receptions in his career , good for 2 @,@ 927 yards and 28 touchdowns . He ranks first in school history in career receiving yards , second in receptions , first in touchdown receptions , and first in career 100 @-@ yard receiving games with 13 . 
 As a freshman in 2004 , Johnson was a first @-@ team All @-@ Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) selection . Johnson was the Jackets ' leading receiver with 48 catches for 837 yards and seven scores , which were Georgia Tech freshman records . Johnson ended his freshman campaign against Syracuse University in the Champs Sports Bowl , where he recorded a touchdown . 2005 was Johnson 's sophomore year , when he earned first @-@ team All @-@ American honors . He also earned All @-@ ACC honors for the second straight year and was semifinalist for the Fred Biletnikoff Award . He led Tech with 54 catches for 888 yards and six scores . 
 Johnson entered his 2006 junior season in the running for the Biletnikoff Award and Heisman Trophy . Although Johnson finished tenth in the Heisman voting , he won the Biletnikoff as the best college wide receiver . Johnson was honored as the ACC Player of the Year , was a first @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection for the third consecutive year , and was recognized as a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ American . Johnson tallied 1 @,@ 202 yards on 76 catches . Johnson 's 15 touchdowns in 2006 was a new Georgia Tech single @-@ season record . Against the West Virginia Mountaineers in the Toyota Gator Bowl , Johnson had nine catches for 186 yards and two touchdowns , albeit in a losing effort . 
 = = = College record = = = 
 Georgia Tech career receiving yards – 2 @,@ 927 
 = = = College awards and honors = = = 
 First @-@ team Freshman All @-@ American 2004 
 All @-@ American 2005 and 2006 
 First @-@ Team All @-@ Atlantic Coast Conference , 2004 , 2005 and 2006 
 ACC Rookie of the Year , 2004 
 ACC Player of the Year , 2006 
 Four @-@ time ACC Rookie of the Week 
 Biletnikoff Award , 2006 
 Paul Warfield Trophy , 2006 
 10th 2006 Heisman Vote - 43 total votes ( 76 rec , 1202 yds , 15 @.@ 8 avg , 15 TD ) 
 = = = Academic activities = = = 
 During the 2006 summer , Johnson , who majored in management with a background in building construction , was given the option of working on either constructing environmentally friendly luxury condos , or a project building solar latrines to improve sanitation in Bolivia . Johnson chose the latter , as he wanted to help the less fortunate . The " solar latrines " use the sun ’ s rays to safely transform bacteria @-@ laden waste into fertilizer . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2007 NFL Draft = = = 
 Johnson was SI.com 's Midseason NFL Draft Projection # 1 pick , though Johnson had stated that he intended to earn his degree from Georgia Tech . On January 8 , 2007 , Johnson declared himself eligible for the NFL Draft , bypassing his senior season at Georgia Tech . He was regarded as the best athlete to come out of the draft and was the # 1 player on most draft boards . Johnson was said by ESPN to be able to be productive as a rookie , much like receiver Randy Moss was as a rookie . In a mid @-@ February workout with speed and conditioning coach Mark Pearsall , Johnson clocked a 4 @.@ 33 @-@ second 40 @-@ yard dash , recorded an 11 @-@ foot standing broad jump , and had a vertical leap of 43 inches . 
 Johnson surprised many when he weighed in at 239 pounds at the combine , 12 pounds more than expected , although he claims that this season he played " at about 235 and I got up to 238 " and that his weight was not a problem . Johnson had told the media that he would not run the 40 @-@ yard dash at the combine but would wait until his March 15 workout at Georgia Tech . Johnson ran a 4 @.@ 35 and wowed scouts with his jump drill results , his receiving skills , and his 11 ft 7 in ( 3 @.@ 53 m ) broad jump , which is " best broad jump I can ever remember an NFL prospect having , " according to Gil Brandt . Johnson is the only player 6 @-@ foot @-@ 5 or taller , regardless of position , to run a 40 @-@ yard dash in under 4 @.@ 40 seconds at the combine since 2006 . 
 Johnson was selected by the Detroit Lions as the second pick overall in the 2007 NFL Draft . This is the highest a Georgia Tech Yellow Jacket has ever been drafted . The Lions were expected to trade Johnson , most likely to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , but the team announced that they were keeping him . The next day , the Detroit Tigers invited him to throw out the first pitch . 
 = = = Detroit Lions = = = 
 = = = = 2007 season = = = = 
 Johnson attended Reebok 's NFL Rookie Premiere in Los Angeles . The Lions , being told by the league that Johnson would have to skip the minicamp to attend , rescheduled the camp to accommodate Johnson . On August 3 , 2007 , Johnson signed a six @-@ year deal with the Detroit Lions after holding out for eight days , and passed his physical in time to be on the field for the start of that morning 's practice . He was represented by agent James " Bus " Cook . The contract is worth up to US $ 64 million , with $ in guaranteed money , making Johnson the third highest @-@ paid player in Lions history ( the highest at the time , since passed by Matthew Stafford and Ndamukong Suh ) and the highest @-@ paid receiver ( in guaranteed money ) in the NFL . 
 Although he did not start the game , Johnson had an impressive NFL debut on Sunday , September 9 , 2007 , catching 4 passes for 70 yards and his first career touchdown in Detroit 's 36 – 21 win over the Oakland Raiders . He sustained a lower back injury after making a catch over two Philadelphia Eagles defenders on September 23 , 2007 . He scored his first NFL rushing touchdown against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on October 21 , 2007 on a 32 @-@ yard reverse play . Fellow teammate Roy Williams nicknamed Johnson " Megatron " , due to his large hands being similar to that of the towering Decepticon . The nickname caught on well with fans . Williams later changed the nickname to " Bolt " after Jamaican sprinting phenom Usain Bolt , comparing the two athletes ' similar height and running abilities . Johnson finished the 2007 season with 756 yards and 5 total touchdowns . 
 In 2008 , Johnson said he could " still feel " the lower @-@ back injury that bothered him throughout his rookie season . Johnson took five weeks off after the 2007 season and was taking part in the Lions ' offseason program . " I know it 's there but it doesn 't hurt , " he said . Johnson revealed that he needed Vicodin to play through the final three months of the 2007 season . He needed the medication to help him play with a bone bruise in his back . " I was on meds the rest of the season , " he said . " I was taking Vicodin twice a game just to get through the game . I stayed hurt the whole season , probably because I was trying to come back too soon . " Johnson averaged 15 @.@ 8 yards on 48 catches in the 2007 season . 
 = = = = 2008 season = = = = 
 Johnson and the Lions faced the Atlanta Falcons on the road on September 7 , 2008 , to begin the season . As the official starting wide receiver behind Roy Williams , Johnson led the team in receptions and yards , collecting 7 catches for 107 yards , which included one 38 @-@ yard catch @-@ and @-@ run in the Lions ' 34 – 21 loss . During week 2 versus the Green Bay Packers , he had two key touchdowns late in the game , which sparked a large comeback , though the Lions eventually lost the game , 48 – 25 . Both touchdowns catches included a run after the catch ( the first catch going for 38 yards and the second going for 47 yards , both over the middle ) displaying Johnson 's speed and breakaway ability . He ended the game with 6 receptions for 129 yards and 2 touchdowns . In the following two games , losses to San Francisco and Chicago , Johnson failed to score a touchdown or gain over 50 yards receiving . However , against the Minnesota Vikings , Johnson had 4 receptions for 85 yards and his third touchdown of the season . 
 On October 14 before the week 6 trade deadline , Roy Williams was traded to the Dallas Cowboys for a first , a 3rd and a 7th @-@ round pick in the 2009 NFL Draft , making Johnson the Lions ' starting wide receiver and the last big threat on the offense . In his first game without Roy Williams alongside him in the week 7 game against the Houston Texans , Johnson caught only 2 passes , totaling 154 yards receiving ; the first pass didn 't come until Dan <unk> threw a pass up for grabs at the end of the first half which Johnson caught for 58 yards and the second pass came on a 96 @-@ yard touchdown catch @-@ and @-@ run . With Williams gone and starting quarterback Jon <unk> lost to injury for the season , the Texans defense had little to do to stop the Lions ' offense but shut down Johnson , winning the game 28 – 21 . 
 Johnson set a career high for receptions in a game during the week @-@ 9 match @-@ up against their division rivals , the Chicago Bears , with 8 receptions that garnered 94 yards and one touchdown , although still losing the game 27 – 23 . During week 10 , formerly retired All @-@ Pro quarterback Daunte Culpepper was signed to a one @-@ year contract with the Lions in hopes to spur the offense and earned the starting job for the next two games . Johnson ended his first game with Culpepper at quarterback with 2 receptions for 92 yards in a 38 – 14 loss to the Jacksonville Jaguars . In Johnson 's 4th game with Culpepper , he had 5 catches for 66 yards . During the week 14 match @-@ up against the division rival Minnesota Vikings , Johnson passed the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard receiving mark for the first time in his career after collecting 3 catches for 84 yards and one touchdown , ending the week with 1 @,@ 055 yards receiving and 9 touchdowns on the season . 
 Johnson and the 2008 Detroit Lions finished the first ever 0 – 16 season in NFL history after a 31 – 21 loss to the Green Bay Packers in week 17 . Despite the Lions ' failures and the fact that five different quarterbacks played during the year , Johnson finished as one of the strongest wide receivers statistically for the season , finishing fifth in receiving yards ( 1 @,@ 331 ) and 7th in receiving yards per game ( 83 @.@ 2 ) , and leading the league in receiving touchdowns ( 12 ) , despite the fact that the entire Lions team only passed for 18 touchdowns . However , Johnson missed the Pro Bowl , with most experts attributing the snub to the Lions ' dismal winless season ( he was named an alternate instead ) . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 After 2008 , Detroit 's front office and coaching personnel were essentially overhauled by the team ownership . Matt Millen , the team 's incumbent general manager and CEO since 2001 , was terminated on September 28 , 2008 . His replacement , Martin Mayhew , ultimately terminated head coach Rod Marinelli in the off @-@ season . Marinelli was replaced by Jim Schwartz , then defensive coordinator of the Tennessee Titans . Schwartz ultimately revamped the entire Detroit offensive ( and defensive ) philosophies ‍ — ‌ hiring Scott Linehan and Gunther Cunningham , respectively . Detroit held the first pick in the 2009 NFL Draft , and selected Matthew Stafford out of the University of Georgia . Stafford was named the team 's starting quarterback out of training camp , but he battled various injuries throughout the season . Much of the 2008 Detroit roster was released by the new regime , and the 2009 team was viewed as somewhat of a work @-@ in @-@ progress , but Johnson still finished the 2009 season with 67 receptions 984 yards and five TDs , while completely missing two games . 
 = = = = 2010 season = = = = 
 In a week 1 game against the Chicago Bears , Johnson caught a pass with 31 seconds left in regulation in the end zone for what looked like a game @-@ winning touchdown . However , referee Gene <unk> ruled the catch incomplete , saying that Johnson had not maintained possession of the ball through the entire process of the catch . The Lions lost the game , 19 – 14 . 
 Johnson amassed 77 receptions for 1 @,@ 120 yards and 12 TDs during 2010 . He was also selected to the first Pro Bowl of his career . Following the 2010 season , Johnson was the recipient of the Lions / Detroit Sports Broadcasters Association / Pro Football Writers Association ( Detroit Chapter ) Media @-@ Friendly Good Guy Award . 
 = = = = 2011 season = = = = 
 In 2011 , Johnson had his second best statistical season of his NFL career , reaching a career @-@ high 1 @,@ 681 receiving yards and 16 touchdowns . In a week @-@ 4 game against the Dallas Cowboys , Johnson helped rally the Lions from a 24 @-@ point deficit to a 34 – 30 victory by catching two touchdown passes in the fourth quarter , including a famous catch in which Johnson beat the Cowboys ' triple coverage in the end zone . This performance gave Johnson 8 touchdown receptions through the first four games of the season and tied Cris Carter for most consecutive games with multiple touchdown receptions at 4 . In a Week 17 game against the Green Bay Packers , Johnson had a career @-@ best 244 receiving yards in a 45 – 41 loss . Johnson and the Lions clinched a playoff spot for the first time since 1999 , and the first time in Johnson 's career , after a 38 – 10 beating of the San Diego Chargers on Christmas Eve . 
 However , Detroit would ultimately lose on the road against the Packers the following week ( New Year 's Day ) and would find themselves on the road again in a 2012 NFC Wild Card game against the heavily favored New Orleans Saints in the playoff bracket . Always tough to play against at the Superdome , the Saints wore down the Detroit defense and New Orleans would go on to a win 45 – 28 . In the game , Johnson caught 12 passes for 211 receiving yards and two touchdowns ‍ — ‌ breaking Detroit 's playoff record of 150 receiving yards in a playoff game previously held by Brett <unk> and Leonard Thompson . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 On March 14 , 2012 , Johnson signed an 8 @-@ year extension worth US $ 132 million with the Detroit Lions , with US $ 60 million guaranteed , making Johnson the highest @-@ paid receiver in the league . Johnson beat out 42 other players and eliminated Cam Newton to win the Madden NFL 13 cover athlete on April 25 , 2012 , on SportsNation . From week 9 – 16 , he recorded consecutive games with 125 receiving yards or more , which broke the NFL record previously held by Pat <unk> . On December 22 , 2012 against the Atlanta Falcons , Johnson broke Jerry Rice 's single @-@ season receiving yards record of 1 @,@ 848 yards . Johnson was also named a starter for the NFC in the Pro Bowl played in Honolulu , Hawaii . Johnson finished with 72 yards against Chicago in week 17 , missing out on 2000 by just 36 yards . Johnson finished the season leading the league in receptions ( 122 ) and receiving yards ( 1 @,@ 964 ) . Johnson is the only player in the Super Bowl era ( since 1967 ) to average 120 yards per game in a season when he averaged 122 @.@ 8 yards per game in 2012 . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 On October 27 , 2013 , in a 31 – 30 win over the Dallas Cowboys , Johnson caught 14 of 16 passes thrown in his direction ; he finished the game with 329 receiving yards and one touchdown . In addition to breaking the Lions ' franchise record of 302 receiving yards set by <unk> Box on Dec. 3 , 1950 , it was the highest receiving yardage ever in a regulation @-@ length game and the second @-@ highest overall single @-@ game yardage in NFL history , behind Flipper Anderson 's 336 @-@ yard performance in a 1989 overtime win ( Anderson accumulated 40 of those yards in overtime ) . In this same game , Calvin also tied Lance <unk> for the most career games with at least 200 yards receiving ( 5 ) . 
 In a Week 10 game against the Chicago Bears , Johnson had two TD receptions . The second one gave him the Lions all @-@ time record for touchdown catches ( 63 ) , breaking the old mark previously held by Herman Moore . Johnson was named to the 2014 Pro Bowl , but an injury forced him to withdraw . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 In the Thanksgiving Day game against the Chicago Bears ( November 27 ) , Johnson became the fastest player to reach 10 @,@ 000 receiving yards in NFL history , eclipsing the mark in the second quarter of his 115th game . He was named to his fifth Pro Bowl in a row , the most by any Lion since Barry Sanders was named to 10 straight pro bowls . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 Much like Week 1 in Chicago five years back , in Week 4 at Seattle , Johnson was involved in another controversial play . This time , late in the fourth quarter , Seahawks safety Kam Chancellor punched the ball out of Johnson 's hands while he was trying to score . <unk> Wright then batted the ball out of the end zone for a touchback . The NFL later admitted the referees should have penalized Wright for illegal batting . The Seahawks won 13 – 10 . 
 In Week 5 against Arizona , Johnson caught his <unk> pass , breaking Herman Moore 's franchise record . However , the Lions were the victims of a 42 – 17 loss to the Cardinals . 
 In Week 6 , Johnson caught 6 passes for 166 yards in an overtime victory over Chicago . This gave the Lions their first victory of the season after an 0 – 5 start . In Week 12 , against Philadelphia , Johnson caught eight passes for 93 yards and three touchdowns to help lead the Lions to their third straight victory and lift their record to 4 – 7 . 
 In Week 8 against the Kansas City Chiefs in the NFL International Series on November 1 , 2015 , Johnson became the fastest player to reach 11 @,@ 000 receiving yards in NFL history , in his 127th game . 
 Johnson finished the season with 88 receptions for 1 @,@ 214 yards ( 13 @.@ 8 average ) , and nine touchdowns , reaching 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yards receiving for the sixth consecutive year , and seventh time in nine @-@ years . Johnson was named to the Pro Bowl for the sixth consecutive year , however declined to attend . His 1 @,@ 214 yards in 2015 are the most ever in a player 's final season in the NFL , while his 88 receptions are the second most in a player 's final season , trailing Sterling Sharpe 's 94 in 1994 . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On March 8 , 2016 , Johnson announced his retirement from the NFL after nine seasons . His 11 @,@ 619 receiving yards rank third in a player 's first nine seasons , trailing only Torry Holt ( 11 @,@ 864 ) and Jerry Rice ( 11 @,@ 776 ) . Since Johnson was drafted by the Lions with the second overall pick in the 2007 NFL draft , no player has more receiving yards , receiving touchdowns or 100 @-@ yard games ( 46 ) than Johnson through the 2015 season . Among those who have played in 100 career games in NFL history , no player has averaged more receiving yards per game than Johnson . Johnson 's average of 86 @.@ 1 receiving yards per game is 8 @.@ 7 yards better than the next @-@ closest player on that list : Holt . From 2011 to 2013 , Johnson caught 302 passes for 33 touchdowns . His 5 @,@ 137 receiving yards over that time are the most by any player over a three @-@ year stretch in NFL history . 
 = = = NFL records = = = 
 Most receiving yards in a single season : 1 @,@ 964 yards ( 2012 ) 
 Seasons with 1 @,@ 600 yards receiving ( 2 , tied with Marvin Harrison , Torry Holt , and Antonio Brown ) 
 Most consecutive games with at least 100 receiving yards ( 8 ) 
 Most consecutive games with at least 10 receptions ( 4 ) 
 Most 100 receiving yard games in a single season ( 11 , tied with Michael Irvin ) 
 Most receiving yards in a five @-@ game span ( 861 yards ) 
 Most receiving yards in a six @-@ game span ( 962 yards ) 
 Fastest to 10 @,@ 000 NFL receiving yards ( 115 games ) 
 Fastest to 11 @,@ 000 NFL receiving yards ( 127 games ) 
 = = = Lions franchise records = = = 
 Most receiving touchdowns in a single season : 16 ( 2011 ) 
 Most receiving touchdowns , career : 83 
 Most receiving yards , career : 11 @,@ 619 
 Most receptions in a single game : ( 14 , 10 / 27 / 2013 vs. Dallas , tied with Herman Moore ) 
 Most receptions , career : 731 
 Most seasons with 10 + receiving touchdowns : 4 
 Most career 70 + yard receptions : 8 
 Most games with multiple touchdowns in one half : 12 
 Most receiving yards in a single game in regulation ( 329 ) . This is the 2nd most overall in NFL history behind Flipper Anderson ( 336 ) . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) = = = 
 = = = National Football League ( NFL ) = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnson is a Christian . Johnson has a tattoo of the crucifixion of Jesus on his left arm and a Christian cross on his right arm . Johnson is part of a weekly Bible study group with other Lions players . 
 Johnson is funding a film called Real Love . The film is " a coming @-@ of @-@ age story about a girl trying to stay true to her virginity and her religion " and " ... a message [ Johnson ] wants to get out there . " 
 = Miami Showband killings = 
 The Miami Showband killings ( also called the Miami Showband Massacre ) was an attack by the Ulster Volunteer Force ( UVF ) , a loyalist paramilitary group , on 31 July 1975 . It took place on the A1 road at Buskhill in County Down , Northern Ireland . Five people were killed , including three members of The Miami Showband , who were then one of Ireland 's most popular cabaret bands . 
 The band was travelling home to Dublin late at night after a performance in Banbridge . Halfway to Newry , their minibus was stopped at what appeared to be a military checkpoint , where gunmen in British Army uniforms ordered them to line up by the roadside . At least four of the gunmen were serving soldiers from the British Army 's Ulster Defence Regiment ( UDR ) but , unbeknownst to the band , all were members of the UVF . While two of the gunmen ( both soldiers ) were hiding a time bomb on the minibus , it exploded prematurely and killed them . The other gunmen then opened fire on the dazed band members , killing three and wounding two . It is believed the bomb was meant to explode en route , killing the band and framing them as IRA bomb @-@ smugglers , and possibly leading to stricter security measures at the border . 
 Two serving British soldiers and one former British soldier were found guilty of the murders and received life sentences ; they were released in 1998 . Those responsible for the attack belonged to the Glenanne gang ; a secret alliance of loyalist militants , rogue police officers and British soldiers . There are also allegations that British military intelligence agents were involved . According to former Intelligence Corps agent Captain Fred Holroyd , the killings were organised by British intelligence officer Robert Nairac , together with the UVF 's Mid @-@ Ulster Brigade and its commander Robin " The Jackal " Jackson . The Historical Enquiries Team , which investigated the killings , released their report to the victims ' families in December 2011 . It confirmed that Jackson was linked to the attack by fingerprints . 
 The massacre dealt a blow to Northern Ireland 's live music scene , which had brought young Catholics and Protestants together . In a report published in the Sunday Mirror in 1999 , Colin Wills called the Miami Showband attack " one of the worst atrocities in the 30 @-@ year history of the Troubles " . Irish Times diarist Frank McNally summed up the massacre as " an incident that encapsulated all the madness of the time " . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Political situation in Northern Ireland = = = 
 The conflict in Northern Ireland , known as " the Troubles " , began in the late 1960s . The year 1975 was marked by an escalation in sectarian attacks and a vicious feud between the two main loyalist paramilitary groups , the Ulster Volunteer Force ( UVF ) and the Ulster Defence Association ( UDA ) . On 4 April 1974 the proscription against the UVF had been lifted by Merlyn Rees , Secretary of State for Northern Ireland . This meant that both it and the UDA were legal organisations . The UVF would be once more banned by the British government on 3 October 1975 . 
 In May 1974 unionists called a general strike to protest against the Sunningdale Agreement – an attempt at power @-@ sharing , setting up a Northern Ireland Executive and a cross @-@ border Council of Ireland , which would have given the Government of Ireland a voice in running Northern Ireland . During that strike on 17 May , the UVF carried out the Dublin and Monaghan car bombings , which killed 33 civilians . The Provisional IRA were suspected by British police of bombing two pubs in the English city of Birmingham the following November , resulting in 21 deaths . 
 UK Home Secretary Roy Jenkins introduced the Prevention of Terrorism Act , which gave the government unprecedented powers against the liberty of individuals in the United Kingdom in peacetime . At Christmas 1974 the IRA declared a ceasefire , which theoretically lasted throughout most of 1975 . This move made loyalists apprehensive and suspicious that a secret accord was being conducted between the British government and the IRA , and that Northern Ireland 's Protestants would be " sold out " . Their fears were slightly grounded in fact , as the MI6 officer Michael Oatley was involved in negotiations with a member of the IRA Army Council , during which " structures of disengagement " from Ireland were discussed . This had meant the possible withdrawal of British troops from Northern Ireland . The existence of these talks led unionists to believe that they were about to be abandoned by the British government and forced into a united Ireland ; as a result , the loyalist paramilitary groups reacted with a violence that , combined with the tit @-@ for @-@ tat retaliations from the IRA ( despite their ceasefire ) , made 1975 one of the " bloodiest years of the conflict " . 
 In early 1975 Merlyn Rees set up elections for the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention at which all of Northern Ireland 's politicians would plan their way forward . These were held on 1 May 1975 and the United Ulster Unionist Council ( <unk> ) , which had won 11 out of 12 Northern Irish seats in the February 1974 general election , won a majority again . As the <unk> would not abide any form of power @-@ sharing with the Dublin government , no agreement could be reached and the convention failed , again marginalising Northern Ireland 's politicians and the communities they represented . 
 = = = Robin Jackson and the Mid @-@ Ulster UVF = = = 
 The UVF Mid @-@ Ulster Brigade operated mainly around the Portadown and Lurgan areas . It had been set up in Lurgan in 1972 by part @-@ time Ulster Defence Regiment ( UDR ) sergeant and permanent staff instructor Billy Hanna , who made himself commander of the brigade . His leadership was endorsed by the UVF 's leader Gusty Spence . The brigade was described by author Don Mullan as one of the most ruthless units operating in the 1970s . At the time of the attack the Mid @-@ Ulster Brigade was commanded by Robin Jackson , also known as " The Jackal " . Jackson had assumed command of the Mid @-@ Ulster UVF just a few days before the Miami Showband attack , after allegedly shooting Hanna dead outside his home in Lurgan on 27 July 1975 . According to authors Paul Larkin and Martin Dillon , Jackson was accompanied by Harris Boyle when he killed Hanna . Hanna was named by former British Intelligence Corps operative Colin Wallace as having organised and led the 1974 Dublin and Monaghan bombings , along with Jackson . Journalist Joe Tiernan suggested that Hanna was shot for refusing to participate in the Miami Showband attack and that he had become an informer for the Gardaí in exchange for immunity from prosecution for the Dublin bombings . Dillon suggested that because a large number of joint UDR / UVF members were to be used for the planned Miami Showband ambush , Hanna was considered to have been a " security risk " , and the UVF decided he had to be killed before he could alert the authorities . 
 Jackson was an alleged RUC Special Branch agent who was said by Yorkshire Television 's The Hidden Hand : The Forgotten Massacre programme to have had links to both the Intelligence Corps and Captain Robert Nairac . A report in the Irish Times implicated Jackson in the Dublin bombings . More than 100 killings have been attributed to him by the Pat Finucane Centre , the Derry @-@ based civil rights group . 
 = = = The Miami Showband = = = 
 The Miami Showband was a popular Dublin @-@ based cabaret band , enjoying fame and , according to journalist Peter Taylor , " Beatle @-@ like devotion " from fans on both sides of the Irish border . A typical Irish showband was based on the popular six- or seven @-@ member dance band . Its basic repertoire included cover versions of pop songs that were currently in the charts and standard dance numbers . The music ranged from rock and country and western to Dixieland jazz . Sometimes the showbands played traditional Irish music at their performances . 
 Originally called the <unk> Quartet , the Miami Showband was reformed in 1962 by rock promoter Tom Doherty , who gave them their new name . With Dublin @-@ born singer Dickie Rock as frontman , the Miami Showband underwent many personnel changes over the years . In December 1972 , Rock left the band to be briefly replaced by two brothers , Frankie and Johnny Simon . That same year keyboardist Francis " Fran " O 'Toole ( from Bray , County Wicklow ) had won the Gold Star Award on RTÉ 's Reach For the Stars television programme . In early 1973 , Billy MacDonald ( aka " Billy Mac " ) took over as the group 's frontman when the Simon brothers quit the band . The following year , Fran O 'Toole became the band 's lead vocalist after Mick Roche ( Billy Mac 's replacement ) was sacked . O 'Toole was noted for his good looks and popularity with female <unk> was described by the Miami Showband 's former bass guitarist , Paul Ashford , as having been the " greatest soul singer " in Ireland . Ashford had been asked to leave the band in 1973 , for complaining that performing in Northern Ireland put their lives at risk . He was replaced by Johnny Brown , who in turn was replaced by Dave Monks until Stephen Travers eventually became the band 's permanent bass player . In late 1974 , the Miami Showband 's song Clap Your Hands and Stomp Your Feet ( featuring O 'Toole on lead vocals ) reached number eight in the Irish charts . 
 The 1975 line @-@ up comprised four Catholics and two Protestants . They were : lead vocalist and keyboard player Fran O 'Toole ( 28 , Catholic ) , guitarist Anthony " Tony " Geraghty ( 24 , Catholic ) from Dublin , trumpeter Brian McCoy ( 32 , Protestant ) from Caledon , County Tyrone , saxophonist Des McAlea ( aka " Des Lee " ) , 24 , a Catholic from Belfast , bassist Stephen Travers ( 24 , Catholic ) from Carrick @-@ on @-@ Suir , County Tipperary and drummer Ray Millar ( Protestant ) from Antrim . O 'Toole and McCoy were both married ; each had two children . Geraghty was engaged to be married . 
 Their music was described as " contemporary and trans @-@ Atlantic " , with no reference to the Northern Ireland conflict . By 1975 they had gained a large following , playing to crowds of people in dance halls and ballrooms across the island . The band had no overt interest in politics nor in the religious beliefs of the people who made up their audience . They were prepared to travel anywhere in Ireland to perform for their fans . 
 According to the Irish Times , at the height of the Irish showband 's popularity ( from the 1950s to the 1970s ) , up to as many as 700 bands travelled to venues all over Ireland on a nightly basis . 
 = = Ambush = = 
 = = = Bogus checkpoint = = = 
 Five members of the Dublin @-@ based band were travelling home after a performance at the Castle Ballroom in Banbridge , County Down on Thursday 31 July 1975 . Ray Millar , the band 's drummer , was not with them as he had chosen to go to his home town of Antrim to spend the night with his parents . The band 's road manager , Brian Maguire , had already gone ahead a few minutes earlier in the equipment van . At about 2 : 30am , when the band was seven miles ( 11 km ) north of Newry on the main A1 road , their Volkswagen minibus ( driven by trumpeter Brian McCoy with Stephen Travers in the front seat beside him ) reached the townland of Buskhill . Near the junction with Buskhill Road they were flagged down by armed men dressed in British Army uniforms waving a red torch in a circular motion . During " The Troubles " it was normal for the British Army to set up checkpoints at any time . 
 Assuming it was a legitimate checkpoint , McCoy informed the others inside the minibus of a military checkpoint up ahead and pulled in at the lay @-@ by as directed by the armed men . As McCoy rolled down the window and produced his driving licence , gunmen came up to the minibus and one of them said in a Northern Irish accent , " Goodnight , fellas . How are things ? Can you step out of the van for a few minutes and we 'll just do a check " . The unsuspecting band members got out and were politely told to line up facing the ditch at the rear of the minibus with their hands on their heads . More uniformed men appeared from out of the darkness , their guns pointed at the minibus . About 10 gunmen were at the checkpoint , according to author and journalist Martin Dillon . 
 After McCoy told them they were the Miami Showband , Thomas Crozier ( who had a notebook ) asked the band members for their names and addresses , while the others <unk> with them about the success of their performance that night . As Crozier took down the information , a car pulled up and another uniformed man appeared on the scene . He wore a uniform and beret noticeably different from the others . He spoke with an educated English accent and immediately took charge , ordering a man who appeared to have been the leader of the patrol , to tell Crozier to obtain their names and dates of birth instead of addresses . 
 The jocular mood of the gunmen abruptly ceased . At no time did this new soldier speak to any of the band members nor did he directly address Crozier . He relayed all his instructions to the gunman in command . Travers , the band 's new bass player , assumed he was a British Army officer , an opinion shared by McCoy . Just after the arrival of this mysterious soldier , McCoy nudged Travers , who was standing beside him , and reassured him by saying " Don 't worry Stephen , this is British Army " . Travers thought that McCoy , a Protestant from Northern Ireland , was familiar with security checkpoints and had reckoned the regular British Army would be more efficient than the Ulster Defence Regiment ( UDR ) , who had a reputation for unprofessional and unpredictable behaviour , especially towards people from the Republic . 
 McCoy , son of the Orange Order 's Grand Master for County Tyrone , had close relatives in the security forces ; his brother @-@ in @-@ law was a former member of the B Specials which had been disbanded in 1970 . Travers described McCoy as a " sophisticated , father @-@ type figure . Everybody was respectful to Brian " . McCoy 's words , therefore , were taken seriously by the other band members , and anything he said was considered to be accurate . 
 = = = Explosion = = = 
 At least four of the gunmen were soldiers from the UDR , the locally recruited infantry regiment of the British Army in Northern Ireland . Martin Dillon suggested in The Dirty War , that at least five serving UDR soldiers were present at the checkpoint . All the gunmen were members of the UVF 's Mid @-@ Ulster Brigade , and had been lying in wait to ambush the band , having set up the checkpoint just minutes before . 
 Out of sight of the band members , two of the gunmen placed a ten @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) time bomb in the rear of the minibus . The UVF 's plan was that the bomb would explode once the minibus had reached Newry , killing all on board . However , Martin Dillon alleged that the bomb was meant to go off in the Irish Republic . He suggested that had all gone according to plan , the loyalist extremists would have been able to clandestinely bomb the Republic of Ireland , yet claim that the band were republican bomb @-@ smugglers carrying explosives on behalf of the IRA . They had hoped to embarrass the Government of Ireland , as well as to draw attention to its level of control of the border . This may have resulted in the Irish authorities enforcing tighter controls over the border , thus restricting IRA operations . Dillon opined that another reason the UVF decided to target the Miami Showband was because Irish nationalists held them in high regard ; to attack the band was to strike the nationalists indirectly . 
 Stephen Travers heard the gunmen rummaging in the back of the minibus , where he kept his guitar . Concerned it might be damaged , he approached the two gunmen and told them to be careful . Asked whether he had anything valuable inside the case , Travers replied no . The gunman turned him round , punched him in the back and pushed him on the shoulder back into the line @-@ up . 
 When the two gunmen closed the rear door , clumsy soldering on the clock used as a timer caused the device to explode prematurely , blowing the minibus apart and killing soldiers Harris Boyle ( aged 22 , a telephone <unk> from Portadown ) and Wesley Somerville ( aged 34 , a textile worker from <unk> ) instantly . <unk> in opposite directions , they were both decapitated and their bodies dismembered . What little that remained intact of their bodies was burnt beyond recognition ; one of the limbless torsos was completely charred . → 
 = = = Shootings = = = 
 Following the explosion , the remaining gunmen opened fire on the dazed band members , who had all been knocked down into the field below the level of the road from the force of the blast . The order to shoot was given by the patrol 's apparent leader , James McDowell , to eliminate witnesses to the bogus checkpoint and subsequent bombing . Three of the musicians were killed : lead singer Fran O 'Toole , trumpeter Brian McCoy , and guitarist Tony Geraghty . 
 Brian McCoy was the first to die , having been hit in the back by nine rounds from a 9mm Luger pistol in the initial volley of gunfire . Fran O 'Toole attempted to run away , but was quickly chased down by the gunmen who had immediately jumped down into the field in pursuit . He was then machine @-@ gunned 22 times , mostly in the face , as he lay supine on the ground . Tony Geraghty also attempted to escape ; but he was caught by the gunmen and shot at least four times in the back of the head and back . Both men had pleaded for their lives before they were shot ; one had cried out , " Please don 't shoot me , don 't kill me " . 
 Bassist Stephen Travers was seriously wounded by a dum @-@ dum bullet which had struck him when the gunmen had first begun shooting . He survived by pretending he was dead , as he lay beside the body of McCoy . Saxophone player Des McAlea was hit by the minibus 's door when it was blown off in the explosion , but was not badly wounded . He lay hidden in thick undergrowth , undetected by the gunmen . He also survived . However , the flames from the burning hedge ( which had been set on fire by the explosion ) soon came dangerously close to where he lay ; he was forced to leave his hiding spot . By this time the gunmen had left the scene , assuming everyone else had been killed . Travers later recalled hearing one of the departing gunmen tell his comrade who had kicked McCoy 's body to make sure he was not alive : " Come on , those bastards are dead . I got them with dum @-@ <unk> " . McAlea made his way up the embankment to the main road where he hitched a lift to alert the RUC at their barracks in Newry . 
 = = = Forensic and ballistic evidence = = = 
 When the RUC arrived at the site they found five dead bodies , a seriously injured Stephen Travers , body parts , the smouldering remains of the destroyed minibus , debris from the bomb blast , bullets , spent cartridges , and the band members ' personal possessions , including clothing , shoes , and a photograph of the group , strewn across the area . They also discovered a stolen white Ford Escort registration number <unk> LZ , which had been left behind by the gunmen , along with two guns , ammunition , green UDR berets and a pair of glasses later traced to James McDowell , the gunman who had ordered the shootings . 
 One of the first RUC men who arrived at Buskhill in the wake of the killings was scenes of crime officer James O 'Neill . He described the scene as having " just the smell of utterly death about the place ... burning blood , burning tyres " . He also added that " that bomb was definitely placed there with a view to killing all in that band " . 
 The only identifiable body part from the bombers to survive the blast ( which had been heard up to four miles away ) was a severed arm belonging to Wesley Somerville . It was found 100 yards from the site with a " UVF Portadown " tattoo on it . 
 The RUC 's investigative unit , the Assassination or " A " Squad of detectives , was set up to investigate the crime and to discover the identities of the UVF gunmen who perpetrated the killings . Afterwards , as Travers recovered in hospital , the second survivor Des McAlea gave the police a description of McDowell as the gunman with a moustache and wearing dark glasses who appeared to have been the leader of the patrol . Some time after the attack , RUC officers questioned Stephen Travers at Dublin Castle . He subsequently stated they refused to accept his description of the different @-@ coloured beret worn by the soldier with the English accent . The UVF gunmen had worn green UDR berets , whereas the other man 's had been lighter in colour . 
 The dead bombers were named by the UVF , in a statement issued within 12 hours of the attack . Harris Boyle and Wesley Somerville were UDR soldiers as well as holding the rank of major and lieutenant , respectively , in the UVF . In 1993 Boyle was named by The Hidden Hand programme as one of the Dublin car bombers . 
 The stolen Ford Escort belonged to a man from Portadown , who according to Captain Fred Holroyd , had links with one of the UVF bombers and the driver of the bomb car which had been left to explode in Parnell Street , Dublin on 17 May 1974 . He was also one of the prime suspects in the sectarian killing of Dorothy Traynor on 1 April 1975 in Portadown . 
 Ballistic evidence indicates that the 10 @-@ member gang took at least six guns with them on the attack . An independent panel of inquiry commissioned by the Pat Finucane Centre has established that among the weapons actually used in the killings were two Sterling 9mm submachine guns and a 9mm Luger pistol serial no . U 4 . The submachine guns , which had been stolen years earlier from a former member of the B Specials , were linked to prior and later sectarian killings , whereas the Luger had been used to kill leading IRA member , John Francis Green , the previous January . In a letter to the Independent Commission of Inquiry into the Bombing of Kay 's Tavern dated 22 February 2004 , the Northern Ireland Office stated that : " The PSNI [ The Police Service of Northern Ireland ] have confirmed that a 9mm Luger pistol was <unk> traced both to the murder of John Francis Green and to the Miami Showband murders . " In May 1976 , Robin Jackson 's fingerprints were discovered on the metal barrel of a home @-@ made silencer constructed for a Luger . Both the silencer and pistol – which was later established to have been the same one used in the Miami Showband killings – were found by the security forces at the home of Edward Sinclair . Jackson was charged with possession of the silencer but not convicted , the trial judge having reportedly said : " At the end of the day I find that the accused somehow touched the silencer , but the Crown evidence has left me completely in the dark as to whether he did that wittingly or unwittingly , willingly or unwillingly " . The Luger was destroyed by the RUC on 28 August 1978 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Within 12 hours of the attack the UVF 's Brigade Staff ( Belfast leadership ) issued a statement . It was released under the heading Ulster Central Intelligence Agency – Miami Showband Incident Report : 
 A UVF patrol led by Major Boyle was suspicious of two vehicles , a minibus and a car parked near the border . Major Boyle ordered his patrol to apprehend the occupants for questioning . As they were being questioned , Major Boyle and Lieutenant Somerville began to search the minibus . As they began to enter the vehicle , a bomb was detonated and both men were killed outright . At the precise moment of the explosion , the patrol came under intense automatic fire from the occupants of the other vehicle . The patrol sergeant immediately ordered fire to be returned . Using self @-@ loading rifles and sub @-@ machine guns , the patrol returned fire , killing three of their attackers and wounding another . The patrol later recovered two Armalite rifles and a pistol . The UVF maintains regular border patrols due to the continued activity of the Provisional IRA . The Mid @-@ Ulster Battalion has been assisting the South Down @-@ South Armagh units since the IRA <unk> <unk> which killed four British soldiers . Three UVF members are being treated for gunshot wounds after last night but not in hospital . 
 It would appear that the UVF patrol surprised members of a terrorist organisation transferring weapons to the Miami Showband minibus and that an explosive device of some description was being carried by the Showband for an unlawful purpose . It is obvious , therefore , that the UVF patrol was justified in taking the action it did and that the killing of the three Showband members should be regarded as justifiable homicide . The Officers and Agents of the Ulster Central Intelligence Agency commend the UVF on their actions and tender their deepest sympathy to the relatives of the two Officers who died while attempting to remove the bomb from the minibus . 
 Harris Boyle and Wesley Somerville were given UVF paramilitary funerals conducted by Free Presbyterian minister William McCrea , a Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) politician . 
 The killings shocked both Northern Ireland and Ireland and put a serious strain on Anglo @-@ Irish relations . The Irish Times reported that on the night following the attack , the British ambassador Sir Arthur Galsworthy was summoned to hear the Government of Ireland 's strong feelings regarding the murder of the three band members . The government held the view that the British Government had not done enough to stop sectarian assassinations in Northern Ireland . 
 Following the post @-@ mortems , funerals were held for the three slain musicians ; they received televised news coverage by RTÉ , Ireland 's public service broadcaster . According to RTÉ , " Their families were in deep mourning and Ireland mourned with them " . 
 According to Peter Taylor , the Provisional IRA 's gun and bomb attack on the loyalist <unk> Bar in Belfast 's Shankill Road on 13 August was in retaliation for the Miami Showband ambush . Four Protestant civilians ( two men and two women ) and UVF member Hugh Harris were killed in the attack . Two days later , Portadown disc jockey Norman " Mooch " Kerr , aged 28 , was shot dead by the IRA as he packed up his equipment after a show at the <unk> Bar in Armagh . Although not a member of any loyalist paramilitary group , he was a close friend of Harris Boyle and the two were often seen together . The IRA said it killed him because of an alleged association with British Army officer and member of 14th Intelligence Company , Captain Robert Nairac , and claimed it was in possession of his diary , which had been stolen in Portadown . 
 = = = Gilford and <unk> attacks = = = 
 Over the following month , there were two similar attacks in the area . 
 The night after the Miami Showband massacre , gunmen opened fire on a minibus near Gilford . It had been travelling from Banbridge to <unk> with nine people on board ; all were Catholics and most had been returning from a regular bingo session . One report says it was stopped at a fake British Army checkpoint . Five Catholic civilians were shot ; passenger Joseph Toland was killed outright and driver James Marks died of his wounds in January 1976 . The attack was blamed on loyalists and Lost Lives — an account of every death in the conflict — states that reliable loyalist sources have confirmed the UVF was responsible . However , police have blamed the IRA . The RUC suggested the IRA had meant to attack a police minibus in revenge for the Miami killings , but had mistakenly attacked a civilian minibus instead . A report by the police 's Historical Enquiries Team ( HET ) also suggests this . The IRA has denied responsibility . 
 On 24 August 1975 , Catholic civilians Colm McCartney and Sean Farmer were stopped in their car at another fake British Army checkpoint at <unk> ( near <unk> ) . They were driving home from a Gaelic football match in Dublin . The two men were found shot dead nearby . Earlier that night , three RUC officers in an unmarked car had been stopped at the same checkpoint but allowed through . However , the officers suspected that the checkpoint was fake . After receiving radio confirmation that there were no authorised checkpoints in the area that night , they reported the incident and requested help from the British Army to investigate it , but no action was taken . RUC officer John Weir claims that UDR corporal Robert McConnell was involved in the attack . 
 = = = Convictions = = = 
 A number of suspects were arrested by the RUC in early August 1975 . One of these men , Lance @-@ Corporal Thomas Raymond Crozier ( aged 25 , a painting contractor from Lurgan ) of C Company , 11th Battalion UDR was charged with the Miami killings . It was believed he had been betrayed to the RUC by a member of the gang . 
 Thomas Crozier recounted that on the night of the killings , he had driven to the grounds of a school in Lurgan where he had picked up two men . He then drove to a lay @-@ by on the Newry @-@ Banbridge dual carriageway and met up with another five men , who were all wearing British Army uniforms . They subsequently set up a roadblock with " all the trappings of a regular military checkpoint " . Crozier told police , and later a court , that he had not played a large part in the attack . He refused to name his accomplices , as he felt that to do so would put the lives of his family in danger . 
 On 22 January 1976 , a second UDR soldier , Sergeant James Roderick Shane McDowell ( aged 29 , an optical worker , also from Lurgan ) was arrested and charged with the Miami killings . He served in C Company , 11th Battalion UDR . The RUC were led to him through his glasses which had been found at the murder scene . Tests done on the glasses , which were eventually traced back to McDowell , revealed that the lenses were of a prescription worn by just 1 in 500 @,@ 000 of the population . 
 McDowell 's statement of admission was published in David McKittrick 's book Lost Lives : 
 " There was very little planning . I only came into it because of my UDR connection and the fact that I had a uniform . I was given a sub @-@ machine gun but I had never fired it . I passed out when the explosion happened and that was when I lost the gun , the glasses , and a UDR beret " . 
 On 15 October 1976 , Crozier and McDowell both received life sentences for the Miami Showband murders . McDowell had pleaded guilty . Crozier had pleaded not guilty . The judge , by sentencing McDowell and Crozier to 35 years imprisonment each , had handed down the longest life sentences in the history of Northern Ireland ; he commented that " killings like the Miami Showband must be stopped " . He added that had the death penalty not been abolished , it would have been imposed in this case . During the trial Des McAlea had received death threats which made him fear for the safety of his family ; this caused him to eventually leave Northern Ireland . 
 A third person , former UDR soldier John James Somerville ( aged 37 , a lorry @-@ helper and the brother of Wesley ) , was arrested following an RUC raid in Dungannon on 26 September 1980 . He was charged with the Miami Showband murders , the attempted murder of Stephen Travers , and the murder of Patrick Falls in 1974 . He was given a total of four life sentences ( three for the murders of the Miami Showband members and one for the Falls murder ) on 9 November 1981 ; he had pleaded not guilty . The three convicted UVF men , although admitting to having been at the scene , denied having shot anyone . None of the men ever named their accomplices , and the other UVF gunmen were never caught . The three men were sent to serve their sentence in the Maze Prison , on the outskirts of Lisburn . Fortnight Magazine reported that on 1 June 1982 , John James Somerville began a hunger strike at the Maze to obtain special category status . Crozier , McDowell , and Somerville were released after 1998 under the terms of the Belfast Agreement . 
 = = = Allegations = = = 
 A continued allegation in the case has been the presence of Captain Robert Nairac at the scene . Former serving Secret Intelligence Service agent Captain Fred Holroyd , and others , suggested that Nairac had organised the attack in co @-@ operation with Robin Jackson and the Mid @-@ Ulster UVF . In his maiden parliamentary speech on 7 July 1987 , Ken Livingstone MP told the House of Commons , " it was likely " that Nairac had organised the attack . Surviving band members Stephen Travers and Des McAlea told police and later testified in court that a British Army officer with a " crisp , clipped English accent " oversaw the Buskhill attack , the implication being that this was Nairac . In his book The Dirty War , Martin Dillon adamantly dismissed the allegation that Nairac had been present . He believed it was based on the erroneous linkage of Nairac to the earlier murder of IRA man John Francis Green in County Monaghan – the same pistol was used in both attacks . Regarding the soldier with the English accent , Dillon wrote : 
 it is to say the least highly dubious , if not absurd to conclude from such superficial factors that Nairac was present at the Miami murders . I was told by a source close to " Mr. A " and another loyalist hitman that Nairac was not present at either murder [ Miami Showband and John Francis Green ] . 
 Travers had described the English @-@ accented man as having been of normal height and thought he had fair hair , but was not certain . Travers was not able to positively identify Nairac , from his photograph , as having been the man at Buskhill . The RTÉ programme Today Tonight aired a documentary in 1987 in which it claimed that former UVF associates of Harris Boyle revealed to the programme 's researchers that Nairac had deliberately detonated the bomb to eliminate Boyle , with whom he had carried out the Green killing . Journalist Emily O 'Reilly noted in the Sunday Tribune that none of the three men convicted of the massacre ever implicated Nairac in the attack or accused him of causing Boyle 's death . 
 The band 's road manager , Brian Maguire stated that when he drove away from Banbridge in the lead , a few minutes ahead of the band 's minibus , he passed through security barriers manned by the RUC . As Maguire continued ahead , up the by @-@ pass towards Newry , he noticed a blue Triumph 2000 pulling @-@ out from where it had been parked in a lay @-@ by . Maguire recalled that the car first slowed down , then it accelerated , flashing its lights . Two men had been observed acting suspiciously inside the Castle Ballroom during the band 's performance that night , suggesting that the Miami Showband 's movements were being carefully monitored . 
 Another persistent allegation is the direct involvement of Mid @-@ Ulster UVF leader Robin Jackson . He was one of the men taken in by the RUC in August 1975 and questioned as a suspect in the killings , but was released without charge . The independent panel of inquiry commissioned by the Pat Finucane Centre concluded that there was " credible evidence that the principal perpetrator [ of the Miami Showband attack ] was a man who was not prosecuted – alleged RUC Special Branch agent Robin Jackson " . The same panel revealed that about six weeks before the attack , Thomas Crozier , Jackson , and the latter 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Samuel Fulton Neill , were arrested for the possession of four shotguns . Neill 's car was one of those allegedly used in the Buskhill attack . He was later shot dead in Portadown on 25 January 1976 , allegedly by Jackson for having informed the RUC about Thomas Crozier 's participation in the attack . The panel stated that it was unclear why Crozier , Jackson , and Neill were not in police custody at the time the Miami Showband killings took place . Martin Dillon maintained in The Dirty War that the Miami Showband attack was planned weeks before at a house in Portadown , and the person in charge of the overall operation was a former UDR man , whom Dillon referred to for legal reasons as " Mr. A " . Dillon also opined in God and the Gun : the Church and Irish Terrorism that the dead bombers , Harris Boyle and Wesley Somerville , had actually led the UVF gang at Buskhill . Journalists Kevin Dowling and Liam Collins in the Irish Independent however , suggested in their respective articles that Jackson had been the leader of the unit . 
 Former British soldier and writer Ken Wharton published in his book Wasted Years , Wasted Lives , Volume 1 , an alternative theory that was suggested to him by loyalist <unk> researcher Jeanne Griffin ; this was that the ambush was planned by Robin Jackson as an elaborate means of eliminating trumpet player Brian McCoy . Griffin suggests that McCoy , who originally came from Caledon , County Tyrone and had strong UDR and Orange Order family connections , was possibly approached at some stage by Jackson with a view of securing his help in carrying out UVF attacks in the Irish Republic . When McCoy refused , Jackson then hatched his plan to murder McCoy and his band mates in retaliation , even <unk> choosing Buskhill as the ambush site due to its similarity to Bus @-@ kill . Griffin goes on to add that the bogus checkpoint was set up not only to plant the bomb on board the van but to ensure the presence of McCoy which would have been confirmed when he handed over his driver 's license to the gunmen . She also thinks that had everything gone to plan once the bomb was planted in the van McCoy would have been instructed to drive through Newry where the bomb would have gone off and the UVF could then afterwards portray the Miami Showband as IRA members on a mission to blow up the local RUC barracks . Griffin based her theory on the nine bullets that were fired from a Luger into McCoy 's body and that Jackson 's fingerprints were found on the silencer used for a Luger . She furthermore opined that Jackson was the man Travers saw kicking McCoy 's body to make sure he was dead . 
 The Pat Finucane Centre has named the Miami Showband killings as one of the 87 violent attacks perpetrated by the Glenanne gang against the Irish nationalist community in the 1970s . The Glenanne gang was a loose alliance of loyalist extremists allegedly operating under the command of British Military Intelligence and / or RUC Special Branch . It comprised rogue elements of the British security forces who , together with the UVF , carried out sectarian killings in the Mid @-@ Ulster / County Armagh area . Their name comes from a farm in Glenanne , County Armagh , which was owned by RUC reservist James Mitchell ; according to RUC Special Patrol Group officer John Weir , it was used as a UVF arms dump and bomb @-@ making site . Weir alleged the bomb used in the Miami Showband attack came from Mitchell 's farm . Weir 's affidavit implicating Robin Jackson in a number of attacks including the 1974 Dublin bombings was published in the 2003 Barron Report ; the findings of an official investigation into the Dublin and Monaghan bombings commissioned by Irish Supreme Court Judge Henry Barron . 
 = = Later years = = 
 During the six years from the onset of " The Troubles " until the July 1975 attack , there had never been an incident involving any of the showbands . The incident had an adverse effect on the Irish showband scene , with many of the bands afraid to play in Northern Ireland . The emergence of discos later in the decade meant that ballrooms were converted into nightclubs , leaving the showbands with few venues available in which to perform . By the mid @-@ 1980s , the showbands had lost their appeal for the Irish public ; although The Miami Showband , albeit with a series of different line @-@ ups , did not disband until 1986 . The Miami Showband reformed in 2008 , with Travers , Des McAlea , Ray Millar and other new members . It is fronted by McAlea , who returned to Northern Ireland the same year after living in South Africa since about 1982 . 
 In 1994 , Eric Smyth , a former UDR member and the husband of Brian McCoy 's sister , Sheila , was killed by the IRA . 
 Travers travelled to Belfast in 2006 for a secret meeting with the second @-@ in @-@ command of the UVF 's Brigade Staff , in an attempt to come to terms with the killing of his former colleagues and friends . The meeting was arranged by Rev. Chris Hudson , a former intermediary between the government of Ireland and the UVF , whose role was crucial to the Northern Ireland peace process . Hudson , a Unitarian minister , had been a close friend of Fran O 'Toole . The encounter took place inside Hudson 's church , All Souls Belfast . The UVF man , who identified himself only as " the Craftsman " , apologised to Travers for the attack , and explained that the UVF gunmen had opened fire on the band because they " had panicked " that night . It was revealed in Peter Taylor 's book Loyalists that " the Craftsman " had been instrumental in bringing about the 1994 Combined Loyalist Military Command ( <unk> ) ceasefire . 
 Travers also visited the home of Thomas Crozier , hoping to meet with him , but the latter did not come to the door . He presently resides near Craigavon . James McDowell lives in Lurgan , and John James Somerville became an evangelical minister in Belfast . The UVF had cut all ties with Somerville after he had opposed the 1994 ceasefire . In January 2015 he was found dead in his Shankill Road flat . Aged 70 , he died of cancer of the kidney . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 A monument dedicated to the dead Miami Showband members was unveiled at a ceremony at Parnell Square North , Dublin , on 10 December 2007 . Survivors Stephen Travers and Des McAlea were both present at the unveiling , as was the Taoiseach , Bertie Ahern , who made a tribute . The monument , made of limestone , bronze and granite , by County Donegal sculptor Redmond <unk> , is at the site of the old National Ballroom , where the band often played . 
 A mural and memorial plaque to Harris Boyle and Wesley Somerville is in the <unk> Estate in Portadown , where Boyle had lived . The plaque describes them as having been " killed in action " . 
 In a report on Nairac 's alleged involvement in the massacre , published in the Sunday Mirror newspaper on 16 May 1999 , Colin Wills called the ambush " one of the worst atrocities in the 30 @-@ year history of the Troubles " . Irish Times diarist , Frank McNally , summed up the massacre as " an incident that encapsulated all the madness of the time " . In 2011 , Journalist Kevin Myers denounced the attack with the following statement : " in its diabolical inventiveness against such a group of harmless and naïve young men , it is easily one of the most depraved [ of the Troubles ] " . 
 A stamp was issued in Ireland on 22 September 2010 commemorating the Miami Showband . The 55 @-@ cent stamp , designed with a 1967 publicity photograph of the band , included two of the slain members Fran O 'Toole and Brian McCoy as part of the line @-@ up when Dickie Rock was the frontman . It was one of a series of four stamps issued by An Post , celebrating the " golden age of the Irish showband era from the 1950s to the 1970s " . 
 = = The HET Report = = 
 The Historical Enquiries Team ( HET ) , which was set up to investigate the more controversial Troubles @-@ related deaths , released its report on the Miami Showband killings to the victims ' families in December 2011 . The findings noted in the report confirmed Mid @-@ Ulster UVF leader Robin Jackson 's involvement and identified him as an RUC Special Branch agent . According to the report , Jackson had claimed during police interrogations that after the shootings , a senior RUC officer had advised him to " lie low " . Although this information was passed on to RUC headquarters , nothing was done about it . In a police statement made following his arrest for possession of the silencer and Luger on 31 May 1976 , Jackson maintained that a week before he was taken into custody , two RUC officers had tipped him off about the discovery of his fingerprints on the silencer ; he also claimed they had forewarned him : " I should clear as there was a wee job up the country that I would be done for and there was no way out of it for me " . Although ballistic testing had linked the Luger ( for which the silencer had been specifically made ) to the Miami Showband attack , Jackson was never questioned about the killings after his fingerprints had been discovered on the silencer , and the Miami inquiry team were never informed about these developments . 
 Robin Jackson died of cancer on 30 May 1998 , aged 49 . 
 The families held a press conference in Dublin after the report was released . When asked to comment about the report , Des McAlea replied , " It 's been a long time but we 've got justice at last " . He did , however , express his concern over the fact that nobody was ever charged with his attempted <unk> and that none of the perpetrators ever offered him an apology . Stephen Travers offered , " We believe the only conclusion possible arising from the HET report is that one of the most prolific loyalist murderers of the conflict was an RUC Special Branch agent and was involved in the Miami Showband attack " . 
 The HET said the killings raised " disturbing questions about collusive and corrupt behaviour " . 
 = Madman 's Drum = 
 Madman 's Drum is a 1930 wordless novel by American artist Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) . Its 118 images tell the story of a slave trader who steals a demon @-@ faced drum from an African he murders , and the consequences for him and his family . 
 The book was executed in wood engravings . It is the second of Ward 's six wordless novels , after Gods ' Man of 1929 . Ward was more ambitious with this second work in the medium : the characters are more nuanced , the plot more developed and complicated , and his outrage at social injustice more explicit . He used a finer degree of detail in the artwork , through a wider variety of carving tools , and was expressive in his use of symbolism and exaggerated emotional facial expressions . 
 The book was well received upon release , and the success of Ward 's first two wordless novels encouraged publishers to publish more books in the genre . In 1943 psychologist Henry Murray used two images from the work in his Thematic <unk> Test of personality traits . Madman 's Drum is considered less successfully executed than Gods ' Man , and Ward streamlined his work in his next wordless novel , Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A slave trader steals from an African he murders a drum bearing the face of a demon , condemning his family to its curse . The slave trader becomes rich and buys a mansion for his family , in which he displays the drum and the sword he used to kill the drum 's original owner . He catches his son playing on the drum , beats the boy , and insists he read and study . The slave trader is lost at sea when he tries to return to Africa . 
 The boy devotes himself to study , while distancing himself from the vices of his peers . He embraces and then rejects religion , and a cross he tosses to the floor trips and kills his mother . He becomes a successful scientist , and in middle age marries and has two daughters , but is cold and indifferent to his family . One by one he loses them : his wife dies after having an affair with a musician , one daughter falls into depression when her labor @-@ organizer lover is hanged for his communist sympathies , and the other daughter falls in love with a man who pimps her to others . Driven insane by the loss of all who were close to him , he equips himself with the forbidden drum to play music with his wife 's musician lover . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Chicago , Lynd Ward ( 1905 – 1985 ) was a son of Methodist minister Harry F. Ward , a social activist and the first chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union . Throughout his career , the younger Ward displayed in his work the influence of his father 's interest in social injustice . He was drawn to art from an early age , and contributed images and text to high school and college newspapers . 
 After getting a university degree in fine arts in 1926 , Ward married writer May McNeer and the couple left for an extended honeymoon in Europe . Ward spent a year studying wood engraving in Leipzig , Germany , where he encountered German Expressionist art and read the wordless novel The Sun ( 1919 ) by Flemish woodcut artist Frans Masereel ( 1889 – 1972 ) . Ward returned to the United States and freelanced his illustrations . In New York City in 1929 , he came across the wordless novel Destiny ( 1926 ) by German artist Otto Nückel ( 1888 – 1955 ) . Nückel 's only work in the genre , Destiny told of the life and death of a prostitute in a style inspired by Masereel 's , but with a greater cinematic flow . The work inspired Ward to create a wordless novel of his own : Gods ' Man ( 1929 ) . In his second such work , Madman 's Drum , he hoped to explore more deeply the potential of the narrative medium , and to overcome what he saw as a lack of individuality in the characters in Gods ' Man . 
 = = Production and publishing history = = 
 Ward made 118 woodcuts for Madman 's Drum . The black @-@ and @-@ white images are not uniform in size — they measure from 4 by 3 inches ( 10 @.@ 2 cm × 7 @.@ 6 cm ) to 5 by 4 inches ( 13 cm × 10 cm ) . Cape & Smith published the book in October 1930 in trade and deluxe editions ; the latter was available in a signed edition limited to 309 copies . The original woodblocks are in the Lynd Ward Collection in the Joseph Mark Lauinger Memorial Library at Georgetown University in Washington , DC . 
 Jonathon Cape published the book in the UK in 1930 . It appeared in the collected volume Storyteller Without Words : The Wood Engravings of Lynd Ward in 1974 , and again in 2010 in a Library of America collection , Lynd Ward : Six Novels in Woodcuts , edited by cartoonist Art Spiegelman . It had a Japanese publication in 2002 by <unk> <unk> , and was brought back into print in the US as a standalone edition by Dover Publications in 2005 . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 Madman 's Drum is a more ambitious work than Gods ' Man , with a larger cast of characters and more complicated plot . The book is more explicit in its radical leftist politics , and includes a subplot in which the main character 's sister 's communist lover is executed for his political beliefs . Late in life Ward described it as " set a hundred years or more ago ... in an obviously foreign land " , but that the story 's situation and characters could be encountered " almost anywhere at any time " . 
 The art has a variety of line qualities and textures , and more detail than in Gods ' Man . Ward availed himself of a larger variety of engraving tools , such as the multiple @-@ tint tool for making groups of parallel lines , and rounded engraving tools for organic textures . The large cast of characters is distinguished by visual details in faces and clothing , such as the main character 's sharp nose and receding hairline and his wife 's checked dress . 
 A wide range of emotions such as resentment and terror is expressed through exaggerated facial expressions . Ward broadens his use of visual symbolism , as with a young woman 's purity represented by a flower she wears — she is deflowered by a young man whose vest is adorned with flowers . His house also displays a floral stucco pattern and is adorned with phallic spears and an exultant rooster as a weathervane . To French comics <unk> Jérôme <unk> , the " madman " in the title could be interpreted as any of a number of its characters : the laughing image adorning the drum , the subdued African , the slave trader , and even Ward himself . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The book 's release in 1930 was well @-@ received , though it did not achieve the earlier book 's sales . A reviewer for The Burlington Magazine in 1931 judged the book a failed experiment , finding the artwork uneven and the narrative hard to follow without even the chapter titles as textual guidance that Gods ' Man had . 
 The success of Ward 's first two wordless novels led American publishers to put out a number of such books , including Nückel 's Destiny in 1930 , as well as books by Americans and other Europeans . Interest in wordless novels was short @-@ lived , and few besides Masereel and Ward produced more than a single work . Each of Ward 's sold fewer copies than the last , and he abandoned the genre in 1940 after a failed attempt at a seventh . In 1943 psychologist Henry Murray used two images from Madman 's Drum in his Thematic <unk> Test of personality traits . 
 Cartoonist Art Spiegelman considered Ward 's second wordless novel a " sophomore slump " , whose story was bogged down by Ward 's attempt to flesh out the characters and produce a more complicated plot . He believed the artwork was a mix of strengths and weaknesses : it had stronger compositions , but the more finely engraved images were " harder to read " , and the death of the wife and other plot points were unclear and difficult to interpret . Spiegelman considered Ward to have broken free from this slump by streamlining his work in his next wordless novel , Wild Pilgrimage ( 1932 ) . Jérôme <unk> declared Madman 's Drum Ward 's first masterpiece , " [ triumphing ] at every fault , [ succeeding ] in each failure " as Ward freed himself from the restraint displayed in Gods ' Man . 
 = Glee : The Music , Volume 1 = 
 Glee : The Music , Volume 1 is the debut soundtrack album by the cast of the musical television series Glee , which aired on Fox in the United States . It features cover versions from the first nine episodes of the first season and was released on November 2 , 2009 by Columbia Records and 20th Century Fox Television Records . The album received mixed reviews from critics , with many praising large ensemble numbers , but comparing it to karaoke tracks . It went to number one on album charts in Ireland and the United Kingdom , and peaked at number three in Australia and number four in both Canada and the United States . Volume 1 has been certified platinum in these five countries . 
 All non @-@ bonus tracks from the album have been released as digital singles . The cast 's debut single , a cover of Journey 's " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , charted within the top five in many countries and has sold over one million copies in the US . Other high @-@ charting and best @-@ selling singles include the covers of Queen 's " Somebody to Love " , Neil Diamond 's " Sweet Caroline " , and " Defying Gravity " from the musical Wicked . Glee Live ! In Concert ! saw the cast tour the US in promotion of the series ' first season and its musical releases . The album earned a nomination for Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media for the 2011 ceremony . 
 = = Development = = 
 Glee debuted in America on the Fox network on May 19 , 2009 . Series creator Ryan Murphy planned to include five to eight musical numbers per episode , and to release accompanying soundtrack albums every few months . In the week prior to the broadcast of the pilot episode , Murphy stated that seven different companies had bid on the rights to the series ' first soundtrack . The contenders were narrowed down to four labels , with Fox ultimately signing a deal with Columbia Records as a result of chairman Rob Stringer 's belief that Glee would be a success . Stringer appreciated the series ' use of both classic and contemporary pop music . He suggested that other record labels underestimated the potential of Glee 's musical releases as they are all cover versions . 
 Murphy was responsible for selecting all of the songs covered on the album , and strove to maintain a balance between show tunes and chart hits . He was surprised at the ease with which use of songs was approved by the record labels approached , and explained , " I think the key to it is they loved the tone of it . They loved that this show was about optimism and young kids , for the most part , reinterpreting their classics for a new audience . " Music supervisor P.J. Bloom cleared the song rights with their respective publishers , and music producer Adam Anders rearranged the tracks for the Glee cast . " Take a Bow " was offered for use at a reduced licensing rate , which surprised Murphy , who had believed he would not be able to afford the rights given that it had been a number one hit for Rihanna . Neil Diamond had some reluctance over licensing " Sweet Caroline " to the show , and retracted clearance after it had already been recorded . Bloom was able to convince him to reverse his decision , and Diamond went on to also license his song " Hello Again " for use on the show at a later date . 
 Stringer did not expect the success of Glee Cast single releases , and estimated that four million copies would be sold by Christmas 2009 . He was unsure whether the high sales figures would help or hinder the release of Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , and as such , was eager for its release in order to gauge the physical and digital market response . The 17 tracks selected for the album were considered amongst the series ' most popular , with Columbia and Fox aiming to attract casual buyers as well as Glee fans . Geoff Bywater , head of Fox 's music department , anticipated considerable sales from impulse buyers in retail stores . Instrumental versions of some songs were included as bonus tracks , based on a trend of fans recreating the musical numbers in tribute to the show . 
 In May 2010 , the Glee Cast undertook a US tour entitled Glee Live ! In Concert ! , performing tracks from the first season 's musical releases . From Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , " Push It " , " Sweet Caroline " , " Defying Gravity " , " Bust Your Windows " and " Dancing with Myself " were included on the setlist , with " Somebody to Love " as an encore performance . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Metacritic gave the album a Metascore — a weighted average based on the impression of eight critical reviews — of 60 percent , signifying mixed or average reviews . Both Emma Wall of The Daily Telegraph and Christopher John Farley of The Wall Street Journal expressed approval of the choral arrangements , though Wall review observed that some of the ballads lack potency without their episodic context . Farley appreciated the " emotional backstory " given to the album by the television series , writing that it would " evoke fond memories of favorite episodes " for Glee fans . He found the better songs to be the ones which do not seem " too polished " , giving them a karaoke appeal . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt wrote that the soundtrack is essentially a karaoke album , describing the songs as " unapologetically sincere " — lacking the series ' subversive wit , but with " a giddy sort of ' let 's put on a show ' charm " . Billboard 's Mikael Wood deemed the most successful tracks those which seem least suited to the series , such as the rock ballads " Don 't Stop Believin ' " and " Can 't Fight This Feeling " . Wood commented that " Take a Bow " and " Bust Your Windows " are also enjoyable , but " lack a certain revenge @-@ of @-@ the @-@ nerds triumph . " 
 The Independent 's Andy Gill was apathetic towards the album , which he too deemed " karaoke @-@ pop " . He praised Riley 's rendition of " Bust Your Windows " , calling it the album 's " most compelling moment " , but criticized Morrison 's rapping as " the least convincing [ ... ] in recording history . " Gill found Agron 's cover of " You Keep Me Hanging On " to be " irritatingly anonymous " , but otherwise felt the album contained little of note , either positive or negative . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone shared Gill 's sentiments with regards to Morrison 's rapping and Riley 's " Bust Your Windows " , also deeming " Don 't Stop Believin ' " " a triumphal moment against which resistance is futile . " Dan Cairns of The Times described the album as " music of catch @-@ in @-@ the @-@ throat , quick @-@ fix , talent @-@ show emotion " variety , calling it " undeniably effective " but " utterly nauseating . " 
 Andrew Leahey of allmusic opined that some of the cast members are better actors than vocalists , but gave particular praise to Michele 's songs , suggesting that the soundtrack is largely a showcase for her talent , and that she outperforms most of the original artists . IGN 's Brian Linder described the album as having " an appealing irreverent spirit that <unk> down the earnestness just as it begins to overwhelm . " Linder agreed that Morrison does not excel as an emcee , but still found his attempts at rapping enjoyable . He generally approved of the track list , but found the older songs such as " Sweet Caroline " and " Say a Little Prayer " lacking in resonance , and named " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " as the weakest performance . Linder commended Riley and Michele 's vocals , and most enjoyed the covers of " Somebody to Love " and " Keep Holding On " , suggesting that the latter surpasses the original version . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian commented that the album requires a suspension of disbelief , attributing some negative reviews from US critics to their inability to accept the fantasy of the series . Petridis reviewed " Dancing With Myself " , " Sweet Caroline " , " Gold Digger " , " Somebody to Love " and " Alone " favorably , but as with Gill and Linder disliked " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " , which she deemed bland and boring . Petridis wrote that the album does not entirely work in its own right , separate from the television series , but concluded that for listeners prepared to accept the conceit , " Glee : the Soundtrack almost lives up to its title . " 
 Glee : The Music , Volume 1 received a nomination in the category of Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media at the 53rd Grammy Awards . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Glee : The Music , Volume 1 debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 , selling 113 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . The same week , the album also debuted at number two on the Billboard Soundtracks chart , going on to reach the top position on May 1 , 2010 . On September 9 , 2010 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales or shipments of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 or more . As of May 2011 , 1 @.@ 169 million copies have been sold in the US , and it has remained on the Billboard 200 for seventy @-@ three weeks . In the United Kingdom , the album entered the top 75 three weeks before its official release , on import sales alone . Following its official release , it debuted at number one with sales of 62 @,@ 000 according to The Official Charts Company . It was certified platinum for 300 @,@ 000 copies sold by the British Phonographic Industry on May 21 , 2010 . In Australia , the album peaked at number three , and was certified platinum for 70 @,@ 000 copies sold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) in 2009 , and received a 2x platinum certification from ARIA in 2011 . It peaked at number four in Canada , and has been certified platinum with 80 @,@ 000 units sold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . The album also peaked at number one in Ireland , eight in New Zealand , nine in the Netherlands , thirty @-@ four in both Austria and Wallonia , thirty @-@ seven in Mexico , forty @-@ eight in Switzerland , sixty @-@ nine in Spain , seventy @-@ four in Flanders , and eighty in Japan . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Each of the songs included on Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , except for the bonus tracks , were released as singles , available for download . The releases made the Glee Cast the tenth cast to have entries chart on the Billboard Hot 100 in its 51 @-@ year history . Their debut single " Don 't Stop Believin ' " charted at number five in Australia , number four in the US and Ireland , and number two in the United Kingdom . In the US , 177 @,@ 000 copies of the song were sold in its first week of release . Its number four debut surpassed the Journey original , which peaked at number nine in 1981 . The original rendition sold 42 @,@ 000 copies in the week of the Glee Cast release , up 48 % on the previous week . " Don 't Stop Believin ' " was also the cast 's best @-@ selling single , and has sold 1 @,@ 005 @,@ 000 copies in the US , a combination of sales from the original release ( 921 @,@ 000 ) and the rerecording for the season finale ( 84 @,@ 000 ) . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on October 13 , 2009 , and platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association the following year . 
 On October 22 , 2010 , Yahoo ! Music published a list of the twenty most popular Glee songs , based on download data from Nielsen SoundScan . Of the twenty best @-@ selling singles , eight are included on Glee : The Music , Volume 1 : " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , " Defying Gravity " ( 335 @,@ 000 copies ) , " Somebody to Love " ( 315 @,@ 000 ) , " Sweet Caroline " ( 187 @,@ 000 ) , " Take a Bow " ( 181 @,@ 000 ) , " Keep Holding On " ( 166 @,@ 000 ) , " Taking Chances " ( 163 @,@ 000 ) , and " Alone " ( 159 @,@ 000 ) . " Take a Bow " charted at number 46 in the US , with 53 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week of release . Sales of the original Rihanna version increased by 189 percent after the song was covered in the Glee episode " Showmance " . Sales of the Queen version of " Somebody to Love " rose from 2 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 downloads following the release of the Glee Cast cover version . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Orkney = 
 Orkney / <unk> / ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> ) , also known as the Orkney Islands , is an archipelago in the Northern Isles of Scotland , United Kingdom , situated off the north coast of Great Britain . Orkney is 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) north of the coast of Caithness and comprises approximately 70 islands , of which 20 are inhabited . The largest island Mainland is often referred to as " the Mainland " . It has an area of 523 square kilometres ( 202 sq mi ) , making it the sixth @-@ largest Scottish island and the tenth @-@ largest island in the British Isles . The largest settlement and administrative centre is Kirkwall . 
 A form of the name dates to the pre @-@ Roman era and the islands have been inhabited for at least 8500 years , originally occupied by Mesolithic and Neolithic tribes and then by the Picts . Orkney was invaded and forcibly annexed by Norway in 875 and settled by the Norse . The Scottish Parliament then re @-@ annexed the earldom to the Scottish Crown in 1472 , following the failed payment of a dowry for James III 's bride Margaret of Denmark . Orkney contains some of the oldest and best @-@ preserved Neolithic sites in Europe , and the " Heart of Neolithic Orkney " is a designated UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 Orkney is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland , a constituency of the Scottish Parliament , a lieutenancy area , and a former county . The local council is Orkney Islands Council , one of only three Councils in Scotland with a majority of elected members who are independents . 
 In addition to the Mainland , most of the islands are in two groups , the North and South Isles , all of which have an underlying geological base of Old Red Sandstone . The climate is mild and the soils are extremely fertile , most of the land being farmed . Agriculture is the most important sector of the economy . The significant wind and marine energy resources are of growing importance , and the island generates more than its total yearly electricity demand using renewables . The local people are known as Orcadians and have a distinctive Orcadian dialect of Scots and a rich inheritance of folklore . There is an abundance of marine and avian wildlife . 
 = = Origin of the name = = 
 Pytheas of Massilia visited Britain – probably sometime between 322 and 285 BC – and described it as triangular in shape , with a northern tip called Orcas . This may have referred to Dunnet Head , from which Orkney is visible . Writing in the 1st century AD , the Roman geographer Pomponius Mela called the islands Orcades , as did Tacitus in AD 98 , claiming that his father @-@ in @-@ law Agricola had " discovered and subjugated the Orcades hitherto unknown " ( although both Mela and Pliny had previously referred to the islands . ) <unk> usually interpret the element <unk> as a Pictish tribal name meaning " young pig " or " young boar " . 
 Speakers of Old Irish referred to the islands as <unk> Orc " island of the pigs " . The archipelago is known as Ynysoedd <unk> in modern Welsh and <unk> in modern Scottish Gaelic , the <unk> representing a fossilized prepositional case ending . 
 Bede refers to the islands as " Orcades insulae " in his seminal work Ecclesiastical History of the English People . 
 Norwegian settlers arriving from the late ninth century reinterpreted orc as Old Norse <unk> " seal " and added ey " island " to the end so the name became <unk> " Seal Islands " , later shortened to " Orkney " in English . According to the Historia <unk> , Orkney was named after an earl called Orkan . 
 The Norse knew Mainland Orkney as <unk> " Mainland " or as <unk> " Horse Island " . The island is sometimes referred to as Pomona ( or <unk> ) , a name that stems from a sixteenth @-@ century mistranslation by George Buchanan , which has rarely been used locally . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 A charred hazelnut shell , recovered in 2007 during excavations in Tankerness on the Mainland has been dated to <unk> – 6660 BC indicating the presence of Mesolithic nomadic tribes . The earliest known permanent settlement is at Knap of Howar , a Neolithic farmstead on the island of Papa Westray , which dates from 3500 BC . The village of Skara Brae , Europe 's best @-@ preserved Neolithic settlement , is believed to have been inhabited from around 3100 BC . Other remains from that era include the Standing Stones of Stenness , the Maeshowe passage grave , the Ring of Brodgar and other standing stones . Many of the Neolithic settlements were abandoned around 2500 BC , possibly due to changes in the climate . 
 During the Bronze Age fewer large stone structures were built although the great ceremonial circles continued in use as metalworking was slowly introduced to Scotland from Europe over a lengthy period . There are relatively few Orcadian sites dating from this era although there is the impressive <unk> Mound near the Ring of Brodgar and various islands sites such as Tofts Ness on Sanday and the remains of two houses on Holm of Faray . 
 = = = Iron Age = = = 
 Excavations at Quanterness on the Mainland have revealed an Atlantic roundhouse built about 700 BC and similar finds have been made at Bu on the Mainland and Pierowall Quarry on Westray . The most impressive Iron Age structures of Orkney are the ruins of later round towers called " brochs " and their associated settlements such as the Broch of Burroughston and Broch of Gurness . The nature and origin of these buildings is a subject of ongoing debate . Other structures from this period include underground storehouses , and aisled roundhouses , the latter usually in association with earlier broch sites . 
 During the Roman invasion of Britain the " King of Orkney " was one of 11 British leaders who is said to have submitted to the Emperor Claudius in AD 43 at Colchester . After the Agricolan fleet had come and gone , possibly anchoring at Shapinsay , direct Roman influence seems to have been limited to trade rather than conquest . 
 By the late Iron Age , Orkney was part of the Pictish kingdom , and although the archaeological remains from this period are less impressive there is every reason to suppose the fertile soils and rich seas of Orkney provided the Picts with a comfortable living . The <unk> Gaels began to influence the islands towards the close of the Pictish era , perhaps principally through the role of Celtic missionaries , as evidenced by several islands bearing the epithet " Papa " in commemoration of these preachers . However , before the Gaelic presence could establish itself the Picts were gradually dispossessed by the Norsemen from the late 8th century onwards . The nature of this transition is controversial , and theories range from peaceful integration to enslavement and genocide . 
