 Kongō was fitted with three 172 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 8 in ) Krupp rifled breech @-@ loading ( RBL ) guns and six RBL 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) Krupp guns . All of the 172 @-@ millimeter guns were positioned as chase guns , two forward and one aft . The 152 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted on the broadside . The ship also carried two short 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns for use ashore or mounted on the ships ' boats . 
 During the 1880s , the armament of the ship was reinforced with the addition of four quadruple @-@ barreled 25 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) Nordenfelt and two quintuple @-@ barreled 11 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) Nordenfelt machine guns for defense against torpedo boats . Around the same time she also received two 356 @-@ millimeter ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes for Schwartzkopff torpedoes . The anti @-@ torpedo boat armament was again reinforced in 1897 by the addition of a pair of 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . After the end of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Kongō 's armament was reduced to six ex @-@ Russian 12 @-@ pounder guns and six 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounders . 
 The Kongō @-@ class corvettes had a wrought @-@ iron armor waterline belt 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick amidships that tapered to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) at the ends of the ship . 
 = = History = = 
 Japanese sources universally give the date for Kongō 's keel @-@ laying as 24 September 1875 — the same as that for the awarding of the contract — but historian Hans Langerer describes this as improbable , arguing that no shipyard would order enough material to begin construction without cash in hand . Kongō was launched on 17 April 1877 ; the wife of a secretary in the Japanese Legation cut the retaining rope with a hammer and chisel . Completed in January 1878 , Kongō sailed for Japan on 18 February under the command of a British captain and with a British crew because the IJN was not yet ready for such a long voyage . She arrived in Yokohama on 26 April and was classified as a Third Class Warship on 4 May . On 10 July a formal ceremony was held in Yokohama for the receipt of the ship that was attended by the Meiji Emperor and many senior government officials . The ship was opened for tours by the nobility , their families and invited guests for three days after the ceremony . On 14 July , the general public was allowed to tour the ship for a week . 
 Kongō hosted the Duke of Genoa when he visited Japan in late 1879 . The ship was assigned to the Small Standing Fleet in 1885 and made port visits to Port Arthur and Chefoo in China and Jinsen in Korea the following year . She became a training ship in 1887 for the Kure Naval District . Together with her sister ship Hiei , Kongō sailed from Shinagawa , Tokyo on 13 August 1889 on a training cruise to the Mediterranean with cadets from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy , returning on 2 February 1890 . On 5 October , the sister ships departed Shinagawa for Kobe to pick up the 69 survivors of the wrecked Ottoman frigate Ertuğrul , transporting them to their homeland at Constantinople , Turkey , on 2 January 1891 , after which the ships ' officers were received by Sultan Abdul Hamid II . The ships also carried a class of naval cadets on this mission . On the return voyage , the two corvettes made port at Piraeus where they were visited by King George I of Greece and his son , Crown Prince Constantine . Making stops at Alexandria , Port Said , Aden , Colombo , Singapore and Hong Kong , the sister ships arrived at Shinagawa on 10 May where Kongō resumed her training duties . 
 Kongō began another cadet cruise on 24 September 1892 and visited Vancouver and San Francisco . On her return voyage she stopped at Honolulu and was present during the Hawaiian Revolution of 1893 . Though playing no part in the affair , she remained there to protect Japanese interests until relieved by the cruiser Naniwa and reached home on 22 April . Kongō began another cadet cruise on 19 April 1894 , but on arrival at Honolulu , transferred her cadets to the cruiser Takachiho on 16 June and relieved Takachiho as the patrol ship . Kongō 's tenure there was brief as she was recalled home on 5 July due to rising tensions ahead of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War . She did not participate in the Battle of the Yalu River in September , but was present during the Battle of Weihaiwei in January – February 1895 . 
 After the war , Kongō and Hiei alternated annual cadet training cruises , with Kongō making the 1896 cruise to China and Southeast Asia from 11 April to 16 September and the 1898 cruise to Australia from 17 March to 16 September . During the latter cruise , on 21 March 1898 , she was re @-@ designated as a 3rd @-@ class coast defense ship , although she retained her training duties . Kongō made the 1900 cruise to Manila , Hong Kong and Australia from 21 February to 30 July and both ships made the 1902 cruise , their last , to Manila and Australia from 19 February to 25 August . Kongō played a minor role in the Russo @-@ Japanese War before being reclassified as a survey ship in 1906 . She was stricken from the Navy List on 20 July 1909 and sold on 20 May 1910 for scrap . 
 = Leges Henrici Primi = 
 The Leges Henrici Primi or Laws of Henry I is a legal treatise , written in about 1115 , that records the legal customs of medieval England in the reign of King Henry I of England . Although it is not an official document , it was written by someone apparently associated with the royal administration . It lists and explains the laws , and includes explanations of how to conduct legal proceedings . Although its title implies that these laws were issued by King Henry , it lists laws issued by earlier monarchs that were still in force in Henry 's reign ; the only law of Henry that is included is the coronation charter he issued at the start of his reign . It covers a diverse range of subjects , including ecclesiastical cases , treason , murder , theft , feuds , assessment of danegeld , and the amounts of judicial fines . 
 The work survives in six manuscripts that range in date from about 1200 to around 1330 , belonging to two different manuscript traditions . Besides the six surviving manuscripts , three others were known to scholars in the 17th and 18th centuries , but have not survived to the present day . Two other separate copies may also have existed . The complete work itself was first printed in 1644 , but an earlier partial edition appeared in 1628 . The Leges is the first legal treatise in English history , and has been credited with having the greatest effect on the views of English law before the reign of King Henry II than any other work of its kind . 
 = = Background and similar works = = 
 The Leges Henrici Primi or Laws of Henry I is not merely a compilation of laws but an integrated legal treatise , the first such in the history of England , written in the Latin language about 1115 . It records the legal customs of medieval England . It was part of a small group of similar writings devoted to legal procedures that were written for royal administrators . Besides the Leges , other works of this type produced at this time were the Quadripartitus , parts of the Leges Edwardi Regis , the <unk> <unk> , and the <unk> <unk> . It is possible the Leges <unk> was also written during this time period . It is the longest of the legal tracts from its time , and made some effort to be comprehensive . 
 = = Authorship and title = = 
 The Leges was written between 1114 and 1118 by an unknown Norman , who is very likely to be the author of another legal work , the Quadripartitus , although some historians , including H. G. Richardson and G. O. Sayles , argue that the two works were by different authors . The Leges was probably part of a project including the Quadripartitus , the two works being part of a planned work in four volumes to cover not only the laws of the writer 's own time , but previous laws of the Anglo @-@ Saxon monarchs , as well as how to handle legal cases . As part of both works , the author has included the Charter of Liberties , which was King Henry 's coronation charter promising not to follow the administrative and legal policies of his predecessor , King William II . About a third of the material in the Leges is also in the Quadripartitus . There is evidence that the author of the two works had been a member of the household of Gerard , who had been chancellor under Kings William I and William II before becoming Archbishop of York under Henry I. The work was likely composed at Winchester . 
 Usually the work has been known as the Leges Henrici Primi , or Laws of Henry the First . It gained that name from the inscription " De <unk> ecclesie et totius <unk> <unk> leges Henrici primi " which occurs on five of the six extant manuscripts . The sixth manuscript adds " <unk> <unk> " at the end of the inscription . The historian Felix <unk> called the work Leges Henrici , but the fuller title of Leges Henrici Primi is generally used to help differentiate which Henry is being referred to . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The work is not a law code issued by King Henry , but a compilation of already extant legislation that was still current during his reign . It is not a comprehensive listing of all laws that were in force during the early 11th century . It begins with Henry 's Charter of Liberties , which he issued after his coronation , and this is the only actual legal document reproduced in the Leges . Some discussions of juridical matters then follow , then a long treatment of ecclesiastical issues . The rest of the treatise is concerned with non @-@ ecclesiastical subjects , including cases of injury , theft , murder , and feuds . Procedural topics are included , such as how summonses to court should be formed , what notices need to be made before judicial procedures , how adjournments should be handled , and other such concerns . There is no strong organizational framework to the entirety of the Leges , which leads the author to repeat subjects as well as treating some subjects less than adequately . 
 The law code recognised the difference between the laws of the Danelaw , the old Kingdom of Mercia , and the lands of the Kingdom of Wessex . It also set out a list of legal proceedings that could only be tried before the king or his officials , the cases of which were known as " royal pleas " or " pleas of the crown " ; they included serious crimes such as treason , murder , rape , robbery , arson , and some types of theft . Treasure trove and salvage from wrecks were also matters of interest to the crown . Other royal cases involved counterfeiters or false judgement , or violent acts against the king himself or his household and servants . The king also reserved the right to hear appeals from other courts conducted by local authorities or by his nobles . The tract also set out who should attend the shire court , ruling that the local bishop and earl , as well as the sheriff and local barons , among others , should attend . 
 The work assumes that the royal legal system would still address some issues that later would have been dealt with by ecclesiastical courts . Clergy are not only to take part in the shire court , but could be summoned to answer charges in the court . It also sets out the various courts that were established and their jurisdiction . It takes for granted that the Anglo @-@ Saxon laws of England are still in effect . It also addresses the administration of forest law under Henry I. Another new concern in the Leges is law covering the roadways and highways . 
 Another area covered by the work is royal finance , with the Leges setting out the rate of Danegeld , at a rate of one shilling per hide . It also covers judicial fines , setting forth a fine of 46 marks as the penalty for committing murder . The author of the work criticised the royal justices , calling them greedy . It sets out elaborate procedures for the conduct of murder cases , or <unk> . 
 The Leges also devoted some effort to the theory of the law , and attempted to make generalisations about legal procedures and practices . It also contains a number of dicta which became cliches , such as " who unknowingly offends will knowingly amend " and " witness is not needed as to what did not occur , but as to what an accused claims did occur " . 
 = = Manuscripts = = 
 The work comes down to the present day in two manuscript traditions , neither one of which contains many manuscripts . There are six surviving manuscripts between the two traditions – that of the manuscript Sc and its copies , and the " London group " . The Sc group is composed of the Sc manuscript itself , which probably dates from about 1225 , and its copy , Hg , which was written about 1250 . Sc is currently part of the Red Book of the Exchequer held by the Public Record Office . Hg is held by the British Library and is catalogued as Hargrave 313 . It consists of folios 5 through 14a of the manuscript . 
 Four other extant manuscripts belong to the " London " tradition , and three other now @-@ lost manuscripts are also known to have belonged to this grouping . The surviving manuscripts are known as K , Co , Or , and Rs . The three lost manuscripts have been assigned the names of Gi , <unk> , and <unk> . K is a manuscript currently in the British Library , and was part of the Cotton Library before becoming part of the British Museum then the British Library . Given the catalogue name of Cotton Claudius D II , it is the only illuminated manuscript of the Leges and dates to around 1310 . Co is currently in the Corpus Christi College , Cambridge Library and was part of the Parker Library in the 16th century before being bequeathed to Corpus Christi on Parker 's death . This manuscript dates to around 1320 and is catalogued as Corpus Christi College 70 . The Leges occupies folios 108 through 170 . The manuscript Or was originally part of the Oriel College , Oxford Library but is now part of the Bodleian Library . It dates from around 1330 and is catalogued as Oriel College 46 . The last extant manuscript is Rs , which is currently in the John Rylands Library in Manchester . It was written about 1201 and is catalogued as Rylands <unk> 
 The three known but now @-@ lost manuscripts included Gi , which was known in 1721 and was owned by the London Guildhall . It was used by David Wilkins to compile his 1721 work Leges Anglo @-@ Saxonicae as well by Henry Spelman to correct manuscripts used in the Epistola <unk> . The <unk> manuscript belonged to John Selden in the 17th century , but it is unclear when it was created . It was used by Roger Twysden in his edition of the Leges Henrici Primi . The last securely known lost manuscript is the <unk> manuscript , and was used by Twysden in his edition of the Leges , and was perhaps owned by him also . 
 Possibly two other manuscripts existed but little is known about them . One is often designated Sp , and was used by Spelman for his 1625 Glossarium <unk> , for which he used three manuscripts of the Leges – Sc , K and one that he does not name but has subsequently been designated as Sp . It appears to have belonged to the London grouping , and may have been Gi rather than a separate manuscript , although Spelman 's description and usage is unclear as to which possibility is most likely . The other possible manuscript was one that Wilkins referred to as " quod <unk> <unk> <unk> aut <unk> Cantuar . " but it has not been found in searches of the Lambeth Library and the various Canterbury repositories . 
 Besides the medieval manuscripts , there are three early modern transcriptions of the work – one from the 16th century now at the Cambridge University Library as manuscript <unk> 38 , the second at Trinity College , Cambridge from the 17th century , <unk> as Cambridge <unk> , and the last in the British Library as Harley 785 , also dating from the 17th century . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 The first complete printed edition of the Leges was in 1644 , as an appendix to a new edition of the <unk> prepared by Abraham Wheelock . The actual text of the Leges was edited by Twysden . Prior to this , two other scholars , William Lambarde and Spelman , had intended to produce printed editions of the Leges , but were unable to follow through on the project . A portion of the Leges had earlier appeared in Edward Coke 's Institutes of the Laws of England in 1628 . Another edition appeared in 1721 , with Wilkins ' publication of the Leges Anglo @-@ Saxonicae , which built on the work of William Somner between 1645 and 1652 . In 1776 , David <unk> reprinted Wilkins ' text of the Leges in the <unk> sur les <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , and in 1789 another reproduction of Wilkins ' text appeared in Paulus <unk> 's Barbarorum Legs <unk> . 
 What is considered the first scholarly discussion of the Leges appeared in 1827 by George Philips , who did not reproduce the entire text in his <unk> <unk> <unk> , but did provide a couple of extracts along with a discussion of the sources of the work and a description of the work . In 1840 , the Record Commission published an edition of the text that had been edited by Richard Price and Benjamin Thorpe . The next major production of the Leges was Felix Liebermann who produced three volumes of Gesetze der <unk> between 1903 and 1916 , with the Leges being one of the legal treatises being reproduced in the Gesetze . A modern translation , with the original Latin text on pages facing the translation , was published in 1972 by the Clarendon Press and edited by L. J. Downer , and includes updated commentary and manuscript information . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The work is an important historical source for the study of the Middle Ages . An edition was published along with other 12th @-@ century legal treatises , in the Die Gesetze der <unk> , and more recently it has been studied by the historian L. J. Downer . The historian Patrick Wormald says of the Leges that it " has had more effect on views of English law before Henry II than any other " . 
 = 2001 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 2001 FA Charity Shield was the 79th FA Charity Shield , an annual football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup . The match was contested between Liverpool , winners of the 2000 – 01 FA Cup and Manchester United , who won the 2000 – 01 Premier League on 12 August 2001 . It was the first Shield match to be held at the Millennium Stadium following the closure of Wembley Stadium for reconstruction . 
 This was Liverpool 's 19th appearance and Manchester United 's 21st and the 5th time they had met in the competition . The anticipated meeting of Liverpool midfielder Steven Gerrard and new Manchester United signing Juan Sebastián Verón did not occur . Another omission from the Liverpool team was striker Robbie Fowler , who was left out of the matchday squad . New signings for both teams made an appearance , with defender John Arne Riise making his first appearance in English football for Liverpool , while striker Ruud van Nistelrooy made his debut for Manchester United . 
 Watched by a crowd of 70 @,@ 027 spectators , Liverpool took the lead in the second minute when Gary McAllister scored from a free kick after a foul on Danny Murphy by Roy Keane . Liverpool extended their lead in the 16th minute when striker Michael Owen scored . Manchester United scored in the second half through Van Nistelrooy but were unable to find the equalising goal in the remaining minutes . Thus , Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 to win the Shield for the 14th time . Despite the victory , Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier was realistic about his team 's prospects in the upcoming 2001 – 02 FA Premier League . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson was critical of referee Andy D 'Urso 's performance after he turned down two penalty appeals from his side during the match . Liverpool 's victory marked their 14th success , while the match was United 's fourth consecutive loss in the competition . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Community Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . Wembley Stadium acted as the host of the Shield from 1974 . Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium was hosting the Shield for the first time ; it took over as the venue for the event while the new Wembley Stadium underwent a six @-@ year renovation between 2001 and 2006 . 
 Liverpool qualified for the Charity Shield by winning the 2000 – 01 FA Cup . They beat Arsenal 2 – 1 in the final , courtesy of two goals from Michael Owen after Fredrik Ljungberg had given Arsenal the lead . Manchester United qualified by way of winning the 2000 – 01 FA Premier League , their third successive league championship . They finished 10 points clear of second placed Arsenal . 
 Liverpool were appearing in their 19th match in the competition . They had won seven outright ( 1966 , 1976 , 1979 , 1980 , 1982 , 1988 , 1989 ) , shared five ( 1964 , 1965 , 1974 , 1977 , 1986 , 1990 ) and lost five ( 1922 , 1971 , 1983 , 1984 , 1992 ) . This was Manchester United 's 21st appearance in the competition , they had won 10 ( 1908 , 1911 , 1952 , 1956 , 1957 , 1983 , 1993 , 1994 , 1996 , 1997 ) , shared four ( 1965 , 1967 , 1977 , 1990 ) and lost six ( 1948 , 1963 , 1985 , 1998 , 1999 , 2000 ) . Liverpool and United had previously contested the Shield four times , with United winning in 1983 and the Shield being shared on the other three occasions in 1965 , 1977 and 1990 . 
 Before the match , the decision was taken to close the roof on the Millennium Stadium , the first time this had happened in the United Kingdom . Liverpool lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , with new signing John Arne Riise included in the team , while midfielder Steven Gerrard was absent with an ankle injury . There was also no place for striker Robbie Fowler , who was expected to captain the side . Manchester United lined up in a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation , with Paul Scholes playing just off the main striker , Ruud van Nistelrooy , who made his debut for the club . Van Nistelrooy 's fellow new signing , Juan Sebastián Verón , was on international duty with the Argentina national team ; his place in midfield was taken by Nicky Butt . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Manchester United kicked off the match , but within the first two minutes they had conceded a goal . A foul on Liverpool midfielder Danny Murphy by United captain Roy Keane resulted in a Liverpool penalty , which Gary McAllister subsequently scored to give Liverpool a 1 – 0 lead . Minutes later , Liverpool were awarded a free kick , but McAllister was unable to score , hitting Manchester United 's defensive wall . United had their first chance two minutes later , but Van Nistelrooy <unk> his shot in front of goal . In the 11th minute , Liverpool 's lead was almost extended as United midfielder Nicky Butt almost diverted a cross from Riise into his own goal . Five minutes later , Liverpool did extend their lead ; United defender Jaap Stam slipped after Liverpool striker Emile Heskey headed the ball down to Michael Owen , allowing Owen to sidestep Gary Neville and place his shot into the United goal to make the score 2 – 0 . The frustration of the United players was beginning to show and immediately after the goal , Paul Scholes was shown a yellow card for a challenge on Dietmar Hamann . 
 United 's best chance of the half so far came in the 25th minute . Keane met a free kick from David Beckham with a header , which was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Sander Westerveld . Three minutes later , United felt they should have had a penalty when Mikaël Silvestre 's shot hit the arm of Liverpool defender Stéphane Henchoz , but referee Andy D 'Urso did not award a penalty . Liverpool continued to be dangerous on the attack and came close to extending their lead in the 34th minute ; United goalkeeper Fabien Barthez failed to claim a cross from McAllister and the ball fell to Nick Barmby , but his shot was cleared off the line by Denis Irwin . United came closest to scoring in the 36th minute , but Keane 's shot from 25 yards ( 23 m ) hit the crossbar with Westerveld beaten . United continued to enjoy the majority of the possession , but were unable to make it count as they could not find a way past Liverpool 's defence . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Manchester United started the second half in attacking fashion , as they had chances immediately . A Silvestre run down the pitch resulted in a pass that found Van Nistelrooy on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area , but his shot went high and wide of the goal . He had another chance a minute later , but despite beating the offside trap set by the Liverpool defence , he could not beat Westerveld , who saved his shot . United 's attacking start to the half was underlined by a third chance in as many minutes , but Scholes ' shot went wide of the Liverpool goal . However , two minutes later , United 's pressure told and they scored . A move that involved Beckham , Keane and Ryan Giggs resulted in the ball being played to Van Nistelrooy , who went around Westerveld and subsequently scored to reduce Liverpool 's lead to 2 – 1 . Beckham came close to levelling the match in the 62nd minute when he had two chances to score ; he was unable to get his shot on target after Liverpool failed to clear a cross from Giggs and he was unable to score with a long @-@ range shot . 
 In an effort to find the equalising goal , United manager Alex Ferguson moved Giggs from the centre of midfield to the left in order to restore the width of his team and brought on striker Dwight Yorke for Butt . Yorke would spearhead the attack with Van Nistelrooy , a partnership that worked on the club 's pre @-@ season tour of Asia . United had another chance in the 68th minute , but Scholes was unable to beat Westerveld , who saved his shot . Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier made his first substitutions of the match soon after ; in an attempt to regain control of possession , he brought on Igor Bišćan and Patrik Berger to replace Barmby and Murphy . Liverpool 's first chance of the half came in the 81st minute , Bišćan and Owen exchanged passes , before Bišćan shot wide of the goal . United went straight on the attack and a goal @-@ bound shot by Keane was saved by Westerveld . Liverpool replaced Riise with defender Jamie Carragher minutes later in order to see out the game . A minute later , referee D 'Urso declined to award United a penalty for the second time when Van Nistelrooy 's shot appeared to be blocked by the arm of Henchoz . United continued to push forward for an equaliser , but a long @-@ range shot by Irwin , which went wide , was their only notable chance before the match ended . Liverpool won 2 – 1 to win the Shield for the 14th time . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The win marked Liverpool 's third consecutive victory against Manchester United , but despite this , manager Houllier refused to get carried away : " At the moment I am worried because the team which has won the Charity Shield in recent years has not won the title , I don 't think you can draw conclusions from this match . " Man of the match Sander Westerveld echoed similar sentiments : " It doesn 't say too much about the season . Last year Chelsea beat them 2 @-@ 0 and had high expectations . We played well and it 's a good result but it doesn 't say anything about the Championship . " Questions were asked about the exclusion of striker Robbie Fowler from the match @-@ day squad , with Houllier confirming the striker had been left out after a training ground bust @-@ up with assistant manager Phil Thompson : " It is a regrettable moment for the team and the club but I 'm sure at some stage common sense will prevail . I am leaving it to him . I brokered a get @-@ together between Phil and Robbie , which I attended at the beginning . Then I left the two <unk> together . But so far it has been unsuccessful . " Houllier added that he had tried to resolve the issue before the start of the match : " I waited until the Sunday lunchtime before the Charity Shield game . I again insisted yesterday . I took them together again . I think at some stage it will be solved . I am a patient man . " 
 Manchester United manager Ferguson was critical of the performance of referee D 'Urso : " I felt sorry for the referee today , it doesn 't matter how much training you have in any job . It 's about temperament , and I just think the lad was too nervous for that today . " Despite losing their fourth consecutive Charity Shield match , Ferguson did not believe it would affect his team heading into the start of the season : " We certainly hope we can go on to win the title again like we have in previous years . We just need to keep the standards up and show the desire we did in the second half . " He was also unsure whether Liverpool would be able to challenge for the Premier League : " It 's difficult to assess Liverpool at the moment . They started with confidence , but then you would expect that from a team that won three trophies a few months ago . You would also expect us to be sluggish at the start , because we are bloody good at it . " 
 The match was marred by a series of hooligan incidents occurring near the stadium . It was being played the day before a Cardiff City game ; a group of Cardiff City fans entered the Prince of Wales public house in the city to find it occupied by Manchester United fans staying in the city overnight . A series of running battles between fans of the two clubs followed , resulting in 22 arrests ( including two boys aged just 11 and 13 ) as well as a man suffering stab wounds and a police officer suffering a broken arm . On the day of the game , an army of around 50 Cardiff and Liverpool hooligans were seen attacking United supporters in the Wood Street area . 
 = Pearl Jam = 
 Pearl Jam is an American rock band formed in Seattle , Washington in 1990 . Since its inception , the band 's line @-@ up has comprised Eddie Vedder ( lead vocals ) , Mike McCready ( lead guitar ) , Stone Gossard ( rhythm guitar ) and Jeff Ament ( bass ) . The band 's fifth member is drummer Matt Cameron ( also of Soundgarden ) , who has been with the band since 1998 . Boom Gaspar ( piano ) has also been a session / touring member with the band since 2002 . Drummers Dave Krusen , Matt Chamberlain , Dave Abbruzzese and Jack Irons are former members of the band . 
 Formed after the demise of Gossard and Ament 's previous band , Mother Love Bone , Pearl Jam broke into the mainstream with its debut album , Ten , in 1991 . One of the key bands in the grunge movement of the early 1990s , over the course of the band 's career , its members became noted for their refusal to adhere to traditional music industry practices , including refusing to make proper music videos or give interviews , and engaging in a much @-@ publicized boycott of Ticketmaster . In 2006 , Rolling Stone described the band as having " spent much of the past decade deliberately tearing apart their own fame . " 
 To date , the band has sold nearly 32 million records in the United States and an estimated 60 million worldwide . Pearl Jam has outlasted and outsold many of its contemporaries from the alternative rock breakthrough of the early 1990s , and is considered one of the most influential bands of that decade . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic referred to Pearl Jam as " the most popular American rock & roll band of the ' 90s " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years ( 1984 – 90 ) = = = 
 Stone Gossard and Jeff Ament were members of pioneering grunge band Green River during the mid @-@ 1980s . Green River toured and recorded to moderate success but disbanded in 1987 due to a stylistic division between the pair and bandmates Mark Arm and Steve Turner . In late 1987 , Gossard and Ament began playing with Malfunkshun vocalist Andrew Wood , eventually organizing the band Mother Love Bone . In 1988 and 1989 , the band recorded and toured to increasing interest and found the support of the PolyGram record label , which signed the band in early 1989 . Mother Love Bone 's debut album , Apple , was released in July 1990 , four months after Wood died of a heroin overdose . 
 Ament and Gossard were devastated by the death of Wood and the resulting demise of Mother Love Bone . Gossard spent his time afterwards writing material that was harder @-@ edged than what he had been doing previously . After a few months , Gossard started practicing with fellow Seattle guitarist Mike McCready , whose band , Shadow , had broken up ; McCready in turn encouraged Gossard to reconnect with Ament . After practicing for a while , the trio sent out a five @-@ song demo tape in order to find a singer and a drummer . They gave former Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons the demo to see if he would be interested in joining the band and to distribute the demo to anyone he felt might fit the lead vocal position . 
 Irons passed on the invitation but gave the demo to his basketball buddy , San Diego , California singer Eddie Vedder . Vedder was the lead vocalist for a San Diego band , Bad Radio , and worked part @-@ time at a gas station . He listened to the tape shortly before going surfing , where lyrics came to him . He then recorded the vocals to three of the songs ( " Alive " , " Once " , and " Footsteps " ) in what he later described as a " mini @-@ opera " entitled Momma @-@ Son . Vedder sent the tape with his vocals back to the three Seattle musicians , who were impressed enough to fly Vedder up to Seattle for an audition . Within a week , Vedder had joined the band . 
 With the addition of Dave Krusen on drums , the band took the name Mookie Blaylock , in reference to the then @-@ active All @-@ Star basketball player . The band played its first official show at the Off Ramp Café in Seattle on October 22 , 1990 , and soon signed to Epic Records and renamed themselves Pearl Jam . In an early promotional interview , Vedder said that the name " Pearl Jam " was a reference to his great @-@ grandmother Pearl , who was married to a Native American and had a special recipe for peyote @-@ laced jam . In a 2006 Rolling Stone cover story however , Vedder admitted that this story was " total bullshit " , even though he indeed had a great @-@ grandma named Pearl . Ament and McCready explained that Ament came up with " pearl " , and that the band later settled on " Pearl Jam " after attending a concert by Neil Young , in which he extended his songs as improvisations of 15 – 20 minutes in length . 
 = = = Ten and the grunge explosion ( 1991 – 92 ) = = = 
 Pearl Jam entered Seattle 's London Bridge Studios in March 1991 to record its debut album , Ten . McCready said that " Ten was mostly Stone and Jeff ; me and Eddie were along for the ride at that time . " Krusen left the band in May 1991 after checking himself into rehabilitation ; he was replaced by Matt Chamberlain , who had previously played with Edie Brickell & New Bohemians . After playing only a handful of shows , one of which was filmed for the " Alive " video , Chamberlain left to join the Saturday Night Live band . Chamberlain suggested Dave Abbruzzese as his replacement . Abbruzzese joined the group and played the rest of Pearl Jam 's live shows supporting Ten . 
 Released on August 27 , 1991 , Ten ( named after Mookie Blaylock 's jersey number ) contained eleven tracks dealing with dark subjects like depression , suicide , loneliness , and murder . Ten 's musical style , influenced by classic rock , combined an " expansive harmonic vocabulary " with an anthemic sound . The album was slow to sell , but by the second half of 1992 it became a breakthrough success , being certified gold and reaching number two on the Billboard charts . Ten produced the hit singles " Alive " , " Even Flow " , and " Jeremy " . Originally interpreted as an anthem by many , Vedder later revealed that " Alive " tells the semi @-@ biographical tale of a son discovering that his father is actually his stepfather , while his mother ’ s grief turns her to sexually embrace her son , who strongly resembles the biological father . The song " Jeremy " ( sample ) and its accompanying video were inspired by a true story in which a high school student shot himself in front of his classmates . Ten stayed on the Billboard charts for nearly five years , and has gone on to become one of the highest @-@ selling rock records ever , going 13x platinum . 
 With the success of Ten , Pearl Jam became a key member of the Seattle grunge explosion , along with Alice in Chains , Nirvana , and Soundgarden . The band was criticized in the music press ; British music magazine NME said that Pearl Jam was " trying to steal money from young alternative kids ' pockets . " Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain angrily attacked Pearl Jam , claiming the band were commercial sellouts , and argued Ten was not a true alternative album because it had so many prominent guitar leads . Cobain later reconciled with Vedder , and they reportedly were on amicable terms before Cobain 's death in 1994 . 
 Pearl Jam toured relentlessly in support of Ten . Ament stated that " essentially Ten was just an excuse to tour , " adding , " We told the record company , ' We know we can be a great band , so let 's just get the opportunity to get out and play . ' " The band 's manager , Kelly Curtis , stated , " Once people came and saw them live , this lightbulb would go on . Doing their first tour , you kind of knew it was happening and there was no stopping it . " Early on in Pearl Jam 's career , the band became known for its intense live performances . Looking back at this time , Vedder said that " playing music and then getting a shot at making a record and at having an audience and stuff , it 's just like an untamed force ... But it didn 't come from jock mentality . It came from just being let out of the gates . " In 1992 , Pearl Jam made television appearances on Saturday Night Live and MTV Unplugged and took a slot on that summer 's Lollapalooza tour with the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Soundgarden , and Ministry , among others . The band contributed two songs to the soundtrack of the 1992 Cameron Crowe film Singles : " State of Love and Trust " and " Breath " . Ament , Gossard and Vedder appeared in Singles under the name " Citizen Dick " ; their parts were filmed when Pearl Jam was known as Mookie Blaylock . 
 = = = Vs . , Vitalogy and dealing with success ( 1993 – 95 ) = = = 
 The band members grew uncomfortable with their success , with much of the burden of Pearl Jam 's popularity falling on frontman Vedder . While Pearl Jam received four awards at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards for its video for " Jeremy " , including Video of the Year and Best Group Video , the band refused to make a video for " Black " in spite of pressure from the label . This action began a trend of the band refusing to make videos for its songs . Vedder felt that the concept of music videos robbed listeners from creating their own interpretations of the song , stating that " Before music videos first came out , you ’ d listen to a song with headphones on , sitting in a beanbag chair with your eyes closed , and you ’ d come up with your own visions , these things that came from within . Then all of a sudden , sometimes even the very first time you heard a song , it was with these visual images attached , and it robbed you of any form of self @-@ expression . " " Ten years from now , " Ament said , " I don 't want people to remember our songs as videos . " 
 Pearl Jam headed into the studio in early 1993 facing the challenge of following up the commercial success of its debut . McCready said , " The band was blown up pretty big and everything was pretty crazy . " Released on October 19 , 1993 , Pearl Jam 's second album , Vs . , sold 950 @,@ 378 copies in its first week of release and outperformed all other entries in the Billboard top ten that week combined . The album set the record for most copies of an album sold in its first week of release , which it held until broken by Garth Brooks ' 1998 album , Double Live . Vs. included the singles " Go " , " Daughter " , " Animal " , and " Dissident " . Paul Evans of Rolling Stone said , " Few American bands have arrived more clearly talented than this one did with Ten ; and Vs. tops even that debut . " He added , " Like Jim Morrison and Pete Townshend , Vedder makes a forte of his psychological @-@ mythic explorations ... As guitarists Stone Gossard and Mike McCready paint dense and slashing backdrops , he invites us into a drama of experiment and strife . " The band decided , beginning with the release of Vs . , to scale back its commercial efforts . The members declined to produce any more music videos after the massive success of " Jeremy " and opted for fewer interviews and television appearances . Industry insiders compared Pearl Jam 's tour that year to the touring habits of Led Zeppelin , in that the band " ignored the press and took its music directly to the fans . " During the Vs . Tour , the band set a cap on ticket prices in an attempt to thwart scalpers . 
 By 1994 , Pearl Jam was " fighting on all fronts " , as its manager described the band at the time . Reporter Chuck Philips broke a series of stories showing that Ticketmaster was gouging Pearl Jam 's customers . Pearl Jam was outraged when , after it played a pair of shows in Chicago , Illinois , it discovered that ticket vendor Ticketmaster had added a service charge to the tickets . Pearl Jam was committed to keeping their concert ticket prices down but Fred Rosen of Ticketmaster , refused to waive the service charge . Since Ticketmaster controlled most major venues , the band was forced to create from scratch its own outdoor stadiums in rural areas in order to perform . Pearl Jam ’ s efforts to organize a tour without the ticket giant collapsed which Pearl Jam said was evidence of Ticketmaster 's monopoly . An analysis of journalist Chuck Philips investigative series in a well known legal monograph concluded that it was hard to imagine a legitimate reason for Ticketmaster ’ s exclusive contracts with venues and contracts which covered such a lengthy period of time . The authors said , “ The pervasiveness of Ticketmaster 's exclusive agreements , coupled with their excessive duration and the manner in which they are procured , supported a finding that Ticketmaster had engaged in anticompetitive conduct under section 2 of the Sherman Act . ” 
 The United States Department of Justice was investigating the company 's practices at the time and asked the band to create a memorandum of its experiences with the company . Band members Gossard and Ament testified at a subcommittee investigation on June 30 , 1994 in Washington , D.C. Pearl Jam alleged that Ticketmaster used anti @-@ competitive and monopolistic practices to gouge fans . After Pearl Jam ’ s testimony before Congress , Congressman Dingell ( D @-@ Mich . ) wrote a bill requiring full disclosure to prevent Ticketmaster from burying escalating service fees . Pearl Jam ’ s manager said he was gratified that Congress recognized the problem as a national issue . The band eventually canceled its 1994 summer tour in protest . After the Justice Department dropped the case , Pearl Jam continued to boycott Ticketmaster , refusing to play venues that had contracts with the company . The band tried to work around Ticketmaster 's exclusive contracts by hosting charities and benefits at major venues , because the exclusive contracts often contained a clause allowing charity event promoters to sell their own tickets . Music critic Jim DeRogatis noted that along with the Ticketmaster debacle , " the band has refused to release singles or make videos ; it has demanded that its albums be released on vinyl ; and it wants to be more like its ' 60s heroes , The Who , releasing two or three albums a year . " He also stated that sources said that most of the band 's third album Vitalogy was completed by early 1994 , but that either a forced delay by Epic or the battle with Ticketmaster were to blame for the delay . 
 Pearl Jam wrote and recorded while touring behind Vs. and the majority of the tracks for its next album , Vitalogy , were recorded during breaks on the tour . Tensions within the band had dramatically increased by this time . Producer Brendan O 'Brien said , " Vitalogy was a little strained . I 'm being polite — there was some imploding going on . " After Pearl Jam finished the recording of Vitalogy , drummer Dave Abbruzzese was fired . The band cited political differences between Abbruzzese and the other members ; for example , Abbruzzese disagreed with the Ticketmaster boycott . He was replaced by Jack Irons , a close friend of Vedder and the former and original drummer of the Red Hot Chili Peppers . Irons made his debut with the band at Neil Young 's 1994 Bridge School Benefit , but he was not officially announced as the band 's new drummer until its 1995 Self @-@ Pollution satellite radio broadcast , a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour @-@ long pirate broadcast out of Seattle which was available to any radio stations that wanted to carry it . 
 Vitalogy was released first on November 22 , 1994 on vinyl and then two weeks later on December 6 , 1994 on CD and cassette . The CD became the second @-@ fastest @-@ selling in history , with more than 877 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that " thanks to its stripped @-@ down , lean production , Vitalogy stands as Pearl Jam 's most original and uncompromising album . " Many of the songs on the album appear to be inspired by the pressures of fame . The song " Spin the Black Circle " , an homage to vinyl records , won a Grammy Award in 1996 for Best Hard Rock Performance . Vitalogy also included the songs " Not for You " , " Corduroy " , " Better Man " , and " Immortality " . " Better Man " ( sample ) , a song originally written and performed by Vedder while in Bad Radio , reached number one on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart , spending a total of eight weeks there . Considered a " blatantly great pop song " by producer Brendan O 'Brien , Pearl Jam was reluctant to record it and had initially rejected it from Vs. due to its accessibility . 
 The band continued its boycott against Ticketmaster during its 1995 tour for Vitalogy , but was surprised that virtually no other bands joined in . Pearl Jam 's initiative to play only at non @-@ Ticketmaster venues effectively , with a few exceptions , prevented it from playing shows in the United States for the next three years . Ament later said , " We were so <unk> about the 1995 tour . Had to prove we could tour on our own , and it pretty much killed us , killed our career . " In the same year Pearl Jam backed Neil Young , whom the band had noted as an influence , on his album Mirror Ball . Contractual obligations prevented the use of the band 's name anywhere on the album , but the members were all credited individually in the album 's liner notes . Two songs from the sessions were left off Mirror Ball : " I Got Id " and " Long Road " . These two tracks were released separately by Pearl Jam in the form of the 1995 EP , Merkin Ball . 
 = = = No Code and Yield ( 1996 – 99 ) = = = 
 Following the round of touring for Vitalogy , the band went into the studio to record its follow @-@ up , No Code . Vedder said , " Making No Code was all about gaining perspective . " Released in 1996 , No Code was seen as a deliberate break from the band 's sound since Ten , favoring experimental ballads and noisy garage rockers . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly stated that " No Code displays a wider range of moods and instrumentation than on any previous Pearl Jam album . " The lyrical themes on the album deal with issues of self @-@ examination , with Ament stating , " In some ways , it 's like the band 's story . It 's about growing up . " Although the album debuted at number one on the Billboard charts , it quickly fell down the charts . No Code included the singles " Who You Are " ( sample ) , " Hail , Hail " , and " Off He Goes " . As with Vitalogy , very little touring was done to promote No Code because of the band 's refusal to play in Ticketmaster 's venue areas . A European tour took place in the fall of 1996 . Gossard stated that there was " a lot of stress associated with trying to tour at that time " and that " it was growing more and more difficult to be excited about being part of the band . " 
 Following the short tour for No Code , the band went into the studio in 1997 to record its follow @-@ up . The sessions for the band 's fifth album represented more of a team effort between all members of the group , with Ament stating that " everybody really got a little bit of their say on the record ... because of that , everybody feels like they 're an integral part of the band . " On February 3 , 1998 , Pearl Jam released its fifth album , Yield . The album was cited as a return to the band 's early , straightforward rock sound . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly stated that the band has " turned in an intermittently affecting album that veers between fiery garage rock and rootsy , acoustic @-@ based ruminations . Perhaps mindful of their position as the last alt @-@ rock ambassadors with any degree of clout , they 've come up with their most cohesive album since their 1991 debut , Ten . " Lyrically , Yield continued with the more contemplative type of writing found on No Code , with Vedder saying , " What was rage in the past has become reflection . " Yield debuted at number two on the Billboard charts , but like No Code soon began dropping down the charts . It included the singles " Given to Fly " and " Wishlist " . The band hired comic book artist Todd McFarlane to create an animated video for the song " Do the Evolution " from the album , its first music video since 1992 . A documentary detailing the making of Yield , Single Video Theory , was released on VHS and DVD later that year . 
 In April 1998 , Pearl Jam once again changed drummers . Jack Irons left the band due to dissatisfaction with touring and was replaced with former Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron on an initially temporary basis , but he soon became a permanent replacement for Irons . Pearl Jam 's 1998 Yield Tour in North America marked the band ’ s return to full @-@ scale touring . The band 's anti @-@ trust lawsuit against Ticketmaster had proven to be unsuccessful and hindered live tours . Many fans had complained about the difficulty in obtaining tickets and the use of non @-@ Ticketmaster venues , which were judged to be out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ way and impersonal . For this tour and future tours , Pearl Jam once again began using Ticketmaster in order to " better accommodate concertgoers . " The 1998 summer tour was a big success , and after it was completed the band released Live on Two Legs , a live album which featured select performances from the tour . 
 In 1998 , Pearl Jam recorded " Last Kiss " , a cover of a 1960s ballad made famous by J. Frank Wilson and the Cavaliers . It was recorded during a soundcheck and released on the band 's 1998 fan club Christmas single . The following year , the cover was put into heavy rotation across the country . By popular demand , the cover was released to the public as a single in 1999 , with all of the proceeds going to the aid of refugees of the Kosovo War . The band also decided to include the song on the 1999 charity compilation album , No Boundaries : A Benefit for the Kosovar Refugees . " Last Kiss " peaked at number two on the Billboard charts and became the band 's highest @-@ charting single . 
 = = = Binaural and the Roskilde tragedy ( 2000 – 01 ) = = = 
 Following its full @-@ scale tour in support of Yield , the band took a short break , but then reconvened toward the end of 1999 and commenced work on a new album . On May 16 , 2000 , Pearl Jam released its sixth studio album , Binaural . It was drummer Matt Cameron 's studio recording debut with the band . The title is a reference to the binaural recording techniques that were utilized on several tracks by producer Tchad Blake , known for his use of the technique . Binaural was the first album since the band 's debut not produced by Brendan O 'Brien , although O 'Brien was called in later to remix several tracks . Gossard stated that the band members " were ready for a change . " Jon Pareles of Rolling Stone said , " Apparently as tired of grunge as everyone except Creed fans , Pearl Jam delve elsewhere . " He added , " The album reflects both Pearl Jam 's longstanding curse of self @-@ importance and a renewed willingness to be experimental or just plain odd . " The album is lyrically darker than the band 's previous album Yield , with Gossard describing the lyrics as " pretty sombre . " Binaural included the singles " Nothing as It Seems " ( sample ) , one of the songs featuring binaural recording , and " Light Years " . The album sold just over 700 @,@ 000 copies and became the first Pearl Jam studio album to fail to reach platinum status . 
 Pearl Jam decided to record every show on its 2000 Binaural Tour professionally , after noting the desire of fans to own a copy of the shows they attended and the popularity of bootleg recordings . The band had been open in the past about allowing fans to make amateur recordings , and these " official bootlegs " were an attempt to provide a more affordable and better quality product for fans . Pearl Jam originally intended to release them to only fan club members , but the band 's record contract prevented it from doing so . Pearl Jam released all of the albums in record stores as well as through its fan club . The band released 72 live albums in 2000 and 2001 , and twice set a record for most albums to debut in the Billboard 200 at the same time . 
 Pearl Jam 's 2000 European tour ended in tragedy on June 30 , with an accident at the Roskilde Festival in Denmark . Nine fans were crushed underfoot and suffocated to death as the crowd rushed to the front . After numerous requests for the crowd to step back , the band stopped playing and tried to calm the crowd when the musicians realized what was happening , but it was already too late . The two remaining dates of the tour were canceled and members of the band contemplated retiring after this event . Pearl Jam was initially blamed for the accident , but was later cleared of responsibility . 
 A month after the European tour concluded , the band embarked on its two @-@ leg 2000 North American tour . On performing after the Roskilde tragedy , Vedder said that " playing , facing crowds , being together — it enabled us to start processing it . " On October 22 , 2000 , the band played the MGM Grand in Las Vegas , celebrating the tenth anniversary of its first live performance as a band . Vedder took the opportunity to thank the many people who had helped the band come together and make it to ten years . He noted that " I would never do this accepting a Grammy or something . " After concluding the Binaural Tour , the band released Touring Band 2000 the following year . The DVD featured select performances from the North American legs of the tour . 
 Following the events of the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , Vedder and McCready were joined by Neil Young to perform the song " Long Road " from the Merkin Ball EP at the America : A Tribute to Heroes benefit concert . The concert , which aired on September 21 , 2001 , raised money for the victims and their families . 
 = = = Riot Act ( 2002 – 05 ) = = = 
 Pearl Jam commenced work on a new album following a year @-@ long break after its full @-@ scale tour in support of Binaural . McCready described the recording environment as " a pretty positive one " and " very intense and spiritual . " Regarding the time period when the lyrics were being written , Vedder said , " There 's been a lot of mortality ... It 's a weird time to be writing . Roskilde changed the shape of us as people , and our filter for seeing the world changed . " Pearl Jam released its seventh album , Riot Act , on November 12 , 2002 . It included the singles " I Am Mine " and " Save You " . The album featured a much more folk @-@ based and experimental sound , evident in the presence of B3 organist Boom Gaspar on songs such as " Love Boat Captain " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said " Riot Act is the album that Pearl Jam has been wanting to make since Vitalogy — a muscular art rock record , one that still hits hard but that is filled with ragged edges and odd detours . " The track entitled " Arc " was recorded as a vocal tribute to the nine people who died at the Roskilde Festival in June 2000 . Vedder only performed this song nine times on the 2003 tour , and the band left the track off all released bootlegs . 
 In 2003 , the band embarked on its Riot Act Tour , which included tours in Australia and North America . The band continued its official bootleg program , making every concert from the tour available in CD form through its official website . A total of six bootlegs were made available in record stores : Perth , Tokyo , State College , Pennsylvania , two shows from Madison Square Garden , and Mansfield , Massachusetts . At many shows during the 2003 North American tour , Vedder performed Riot Act 's " Bu $ hleaguer " , a commentary on President George W. Bush , with a rubber mask of Bush , wearing it at the beginning of the song and then hanging it on a mic stand to allow him to sing . The band made news when it was reported that several fans left after Vedder had " impaled " the Bush mask on his mic stand at the band 's Denver , Colorado show . 
 In June 2003 , Pearl Jam announced it was officially leaving Epic Records following the end of its contract with the label . The band stated it had " no interest " in signing with another label . The band 's first release without a label was the single for " Man of the Hour " , in partnership with Amazon.com. Director Tim Burton approached Pearl Jam to request an original song for the soundtrack of his new film , Big Fish . After screening an early print of the film , Pearl Jam recorded the song for him . " Man of the Hour " , which was later nominated for a Golden Globe Award , can be heard in the closing credits of Big Fish . 
 The band released Lost Dogs , a two @-@ disc collection of rarities and B @-@ sides , and Live at the Garden , a DVD featuring the band 's July 8 , 2003 concert at Madison Square Garden through Epic Records in November 2003 . In 2004 , Pearl Jam released the live album , Live at Benaroya Hall , through a one @-@ album deal with BMG . 2004 marked the first time that Pearl Jam licensed a song for usage in a television show ; a snippet of the song " Yellow Ledbetter " was used in the final episode of the television series Friends . Later that year , Epic released <unk> ( Greatest Hits 1991 – 2003 ) , a Pearl Jam greatest hits collection spanning 1991 to 2003 . This release marked the end of Pearl Jam 's contractual agreement with Epic Records . 
 Pearl Jam played a show at Easy Street Records in Seattle in April 2005 ; recordings from the show were compiled for the Live at Easy Street album and released exclusively to independent record stores in June 2006 . The band embarked on a Canadian cross @-@ country tour in September 2005 , kicking off the tour with a fundraising concert in Missoula , Montana for Democratic politician Jon Tester , then playing the Gorge Amphitheater before crossing into Canada . After touring Canada , Pearl Jam proceeded to open a Rolling Stones concert in Pittsburgh , then played two shows at the Borgata casino in Atlantic City , New Jersey , before closing the tour with a concert in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The official bootlegs for the band 's 2005 shows were distributed via Pearl Jam 's official website in MP3 form . Pearl Jam also played a benefit concert to raise money for Hurricane Katrina relief on October 5 , 2005 , at the House of Blues in Chicago , Illinois . On November 22 , 2005 , Pearl Jam began its first Latin American tour . 
 = = = Move to J Records and Pearl Jam ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = 
 The work for Pearl Jam 's follow @-@ up to Riot Act began after its appearance on the 2004 Vote for Change tour . The time period between the two albums was the longest gap between Pearl Jam 's studio albums to date and the new album was its first release for a new label . Clive Davis announced in February 2006 that Pearl Jam had signed with his label , J Records , which like Epic , is part of Sony Music Entertainment ( then known as Sony BMG ) , though J has since folded into RCA Records . The band 's eighth studio album , Pearl Jam , was released on May 2 , 2006 . A number of critics cited Pearl Jam as a return to the band 's early sound , and McCready compared the new material to Vs. in a 2005 interview . Ament said , " The band playing in a room — that came across . There ’ s a kind of immediacy to the record , and that ’ s what we were going for . " Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly said that " in a world full of boys sent to do a man 's job of rocking , Pearl Jam can still pull off gravitas . " Current socio @-@ political issues in the United States are addressed on the album . " World Wide Suicide " , a song criticizing the Iraq War and U.S. foreign policy , was released as a single and topped the Billboard Modern Rock chart ; it was Pearl Jam 's first number one on that chart since " Who You Are " in 1996 , and first number one on any chart in the United States since 1998 when " Given to Fly " reached number one on the Mainstream Rock chart . Pearl Jam also included the singles " Life Wasted " and " Gone " . 
 To support Pearl Jam , the band embarked on its 2006 world tour . It toured North America , Australia and notably Europe ; Pearl Jam had not toured the continent for six years . The North American tour included three two @-@ night stands opening for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers . The band served as the headliners for the Leeds and Reading festivals , despite having vowed to never play at a festival again after Roskilde . Vedder started both concerts with an emotional plea to the crowd to look after each other . He commented during the Leeds set that the band 's decision to play a festival for the first time after Roskilde had nothing to do with " guts " but with trust in the audience . 
 In 2007 , Pearl Jam recorded a cover of The Who 's " Love , Reign o 'er Me " for the Mike Binder film , Reign Over Me ; it was later made available as a music download on the iTunes Music Store . The band embarked on a 13 @-@ date European tour , and headlined Lollapalooza in Grant Park , on August 5 , 2007 . The band released a CD box set in June 2007 , entitled Live at the Gorge 05 / 06 , that documents its shows at The Gorge Amphitheatre , and in September 2007 a concert DVD , entitled Immagine in <unk> , which documents the band 's Italian shows from its 2006 tour was released . 
 In June 2008 , Pearl Jam performed as the headline act at the Bonnaroo Music Festival . The Bonnaroo appearance took place amidst a twelve @-@ date tour in the Eastern United States . In July 2008 , the band performed at the VH1 tribute to The Who alongside Foo Fighters , Incubus and The Flaming Lips . In the days prior to Election Day 2008 , Pearl Jam digitally released through its official website a free documentary film , entitled Vote for Change ? 2004 , which follows the band 's time spent on the 2004 Vote for Change tour . 
 = = = Reissues and Backspacer ( 2009 – 12 ) = = = 
 In March 2009 , Ten was reissued in four editions , featuring such extras as a remastering and remix of the entire album by Brendan O 'Brien , a DVD of the band 's 1992 appearance on MTV Unplugged , and an LP of its September 20 , 1992 concert at Magnuson Park in Seattle . It was the first reissue in a planned re @-@ release of Pearl Jam 's entire catalog that led up to the band 's 20th anniversary in 2011 . A Pearl Jam retrospective film directed by Cameron Crowe titled Pearl Jam Twenty was also planned to coincide with the anniversary . In 2011 , Vs. and Vitalogy were reissued in the spring time in deluxe form . 
 Pearl Jam began work for the follow @-@ up to Pearl Jam in early 2008 . In 2009 , the band began to build on instrumental and demo tracks written during 2008 . The band 's ninth studio album , Backspacer , was its first to be produced by Brendan O 'Brien since Yield . Backspacer debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard music charts , the band 's first album to do so since No Code in 1996 , and has sold 635 @,@ 000 copies as of July 2013 , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The music on the record features a sound influenced by pop and new wave . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that " prior to Backspacer , Pearl Jam wouldn 't or couldn 't have made music this unfettered , unapologetically assured , casual , and , yes , fun . " Regarding the lyrics , Vedder said , " I 've tried , over the years , to be hopeful in the lyrics , and I think that 's going to be easier now . " " The Fixer " was chosen as the album 's first single . Pearl Jam did not re @-@ sign its record deal with J Records , and the band released the album through its own label Monkeywrench Records in the United States and through Universal Music Group internationally . Pearl Jam reached a deal with Target to be the exclusive big @-@ box store retailer for the album in the United States . The album also saw release through the band 's official website , independent record stores , online retailers , and iTunes . In an interview in September 2009 McCready revealed that Pearl Jam was scheduled to finish the Backspacer outtakes within six months , and told San Diego radio station <unk> that the band may release an EP in 2010 consisting of those songs , while Vedder instead suggested that the songs may be used for the band 's next studio album . 
 In August 2009 , Pearl Jam headlined the Virgin Festival , the Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival , and played five shows in Europe and three in North America . In October 2009 , Pearl Jam headlined the Austin City Limits Music Festival . Later in October on Halloween night , the band played in what was the last performance at the Philadelphia Spectrum . An additional leg consisting of a tour of Oceania took place afterwards . In May 2010 , the band embarked on a month @-@ long tour starting with the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival . The tour headed to the East Coast and ended May 21 , 2010 at Madison Square Garden in New York . A European tour took place in June and July 2010 , where the band performed in Northern Ireland for the first time at the Odyssey Arena in Belfast . In late October 2010 , Pearl Jam performed at the 24th Annual Bridge School Benefit Concert at the Shoreline Amphitheater in Mountain View , California . A live album , titled Live on Ten Legs , was released on January 17 , 2011 . It is a compilation of live tracks from their 2003 to 2010 world tours , and is a follow @-@ up to Live on Two Legs , which consisted of songs recorded during their 1998 North American tour . 
 In March 2011 , bassist Jeff Ament told Billboard that the band had 25 songs and they 'd be heading into the studio in April to begin recording the follow @-@ up to Backspacer . On May 16 , 2011 , the band confirmed that they would play the Labor Day weekend at the Alpine Valley Music Theatre , East Troy , Wisconsin , followed by ten shows in Canada . 
 On September 8 , 2011 , the band released a new song titled " Olé " . On November 18 , the band released Toronto 9 @.@ 11 @.@ 11 — a free live album available through the launch of Google Music . 
 On November 21 , 2011 , as part of their <unk> World Tour , Pearl Jam visited Costa Rica for the first time to a 30 @,@ 000 crowd of fans at the National Stadium . The following month , the band announced a tour of Europe , which started in June 2012 . 
 = = = Lightning Bolt ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 On July 11 , 2013 , the band announced that their tenth studio album Lightning Bolt would be released internationally on October 14 , 2013 and on the next day in the United States , along with releasing the first single " Mind Your Manners " . The band played a two @-@ leg tour in North America during October and November , followed by headlining the Big Day Out festival in Australia and New Zealand in 2014 . The second single , " Sirens " , was released on September 18 , 2013 . After selling 166 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , Lightning Bolt became Pearl Jam 's fifth album to reach number one on the Billboard 200 . At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015 , the album won the award for Best Recording Package . In November 2015 the band played a nine @-@ date tour of Latin America . In January 2016 , the band announced a tour of the United States and Canada , including appearances at the New Orleans Jazz Festival and Bonnaroo . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Compared with the other grunge bands of the early 1990s , Pearl Jam ’ s style is noticeably less heavy and harkens back to the classic rock music of the 1970s . Pearl Jam has cited many punk rock and classic rock bands as influences , including The Who , Led Zeppelin , Neil Young , Kiss and the Ramones . Pearl Jam ’ s success has been attributed to its sound , which fuses " the riff @-@ heavy stadium rock of the ' 70s with the grit and anger of ' 80s post @-@ punk , without ever neglecting hooks and choruses . " Gossard 's rhythm guitar style is known for its sense of beat and groove , while McCready 's lead guitar style , influenced by artists such as Jimi Hendrix , has been described as " feel @-@ oriented " and " rootsy . " 
 Pearl Jam has broadened its musical range with subsequent releases . As he had more influence on the band 's sound , Vedder sought to make the band 's musical output less catchy . He said , " I felt that with more popularity , we were going to be crushed , our heads were going to pop like grapes . " By 1994 ’ s Vitalogy , the band began to incorporate more punk influences into its music . The band ’ s 1996 album , No Code , was a deliberate break from the musical style of Ten . The songs on the album featured elements of garage rock , worldbeat , and experimentalism . After 1998 ’ s Yield , which was somewhat of a return to the straightforward rock approach of the band 's early work , the band dabbled with experimental art rock on 2000 's Binaural and folk rock elements on 2002 ’ s Riot Act . The band ’ s 2006 album , Pearl Jam , was cited as a return to the band ’ s early sound . The band 's 2009 album , Backspacer , contains elements of pop and new wave . 
 Critic Jim DeRogatis describes Vedder 's vocals as a " Jim Morrison @-@ like vocal growl . " Greg Prato of AllMusic said , " With his hard @-@ hitting and often confessional lyrical style and Jim Morrison @-@ esque baritone , Vedder also became one of the most copied lead singers in all of rock . " Vedder 's lyrical topics range from personal ( " Alive " , " Better Man " ) to social and political concerns ( " Even Flow " , " World Wide Suicide " ) . His lyrics have often invoked the use of storytelling and have included themes of freedom , individualism , and sympathy for troubled individuals . When the band started , Gossard and McCready were clearly designated as rhythm and lead guitarists , respectively . The dynamic began to change when Vedder started to play more rhythm guitar during the Vitalogy era . McCready said in 2006 , " Even though there are three guitars , I think there 's maybe more room now . Stone will pull back and play a two @-@ note line and Ed will do a power chord thing , and I fit into all that . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While Nirvana had brought grunge to the mainstream in the early 1990s with Nevermind , Pearl Jam 's debut Ten outsold it in the United States , and the band became " the most popular American rock & roll band of the ' 90s " according to AllMusic . Pearl Jam has been described as " modern rock radio 's most influential stylists – the workmanlike midtempo chug of songs like " Alive " and " Even Flow " just melodic enough to get <unk> singing along . " The band inspired and influenced a number of bands , ranging from Silverchair to Puddle of Mudd and The Strokes . The band has also been credited for inspiring the indie rock scene of 90s @-@ era urban Pakistan , that has since evolved into a rich rock music culture in the country . 
 Pearl Jam has been praised for its rejection of rock star excess and its insistence on backing causes it believes in . Music critic Jim DeRogatis said in the aftermath of the band 's battle with Ticketmaster that it " proved that a rock band which isn 't comprised of greed heads can play stadiums and not milk the audience for every last dime ... it indicated that idealism in rock ' n ' roll is not the sole province of those ' 60s bands enshrined in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . " Eric Weisbard of Spin said in 2001 , " The group that was once accused of being synthetic grunge now seem as organic and principled a rock band as exists . " In a 2005 USA Today reader 's poll , Pearl Jam was voted the greatest American rock band of all time . In April 2006 , Pearl Jam was awarded the prize for " Best Live Act " in Esquire 's <unk> Music Awards . The blurb called Pearl Jam " the rare superstars who still play as though each show could be their last . " Pearl Jam 's fanbase following has been compared to that of the Grateful Dead 's , with Rolling Stone magazine stating that Pearl Jam " toured incessantly and became one of rock 's great arena acts , attracting a fanatical , Grateful Dead @-@ like cult following with marathon , true @-@ believer shows in the vanishing spirit of Bruce Springsteen , the Who and U2 . " 
 When asked about Pearl Jam 's legacy in a 2000 interview , Vedder said , " I think at some point along the way we began feeling we wanted to give people something to believe in because we all had bands that gave that to us when we needed something to believe in . That was the big challenge for us after the first record and the response to it . The goal immediately became how do we continue to be musicians and grow and survive in view of all this ... The answers weren ’ t always easy , but I think we found a way . " 
 = = Campaigning and activism = = 
 Throughout its career , Pearl Jam has promoted wider social and political issues , from pro @-@ choice sentiments to opposition to George W. Bush 's presidency . Vedder acts as the band 's spokesman on these issues . The band has promoted an array of causes , including awareness of Crohn 's disease , which Mike McCready suffers from , Ticketmaster venue monopolization and the environment and wildlife protection , among others . Guitarist Stone Gossard has been active in environmental pursuits , and has been an advocate of Pearl Jam 's carbon neutral policy , offsetting the band 's environmental impact . Vedder has advocated for the release of the West Memphis 3 for years and Damien Echols , a member of the three , shares a writing credit for the song " Army Reserve " ( from Pearl Jam ) . 
 The band , and especially frontman Eddie Vedder , have been vocal supporters of the pro @-@ choice movement . In 1992 , Spin printed an article by Vedder , entitled " Reclamation " , which detailed his views on abortion . In an MTV Unplugged concert the same year , Vedder stood on a stool and wrote " PRO @-@ <unk> ! " on his arm in protest when the band performed the song " Porch " . The band are members of a number of pro @-@ choice organizations , including Choice USA and Voters for Choice . 
 As members of Rock the Vote and Vote for Change , the band has encouraged voter registration and participation in United States elections . Vedder was outspoken in support of Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader in 2000 , and Pearl Jam played a series of concerts on the Vote for Change tour in October 2004 , supporting the candidacy of John Kerry for U.S. President . In a Rolling Stone feature showcasing the Vote for Change tour 's performers , Vedder told the magazine , " I supported Ralph Nader in 2000 , but it 's a time of crisis . We have to get a new administration in . " 
 Vedder sometimes comments on politics between songs , often to criticize U.S. foreign policy , and a number of his songs , including " Bu $ hleaguer " and " World Wide Suicide " , are openly critical of the Bush administration . At Lollapalooza 2007 , Vedder spoke out against BP Amoco dumping effluent in Lake Michigan , and at the end of " Daughter " , he sang the lyrics " George Bush leave this world alone / George Bush find yourself another home " . In the beginning of the second encore Vedder invited Iraq war veteran Tomas Young , the subject of the documentary Body of War , onto the stage to urge an end to the war . Young in turn introduced Ben Harper , who contributed vocals to " No More " and " Rockin ' in the Free World " . The band later discovered that some of the Bush @-@ related lyrics were excised from the AT & T webcast of the event , and questioned whether that constitutes censorship . AT & T later apologized and blamed the censorship on contractor Davie Brown Entertainment . 
 Pearl Jam has performed numerous benefit concerts in aid of charities . For example , the band headlined a Seattle concert in 2001 to support the United Nations ' efforts to combat world hunger . The band added a date at the Chicago House of Blues to its 2005 tour to help the victims of Hurricane Katrina ; the concert proceeds were donated to Habitat for Humanity , the American Red Cross and the Jazz Foundation of America . 
 In 2011 , Pearl Jam was named 2011 Planet Defenders by Rock The Earth for their environmental activism and their large @-@ scale efforts to decrease their own carbon emissions . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Ten ( 1991 ) 
 Vs . ( 1993 ) 
 Vitalogy ( 1994 ) 
 No Code ( 1996 ) 
 Yield ( 1998 ) 
 Binaural ( 2000 ) 
 Riot Act ( 2002 ) 
 Pearl Jam ( 2006 ) 
 Backspacer ( 2009 ) 
 Lightning Bolt ( 2013 ) 
 = Solomon ( Byzantine general ) = 
 Solomon ( Greek : <unk> ) was an East Roman ( Byzantine ) general from northern Mesopotamia , who distinguished himself as a commander in the Vandalic War and the reconquest of North Africa in 533 – 534 . He spent most of the next decade in Africa as its governor general , combining the military post of magister militum with the civil position of praetorian prefect . Solomon successfully confronted the large @-@ scale Moorish rebellion , but was forced to flee following an army mutiny in spring of 536 . His second tenure in Africa began in 539 and it was marked by victories over the Moors , which led to the consolidation of the Byzantine position . A few years of prosperity followed , but were cut short by the rekindled Moorish revolt and Solomon 's defeat and death at the Battle of Cillium in 544 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Solomon was born , probably circa 480 / 490 , in the fortress of <unk> in the district of Solachon , near Dara in the province of Mesopotamia . He was a eunuch as a result of an accident during his infancy , not from deliberate castration . Solomon had a brother , Bacchus , who became a priest . Bacchus fathered three sons , Cyrus , Sergius and Solomon , who later became military officers in Africa under their uncle ; Sergius also succeeded Solomon as governor of Africa after the latter 's death . Little is known of Solomon 's early career , except that he served under the dux Mesopotamiae <unk> , perhaps as early as the latter 's installment to the post in 505 / 506 . Certainly by 527 , when he came to the service of General Belisarius , Solomon was considered an experienced officer . It is perhaps at this time that he was named Belisarius 's domesticus , or chief @-@ of @-@ staff , the post with which he is mentioned by the historian Procopius in 533 , before the onset of the campaign against the Vandal Kingdom of North Africa . 
 = = = First tenure in Africa = = = 
 Before the expedition sailed from Constantinople , Solomon was named as one of the nine commanders of the foederati regiments . He is not mentioned in Procopius 's narrative during the subsequent campaign , but he probably participated in the decisive Battle of Ad Decimum on 13 September 533 , which opened the road for the Vandal capital of Carthage . Following the capture of Carthage , Belisarius sent Solomon back to Constantinople to inform Emperor Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) of the campaign 's progress . Solomon remained in the capital until the spring of 534 , when Justinian sent him back to Africa to recall Belisarius and replace him as military commander of the new praetorian prefecture of Africa ( magister militum <unk> ) . Belisarius 's departure coincided with a general uprising of the Moorish tribes of the interior , before the Byzantines had time to strengthen their hold on the province . As a result , Belisarius left most of his privately raised bucellarii behind , and Emperor Justinian sent additional reinforcements . Soon ( sometime in autumn of 534 ) Emperor Justinian also invested Solomon with the civil office of praetorian prefect as well , replacing the aged Archelaus . 
 In the meantime , the Moors had invaded Byzacena and defeated the local Byzantine garrison , killing its commanders , <unk> and Rufinus . After diplomatic entreaties over the winter failed , and with his forces bolstered to some 18 @,@ 000 men ( as estimated by Charles Diehl ) following the arrival of reinforcements , in spring 535 Solomon led his troops into Byzacena . The Moors , under their chiefs Cutzinas , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> had encamped at a location called Mammes . Solomon attacked them there and defeated them . The Byzantine army returned to Carthage , but there news came that the Moors , reinforced , had again attacked and overrun Byzacena . Solomon immediately marched out and met them at Mount <unk> , where the Moors had erected a fortified camp and awaited his attack . Solomon divided his forces and sent 1 @,@ 000 men to attack the Moors from behind , scoring a decisive victory : the Moors broke and scattered , suffering great casualties . Those who survived fled to Numidia , where they joined the forces of Iaudas , the leader of the tribes of Mount Aurasium . With Byzacena secured , and urged by his own Moorish allies <unk> and <unk> , Solomon now turned to Numidia . He cautiously advanced to Aurasium and challenged Iaudas to battle , but after three days , distrusting the loyalty of his allies , Solomon returned his army to the plains . He left part of the army to keep watch on the Moors and established a series of fortified posts along the roads linking Byzacena with Numidia . Solomon then spent the winter preparing a new expedition against Aurasium and also against the Moors of Sardinia , but his designs were interrupted by a major army mutiny in spring 536 . 
 The revolt was caused by dissatisfaction of some of the soldiers , who had taken Vandal wives , with Solomon : the soldiers demanded the property once owned by their wives as their own , but Solomon refused , since this land had been confiscated by imperial decree . A first plot to assassinate Solomon in Easter failed and the conspirators fled into the countryside , but soon open rebellion broke out among the army in Carthage as well . The soldiers acclaimed one of Solomon 's subalterns , Theodore , as its leader , and began looting the city . Solomon managed to find refuge in a church , and under the cover of night , with the aid of Theodore , he departed the city by boat for <unk> , accompanied among others by the historian Procopius . From there , Solomon and Procopius sailed to Sicily , which had just been conquered by Belisarius , while Solomon 's lieutenant Martin was dispatched to try and reach the troops at Numidia , and Theodore instructed to hold Carthage . Upon hearing about the mutiny , Belisarius , with Solomon and 100 picked men , set sail for Africa . Carthage was being besieged by 9 @,@ 000 rebels , including many Vandals , under a certain Stotzas . Theodore was contemplating capitulation when Belisarius appeared . The news of the famous general 's arrival were sufficient for the rebels to abandon the siege and withdraw westwards . Belisarius immediately gave pursuit and caught up and defeated the rebel forces at <unk> . The bulk of the rebels , however , was able to flee , and continued to march towards Numidia , where the local troops decided to join them . Belisarius himself was forced to return to Italy due to trouble there , and Emperor Justinian appointed his cousin Germanus as magister militum to deal with the crisis . Solomon returned to Constantinople . 
 = = = Second tenure in Africa = = = 
 Germanus was successful in winning the confidence of many soldiers , re @-@ establishing discipline and defeating the mutineers at the Battle of Scalas Veteres in 537 . With imperial control over the army restored , Solomon was sent back to Africa to replace Germanus in 539 , again combining in his person the posts of magister militum and praetorian prefect ( in the meantime , he had also been raised to the rank of patricius and named an honorary consul ) . Solomon further reinforced his control of the army by weeding out unreliable soldiers , sending them to Belisarius in Italy and to the East ; by expelling all remaining Vandals from the province ; and by initiating a massive programme of fortification across the region . 
 In 539 AD Solomon [ ... ] devoted the energies of the state to an enormous building programme that fortified the Byzantine province of Africa . The open cities and villa @-@ dotted countryside of the past was transformed into a medieval landscape of small walled towns surrounded by fortified manor houses [ ... ] at the same time sewer systems were overhauled , aqueducts reconnected , harbours cleared and grandiose churches erected to dominate the new urban centres [ ... ] The three great rectangular military fortresses , which were constructed on the south @-@ western frontier zone of Tebessa , <unk> and <unk> , would have required over a million laboring days in their construction . 
 In 540 , Solomon led his army again against the Moors of Mount Aurasium . Initially , the Moors attacked and besieged the Byzantine advance guard , under Guntharis , at their camp in Bagai , but Solomon with the main army came to the rescue . The Moors had to abandon the attack and retreated to <unk> on the foothills of Aurasium , where they pitched camp . Solomon attacked them there and defeated them . The surviving Moors fled south to Aurasium or west into Mauretania , but their leader Iaudas sought refuge in the fortress of <unk> . Solomon and his troops plundered the fertile plains around <unk> , gathering the rich harvest for themselves , before moving onto <unk> . Once there , they found Iaudas gone , having fled to the remote fortress of <unk> . The Byzantines moved up to besiege <unk> , but the siege proved problematic because of the barren terrain , and in particular the lack of water . While Solomon was considering how best to attack the inaccessible fortress , a minor skirmish between the two forces gradually escalated into a full @-@ scale and confused battle , as more and more soldiers from both sides joined in . The Byzantines emerged victorious , while the Moors fled from the field . Shortly after , the Byzantines also captured the fort at the so @-@ called " Rock of <unk> " , where Iaudas had sent his wives and treasure . This victory left Solomon in control of Aurasium , where he built a number of fortresses . With Aurasium secured , effective Byzantine control was established in the provinces of Numidia and Mauretania Sitifensis . Aided by the captured treasure of Iaudas , Solomon extended his fortification programme in these two provinces : some two @-@ dozen inscriptions testifying to his building activity survive from the area . The Moorish rebellion seemed beaten for good , and contemporary chroniclers are unanimous in declaring the next few years as a golden era of peace and prosperity . In the words of Procopius , " all the Libyans who were subjects of the Romans , coming to enjoy secure peace and finding the rule of Solomon wise and very moderate , and having no longer any thought of hostility in their minds , seemed the most fortunate of all men " . 
 This tranquility lasted until 542 / 543 when the great plague arrived in Africa and caused many casualties , especially among members of the army . In addition , in early 543 the Moors in Byzacena became restive . Solomon executed the brother of the chieftain Antalas , whom he held responsible for the disturbances , and ceased the subsidies granted to Antalas , alienating the powerful and hitherto loyal chieftain . At the same time , Solomon 's nephew Sergius , newly named governor of Tripolitania as a token of Emperor Justinian 's gratitude ( along with his brother Cyrus in the <unk> ) , caused the outbreak of hostilities with the tribal confederation of the Leuathae when his men killed 80 of their leaders at a banquet . Although in a subsequent battle near Leptis Magna he was victorious , in early 544 Sergius was forced to travel to Carthage and seek his uncle 's aid . The rebellion spread quickly from Tripolitania to Byzacena , where Antalas joined it . Joined by his three nephews , Solomon marched against the Moors as they assembled , meeting them near <unk> . Last @-@ minute diplomatic overtures to the Leuathae failed , and the two armies clashed at Cillium , on the border of Numidia and Byzacena . The Byzantine army was riven by disunity , with many soldiers refusing to fight or doing so only reluctantly . The contemporary poet Flavius Cresconius Corippus even accused Guntharis of treason , alleging that he withdrew from the line with his troops , causing a general and disorderly Byzantine retreat . Solomon and his bodyguard stood their ground and resisted but at last they were forced to retreat . Solomon 's horse stumbled and fell in a ravine , wounding its rider . With the aid of his guards , Solomon remounted , but they were quickly overcome and slain . 
 Solomon was succeeded by his nephew Sergius , who proved completely inadequate in dealing with the situation . The Moors launched a general revolt and inflicted a severe defeat on the Byzantines in <unk> in 545 . Sergius was recalled , while the army mutinied again , this time under Guntharis , who captured Carthage and installed himself there as an independent ruler . His usurpation did not last long as he was assassinated by Artabanes , but it was not until the arrival of John Troglita in late 546 and his subsequent campaigns that the province was to be pacified and brought again securely under Byzantine imperial control . 
 = Sycorax = 
 Sycorax / <unk> / is an unseen character in William Shakespeare 's play The Tempest ( 1611 ) . She is a vicious and powerful witch and the mother of Caliban , one of the few native inhabitants of the island on which Prospero , the hero of the play , is stranded . 
 According to the backstory provided by the play , Sycorax , while pregnant with Caliban , was banished from her home in Algiers to the island on which the play takes place . Memories of Sycorax , who dies several years before the main action of the play begins , define several of the relationships in the play . Relying on his filial connection to Sycorax , Caliban claims ownership of the island . Prospero constantly reminds Ariel of Sycorax 's cruel treatment in order to maintain the sprite 's service . 
 Scholars generally agree that Sycorax , a foil for Prospero , is closely related to the Medea of Ovid 's Metamorphoses . <unk> writers and critics see Sycorax as giving voice to peoples , particularly women , recovering from the effects of colonization . Later versions of The Tempest , beginning with William Davenant 's eighteenth @-@ century adaptation , have given Sycorax a vocal role in the play , but maintained her image as a malevolent antagonist to Prospero . 
 = = Role in the play = = 
 In The Tempest , Prospero describes Sycorax as an ancient and foul witch native to Algiers , and banished to the island for practicing sorcery " so strong / That [ she ] could control the Moon " . Prospero further relates that many years earlier , sailors had brought her to the island , while she was pregnant with her bestial son , Caliban , and abandoned her there , as by some ambiguous reason , she was spared being put to death . She proceeded to enslave the spirits there , chief among them Ariel , whom she eventually imprisoned in a pine tree for disobedience . Sycorax birthed Caliban and taught him to worship the demonic god <unk> . She dies long before the arrival of Prospero and his daughter , Miranda . Caliban grows to hate Prospero 's presence and power on the island , claiming that the land belongs to him since it was his mother 's before Prospero appeared . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Silent Sycorax = = = 
 Sycorax 's silent role plays an important part in postcolonial interpretations of The Tempest . Because she is native to Algiers and her story is only heard through others ( Prospero , Ariel , and Caliban ) , she is championed by some scholars as a representation of the silenced African woman . Postcolonial authors have also claimed her ; for example , Kamau Brathwaite , in his 1994 work <unk> Poems , includes " Sycorax 's book " as a counterpart to " Prospero 's book " ( mentioned in Act 5 of Shakespeare 's play ) . In an attempt to give voice to unspoken indigenous cultures , Brathwaite 's poems outline the history of the Caribbean through Sycorax 's eyes . Sycorax is presented as Brathwaite 's muse , possessing him and his computer in order to give full voice to the history of the silenced , who in Brathwaite 's philosophy are not only Caribbean natives , but any culture underrepresented during the colonial period . 
 Other postcolonial scholars have argued that Shakespeare 's audiences would have connected Sycorax with the threat of Islamic expansionism . Islam had successfully conquered and colonized much of the Middle East and some of southern Europe during the Middle Ages . The Algerian Sycorax may represent Christian Europe 's fear of Islam and its growing political power . This interpretation inverts the traditional postcolonial interpretations of The Tempest , however . If Sycorax is viewed as an Islamic expansionist , then she herself is the colonizer , not Prospero ( who becomes merely a re @-@ colonizer of the island ) . However , Sycorax 's portrayal as an absent , silent woman still allows the play to solidify the idea of European over Islamic power . 
 Interpretations of Sycorax as silenced focus not only on her race but her gender as well . Most of what is said about her in the play is said by Prospero . However , as scholars point out , Prospero has never met Sycorax — all he learned about her he learned from Ariel — and his suspicion of women makes him an unreliable source of information . Skeptical of female virtue in general , he refuses to accept Caliban 's prior claim to the island , accusing him of being a bastard " got by the devil himself / Upon thy wicked dam . " 
 = = = Sycorax and Prospero = = = 
 In The Tempest , Shakespeare presents two powerful sorcerers , Sycorax and Prospero , who have both controlled the island . Initially it appears that the two characters are a contrasting pair : the benevolent Prospero and the rapacious Sycorax . However , upon closer analysis , the differences between the two characters disappear and the similarities grow . For example , Prospero , like Sycorax , coerces Ariel into doing his bidding , using the sprite to regain his inheritance as a Duke , and tortures Caliban with magic the way Sycorax tortured Ariel . Also , both Prospero and Sycorax were exiled from their respective homelands and both have children , which was possibly the reason why they were both spared being executed . The fine line between Sycorax 's black magic and Prospero 's white blurs even further during his renunciation of magic in Act V , a speech which has strong parallels to one given by the dark witch Medea in the Metamorphoses . In comparing himself to Medea , Prospero is implicitly comparing himself to Sycorax . Emphasizing the relationship between Prospero and Sycorax demonstrates the ambiguity of Prospero 's supposedly benevolent character . 
 = = = Sycorax as mother = = = 
 Sycorax has been described as the matriarchal figure of The Tempest . Modernist authors such as Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes have alluded to Sycorax in their writing in order to illustrate destructive feminine power . As Hughes writes , " ... the difficult task of any poet in English [ is ] to locate the force which Shakespeare called Venus in his first poems and Sycorax in his last . " By emphasizing the female power found in characters such as Sycorax , Plath and Hughes hoped to counteract what they saw as the patriarchal nature of canonical Western literature . Feminist critics , however , have maintained that matriarchal readings of Sycorax are shallow , as they often find importance only in Sycorax 's motherhood rather than her thoughts , feelings , and past life . 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 Some critics have seen both Caliban and Sycorax as instances of indeterminate racial or ethnic identity . Leah Marcus argues that the phrase " ... blue @-@ eyed hag " , suggests racial uncertainty because " as a blue @-@ eyed Algerian Sycorax would have failed to fit our racial stereotypes in a number of interesting ways . We tend not to think of Africans as blue eyed , even though North Africans of ' <unk> ' and elsewhere sometimes are . " Most critics have interpreted the phrase " blue eyed " to be a reference to blueish rings around the eyes , indicating tiredness or pregnancy , on the grounds that this was the most common meaning of the term at the time . However both Marcus and Diane Purkiss suggest that a reference to race might be implied , suggesting that Sycorax 's ethnicity cannot be clearly defined , as although she was born in Algiers , her parentage is not known . 
 = = = Avoiding execution = = = 
 Scholars have wondered what it was that Sycorax did to avoid execution , as described in Act one , Scene two by Prospero : " for one thing she did / They [ the Algerians ] would not take her life . " Charles Lamb , a Romantic writer fascinated by Shakespeare and his works , and particularly intrigued by this question , found in John Ogilby 's " Accurate Description of Africa " ( 1670 ) two versions of a story about Emperor Charles V 's invasion of Algiers in 1541 , relating that a witch ( not named in the source text ) had advised the commander of the city not to surrender , predicting the destruction of the besieging fleet , which was accomplished nine days later by a " dreadful tempest " . The principal version given claims that she was " richly remunerated " but the alternative version , " to palliate the shame and the reproaches that are thrown upon them for making use of a witch , " attributes the storm to the prayers of a holy man named <unk> Utica . 
 Later scholars , however , have argued that Sycorax was saved from execution because she was pregnant . This was not uncommon , as many female criminals in Shakespeare 's day got pregnant in order to avoid execution . 
 = = Sycorax in later versions of the play = = 
 Sycorax has been conceptualized in a variety ways by adapters and directors of The Tempest . In John Dryden and William Davenant 's version of The Tempest ( 1670 ) , Sycorax is survived by two children , Caliban and a daughter also named Sycorax . This second Sycorax makes sexual advances toward Trinculo , the drunken sailor , and ( according to Trinculo ) also has incestuous relations with her brother Caliban . Die <unk> , a 1778 version of the play in German , includes a living Sycorax , a witch who has full power during the night , while Prospero rules the day . In this play , she is the one who causes the tempest and shipwreck , not Prospero ; Prospero is extremely wary of her actions as each night approaches , as she has power over those who sleep . Several times he struggles to keep Miranda awake to protect her from Sycorax 's power . In Eugène Scribe 's French 1846 version , Sycorax is alive but imprisoned behind some rocks out of sight . She spends most of the play trying to convince her son , Caliban , to free her . Peter Brook 's 1968 British version of the play portrayed Sycorax as an ugly witch , including her in a birth scene in which the equally ugly Caliban is born . 
 Film versions of The Tempest have portrayed Sycorax in flashbacks of the island 's history . In Derek Jarman 's 1979 version , Sycorax is shown leading Ariel around by a chain and breast feeding an adult Caliban . Peter Greenaway 's Prospero 's Books ( 1991 ) depicts Sycorax as a bald , naked woman covered in peacock feathers ; Steven Dillon suggests that Greenaway 's vision of Sycorax was inspired by Jarman 's . 
 = = Sycorax in later literature = = 
 In Ernest Renan 's play Caliban the anti @-@ hero states that Sycorax went to " all the devils " but left him as rightful ruler of the island . Marina Warner reimagined the witch in her 1992 book Indigo , in which Sycorax is a healer and dyer of indigo who uses her magic to help slaves . Her attempts to give up sorcery fail , because " she cannot abjure , give up , control the force by which she is possessed " . 
 J.B. Aspinall 's novel Sycorax ( 2006 ) places the origin of the story with a 14th @-@ century peasant woman from Yorkshire . The Indian poet Suniti Namjoshi in Sycorax : New Fables and Poems imagines Sycorax returning to the island after Prospero and the others have left ( including Caliban ) . Namjoshi has stated , " The Sycorax in my poem is still alive . . . She is still defiant , still fierce , but she is old and knows that death is no longer so far away that it need not be thought of ... I wanted to follow Sycorax , keep her company , as it were , up to the final moment " . 
 Sycorax is also revived in the " Baroque pastiche " opera The Enchanted Island , devised by Jeremy Sams , in the first production of which she was played by Joyce <unk> . 
 = = Sycorax in music = = 
 The Decemberists ' 2006 album The Crane Wife features the song " The Island / Come and See " which references " Sycorax and <unk> / watching in <unk> " . 
 = Okęcie Airport incident = 
 The Okęcie Airport incident ( Polish : <unk> na <unk> ) was a dispute between players and technical staff of the Poland national football team on 29 November 1980 , starting at the team hotel in Warsaw and climaxing at Okęcie Airport . An incident of footballing insubordination at a time when strike action and other forms of civil resistance were intensifying in communist Poland , it caused a domestic press storm , which led first to the suspension of several prominent players , then the resignation of the team manager , Ryszard Kulesza . 
 Józef Młynarczyk , the team 's goalkeeper , was hungover when the time came to leave the hotel for the airport , having not been to sleep following a night on the town with a friend . Kulesza and one of his assistants , Bernard Blaut , decided to leave Młynarczyk behind , much to the indignation of some players , including Stanisław Terlecki , Zbigniew Boniek , Włodzimierz Smolarek and Władysław Żmuda . Terlecki , a stridently pro @-@ Western intellectual with a reputation for mocking the communist establishment , was particularly angered , and himself drove Młynarczyk to the airport , where the players continued their protests . Kulesza eventually relented and allowed Młynarczyk to travel with the team . 
 The Polish media took hold of the story and vociferously attacked the rebellious players over the following days . Meanwhile , Terlecki again defied the communist authorities by arranging for the players to meet Pope John Paul II . The Polish Football Association sent Terlecki , Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda home and imposed various bans preventing them from playing at the international and club level over the next year . Terlecki and Boniek in particular were condemned by the association as insubordinate " rabble @-@ rousers " . Smolarek received a more modest , suspended ban . Kulesza resigned in protest at the sanctions imposed on the players , saying they were too harsh . Most of the banned players were reinstated during 1981 , but Terlecki was not — he emigrated to the United States in June that year and although he returned home five years later , he never played for Poland again . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1976 , a series of protests took place across communist Poland soon after the government announced plans to increase sharply the fixed prices charged nationwide for many basic commodities . Violent incidents occurred in Płock , Radom and Ursus as the protests were forcibly put down , and the planned price hikes were cancelled . These demonstrations and the events surrounding them brought the Polish workforce and intellectual political opposition together , and by 1980 , a campaign of civil resistance for political change was intensifying strongly . Industrial strike action in Lublin in July 1980 — the so @-@ called Lublin July — preceded the formation of Solidarity ( Solidarność ) in the port city of Gdańsk during the following months . This was the first non @-@ communist trade union in an Eastern bloc country . The government took several steps to obstruct Solidarity 's emergence , enforcing press censorship and cutting off telephone connections between the coast and the hinterland , but despite these efforts four out of every five Polish workers were members of the union by late 1980 . 
 Poland 's national football team , managed by Ryszard Kulesza , was then regarded as one of the world 's best , having finished third at the 1974 World Cup . In November 1980 it was ranked sixth in the world by the Elo rating system . Late that month , the team was preparing for a 1982 World Cup qualifying match away against Malta on 7 December . The squad 's departure was scheduled for 29 November , 10 days before the game , so the players could attend a training camp in Italy , then contest a warm @-@ up match against a team representing the Italian league . 
 One of Poland 's key players at the time was Stanisław Terlecki , a forward whose club was ŁKS Łódź . The son of university lecturers , Terlecki held a degree in history from the University of Łódź , as well as fervent anti @-@ communist political views and a strident attitude regarding their display . He was known for openly mocking the establishment with subversive abandon , and regularly made jokes in public about communist authority figures and organisations , prompting the ire of the Polish Football Association ( PZPN ) and the Warsaw police force . The first Polish international player with a university degree in anything other than physical education , he eschewed the Polish sports magazines read by many of his team @-@ mates on road trips in favour of Western news journals such as Newsweek and Time . Like many Polish intellectuals , he sympathised with movements such as Solidarity ; following their example , he twice attempted to unionise Polish footballers during the late 1970s . The PZPN blocked both attempts , banning Terlecki from all organised football each time ; first for six months , then for a year . 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Main incident = = = 
 Late on 28 November 1980 , the night before the team 's departure for Italy , goalkeeper Józef Młynarczyk and forward Włodzimierz Smolarek , both of Widzew Łódź , left the team hotel in Warsaw , the Hotel Vera , without permission . According to Smolarek they did this to get some dinner because they did not like the food at the hotel . They met a friend of Młynarczyk 's , sports journalist Wojciech Zieliński , at the Adria nightclub . According to Andrzej Iwan , another member of the team , the main topic of conversation was Zieliński 's estranged wife , who had been caught prostituting herself around Warsaw , and had since moved to Italy . Several Poland players knew her , and Młynarczyk had just been to Italy to play for Widzew Łódź against Juventus . According to Iwan , the journalist encouraged Młynarczyk to drink as they talked , hoping the goalkeeper might have news of her . Smolarek left the club around 02 : 00 , but Młynarczyk and Zieliński stayed until about three hours later . 
 A senior national team official , Colonel Roman <unk> of the Polish Army , said he saw the goalkeeper and the journalist reach the hotel in a taxi soon after 05 : 00 — but rather than going to his room , Młynarczyk then left again with Zieliński before returning again around 07 : 00 . Tired and hungover , Młynarczyk joined the rest of the players for breakfast , and according to Terlecki spent most of the meal getting worked up about possible managerial retribution . Młynarczyk was in such bad shape that he was unable to carry his own bags ; Smolarek took them for him . Next to the team bus , one of Kulesza 's assistants , Bernard Blaut , confronted Smolarek and told him that Młynarczyk was to stay behind . 
 Smolarek , Terlecki and two other Polish players — Zbigniew Boniek and Władysław Żmuda , both of Widzew Łódź — angrily objected and nearly came to blows with Blaut . Grzegorz <unk> , one of the team 's forwards , did not join the protest but later said that he had not thought Młynarczyk drunk enough to warrant exclusion . The team eventually left without Terlecki or Młynarczyk . Terlecki , whose own car was to hand , drove himself and Młynarczyk to the airport , where the confrontation continued . 
 Terlecki tried to stop the many pressmen at the airport from photographing Młynarczyk by running around , yelling , and snatching cameras and microphones from their hands . Meanwhile , the other players attempted to talk Kulesza around , telling him that Młynarczyk had serious personal problems . Kulesza eventually relented and allowed the goalkeeper to travel with the team . 
 = = = Press storm ; players meet the Pope = = = 
 Among the journalists at the airport were Jacek <unk> of Polish Television , Bogdan <unk> of Polish Radio , and Remigiusz Hetman of the weekly football journal Piłka Nożna . News about the incident quickly spread across the country , partly because of Terlecki 's outlandish actions in the reporters ' presence — Iwan later reflected that Terlecki had " made so much commotion it was impossible to sweep everything under the carpet " . Boniek corroborates this version of events : " Terlecki was massively to blame . He brought Młynarczyk to the airport in his own car , then pulled the plug powering a TV camera out of the wall . " Grzegorz Majchrzak , a historian of the Polish Institute of National Remembrance , questions Boniek 's words , positing that he might have distorted events in an attempt to distance himself from Terlecki . 
 The government attempted to use the scandal as a popular distraction , aiming to deflect attention from the strikes and other industrial action . A number of journalists attacked the players who had supported Młynarczyk ; the Przegląd <unk> sports magazine ran the headline " No Mercy for Those Guilty of the Scandal at the Airport " while Tempo , another journal , was similarly severe , proclaiming " This Cannot Be <unk> " . Piłka Nożna condemned the " magnificent men ... who think they can do what they want " , but at the same time questioned the conduct of the team 's non @-@ playing staff . 
 In the Italian capital , Terlecki continued to defy the establishment . The players were under strict instructions not to associate with the Vatican while in Rome , but Terlecki arranged for them to meet Pope John Paul II , who was himself Polish . Seeing this as a second act of defiance , the PZPN promptly sent Terlecki , Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda home , escorted by General Marian Ryba of the Polish Army , who was also the football association president . Lech Poznań 's Piotr <unk> replaced Młynarczyk for the match against Malta , which Poland won 2 – 0 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Hearings and suspensions = = = 
 Ryba announced on 1 December 1980 that he intended to bar the dissenting players from the Poland squad . When the rest of the team returned to Poland , Terlecki once again attempted to form a footballers ' union . Securing the support of 16 other Poland international players , he wrote a letter to the PZPN declaring their intention to do so , leading the authorities to order them to face a tribunal . Only Terlecki , Boniek , Żmuda and Młynarczyk continued to endorse the letter when challenged in court . 
 On 15 December , PZPN officials attempted to reconstruct the night 's events , asking various players and staff to give accounts of what had happened . Several journalists were present . The stories told contradicted each other in several places , notably regarding how much Młynarczyk had had to drink . The team 's technical staff said that he had been obviously intoxicated when they had seen him , while the goalkeeper insisted he had taken only " three glasses of champagne and a sip of beer " with his friend . Another point of contention regarded the conversation at the airport , which had caused Kulesza to yield . It was generally agreed that the players had talked the manager around by telling him that Młynarczyk had personal problems , but the non @-@ playing staff now accused them of emotional blackmail . The players said their intention had been to explain the goalkeeper 's off @-@ field issues to help the manager make a more informed decision . 
 Terlecki 's answers at this meeting under the questioning of General Ryba , a former military prosecutor , were typically provocative ; when the general asked what time Terlecki had left the hotel on 29 November , the ŁKS forward said 08 : 00 . " Are you sure it was 08 : 00 ? " Ryba pressed — " Are you sure it wasn 't 08 : 02 ? " The player replied that he wasn 't : " No . Maybe it was even 08 : 03 . I don 't know this time exactly , because I have one of your Russian watches . " 
 A week later , the PZPN announced its final verdict . The only versions of events accepted for consideration were those recounted by Kulesza and Blaut ; those of all the players and of the team physiotherapist and sport psychologist were dismissed . Żmuda and Młynarczyk were barred from playing for either Poland or their clubs for eight months , and Terlecki and Boniek for twelve . Smolarek received a two @-@ month ban , which was suspended for six months . Citing their previous records of insubordination and misconduct , the PZPN called Terlecki and Boniek " rabble @-@ rousers " . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Kulesza left his job soon afterwards ; according to Majchrzak , he resigned in protest at the players ' punishments , which he thought were too harsh . Officials at Widzew Łódź accused the PZPN of bias , saying the association had not supervised the players properly and should shoulder some of the blame . Directors at Widzew and ŁKS Łódź briefly considered resigning their PZPN memberships and organising their own league championship , but did not . The national team players ' council , at that time comprising Marek <unk> , Paweł <unk> and Wojciech Rudy , wrote an open letter expressing surprise at what they saw as excessive sanctions against Terlecki , Boniek , Żmuda and Młynarczyk . They admitted the goalkeeper 's conduct had been far from exemplary , but contended that the incident was only minor , and had been exacerbated by disproportionately prominent and negative press coverage . 
 Despite being without some of their top players , Widzew Łódź were crowned champions of Poland at the end of the 1980 – 81 season . Ryba left his post in April 1981 , along with a number of his contemporaries , described by Stefan <unk> , a sports journalist and football historian , as " honest officials , together with some football @-@ friendly Polish Army officers " . In their place came a number of communist officials , most prominently Włodzimierz <unk> , an erstwhile Politburo member , who took over as head of the football association despite a reputation for not liking the sport . 
 Młynarczyk , Boniek and Żmuda had their bans cancelled early . Żmuda and Młynarczyk returned in the 1 – 0 home win over East Germany on 2 May 1981 , and Boniek was reinstated four months later . The players ' recall was partly due to the efforts of Kulesza 's replacement , Antoni <unk> , to secure their return . According to Majchrzak , Boniek and Żmuda apologised for their actions before the General Committee for Physical Culture and Sport of the Polish People 's Republic , the PZPN 's governing body , but kept this from Terlecki , who appealed to have his ban lifted several times , but to no avail . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Terlecki openly participated in students ' strikes at his old university in Łódź and across Poland over the next few months , providing food to the students by the car @-@ load . ŁKS cancelled his registration in early 1981 . Majchrzak stresses that Terlecki was the only player involved in the incident not to regain his place in the Poland team , and claims that this was down to an intense grudge held against him by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Secret Police ( SB ) . Terlecki developed his own theory that the media circus following the airport incident had been deliberately engineered by the SB to head the players off forming their own trade union . There were several other incidents of drunkenness involving Młynarczyk , Majchrzak writes , but this was the only occasion when any player was punished for it . In October 1981 , when the team travelled to Argentina , Młynarczyk arrived at Okęcie " completely drunk " , according to Iwan , but far from reprimanding him , team staff gave him even more alcohol during the flight to help ease the pain of his broken finger . 
 Poland qualified for the 1982 World Cup with a perfect record , and performed strongly in the competition , losing to Italy in the semi @-@ finals but beating France in a play @-@ off to claim third place . Kulesza became the manager of Tunisia , and later founded a coaching school in Warsaw . 
 Saying he was " being treated like a leper " , Terlecki emigrated to the United States in June 1981 , and joined the Pittsburgh Spirit of the Major Indoor Soccer League . He pursued a new life in America with great vigour . Terlecki 's on @-@ field displays in the U.S. were widely praised — in three seasons with Pittsburgh he became the club 's all @-@ time top goalscorer — but managers reportedly had trouble " harness [ ing ] Terlecki 's fiery temper " , and his wife Ewa became intensely homesick . Terlecki announced his intention to move back to Poland in 1985 , saying that he believed the political situation had improved and that he wished to reunite his family . He returned home the following year , and resumed his career in Polish club football . He expressed a desire to play for the national team again , but was never selected . 
 = New York State Route 333 = 
 New York State Route 333 ( NY 333 ) was an east – west state highway located in southeastern Steuben County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route was at an intersection with County Route 11 ( CR 11 ) and CR 24 in Risingville , a hamlet within the town of Thurston . Its eastern terminus was at a junction with NY 415 in the town of Campbell . In between , NY 333 passed through the hamlet of Thurston . The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and remained unchanged until April 1 , 1997 , when ownership and maintenance of the route was transferred from the state of New York to Steuben County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . NY 333 was subsequently redesignated as County Route 333 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 333 began at an intersection with CR 11 and CR 24 in Risingville , an isolated hamlet within the Steuben County town of Thurston . It headed eastward , following Michigan Creek along the base of a valley surrounding the waterway . Due to the terrain of the area , NY 333 intersected only a handful of roads , one of which was Cranberry Lake Road ( CR 2 ) , a north – south highway that met NY 333 midway between the hamlets of Risingville and Thurston . The route continued onward , turning northeastward toward Thurston Pond and the small hamlet of Thurston at the eastern edge of the small lake . Here , NY 333 curved back to the east as it met Savona – Thurston Road ( CR 12 ) in the western half of the community . 
 East of Thurston hamlet , NY 333 continued to run along the base of the Michigan Creek valley into the town of Campbell , where the valley met a larger valley surrounding the Cohocton River . The route proceeded eastward across the width of the latter valley , crossing over the river on its way into the riverside hamlet of Campbell , the largest community along NY 333 . It proceeded eastward through the hamlet along Main Street to an interchange with the Southern Tier Expressway ( then @-@ NY 15 and NY 17 ) just east of the community . NY 333 ended just east of the Southern Tier at a junction with NY 415 . The right @-@ of @-@ way also terminated at the junction . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 333 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York as a spur connecting U.S. Route 15 ( US 15 , now NY 415 ) in Campbell to the hamlet of Risingville in the town of Thurston . It remained unchanged until April 1 , 1997 , when ownership and maintenance of the route was transferred from the state of New York to Steuben County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In the switch , NY 333 and nearby NY 432 , both maintained by the state , were given to Steuben County in exchange for maintenance of NY 415 from Meads Creek Road in Coopers Plains ( northwest of Painted Post ) to Babcock Hollow Road in Bath as well as for maintenance of Hamilton Street ( the original routing of NY 17 ) between US 15 and Gang Mills . NY 333 was redesignated as CR 333 as a result . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Steuben County . 
 = Bacliff , Texas = 
 Bacliff is a census @-@ designated place ( CDP ) in north @-@ central Galveston County , Texas , United States , 16 miles ( 26 km ) northwest of Galveston . The population was 8 @,@ 619 at the 2010 census . Bacliff , originally called Clifton @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea , began as a seaside resort town . Located on the western shore of Galveston Bay , Bacliff , along with San Leon and Bayview , are the largest unincorporated communities on the Galveston County mainland . 
 The Bacliff CDP is home to the Kenneth E. Little Elementary school and Bayshore Park , created from land donated by Texas Genco . 
 = = History = = 
 Bacliff was established in 1910 by local landowners G.C. Perkins and <unk> Fuqua as Clifton @-@ by @-@ the Sea . The area was developed as a seaside weekend resort , and included parks , hotels , summer homes , and a bathhouse and open air pavilion built on a pier over the water . Telephone service came to Clifton @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea in 1913 , and Grand Avenue ( FM 646 ) became the main street . Hurricanes , Galveston 's recovery after the Hurricane of 1900 , and rapid transportation diminished Clifton @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea 's popularity . 
 The hurricane of 1915 destroyed many of the improvements to the area , but by 1924 the bathhouse and pavilion had been restored and summer residents returned to the community . A fire destroyed the pavilion in 1929 and it was rebuilt and hosted numerous summer concerts by both the Galveston and Houston orchestras . The hurricane of 1943 caused major damage to the area and the bathhouse and pavilion were not rebuilt . 
 In 1933 , Clifton @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea was home to 50 residents and 2 businesses , and from 1940 @-@ 1949 it was home to 100 residents and 4 businesses . After World War II the area expanded as it became home for workers of the nearby petrochemical plants . The expansion of the area required the establishment of a post office in 1948 . The U.S. Postal Service refused to allow the name Clifton @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea to be used due to its length , and the name Clifton was already in use by another Texas town , so the residents chose the same name as the subdivision at the center of business , Bay Cliff , as a replacement . However , the name was misspelled on the postal paperwork as Bacliff . The new name had only seven letters so it was admissible . 
 " Gator " Miller , publisher of small newspapers such as the monthly magazine <unk> and the entertainment magazine Night Moves , said that in the 1950s the Galveston Daily News bought a large parcel of land and awarded free lots to subscribers ; people who canceled subscriptions lost their <unk> , which were given to other subscribers . Miller said that this resulted in confused titles and a lack of large business ; Miller said that a retailer would not wish to buy land in Bacliff and then discover that an individual claimed title to the land . 
 In 1964 , Houston Lighting and Power began construction on two 450 MW electric generating units in Bacliff as part of the company 's Project Enterprise expansion . The units were of supercritical boiler design , which was then a new technology . The power plant , originally known as the Bacliff Plant , was renamed the P. H. Robinson plant , in honor of company president Perk H. Robinson . The plant eventually grew to four units with a total electrical generating capacity of 2 @,@ 211 MWh . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s there was a dispute over the valuation of the power plant between HL & P and the Dickinson Independent School District ( DISD ) . In 1979 HL & P said the plant was worth $ 238 million but DISD 's board of equalization said it was worth over $ 242 million . A legal dispute ensued between the two agencies . 
 During the 1980s , three ( 3 ) measures to incorporate the Bacliff area failed by wide margins . In April 1985 , residents of Bacliff , Bayview , and San Leon considered an incorporation proposal to become the City of Bayshore . Judge Ray Holbrook signed an order for the election to take place on April 6 , 1985 , freeing the area , which had a population of 11 @,@ 000 , from the extraterritorial jurisdiction of League City and Texas City . Residents rejected the incorporation proposal . The vote was tallied with 1 @,@ 268 against and 399 in favor . Proponents wanted a local police force and the ability to pass ordinances . Opponents said that the tax base was too small to support municipal services including police and road and drainage improvements . 
 By 1986 , the community became a bedroom community for workers commuting to jobs in the area ; during that year the Bacliff community had 4 @,@ 851 residents and 19 businesses . 
 In 1986 , residents in Bacliff and Bayview considered incorporating into a general law city . Supporters said that incorporation would establish more local control over affairs , an area police department , and the ability to pass ordinances . Opponents said that the area 's tax base could not sufficiently support municipal service , including police protection and road and drainage improvements . At the time the area of 3 @.@ 6 square miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km2 ) considering incorporation had 7 @,@ 000 people . Galveston County Judge Ray Holbrook signed an order setting the date of the election as Saturday , August 9 , 1986 and releasing the area from the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Kemah , League City , and Texas City . In 1986 , the Bacliff and Bayview area received water and sewer services from two municipal utility districts ; if the incorporation measure had passed the districts would have likely remained . Donna Maples , vice president of the Bacliff @-@ Bayview Community Association , supported the incorporation measure . The officials overseeing the election described turnout as " heavy . " Officials announced that the incorporation proposal failed on a 770 to 163 count . In 2000 Bacliff and San Leon formed a nine member board to prepare the communities for incorporation . At that time Bacliff and San Leon had a combined population of 10 @,@ 000 . The board was to have three members from the Bacliff area , three members from the San Leon area , and three at large members . It was prompted after the City of Texas City suddenly annexed several commercial parcels along Texas State Highway 146 between Kemah and Dickinson Bayou in the year 2000 . The board hoped to convince Texas City to reverse the annexation . 
 In 2003 , the P. H. Robinson power plant was mothballed by Texas Genco . The plant was mothballed due to the proliferation of newer gas @-@ fired merchant plants in Texas . Robinson Units 1 @-@ 4 had 2 @,@ 213 MW . The plant was decommissioned in 2009 and demolished in 2012 . In 2013 , NRG began construction on a 6 unit electrical generation " peaking plant " . This plant was scheduled to be in service by June 1 , 2014 
 After Hurricane Ike hit Texas in September 2008 , Galveston County officials offered a debris removal program to residents in unincorporated areas , including Bacliff . Flooding from hurricane Ike was minimized due in part to Bacliff 's relatively high elevation of 16 feet . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Bacliff is a Census class code U5 , populated area located at 29 ° 30 ' 24 " N , 94 ° 59 ' 31 " W. 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 2 @.@ 7 square miles ( 7 @.@ 0 km2 ) , of which 2 @.@ 5 square miles ( 6 @.@ 6 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 15 square miles ( 0 @.@ 4 km2 ) , or 5 @.@ 85 % , is water . Bacliff is east of League City , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Kemah , 16 miles ( 26 km ) northeast of Galveston , and 36 miles ( 58 km ) southeast of Downtown Houston . Most of the area is along the Galveston Bay , east of Texas State Highway 146 . 
 The Bacliff , San Leon , and Bayview communities form the " Bayshore " area . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 8 @,@ 619 people , 3 @,@ 022 households , and 2 @,@ 095 families residing in the CDP . This represented a growth of approximately 23 @.@ 8 % since the 2000 census . The population density was 3 @,@ 405 @.@ 4 people per square mile . The racial makeup of the CDP was 74 @.@ 3 % White , 3 @.@ 5 % African American , 0 @.@ 7 % Native American , 2 @.@ 8 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 15 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 7 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 37 @.@ 1 % of the population . 
 There were 3 @,@ 022 households , out of which 34 @.@ 3 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 47 @.@ 9 % were married couples living together , 14 @.@ 2 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 30 @.@ 7 % were non @-@ families . 24 @.@ 1 % of all households were made up of individuals and 6 @.@ 9 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 87 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 41 . 
 In the CDP the population was spread out with 18 @.@ 7 % under the age of 18 years , 7 @.@ 5 % from 18 to 24 years , 31 @.@ 3 % from 25 to 44 years , 22 @.@ 5 % from 45 to 64 , and 8 @.@ 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 32 @.@ 6 years . For every 100 females there were 100 @.@ 3 males . 
 As of 2012 most residents of Bacliff are commuters . As of 2012 Bacliff , Bayview , and San Leon together make up the largest unincorporated community in the mainland portion of Galveston County by population . 
 In 2008 <unk> Cassady Le , an outreach coordinator of Boat People SOS Houston , said that in Bacliff and San Leon there were between 150 and 200 Vietnamese families with origins in crab , oyster , and shrimp fishing operations . According to Le , most of the Vietnamese have no house or boat insurance , and even if they did have this insurance , their English is not well developed enough to read the terms of the policies . Many families had hand @-@ made boats that were constructed over several years as the owner made more and more money . Nick <unk> of The Galveston County Daily News said that the Vietnamese community in Bacliff and San Leon had a " tradition of self @-@ reliance and wariness of outsiders . " 
 The Vietnamese first moved into the Galveston Bay Area in the 1970s and established shrimping businesses with borrowed money . By the early 1980s , many native residents in the area became angered and a conflict started between the groups . Because media groups portrayed White residents as , in the words of Bob Burtman of the Houston Press , " bigoted rednecks , " many residents had a suspicion of the media ; Burtman said that the media had exaggerated the importance of Ku Klux Klan involvement in that conflict . Due to the conflict , local residents had also gained anti @-@ government feelings that were present in 1997 . That year , Burtman said " For the most part , the Vietnamese and Texan <unk> have ironed out their differences , though mistrust remains . " 
 = = Crime = = 
 As of 2008 ( Originally started in 1995 ) Bacliff had the 4th Street Bloods ( <unk> ) , a street gang consisting of mostly White Americans . The name of the gang originates from its headquarters in Bacliff . Documents filed in federal court stated that the gang was formed by six people in the mid @-@ 1990s . Cindy George of the Houston Chronicle said " The gang purportedly makes money by selling powdered and crack cocaine as well as methamphetamine . " To identify themselves , members wore red and had tattoos that read " 4th Street Playa " and " Kliff Side " . 
 In 2008 the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) Texas City Safe Street Task Force , the Galveston County Sheriff 's Office , and other agencies started an investigation into the gang . That year , 10 people were arrested , accused of drug charges . In 2011 the Federal Government of the United States arrested four men from Bacliff , accusing to be a part of the gang and charging them crimes related to crack cocaine distribution . In 2011 12 people accused of being members faced drug charges . In 2012 a federal judge in Houston sentenced four <unk> men to prison . They had pleaded guilty to their crimes . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Two municipal utility districts serve the Bacliff CDP . Some sections of the Bacliff CDP are served by the Bacliff Municipal Utility District ( MUD ) , while other sections are served by the Bayview MUD . In November 2011 the Bacliff MUD requested and received an 8 @.@ 95 million dollar bond issue for the expansion of water services which are currently provided to about 2 @,@ 700 water taps . This bond issue will be funded by Bacliff residents through increased property taxes . In addition to water / sewer service , the Bacliff MUD became responsible for administering trash collection as of February 2016 . The Bacliff Volunteer Fire Department provides fire protection services . In 2010 , under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act , the fire department got a $ 356 @,@ 320 loan and a $ 191 @,@ 854 grant from the United States Department of Agriculture Rural Development . The department used it to buy a newly built pumper fire truck . 
 As of January 2014 Bacliff resident James <unk> was the General Manager of the Bacliff MUD and the Fire Chief for the Bacliff Volunteer Fire Department . 
 = = = County , state , and federal representation = = = 
 The community is within the boundaries of Galveston County Commissioners ' Court Precinct 1 . As of 2014 , Ryan <unk> is the Commissioner of the precinct . The Galveston County Sheriff 's Office is the primary provider of law enforcement for Bacliff . In November 2012 , Rick Sharp was elected constable of Precinct 1 , replacing Pam Matranga . The Galveston County Precinct 1 Justice of the Peace court is located in Bacliff , as of April , 2015 the Justice of the Peace was Alison Cox On January 26 , 2016 a new Law Enforcement Center , located on Grand Avenue at 12th St , was opened . This building was a former illegal gambling hall and was confiscated by Galveston County , it now serves as a local base of operations for the Galveston County Sheriff 's Department and Galveston County Precinct 1 Constable 's office . 
 Bacliff is located in District 23 of the Texas House of Representatives . As of 2016 , Wayne Faircloth represents the district . Bacliff is within District 11 of the Texas Senate ; as of 2016 Larry Taylor represents that district . 
 Bacliff is in Texas 's 14th Congressional district . As of 2016 , Randy Weber represents the district . The United States Postal Service Bacliff Post Office is located at 415 Grand Avenue . 
 In 1994 Republican Party strength grew in Bacliff . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Bacliff has one local newspaper which has been published weekly in Bacliff and distributed free of charge since 1986 , The Eagle Point Press Also circulated in Bacliff on a monthly basis is The <unk> News , which is published in San Leon 
 = = Economy = = 
 Bacliff , like San Leon , and Bayview , originated as a fishing community . In 2012 T.J. <unk> of the Galveston County Daily News stated that much of the area 's economic influence moved to the corridor along Texas State Highway 146 , and that the economy adjusted with the growth of retail food service outlets and bars . Like San Leon and Bayview , many residents in Bacliff commute to work in Houston . 
 Bacliff CDP had 3 @,@ 147 employed civilians as of the 2000 Census , including 1 @,@ 360 females . Of the civilian workers , 2 @,@ 435 ( 77 @.@ 4 % ) were private for profit wage and salary workers . Of them 56 ( 1 @.@ 8 % of the total Bacliff CDP civilian workforce ) were employees of their own corporations , 82 ( 2 @.@ 6 % ) were private non @-@ profit wage and salary workers , 151 ( 4 @.@ 8 % ) worked for local governments , 144 ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) were state government workers , 53 ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) were federal workers , 268 ( 9 @.@ 3 % ) were self @-@ employed , and 14 of them ( less than 1 % of the total Bacliff CDP workforce ) worked in agriculture , forestry , fishing , or hunting . 14 ( Less than 1 % ) were unpaid family workers . 
 = = Education = = 
 Some of the areas within the Bacliff CDP fall under the boundary of Dickinson Independent School District ( DISD ) , while northern areas are zoned to Clear Creek Independent School District ( CCISD ) . The CCISD part of the community north of Bay Avenue is within the Board of Trustee District 5 , represented by Dee Scott as of 2014 . 
 The DISD portion is zoned to Kenneth E. Little Elementary School in the Bacliff community in unincorporated Galveston County . 
 The current 92 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 8 @,@ 500 m2 ) facility , on a 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) campus , has 33 classrooms and capacity for about 750 students . The architect of the building was Bay Architects and the construction company was Falcon Group Construction . Construction began in the year 2000 and completion was scheduled for June 2001 . The cost was $ 7 @.@ 5 million . Classrooms are arranged in pods organized by grade level . Each pod has a commons area . The school has a lighthouse motif reflecting its proximity to the Galveston Bay . The school entrance has a frosted dome , pyramidal skylight . The previous school building was located on the same site . Portions of the original building were to be demolished after students moved into the new school facility . 
 Residents of the DISD portion are also zoned to Barber Middle School in Dickinson , McAdams Junior High School in Dickinson , and Dickinson High School in Dickinson . CCISD pupils are zoned to Stewart Elementary School ( formerly Kemah Elementary School ) in unincorporated Galveston County , League City Intermediate School in League City , and Clear Falls High School in League City . Previously residents were zoned to Clear Creek High School in League City . 
 Residents are zoned to the College of the Mainland , a community college in Texas City . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 Along the Galveston Bay Bacliff has several boat ramps . 
 The Galveston County Department of Parks and Senior Services operates several recreational facilities in Bacliff . The Bacliff Community Center is at <unk> 11th Street . The 28 @-@ acre ( 110 @,@ 000 m2 ) Bayshore Park at <unk> East Farm to Market Road 646 ( FM 646 ) has five baseball fields , one boat ramp , one historic site , ten picnic areas , one pier , one playground , and five practice <unk> . The 25 @-@ acre ( 10 ha ) park was originally owned by Texas Genco for 35 years ; the county operated the park according to an agreement . In 2005 Texas Genco donated the park to the county . Many anglers and their families use Bayshore Park as a place of recreation . In 2014 Galveston County purchased and cleared a new 64 acre tract in Bacliff which will become a new park for the Bayshore area . 
 The Bacliff Boat Ramp is located behind Clifton 's Seaside Diner , while the Bayshore Park Boat Ramp is located on Farm to Market Road 646 , aka Bayshore Drive . The nearest full service marina is the Eagle Point fishing camp , located off East Bayshore Drive in San Leon . In March 2012 the Galveston County Commissioners Court voted unanimously to approve a $ 25 @,@ 000 earnest money contract associated with the purchase of approximately 64 @.@ 06 acres of vacant land in Bacliff for $ 1 @.@ 285 million for a new County park . 
 As of 2012 the most popular restaurant in Bacliff is Clifton ’ s Seaside Diner , which refers to Bacliff 's original name . T.J. <unk> of The Galveston County Daily News said that Bacliff , San Leon , and Bayview " are known for great spots to eat seafood . " 
 As of 1991 Bacliff , along with Kemah and Seabrook , houses pleasure boats from NASA employees due to its proximity to the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Floyd Tillman 
 = Hurricane Darby ( 2004 ) = 
 Hurricane Darby was the first Eastern Pacific major hurricane since Hurricane Kenna in 2002 . The sixth tropical cyclone , fourth named storm , and second hurricane of the 2004 Pacific hurricane season , Darby developed from a tropical wave that emerged from the west coast of Africa on July 12 . After crossing into the Eastern Pacific , the storm became a tropical depression on June 26 . The system steadily intensified , and became a hurricane on 000 UTC July 28 . Darby peaked as a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , though it quickly deteriorated due to cooler waters and increasing wind shear . While Darby dissipated on August 1 , the remnants of the tropical cyclone affected the Hawaiian Islands . The system produced high waves and heavy rainfall that led to extensive flash flooding . Numerous roads were closed , while minor landslides and rockslides were reported . Despite the effects , no fatalities or severe damages occurred . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa on July 12 and entered the Atlantic Ocean . The wave progressed westward , crossing the Atlantic and Caribbean Sea before crossing into the Eastern Pacific on July 20 . The west began to exhibit signs of development on July 23 . The next day , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted an associated area of showers and thunderstorms , indicating that gradual development was possible . The system had become better organized and on July 25 , the NHC continued to remark upon the potential for the weak low pressure area — accompanied by disorganized convective activity — to develop . On July 26 , the system became better @-@ organized , and under favorable conditions it was upgraded to a tropical depression at 1200 UTC , while located about 760 miles ( 1 @,@ 220 km ) to the south @-@ southwest of Cabo San Lucas , Mexico . Under the steering currents of a subtropical ridge of high pressure , the depression continued moving westward . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression contained a somewhat well @-@ defined low @-@ level center of circulation , as well as convective banding . Based on Dvorak classifications , the storm was upgraded to a tropical storm at 0000 UTC on July 27 ; as the fourth tropical storm of the 2004 season , it was named Darby by the NHC . Darby continued to intensify , with established outflow and a well @-@ defined banding feature . Later that day , forecasters predicted the storm to peak as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Darby was upgraded to a hurricane at 0000 UTC on July 28 , at which time it began to turn towards the northwest . An eye , embedded within the deep convection , developed later in the day . Darby attained Category 2 intensity at around 1800 UTC , and it rapidly strengthened to Category 3 , becoming the first Eastern Pacific major hurricane since Hurricane Kenna of the 2002 season . 
 Shortly after peaking in intensity , Darby moved over coolers waters and began to deteriorate . The eye became less well @-@ defined and the associated convection started weakening . Increasingly colder waters and growing wind shear continued to affect Darby , and the cyclone weakened to a tropical storm on July 30 . The low @-@ level center of circulation became exposed from the thunderstorm activity , and the storm quickly degenerated into a swirl of clouds , although it maintained tropical storm strength . On July 31 , it weakened to a tropical depression . Darby soon crossed into the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , and it dissipated as a tropical cyclone on August 1 . However , its remnants continued westward under the low @-@ level trade winds , and dropped heavy rainfall on Hawaii several days after the cyclone dissipated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Upon reaching the Hawaiian Islands , the remnants of Darby contributed to heavy rainfall and high winds , prompting the issuance of flash flood watch . Along the eastern shores of Kauai , Oahu , Molokai , Maui , and the Island of Hawaii , the system generated 4 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) swells . The Honolulu Airport reported a daily record of 2 @.@ 92 inches ( 74 mm ) of rainfall , breaking the previous record of 0 @.@ 96 inches ( 24 mm ) set in 1948 . Elsewhere , parts of Maui reported in excess of 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of precipitation , while 4 @.@ 6 inches ( 120 mm ) fell on Oahu . The rainfall was beneficial in some areas , where dry conditions had persisted . Although crop damage from the storm system was limited , some farming operations were postponed and some coffee and not trees were damaged . Along the eastern shores of several Hawaiian Islands , the storm system triggered surf of 4 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The heavy rainfall resulted in flash flooding throughout several areas . On Oahu , roads and some structures were flooded , and minor landslides were reported . On the island , telephone and electrical service were disrupted . At one location , a large boulder rolled down a hillside and struck a fire hydrant ; firefighters were called to shut it off . On Kauai , the Wailua River exceeded flood stage on August 4 . Small stream and drainage ditch flooding was reported in the Kau District of Hawaii . Excessive runoff around Kailua @-@ Kona resulted in extensive flooding that forced the closure of five schools , submerged several roads , and triggered rockslides . Due to high water , several roads , including part of the <unk> Highway on Maui , were temporarily shut down . A portion of the Kamehameha Highway was also closed after being submerged under waters of up to 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) deep . Despite the flooding , neither Darby nor its remnant moisture caused any casualties or severe property damage . 
 = The Testament of Dr. Mabuse = 
 The Testament of Dr. Mabuse ( German : Das Testament des Dr. Mabuse ) is a 1933 German crime film directed by Fritz Lang . The movie is a sequel to Lang 's silent film Dr. Mabuse the Gambler ( 1922 ) and features many cast and crew members from Lang 's previous films . The film features Rudolf Klein @-@ Rogge as Dr. Mabuse who is in an insane asylum where he is found frantically writing his crime plans . When Mabuse 's criminal plans begin to be implemented , Inspector Lohmann ( played by Otto Wernicke ) tries to find the solution with clues from gangster Thomas Kent ( Gustav <unk> ) , the institutionalized Hofmeister ( Karl Meixner ) and Professor Baum ( Oscar Beregi Sr. ) who becomes obsessed with Dr. Mabuse . 
 The Testament of Dr. Mabuse was based on elements of author Norbert Jacques ' novel Mabuse 's Colony . It was Lang 's second sound film for Nero @-@ Film and was his final collaboration with his wife and screenwriter Thea von Harbou . To promote the film to a foreign market , a French @-@ language version of the film was made by Lang with the same sets but different actors with the title Le Testament du Dr. Mabuse . 
 When Adolf Hitler rose to power , Joseph Goebbels became Minister of Propaganda and banned the film in Germany , suggesting that the film would decrease the audience 's confidence in its statesmen . The French @-@ language and German @-@ language versions of the film were released in Europe while several versions of the film were released in the United States to mixed reception with each re @-@ release . The sequel The Thousand Eyes of Dr. Mabuse ( 1960 ) was also directed by Lang . Modern reception of the film is favorable with critics , while the film has influenced filmmakers including Claude Chabrol and Artur Brauner . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a noisy print shop , a disgraced police detective named Hofmeister ( Karl Meixner ) escapes from pursuing criminals ' attacks . Hofmeister telephones his former superior Inspector Karl Lohmann ( Otto Wernicke ) and explains frantically that he has discovered a huge criminal conspiracy . Before he can disclose the identity of responsible criminal , the lights go out , shots are fired , and Hofmeister becomes mad . Hofmeister vanishes only to be found later singing every time he feels watched , and he is institutionalized at Professor Baum 's asylum . 
 Professor Baum ( Oscar Beregi , Sr. ) introduces the case of Dr. Mabuse ( Rudolf Klein @-@ Rogge ) , the criminal mastermind and hypnotist who ten years earlier went mad . Mabuse spends his days frantically writing detailed plans for crimes while a criminal gang is committing them according to " the plans of the Doctor " , with whom they confer only from behind a curtain . When Baum 's colleague Dr. Kramm ( Theodor Loos ) by chance discovers that recent crimes implement Mabuse 's writings , Kramm is shot by the gang 's execution squad , Hardy and Bredow . A clue scratched in a glass window pane at Hofmeister 's crime scene causes Lohmann to suspect Mabuse . On arrival at the asylum , Baum reveals that Mabuse has died . When Lohmann disparagingly talks about " Mabuse the criminal " , Baum emphatically speaks about " Mabuse the genius " . 
 Baum continues to study Mabuse 's writings and seems to confer with the ghostly Dr. Mabuse . The spirit of Mabuse speaks about an " unlimited reign of crime " and merges with the Professor 's silhouette . During the same night , a hidden figure confers with sections of his organisation , preparing various crimes such as an attack on a chemical plant , robbing a bank , counterfeiting , poisoning water and destroying harvests . One of the gang members , Thomas Kent ( Gustav Diesel ) , is conflicted between his criminal work , which he needs to do for money , and his affection for a young woman named Lilli ( Wera <unk> ) . Lilli , devoted to Kent , begs him to confide in her . Kent confesses his past and his current situation to her . The two decide to inform the police but are abducted and locked in the strange meeting room with the curtain . The hidden figure announces their death when they discover that the curtained alcove contains only a loudspeaker and that there is a time @-@ bomb . After several escape attempts have failed , they flood the place to lessen the impact of the explosion and break free when the time @-@ bomb goes off . 
 Meanwhile the police are besieging a flat where several gangsters , including Hardy and Bredow , are staying . After a shootout , Hardy commits suicide while the other gangsters surrender . As Bredow testifies that they assassinated Dr. Kramm in the vicinity of the asylum , Lohmann arranges a confrontation between the gangsters and the Professor , which proves inconclusive . On Kent and Lilli 's arrival , Baum 's shocked reaction to Kent makes Lohmann suspicious . Lohmann and Kent visit the asylum , where they discover that Baum is the mastermind and has planned an attack on a chemical plant that night . Lohmann and Kent go to the exploding plant where they discover Baum watching from afar . Baum flees to the asylum with Lohmann and Kent pursuing . Mabuse 's spirit leads Baum to Hofmeister in his cell where he introduces himself as Dr. Mabuse , ending Hofmeister 's shock . Baum tries to kill Hofmeister but is stopped by guards , just as Lohmann and Kent arrive . The final scene shows the insane Baum in the cell , tearing Mabuse 's writings to shreds . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Norbert Jacques wrote the original Dr. Mabuse books in the style of other popular thrillers in Europe at the time , such as Nick Carter , <unk> , and Fu Manchu . Jacques expanded the traits of these books to include critiques on Weimar Germany . During 1930 , Jacques was approached by a film producer to develop a story for a new Dr. Mabuse film with a female villain . This caused Jacques to start writing a new novel called Mabuse 's Colony . In the novel , a character named Frau Kristine obtains a copy of Mabuse 's testament which outlines plans for a future world of terrorism and crime that she uses . 
 At this time , Lang and his wife Thea von Harbou were developing the film M. Von Harbou and Lang were friends with Jacques since creating the first Mabuse film Dr. Mabuse the Gambler and went on vacation with each other . Lang asked Jacques for help with the screenplay for M and asked for suggestions for a new Mabuse project . Jacques sent Lang his unfinished work for Mabuse 's Colony . Lang used the idea of Mabuse 's will from the story and began working on an outline to what would become The Testament of Dr. Mabuse . 
 Using the outline that Lang proposed , Jacques signed a contract during July 1931 for the movie to be written by von Harbou and directed by Lang based on Lang 's own outline . The film was released in tandem with Jacques 's book . Jacques ' contributions are not mentioned in the film . The Testament of Dr. Mabuse is a direct sequel to Dr. Mabuse the Gambler and is related to the film M which features the Inspector Lohmann character . 
 = = = Preproduction = = = 
 Many members of the cast and crew had worked with Lang on his earlier films . Rudolf Klein @-@ Rogge returned to play Dr. Mabuse as he did in Dr. Mabuse the Gambler . Klein @-@ Rogge acted in Lang 's earlier films including Destiny , Die Nibelungen , Metropolis and Spies . Otto Wernicke reprises his role as Inspector Lohmann from Lang 's M. Klaus Pohl plays Lohmann 's assistant Muller . Pohl acted in Lang 's Woman in the Moon and in an uncredited role in M. 
 The Testament of Dr. Mabuse was Lang 's second film for the company Nero @-@ Film and producer Seymour Nebenzal . The film would be the last film collaboration between Lang and his wife Thea von Harbou , who had worked with Lang on all his directorial efforts since Destiny . Lang 's relationship with von Harbou was ending and the two would file divorce papers during 1933 . Cinematographer Fritz Arno Wagner returned to work with Lang . Their film credits together include M , Spies and Destiny . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Lang filmed The Testament of Dr. Mabuse at the end of 1932 and the beginning of 1933 , desiring to have the film viewed worldwide . In his film , where gun @-@ play , fires , or explosions are needed , Lang often used real weapons . In the opening scene during a power outage , a stunt actor did the gun play . Cinematographer Fritz Arno Wagner stated that he spent most of the production in a state of panic due to the way Lang would endanger his crew . The film is generally filmed in a realistic style with the exception of Mabuse 's ghostly appearances throughout the film . Lang admitted later in interviews that if he could re @-@ do the film , he would not have included these supernatural scenes . 
 Wagner filmed the explosion scenes at the factory on location during nighttime . These explosion scenes were the first scenes of the film to be filmed before returning to the studio to film the rest of the film . The film crew had three weeks to prepare for the factory scene by clearing trees and bringing in some artificial trees to match Lang 's idea for the scene . The explosion was triggered by Lang himself . 
 During the early years of sound films before dubbing and subtitling , one way to present a film to a foreign audience was to record the film with a translated screenplay with foreign @-@ language cast . As this was a time consuming and expensive procedure , most filmmakers who did this tended to only make one alternative language feature . Producer Seymour Nebenzal felt that creating this alternative version would enhance international sales for The Testament of Dr. Mabuse . The French @-@ language screenplay was adapted by René <unk> . Lang was fluent in French and directed The Testament of Dr. Mabuse in both French and German . Actor Karl Meixner played Hofmeister in both versions of the film as he was bilingual . Rudolf Klein @-@ Rogge also features as Mabuse in the French version with his lines being dubbed . The French version , titled Le Testament du Dr. Mabuse , was edited by Lothar Wolff in France while the film was still in production . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 For the film , Lang commissioned a composer for the first time . Hans Erdmann created the opening theme and the music played during Professor Baum 's madness . The soundtrack in the film is deceptive . As in Lang 's M , the film 's music and sound are a subtle mix of actual silence with accompanying music and more or less realistic sound effects . Lang worked with his German editor Conrad von Molo directly on the post @-@ production process . Lang was known for making very long films and to suit foreign fashions , editor Lothar Wolff was contracted to shorten the French @-@ language version . This version deletes parts from the romantic sub @-@ plot between Lilli and Kent . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was scheduled for release on March 24 , 1933 at the UFA @-@ Palast am Zoo , the same theater that hosted the original premiere of Dr. Mabuse the Gambler during 1922 . Adolf Hitler came to power at the end of January 1933 and on March 14 , Hitler established the new Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda headed by Joseph Goebbels . Lang had not finished editing the film , and would not have a print for Goebbels to view until March 23 . After a screening for Goebbels , he declared that the premiere would be delayed for technical reasons . Goebbels hosted a meeting at his home between himself , Lang and several other German filmmakers on discussions on what films would be permitted by Nazi censorship . Goebbels referred to Lang 's films as the style that Hitler wanted for Nazi Germany . By March 30 , the Ministry of Propaganda banned The Testament of Dr. Mabuse as a menace to public health and safety . Goebbels stated that he would not accept the film as it " showed that an extremely dedicated group of people are perfectly capable of overthrowing any state with violence " . During the 1940s , Lang stated that a meeting occurred between Goebbels and himself with Goebbels wanting Lang to work for him to create films for the Nazis . This offer caused Lang to leave Germany to France that very night . Goebbels ' diary makes no mention of such a meeting and Lang 's passport also shows that he did not leave until June and made repeated trips between France and Germany throughout 1933 . 
 The German version of The Testament of Dr. Mabuse premiered on April 21 , 1933 in Budapest , Hungary with a playing time of 124 minutes . The French @-@ language version was distributed through Europe . A subtitled version of the French version was released during 1943 with the title The Last Will of Dr. Mabuse in the United States . During 1951 , the German version was released in a 75 minute version with the title The Crimes of <unk> which featured an English dub . The English subtitles for the 1943 release and the 1952 dub added allusions to Adolf Hitler that were not part of the original script . The Testament of Dr. Mabuse was first shown publicly in Germany on August 24 , 1961 with a 111 @-@ minute running time . During 1973 , the unedited German version of the film was released in the United States with the title The Testament of Dr. Mabuse with English subtitles . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 During 1938 , Goebbels wrote that on looking at the film that he was " struck by the dullness of its portrayal , the coarseness of its construction , and the inadequacy of its acting . " Despite Goebbels statement , he would present the film uncensored from time to time in private screening rooms for close personal friends . On the French release , The New York Times wrote that " It is the French version of Fritz Lang 's production , " Le Testament du Dr. Mabuse " ( " Dr. Mabuse 's Will " ) . It is a hallucinating and horrifying story , depicted with great power and the extraordinary beauty of photography that Lang has led his admirers to expect . " At the Hungarian premiere of the German @-@ language print in 1933 , Variety wrote that the film " ... certainly shows the influence of American mystery pictures . The story is very long @-@ winded and even an ingenious director like Fritz Lang could not prevent its being rather slow @-@ moving in places . " 
 Bosley Crowther wrote a negative review in The New York Times on the film 's 1943 release , stating " it is a good , old film , well played and beautifully directed – but a battered antique , none the less . " On the 1973 re @-@ release , the same newspaper wrote a positive review of the film , stating that it " yields a sensational torrent of images that almost make the early nineteen @-@ seventies seem tame . " and " While this " Mabuse " lacks most of the surrealistic effects and the dazzling hallucinations that gave its predecessor such magic , it 's rich in the images and the shocks at which Lang excelled . " Modern critical reception of the film has been generally positive . Channel 4 gave the film a four stars out of five rating describing the film as a " Sensational crime drama " and " some of the dialogue is clunky , much of the acting ... is alien to modern audiences ... The final sequence involving the destruction of a huge chemical works and a car chase through eerily lit woods , round hairpin bends and over a closing level crossing is one of the triumphs of early cinema . " TV Guide gave the film a five out of five star rating terming it " a haunting , suspenseful sequel " . Critic Leonard Maltin gave the film three and a half stars out of four and compared it to Dr. Mabuse The Gambler stating that it is " less stylized but no less entertaining " . The online film database Allmovie rated the film four stars out five , stating that by " mixing several genres including cop drama , mystery , and horror , Lang created a rare hybrid picture full of striking characters and images . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After the film 's initial release , producer Seymour Nebenzal used scenes from the car chase in The Testament of Dr. Mabuse for his own production of Le roi des Champs @-@ Élysées ( 1934 ) featuring Buster Keaton . Producer Artur Brauner cited the Dr. Mabuse films as the reason he went into the film industry , noting that he left his parents out in the middle of the night and returned after seeing what he described as " the most exciting film I 've ever seen " . Brauner later bought the rights to the Dr. Mabuse films and hired Fritz Lang to film a sequel titled The Thousand Eyes of Dr. Mabuse . The film was released during 1960 and was Lang 's final film as a director . During 1962 , a remake of The Testament of <unk> was released by director Werner <unk> . 
 Brauner produced several other Mabuse films after the release of The Thousand Eyes of Dr. Mabuse . Director Claude Chabrol identified The Testament of Dr. Mabuse as his primary inspiration to become a filmmaker . Chabrol made his own Mabuse inspired film that was released during 1990 titled Dr. M. 
 The 2008 film The Dark Knight features a version of The Joker inspired by Mabuse . Throughout the film , the character recites monologues promoting chaos & disorder which borrow heavily from Mabuse 's own in 1933 's The Testament of Dr. Mabuse . Director Christopher Nolan has stated : " I think I made Jonah ( Nolan 's brother ) watch Fritz Lang ’ s Dr. Mabuse prior to writing the Joker . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 A Region 1 DVD of The Testament of Dr. Mabuse was released by The Criterion Collection on May 18 , 2004 . This DVD release consists of two discs and contains both the German @-@ language and French @-@ language versions of the <unk> film critic Dave Kehr wrote the German print is " the definite version " . The German print of the film on the DVD is missing small parts of the film and runs at 121 minutes . A Region 2 DVD of the film was released by Eureka ! in a box set titled The Complete Fritz Lang Box Set . This set included the two other Mabuse films directed by Lang , Dr. Mabuse the Gambler and The Thousand Eyes of Dr. Mabuse . 
 = Atlantic puffin = 
 The Atlantic puffin ( Fratercula arctica ) , also known as the common puffin , is a species of seabird in the auk family . It is the only puffin native to the Atlantic Ocean ; two related species , the tufted puffin and the horned puffin , are found in the northeastern Pacific . The Atlantic puffin breeds in Iceland , Norway , Greenland , Newfoundland and many North Atlantic islands , and as far south as Maine in the west and the British Isles in the east . With a large population and a wide range , the species is not considered to be endangered , although there may be local declines in numbers . On land , it has the typical upright stance of an auk . At sea , it swims on the surface and feeds mainly on small fish , which it catches by diving underwater , using its wings for propulsion . 
 This puffin has a black crown and back , pale grey cheek patches and white underparts . Its broad , boldly marked red and black beak and orange legs contrast with its plumage . It moults while at sea in the winter and some of the bright @-@ coloured facial characteristics are lost . The external appearance of the adult male and female are identical except that the male is usually slightly larger . The juvenile has similar plumage but its cheek patches are dark grey . The juvenile does not have brightly coloured head ornamentation , its bill is less broad and is dark @-@ grey with a yellowish @-@ brown tip , and its legs and feet are also dark . Puffins from northern populations are typically larger than their counterparts in southern parts of the range . It is generally considered that these populations are different subspecies . 
 Spending the autumn and winter in the open ocean of the cold northern seas , the Atlantic puffin returns to coastal areas at the start of the breeding season in late spring . It nests in clifftop colonies , digging a burrow in which a single white egg is laid . The chick mostly feeds on whole fish and grows rapidly . After about six weeks it is fully fledged and makes its way at night to the sea . It swims away from the shore and does not return to land for several years . 
 Colonies are mostly on islands where there are no terrestrial predators but adult birds and newly fledged chicks are at risk of attacks from the air by gulls and skuas . Sometimes a bird such as an Arctic skua will harass a puffin arriving with a <unk> of fish , causing it to drop its catch . The striking appearance , large colourful bill , waddling gait and behaviour of this bird have given rise to nicknames such as " clown of the sea " and " sea parrot " . It is the official bird symbol for the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The Atlantic puffin is a species of seabird in the order Charadriiformes . It is in the auk family , Alcidae , which includes the guillemots , typical auks , murrelets , auklets , puffins and the razorbill . The rhinoceros auklet ( <unk> <unk> ) and the puffins are closely related , together composing the tribe <unk> . The Atlantic puffin is the only species in the genus Fratercula to occur in the Atlantic Ocean . Two other species are known from the northeast Pacific , the tufted puffin ( Fratercula cirrhata ) and the horned puffin ( Fratercula <unk> ) , the latter being the closest relative of the Atlantic puffin . 
 The scientific name Fratercula comes from the Medieval Latin <unk> , friar , a reference to the black and white plumage which resembles monastic robes . The specific name arctica refers to the northerly distribution of the bird , being derived from the Greek <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , the bear , referring to the northerly constellation , the Great Bear . The vernacular name puffin – puffed in the sense of swollen – was originally applied to the fatty , salted meat of young birds of the unrelated species Manx shearwater ( Puffinus puffinus ) , which in 1652 was known as the " <unk> puffin " . It is an Anglo @-@ Norman word ( Middle English <unk> or <unk> ) used for the cured carcasses . The Atlantic puffin acquired the name at a much later stage , possibly because of its similar nesting habits , and it was formally applied to Fratercula arctica by Pennant in 1768 . While the species is also known as the common puffin , " Atlantic Puffin " is the English name recommended by the International Ornithological Congress . 
 There are considered to be three subspecies : 
 Fratercula arctica arctica 
 Fratercula arctica <unk> 
 Fratercula arctica <unk> 
 The only morphological difference between the three is their size . Body length , wing length and size of beak all increase at higher latitudes . For example , a puffin from northern Iceland ( subspecies <unk> ) weighs about 650 grams ( 23 oz ) and has a wing length of 186 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 3 in ) while one from the Faroes ( subspecies <unk> ) weighs 400 grams ( 14 oz ) and has a wing length of 158 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 2 in ) . Individuals from southern Iceland ( subspecies arctica ) are intermediate between the other two in size . Ernst Mayr has argued that the differences in size are clinal and are typical of variations found in peripheral population and that no subspecies should be recognised . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Atlantic puffin is sturdily built with a thick @-@ set neck and short wings and tail . It is 28 to 30 centimetres ( 11 to 12 in ) in length from the tip of its stout bill to its blunt @-@ ended tail . Its wingspan is 47 to 63 centimetres ( 19 to 25 in ) and on land it stands about 20 cm ( 8 in ) high . The male is generally slightly larger than the female , but they are coloured alike . The forehead , crown and nape are glossy black , as are the back , wings and tail . A broad black collar extends around the neck and throat . On each side of the head is a large , lozenge @-@ shaped area of very pale grey . These face patches taper to a point and nearly meet at the back of the neck . The shape of the head creates a crease extending from the eye to the hindmost point of each patch giving the appearance of a grey streak . The eye looks almost triangular in shape because of a small , peaked area of horny blue @-@ grey skin above it and a rectangular patch below . The irises are brown or very dark blue and each has red orbital ring . The underparts of the bird , the breast , belly and undertail coverts , are white . By the end of the breeding season , the black plumage may have lost its shine or even taken on a slightly brownish tinge . The legs are short and set well back on the body giving the bird its upright stance on land . Both legs and large webbed feet are bright orange , contrasting with the sharp black claws . 
 The beak is very distinctive . From the side the beak is broad and triangular but viewed from above it is narrow . The half nearest the tip is orange @-@ red and the half nearest to the head is slate grey . There is a yellow chevron @-@ shaped ridge separating the two parts and a yellow , fleshy strip at the base of the bill . At the joint of the two mandibles there is a yellow , wrinkled rosette . The exact proportions of the beak vary with the age of the bird . In an immature individual , the beak has reached its full length but it is not as broad as that of an adult . With time the bill deepens , the upper edge curves and a kink develops at its base . As the bird ages , one or more grooves may form on the red portion . The bird has a powerful bite . 
 The characteristic bright orange bill plates and other facial characteristics develop in the spring . At the close of the breeding season , these special coatings and appendages are shed in a partial moult . This makes the beak appear less broad , the tip less bright and the base darker grey . The eye ornaments are shed and the eyes appear round . At the same time , the feathers of the head and neck are replaced and the face becomes darker . This winter plumage is seldom seen by humans because when they have left their chicks , the birds head out to sea and do not return to land until the next breeding season . The juvenile bird is similar to the adult in plumage but altogether duller with a much darker grey face and yellowish @-@ brown beak tip and legs . After fledging , it will make its way to the water and will head out to sea and not return to land for several years . In the interim , each year it will have a broader bill , paler face patches and brighter legs and beak . 
 The Atlantic puffin has a direct flight , typically 10 metres ( 33 ft ) above the sea surface and higher over the water than most other auks . It mostly moves by paddling along efficiently with its webbed feet and seldom takes to the air . It is typically silent at sea , except for the soft purring sounds it sometimes makes in flight . At the breeding colony it is quiet above ground but in its burrow makes a growling sound somewhat resembling a chainsaw being revved up . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The Atlantic puffin is a bird of the colder waters of the North Atlantic Ocean . It breeds on the coasts of north west Europe , the Arctic fringes and eastern North America . The largest colony is on Iceland where 60 % of the world 's Atlantic puffins nest . The largest colony in the western Atlantic ( estimated at more than 260 @,@ 000 pairs ) can be found at the <unk> Bay Ecological Reserve , south of St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador . Other major breeding locations include the north and west coasts of Norway , the Faroe Islands , the Shetland and Orkney islands , the west coast of Greenland and the coasts of Newfoundland . Smaller sized colonies are also found elsewhere in the British Isles , the Murmansk area of Russia , Novaya Zemlya , Spitzbergen , Labrador , Nova Scotia and Maine . Islands seem particularly attractive to the birds for breeding as compared to mainland sites . 
 While at sea , the bird ranges widely across the North Atlantic Ocean , including the North Sea , and may enter the Arctic Circle . In the summer , its southern limit stretches from northern France to Maine and in the winter the bird may range as far south as the Mediterranean Sea and North Carolina . These oceanic waters have such a vast extent of 15 to 30 million square kilometres ( 6 to 12 million square miles ) that each bird has more than a square kilometre at its disposal and it is unsurprising that they are seldom seen out at sea . In Maine , light level <unk> have been attached to the legs of puffins which store information on their whereabouts . The birds need to be re @-@ captured in order to access the information , a difficult task . One bird was found to have covered 4 @,@ 800 miles ( 7 @,@ 700 km ) of ocean in eight months , traveling northwards to the northern Labrador Sea then southeastward to the mid @-@ Atlantic before returning to land . 
 In a long @-@ lived bird with a small clutch size such as the Atlantic puffin , the survival rate of adults is an important factor influencing the success of the species . Only 5 % of the ringed puffins that failed to reappear at the colony did so during the breeding season . The rest were lost some time between departing from land in the summer and reappearing the following spring . The birds spend the winter widely spread out in the open ocean , though there is a tendency for individuals from different colonies to overwinter in different areas . Little is known of their behaviour and diet at sea but no correlation was found between environmental factors , such as temperature variations , and their mortality rate . A combination of the availability of food in winter and summer probably influences the survival of the birds , since individuals starting the winter in poor condition are less likely to survive than those in good condition . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Like many seabirds , the Atlantic puffin spends most of the year far from land in the open ocean and only visits coastal areas to breed . It is a sociable bird and it usually breeds in large colonies . 
 = = = At sea = = = 
 Atlantic puffins lead solitary existences when out at sea and this part of their life has been little studied as the task of finding even one bird on the vast ocean is formidable . When at sea , the Atlantic puffin bobs about like a cork , propelling itself through the water with powerful thrusts of its feet and keeping itself turned into the wind , even when resting and apparently asleep . It spends much time each day preening to keep its plumage in order and spread oil from the preen gland . Its downy under @-@ plumage remains dry and provides thermal insulation . In common with other seabirds , its upper surface is black and underside white . This provides camouflage , with aerial predators unable to observe the bird against the dark watery background and underwater attackers failing to notice it as it blends in with the bright sky above the waves . 
 When it takes off , the Atlantic puffin patters across the surface of the water while vigorously flapping its wings , before launching itself into the air . The size of the wing is a compromise between its uses above and below water and its surface area is small relative to the bird 's weight . To maintain flight , the wings need to beat very rapidly at a rate of several times each second . The bird 's flight is direct and low over the surface of the water and it can travel at 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) per hour . Landing is awkward ; it either crashes into a wave crest or , in calmer water , does a belly flop . While at sea , the Atlantic puffin has its annual moult . Land birds mostly lose their primaries one pair at a time to enable them still to be able to fly , but the puffin sheds all its primaries at one time and dispenses with flight entirely for a month or two . The moult usually takes place between January and March but young birds may lose their feathers a little later in the year . 
 = = = Food and feeding = = = 
 The Atlantic puffin diet consists almost entirely of fish , though examination of its stomach contents shows that it occasionally eats shrimps , other crustaceans , molluscs and polychaete worms , especially in more coastal waters . When fishing , it swims underwater using its semi @-@ extended wings as paddles to " fly " through the water and its feet as a rudder . It swims fast and can reach considerable depths and stay submerged for up to a minute . It can eat shallow @-@ bodied fish as long as 18 cm ( 7 in ) but its prey is commonly smaller fish , around 7 cm ( 3 in ) long . It has been estimated that an adult bird needs to eat about forty of these per day — sand eels , herring , <unk> and capelin being the most often consumed . It fishes by sight and can swallow small fish while submerged , but larger specimens are brought to the surface . It can catch several small fish in one dive , holding the first ones in place in its beak with its muscular , grooved tongue while it catches others . The two mandibles are hinged in such a way that they can be held parallel to hold a row of fish in place and these are also retained by inward @-@ facing serrations on the edges of the beak . It copes with the excess salt that it swallows partly through its kidneys and partly by excretion through specialised salt glands in its nostrils . 
 = = = On land = = = 
 In the spring , mature birds return to land , usually to the colony at which they were hatched . Birds that were removed as chicks and released elsewhere were found to show fidelity to their point of liberation . They congregate for a few days on the sea in small groups offshore before returning to the cliff top nesting sites . Each large puffin colony is subdivided into sub @-@ colonies by physical boundaries such as stands of bracken or gorse . Early arrivals take control of the best locations , the most desirable nesting sites being the densely packed burrows on grassy slopes just above the cliff edge where take @-@ off is most easily accomplished . The birds are usually monogamous , but this is the result of their fidelity to their nesting sites rather than to their mates and they often return to the same burrows year after year . Later arrivals at the colony may find that all the best nesting sites have already been taken and be pushed towards the periphery where they are in greater danger of predation . Younger birds may come ashore a month or more after the mature birds and find no remaining nesting sites . They will not breed till the following year although it has been found that if the ground cover surrounding the colony is cut back before these sub @-@ adults arrive , the number of successfully nesting pairs may be increased . 
 Atlantic puffins are cautious when approaching the colony and no bird likes to land in a location where other puffins are not already present . They make several circuits of the colony before alighting . On the ground they spend much time preening , spreading oil from their preen gland and setting each feather in its correct position with beak or claw . They also spend time standing by their burrow entrances and interacting with passing birds . Dominance is shown by an upright stance , with fluffed chest feathers and cocked tail , an exaggerated slow walk , head jerking and gaping . Submissive birds lower their head and hold their body horizontal and scurry past dominant individuals . Birds normally signal their intention to take off by briefly lowering their body before running down the slope to gain momentum . If a bird is startled and takes off unexpectedly , a panic can spread through the colony with all the birds launching themselves into the air and wheeling around in a great circle . The colony is at its most active in the evening , with birds standing outside their burrows , resting on the turf or strolling around . Then the slopes empty for the night as the birds fly out to sea to roost , often choosing to do so at fishing grounds ready for early morning provisioning . 
 The puffins are energetic burrow @-@ engineers and repairers and the grassy slopes may be undermined by a network of tunnels . This causes the turf to dry out in summer , vegetation to die and dry soil be whirled away by the wind . Burrows sometimes collapse , and humans may cause this to happen by walking incautiously across nesting slopes . A colony on <unk> was lost through erosion when there was so little soil left that burrows could not be made . New colonies are very unlikely to start up spontaneously because this gregarious bird will only nest where others are already present . Nevertheless , the Audubon Society had success on Eastern Egg Rock Island in Maine , where , after a gap of ninety years , puffins were reintroduced and started breeding again . By 2011 there were over 120 pairs nesting on the small islet . On the Isle of May on the other side of the Atlantic , only five pairs of puffins were breeding in 1958 while twenty years later there were 10 @,@ 000 pairs . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Having spent the winter alone on the ocean , it is unclear whether the Atlantic puffin meets its previous partner offshore or whether they encounter each other when they return to their nest of the previous year . On land , they soon set about improving and clearing out the burrow . Often , one stands outside the entrance while the other excavates , kicking out quantities of soil and grit that showers the partner standing outside . Some birds collect stems and fragments of dry grasses as nesting materials but others do not bother . Sometimes a <unk> of materials is taken underground , only to be brought out again and discarded . Apart from nest @-@ building , the other way in which the birds restore their bond is by billing . This is a practice in which the pair approach each other , each wagging its head from side to side , and then rattle their beaks together . This seems to be an important element of their courtship behaviour because it happens repeatedly , and the birds continue to bill , to a lesser extent , throughout the breeding season . 
 The Atlantic puffin is sexually mature at the age of four to five years . The birds are colonial nesters , excavating burrows on grassy clifftops or reusing existing holes , and may also nest in crevices and amongst rocks and scree on occasion . It is in competition with other birds and animals for burrows . It can excavate its own hole or move into a pre @-@ existing system dug by a rabbit and has been known to peck and drive off the original occupant . Manx shearwaters also nest underground and often live in their own burrows alongside puffins , and their burrowing activities may break through into the puffin 's living quarters resulting in the loss of the egg . They are monogamous ( they mate for life ) and give biparental care to their young . The male spends more time guarding and maintaining the nest while the female is more involved in incubation and feeding the chick . 
 Egg @-@ laying starts in April in more southerly colonies but seldom occurs before June in Greenland . The female lays a single white egg each year but if this is lost early in the breeding season , another might be produced . Synchronous laying of eggs is found in Atlantic puffins in adjacent burrows . The egg is large compared to the size of the bird , averaging 61 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long by 42 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) wide and weighing about 62 grams ( 2 @.@ 2 oz ) . The white shell is usually devoid of markings but soon becomes soiled with mud . The incubation responsibilities are shared by both parents . They each have two feather @-@ free brood patches on their undersides where an enhanced blood supply provides heat for the egg . The parent on incubation duty in the dark nest chamber spends much of its time asleep with its head tucked under its wing , occasionally emerging from the tunnel to flap dust out of its feathers or take a short flight down to the sea . 
 Total incubation time is around 39 – 45 days . From above ground level , the first evidence that hatching has taken place is the arrival of an adult with a beak @-@ load of fish . For the first few days the chick may be fed with these beak @-@ to @-@ beak but later the fish are simply dropped on the floor of the nest beside the chick which swallows them whole . The chick is covered in fluffy black down and its eyes are open and it can stand as soon as it is hatched . Initially weighing about 42 grams ( 1 @.@ 5 oz ) , it grows at the rate of 10 grams ( 0 @.@ 35 oz ) per day . Initially , one or other parents brood it , but as its appetite increases it is left alone for longer periods . Observations of a nest chamber have been made from an underground hide with peephole . It was found that the chick sleeps much of the time between its parents ' visits and also involves itself in bouts of exercise . It rearranges its nesting material , picks up and drops small stones , flaps its immature wings , pulls at protruding root ends and pushes and strains against the unyielding wall of the burrow . It makes its way towards the entrance or along a side tunnel to defecate . The growing chick seems to anticipate the arrival of an adult , advancing along the burrow just before it arrives but not emerging into the open air . It retreats to the nest chamber as the adult bird brings in its load of fish . 
 Hunting areas are often located 100 km ( 60 mi ) or more , offshore from the nest sites , although when feeding their young , the birds venture out only half that distance . It has been found that adults bringing fish to their chicks tend to arrive in groups . This is thought to benefit the bird by reducing kleptoparasitism by the Arctic skua which harasses puffins until they drop their fish loads . Predation by the great skua ( <unk> skua ) is also reduced by several birds arriving simultaneously . 
 In the Shetland Islands , sand eels ( Ammodytes marinus ) normally form at least 90 % of the food fed to chicks . It was found that , in years where the availability of sand eels was low , breeding success rates fell , with many chicks starving to death . In Norway it is the herring ( Clupea <unk> ) that is the mainstay of the diet . When herring numbers dwindled , so did puffin numbers . In Labrador the puffins seemed more flexible and when the staple forage fish capelin ( Mallotus villosus ) declined in availability , they were able to adapt and feed the chicks on other prey species . 
 The chicks take from 34 to 50 days to fledge , the period depending on the abundance of their food supply . In years of fish shortage , the whole colony may experience a longer fledgling period but the normal range is 38 to 44 days , by which time chicks will have reached about 75 % of their mature body weight . The chick may come to the burrow entrance to defecate but does not usually emerge into the open and seems to have an aversion to light until it is nearly fully fledged . Although the supply of fish by the adults reduces over the last few days spent in the nest , the chick is not abandoned as happens in the Manx shearwater . On occasions , an adult has been observed provisioning a nest even after the chick has departed . During the last few days underground , the chick sheds its down and the juvenile plumage is revealed . Its relatively small beak and its legs and feet are a dark colour and it lacks the white facial patches of the adult . The chick finally leaves its nest at night , when the risk of predation is at its lowest . When the moment arrives , it emerges from the burrow , usually for the first time , and walks , runs and flaps its way to the sea . It cannot fly properly yet so descending a cliff is perilous ; when it reaches the water it paddles out to sea , and may be three kilometres ( two miles ) away from the shore by daybreak . It does not congregate with others of its kind and will not return to land for two or three years . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Atlantic puffins are probably safest when out at sea . Here , the dangers are often from below the water rather than above , and puffins can sometimes be seen putting their heads underwater to peer around for predators . Seals have been known to kill puffins and large fish may also do so . Most puffin colonies are on small islands , and this is no coincidence as it avoids predation by ground @-@ based mammals such as foxes , rats , stoats and weasels , cats and dogs . When they come ashore , the birds are still at risk and the main threats come from the sky . 
 Aerial predators of the Atlantic puffin include the great black @-@ backed gull ( Larus marinus ) , the great skua ( Stercorarius skua ) , and similar @-@ sized species , which can catch a bird in flight , or attack one that is unable to escape fast enough on the ground . On detecting danger , puffins take off and fly down to the safety of the sea or retreat into their burrows , but if caught they defend themselves vigorously with beak and sharp claws . When the puffins are wheeling round beside the cliffs it becomes very difficult for a predator to concentrate on a single bird while any individual isolated on the ground is at greater risk . Smaller gull species like the herring gull ( L. argentatus ) and the lesser black @-@ backed gull are hardly able to bring down a healthy adult puffin . They stride through the colony taking any eggs that have rolled towards burrow entrances or recently hatched chicks that have ventured too far towards the daylight . They will also steal fish from puffins returning to feed their young . Where it nests on the tundra in the far north , the Arctic skua ( Stercorarius <unk> ) is a terrestrial predator , but at lower latitudes it is a specialised <unk> , concentrating on auks and other seabirds . It harasses puffins while they are airborne forcing them to drop their catch which it then snatches up . 
 Both the guillemot tick Ixodes <unk> and the flea <unk> <unk> ( probably originally a rabbit flea ) have been recorded from the nests of puffins . Other fleas which have been found on the birds include Ceratophyllus borealis , Ceratophyllus gallinae , Ceratophyllus <unk> , Ceratophyllus <unk> and the common rabbit flea <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Status and conservation = = = 
 In its Red List of Threatened Species , the International Union for Conservation of Nature lists the Atlantic puffin as vulnerable . It has a very large total population and an extensive range which covers over 1 @,@ 620 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 630 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Although the number of birds seems to be decreasing , the decline does not reach the threshold for " vulnerable " status . Some of the causes of population decline may be increased predation by gulls and skuas , the introduction of rats , cats , dogs and foxes onto some islands used for nesting , contamination by toxic residues , drowning in fishing nets , declining food supplies and climate change . On the island of Lundy the number of puffins decreased from 3 @,@ 500 pairs in 1939 to 10 pairs in 2000 . This was mainly due to the rats that had proliferated on the island and were eating eggs and young chicks . Following the elimination of the rats , it is hoped that populations will recover , and in 2005 , a juvenile was seen , believed to be the first chick raised on the island for thirty years . 
 On the other hand , puffin numbers increased considerably in the late twentieth century in the North Sea , including on the Isle of May and the Farne Islands where numbers have been increasing by about 10 % per year . In the 2013 breeding season , nearly 40 @,@ 000 pairs were recorded on the Farne Islands , a slight increase on the 2008 census and on the previous year 's poor season when some of the burrows flooded . This number is dwarfed by the Icelandic colonies with five million pairs breeding , the Atlantic puffin being the most populous bird on the island . In the Westman Islands , where about half Iceland 's puffins breed , the birds were almost driven to extinction by overharvesting around 1900 and a thirty @-@ year ban on hunting was put in place . When stocks recovered , a different method of harvesting was used and now hunting is maintained at a sustainable level . Nevertheless , a further hunting ban covering the whole of Iceland was called for in 2011 , although the puffin 's lack of recent breeding success was being blamed on a diminution in food supply rather than overharvesting . 
 SOS Puffin is a conservation project at the Scottish Seabird Centre at North Berwick to save the puffins on islands in the Firth of Forth . Puffin numbers on the island of Craigleith , once one of the largest colonies in Scotland with 28 @,@ 000 pairs , have declined dramatically to just a few thousand due to the invasion of a large introduced plant , the tree mallow ( <unk> arborea ) . This has spread across the island in dense thickets and prevents the puffins from finding suitable sites for burrowing and breeding . The project has the support of over 700 volunteers and progress has been made in cutting back the plants , with puffins returning in greater numbers to breed . Another conservation measure undertaken by the Centre is to encourage motorists to check under their cars in late summer before driving off as young puffins , disorientated by the street lights , may land in the town and take shelter underneath the vehicles . 
 Project Puffin is an effort initiated in 1973 by Dr. Stephen W. Kress of the National Audubon Society to restore Atlantic puffins to nesting islands in the Gulf of Maine . Eastern Egg Rock Island in <unk> Bay , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away from Pemaquid Point , had been occupied by nesting puffins until 1885 , when the birds disappeared because of overhunting . Counting on the fact young puffins usually return to breed on the same island where they fledged , a team of biologists and volunteers translocated 10 – 14 days old nestlings from Great Island in Newfoundland to Eastern Egg Rock . The young were placed into artificial sod burrows , and fed with vitamin @-@ fortified fish daily for about one month . Such yearly translocations took place until 1986 , with 954 young puffins being moved in total . Each year before fledging , the young were individually tagged . The first adults returned to the island by 1977 . Puffin decoys had been installed on the island to fool the puffins into thinking they were part of an established colony . This did not catch on at first , but in 1981 four pairs nested on the island . In 2014 , 148 nesting pairs were counted on the island . In addition to demonstrating the feasibility of re @-@ establishing a seabird colony , the project showed the usefulness of using decoys , and eventually call recordings and mirrors , to facilitate such reestablishment . 
 = = = Pollution = = = 
 Since the Atlantic puffin spends its winters on the open ocean , it is susceptible to human actions and catastrophes such as oil spills . <unk> plumage has a reduced ability to insulate and makes the bird more vulnerable to temperature fluctuations and less buoyant in the water . Many birds die , and others , while attempting to remove the oil by preening , ingest and inhale toxins . This leads to inflammation of the airways and gut and in the longer term , damage to liver and kidneys . This trauma can contribute to a loss of reproductive success and harm to developing embryos . An oil spill occurring in winter , when the puffins are far out at sea , may affect them less than inshore birds as the crude oil slicks soon get broken up and dispersed by the churning of the waves . When oiled birds get washed up on beaches around Atlantic coasts , only about 1 @.@ 5 % of the dead auks are puffins , but many others may have died far from land and sunk . After the oil tanker Torrey Canyon shipwreck and oil spill in 1967 , few dead puffins were recovered , but the number of puffins breeding in France the following year was reduced to 16 % of its previous level . 
 The Atlantic puffin and other pelagic birds are excellent bioindicators of the environment as they occupy a high trophic level . Heavy metals and other pollutants are concentrated through the food chain and , as fish are the primary food source for Atlantic puffins , there is great potential for them to bioaccumulate heavy metals such as mercury and arsenic . Measurements can be made on eggs , feathers or internal organs and beached bird surveys , accompanied by chemical analysis of feathers , can be effective indicators of marine pollution by lipophilic substances as well as metals . In fact these surveys can be used to provide evidence of the adverse effects of a particular pollutant , using fingerprinting techniques to provide evidence suitable for the prosecution of offenders . 
 = = = Climate change = = = 
 Climate change may well affect populations of seabirds in the northern Atlantic . The most important demographic may be an increase in the sea surface temperature which may have benefits for some northerly Atlantic puffin colonies . Breeding success depends on there being ample supplies of food at the time of maximum demand , as the chick grows . In northern Norway the main food item fed to the chick is the young herring . The success of the newly hatched fish larvae during the previous year was governed by the water temperature , which controlled plankton abundance and this in turn influenced the growth and survival of the first @-@ year herring . The breeding success of Atlantic puffin colonies has been found to correlate in this way with the water surface temperatures of the previous year . 
 In Maine , on the other side of the Atlantic , shifting fish populations due to changes in sea temperature are being blamed for the lack of availability of the herring which is the staple diet of the puffins in the area . Some adult birds have become emaciated and died . Others have been provisioning the nest with butterfish ( <unk> <unk> ) but these are often too large and deep @-@ bodied for the chick to swallow , causing it to die from starvation . Maine is on the southerly edge of the bird 's breeding range and with changing weather patterns , this may be set to contract northwards . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Breeding colonies of Atlantic puffins provide an interesting spectacle for both bird watchers and tourists . For example , four thousand puffins nest each year on islands off the coast of Maine and visitors can view them from tour boats which operate during the summer months . There is a Project Puffin Visitor Centre in Rockland providing information on the birds and their lives , and on the other conservation projects being undertaken by the National Audubon Society who run the centre . Similar tours operate in Iceland , the Hebrides , and Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hunting = = = 
 Puffins have been hunted by man since time immemorial . Coastal communities and island dwellers with few natural resources at their disposal , made good use of the seafoods that they found on their cliffs and shores . Puffins were caught and eaten fresh , salted in brine or smoked and dried . Their feathers were used in bedding and their eggs were eaten , but not to the same extent as those of some other seabirds , being more difficult to extract from the nest . In most countries , Atlantic puffins are now protected by legislation , and in the countries where hunting is still permitted , strict laws prevent over @-@ exploitation . They are still caught and eaten in Iceland and the Faroe Islands , but there have been calls for an outright ban on hunting them in Iceland because of concern over the dwindling number of birds successfully raising chicks . 
 Traditional means of capture varied across the birds ' range and nets and rods were used in various ingenious ways . A typical device used in the Faroes was a " <unk> " . This was a long pole with a net on the end laid flat on the ground . A few dead puffins were strewn around to entice incoming birds to land , and the net was flicked upwards to scoop a bird from the air as it slowed before alighting . Most of the birds caught were sub @-@ adults , and a skilled hunter could gather two or three hundred in a day . Another method of capture , used in St Kilda , involved the use of a flexible pole with a noose on the end . This was pushed along the ground towards the intended target , which advanced to inspect the noose as its curiosity overcame its caution . A flick of the wrist would flip the noose over the victim 's head and it was promptly killed , before its struggles could alarm other birds nearby . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 The Atlantic puffin is the official bird symbol of the province of Newfoundland and Labrador , Canada . In August 2007 , the Atlantic puffin was proposed as the official symbol of the Liberal Party of Canada by its deputy leader Michael Ignatieff , after he observed a colony of these birds and became fascinated by their behaviour . The Norwegian municipality of Værøy has an Atlantic puffin as its civic emblem . Puffins are viewed with affection because they are colourful and full of character . They have been given a number of endearing names including " clowns of the sea " and " sea parrots " , and juvenile puffins may be called " <unk> " . 
 A number of islands have been named after the bird . The island of Lundy in the United Kingdom is reputed to derive its name from the Norse lund @-@ ey or " puffin island " . An alternative explanation has been suggested connected with another meaning of the word lund referring to a copse or wooded area . The Vikings might have found the island a useful refuge and restocking point after their depredations on the mainland . The island issued its own coins and , in 1929 , its own stamps with denominations in " puffins " . Other countries and dependencies which have depicted Atlantic puffins on their stamps include Alderney , Canada , the Faroe Islands , France , Gibraltar , Guernsey , Iceland , Ireland , the Isle of Man , Jersey , Norway , Portugal , Russia , Slovenia , St Pierre et Miquelon and the United Kingdom . The LPO , a French biodiversity charity focussing on the protection of birds , uses a pair of Atlantic puffins as its emblem . 
 The publisher of paperbacks , Penguin Books , introduced a range of books for children under the Puffin Books brand in 1939 . At first these were non @-@ fiction titles but these were soon followed by a fiction list of well @-@ known authors . The demand was so great that Puffin Book Clubs were introduced in schools to encourage reading , and a children 's magazine Puffin Post was established . There is a tradition on the Icelandic island of Heimaey for the children to rescue young puffins , a fact recorded in Bruce McMillan 's photo @-@ illustrated children 's book Nights of the <unk> ( 1995 ) . The fledglings emerge from the nest and try to make their way to the sea but sometimes get confused , perhaps by the street lighting , ending up by landing in the village . The children collect them and liberate them to the safety of the sea . 
 = Ohio State Route 249 = 
 State Route 249 ( SR 249 ) is an Ohio State Route that runs between the Indiana state line and Ney in the US state of Ohio . The 14 @.@ 45 miles ( 23 @.@ 26 km ) of SR 249 that lie within the state serve as a minor highway . None of the highway is listed on the National Highway System . The whole route is a rural two @-@ lane highway and passes through farmland . The highway was first signed in 1925 and was a north – south route , a route that later became U.S. Route 127 ( US 127 ) . SR 249 was given its current route in 1927 , as a replacement for SR 22 . The route was completely paved by 1942 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 249 heads southeast from the Indiana – Ohio state line , as a two @-@ lane highway passing through farmland , with some houses . The route passes over the St. Joseph River and turns due east . The highway has an intersection at SR 49 , in rural Defiance County . After the intersection with SR 49 the highway enters farmland and woodland , with a few houses . The route has an intersection with SR 2 , this intersection is the western terminus of the SR 2 concurrency . The concurrency heads east , passing through farmland , until SR 2 turns north in the community of Farmer . SR 249 heads east having an intersection with US 127 . The route turns southeast , before ending at an intersection with SR 15 in Ney . 
 There is no section of SR 249 that is included as a part of the National Highway System , a system of routes determined to be the most important for the nation 's economy , mobility and defense . The highway is maintained by the Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) like all other state routes in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This measurement is a calculation of the traffic level along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2009 , ODOT figured that the lowest traffic level was 820 vehicles on the section that is concurrent with SR 2 , and the peak traffic volume was 6 @,@ 720 vehicles between US 127 and SR 15 . 
 = = History = = 
 The route that became SR 249 was first signed as SR 22 in 1923 following all of SR 249 as it is today and heading as far east @-@ southeast as Marion . Also in this year the route east of Farmer was paved . SR 249 made its debut in 1925 , as a north – south route , on a section of road that is now US 127 . The route went from SR 22 , now SR 249 , north to SR 9 , now SR 15 . In 1927 , SR 249 replaced part of SR 22 , from the Indiana state line to Ney . The rest of the route from the Indiana state line to Farmer was paved in 1942 . No significant changes have taken place to this state route since 1942 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Defiance County . 
 = Operation Uranus = 
 Operation Uranus ( Russian : <unk> « <unk> » , romanised : <unk> " <unk> " ) was the codename of the Soviet 19 – 23 November 1942 strategic operation in World War II which led to the encirclement of the German Sixth Army , the Third and Fourth Romanian armies , and portions of the German Fourth Panzer Army . The operation formed part of the ongoing Battle of Stalingrad , and was aimed at destroying German forces in and around Stalingrad . Planning for Operation Uranus had commenced in September 1942 , and was developed simultaneously with plans to envelop and destroy German Army Group Center and German forces in the Caucasus . The Red Army took advantage of the German army 's poor preparation for winter , and the fact that its forces in the southern Soviet Union were overstretched near Stalingrad , using weaker Romanian troops to guard their flanks ; the offensives ' starting points were established along the section of the front directly opposite Romanian forces . These Axis armies lacked heavy equipment to deal with Soviet armor . 
 Due to the length of the front created by the German summer offensive , aimed at taking the Caucasus oil fields and the city of Stalingrad , German and other Axis forces were forced to guard sectors beyond the length they were meant to occupy . The situation was exacerbated by the German decision to relocate several mechanized divisions from the Soviet Union to Western Europe . Furthermore , units in the area were depleted after months of fighting , especially those which took part in the fighting in Stalingrad . The Germans could only count on the 48th Panzer Corps , which had the strength of a single panzer division , and the 29th Panzergrenadier Division as reserves to bolster their Romanian allies on the German Sixth Army 's flanks . In comparison , the Red Army deployed over one million personnel for the purpose of beginning the offensive in and around Stalingrad . Soviet troop movements were not without problems , due to the difficulties of concealing their build @-@ up , and to Soviet units commonly arriving late due to logistical issues . Operation Uranus was first postponed from 8 to 17 November , then to 19 November . 
 At 07 : 20 Moscow time on 19 November , Soviet forces on the northern flank of the Axis forces at Stalingrad began their offensive ; forces in the south began on 20 November . Although Romanian units were able to repel the first attacks , by the end of 20 November the Third and Fourth Romanian armies were in headlong retreat , as the Red Army bypassed several German infantry divisions . German mobile reserves were not strong enough to parry the Soviet mechanized spearheads , while the Sixth Army did not react quickly enough nor decisively enough to disengage German armored forces in Stalingrad and reorient them to defeat the impending threat . By late 22 November Soviet forces linked up at the town of Kalach , encircling some 290 @,@ 000 men east of the Don River . Instead of attempting to break out of the encirclement , German dictator Adolf Hitler decided to keep Axis forces in Stalingrad and resupply them by air . In the meantime , Soviet and German commanders began to plan their next movements . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 28 June 1942 , the Wehrmacht began its offensive against Soviet forces opposite of Army Group South , codenamed Case Blue . After breaking through Red Army forces by 13 July , German forces encircled and captured the city of Rostov . Following the fall of Rostov , Hitler split German forces operating in the southern extremity of the southern Russian SFSR in an effort to simultaneously capture the city of Stalingrad and the Caucasus oil fields . The responsibility to take Stalingrad was given to the Sixth Army , which immediately turned towards the Volga River and began its advance with heavy air support from the Luftwaffe 's Luftflotte 4 . On 7 August , two German panzer corps were able to flank and encircle a Soviet force of 50 @,@ 000 personnel and approximately 1 @,@ 000 tanks , and on 22 August German forces began to cross the Don River to complete the advance towards the Volga . The following day , the Battle of Stalingrad began when vanguards of the Sixth Army penetrated the suburbs of the city . 
 By November the Sixth Army had occupied most of Stalingrad , pushing the defending Red Army to the banks of the Volga River . By this stage , there were indications of an impending Soviet offensive which would target Wehrmacht forces around the city , including increased Soviet activity opposite the Sixth Army 's flanks , and information gained through the interrogation of Soviet prisoners . However , the German command was intent upon finalizing its capture of Stalingrad . In fact , head of Army General Staff General Franz Halder had been dismissed in September after his efforts to warn about the danger which was developing along the over @-@ extended flanks of the Sixth Army and the Fourth Panzer Army . As early as September the Soviet Stavka ( high command ) began planning a series of counteroffensives to encompass the destruction of German forces in the south , fighting in Stalingrad and in the Caucasus , and against Army Group Center . Ultimately , command of Soviet efforts to relieve Stalingrad was put under the leadership of General Aleksandr Vasilevsky . 
 The Stavka developed two major operations to be conducted against Axis forces near Stalingrad , Uranus and Saturn , and also planned for Operation Mars designed to engage German Army Group Center in an effort to distract reinforcements and to inflict as much damage as possible . Operation Uranus involved the use of large Soviet mechanized and infantry forces to encircle German and other Axis forces directly around Stalingrad . As preparations for the offensive commenced , the attack 's starting points were positioned on stretches of front to the rear of the German Sixth Army , largely preventing the Germans from reinforcing those sectors quickly where Axis units were too overstretched to occupy effectively . The offensive was a double envelopment ; Soviet mechanized forces would penetrate deep into the German rear , while another attack would be made closer to the German Sixth Army in an effort to attack German units there directly in the rear . While the Red Army prepared , the German high commanders — influenced by their belief that the Red Army , building up opposite Germany Army Group Center to the north , was incapable of mounting a simultaneous offensive in the south — continued to deny the possibility of an impending Soviet offensive . 
 = = Comparison of forces = = 
 = = = Axis forces involved = = = 
 Case Blue involved German and other Axis forces sprawled out across a front over 480 kilometers ( 300 mi ) wide and several hundred kilometers deep , while the decision to conquer Stalingrad had stretched Axis forces even more thinly by drawing away personnel eastwards . For example , in early July the Sixth Army was defending a 160 @-@ kilometer ( 99 mi ) line , while also committing to an offensive which involved a distance of around 400 kilometers ( 250 mi ) . Army Group B , which was split from Army Group South ( the forces operating around the Caucasus were named Army Group A ) , seemed strong on paper : it included the Second and Sixth German , Fourth Panzer , Fourth and Third Romanian , Eighth Italian , and Second Hungarian Armies . Army Group B had the 48th Panzer Corps , which had the strength of a weakened panzer division , and a single infantry division as reserves . For the most part the German flanks were held by arriving non @-@ German Axis armies , while German forces were used to spearhead continued operations in Stalingrad and in the Caucasus . 
 While Adolf Hitler expressed confidence in the ability of non @-@ German Axis units to protect German flanks , in reality these units relied on largely obsolete equipment and horse @-@ drawn artillery , while in many cases the harsh treatment of enlisted personnel by officers caused poor morale . In regard to mechanization , the First Romanian Armored Division was equipped with around 100 Czech @-@ built Panzer 35 ( t ) tanks , armed with a 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) gun ineffective against the armor of Soviet T @-@ 34 tanks . Similarly , their 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) PaK anti @-@ tank guns were also antiquated and they were largely short of ammunition . Only after repeated requests did the Germans send the Romanian units 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) PaK guns ; six per division . These units were extended over very large sections of front ; for example , the Third Romanian Army occupied a line 140 kilometers ( 87 mi ) long , while the Fourth Romanian Army protected a line no less than 270 kilometers ( 170 mi ) long . The Italians and Hungarians were positioned at the Don west of the Third Romanian Army , but the German commanders did not hold in high regard the capability of those units to fight . 
 Generally , German forces were in no better shape ; they were weakened by months of fighting the Red Army , and , while Stavka raised new armies , the German high command attempted to maintain its existing mechanized units . Furthermore , during the course of the German offensive between May and November 1942 , two motorized divisions , the elite Leibstandarte and the Großdeutschland , were redeployed from Army Group A to the West , to provide a mechanized reserve in case of an Allied landing in France . The Sixth Army had also suffered many casualties during the fighting in the city of Stalingrad proper . In some cases , such as that of the 22nd Panzer Division , their equipment was no better than that of the First Romanian Armored Division . German formations were also overextended along large stretches of front ; the XI Army Corps , for example , had to defend a front around 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) long . 
 = = = Soviet forces involved = = = 
 The Red Army allocated an estimated 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 personnel , 804 tanks , 13 @,@ 400 artillery pieces and over 1 @,@ 000 aircraft for the upcoming offensive . Across the Third Romanian Army , the Soviets placed the redeployed 5th Tank Army , as well as the 21st and 65th Armies , in order to penetrate and overrun the German flanks . The German southern flank was targeted by the Stalingrad Front 's 51st and 57th Armies , led by the 13th and 4th Mechanized Corps ; these would punch through the Fourth Romanian Army , in order to link up with the 5th Tank Army near the town of Kalach . In total , the Soviets had amassed 11 armies and various independent tank brigades and corps . 
 Preparations for the offensive were , however , far from perfect ; on 8 November , Stavka issued orders to postpone the launch date of the operation , because transportation delays had prevented many units from being able to move into place . In the meantime , units at the front went through a number of war games to practice repelling an enemy counterattack and exploiting a breakthrough with mechanized forces . These movements were masked through a deception campaign by the Soviets , including the decrease of radio traffic , camouflage , operational security , using couriers for communication instead of radio , and active deception , such as increasing troop movements around Moscow . Troops were ordered to build defensive fortifications , to offer false impressions to the Germans , while fake bridges were put up to divert attention from the real bridges being built across the Don River . The Red Army also stepped up attacks against Army Group Center and set up dummy formations to maintain the idea of a main offensive against German forces in the center of the Soviet Union . 
 The Soviet Stalingrad Front forces were subject to heavy bombardment , making mobilization more difficult . The 38 engineer battalions allocated to the front were responsible for ferrying ammunition , personnel and tanks across the Volga River while carrying out minor reconnaissance along sections of the front which were to be the breakthrough points of the impending offensive . In three weeks the Red Army transported around 111 @,@ 000 soldiers , 420 tanks and 556 artillery pieces across the Volga . 
 On 17 November Vasilevsky was recalled to Moscow , where he was shown a letter written to Stalin by General Volsky , commander of the 4th Mechanized Corps , who urged calling off the offensive . Volsky believed the offensive as planned was doomed to failure due to the state of the forces earmarked for the operation ; he suggested postponing the offensive and redesigning it entirely . Many Soviet soldiers had not been issued with winter garments , and many died of frostbite , " due to the irresponsible attitude of commanders " . Although Soviet intelligence made honest efforts to collect as much information as possible on the disposition of the Axis forces arrayed in front of them , there was not much information on the state of the German Sixth Army . The Soviet commanders , overruling Vasilevsky , agreed the offensive would not be called off , and Stalin personally rang Volsky , who reiterated his intention to carry out the operation if ordered to do so . 
 = = Soviet offensive = = 
 Operation Uranus , postponed until 17 November , was again postponed for two days when Soviet General Georgy Zhukov was told the air units allotted to the operation were not ready ; it was finally launched on 19 November . Shortly after 5 a.m. Lieutenant Gerhard <unk> , posted with the Romanian IV Army Corps on the <unk> sector called Sixth Army headquarters housed in <unk> , offering intelligence on a pending attack which would occur after 05 : 00 that morning ; however , because his call had come in after five and false alarms were common during this time , the duty officer on the other end of the line was not keen on waking the Army Chief of Staff , General Arthur Schmidt . Although Soviet commanders suggested postponing the bombardment due to poor visibility due to thick fog , front headquarters decided to proceed . At 07 : 20 Moscow time ( 05 : 20 German time ) Soviet artillery commanders received the codeword " Siren " , prompting an 80 @-@ minute artillery bombardment directed almost entirely against the non @-@ German Axis units protecting the German flanks . Some 3 @,@ 500 guns opened up against the Third Romanian Army and the northern shoulder of the German Sixth Army 's flank . Although thick fog prevented the Soviet artillery from correcting their aim , their weeks of preparation and ranging allowed them to lay down accurate fire on enemy positions along the front . The effect was devastating , as communication lines were breached , ammunition dumps destroyed and forward observation points shattered . Many Romanian personnel who survived the bombardment began to flee to the rear . Soviet heavy artillery aimed at Romanian artillery positions and second @-@ echelon formations also caught the retreating Romanian soldiers . 
 = = = Against the Third Romanian Army : 19 November = = = 
 The offensive against the Third Romanian Army began at 08 : 50 , led by the 21st and 65th Soviet Armies and the 5th Tank Army . The first two assaults were repulsed by the Romanian defenders , and the effects of the heavy artillery bombardment had actually made it more difficult for Soviet armor to navigate through the minefields and terrain . However , the lack of heavy anti @-@ tank artillery caused the Romanian defense to collapse ; a breakthrough by the 4th Tank Corps and 3rd Guards Cavalry Corps was established by noon . Soon after , the 5th Tank Army was able to gain a breakthrough against the Second Romanian Corps , followed by the Eighth Cavalry Corps . As Soviet armor navigated through the thick fog by compass , overrunning Romanian and German artillery positions , three Romanian infantry divisions began to fall back in disarray ; the Third Romanian Army had been outflanked to the West and East . After receiving the news of the Soviet attack , Sixth Army headquarters failed to order the 16th and 24th Panzer Divisions , hitherto engaged in Stalingrad , to reorient themselves to bolster the Romanian defenses ; instead the task was given to the seriously understrength and poorly equipped 48th Panzer Corps . 
 The 48th Panzer Corps had fewer than 100 serviceable modern tanks to combat Soviet armor . Furthermore , they lacked fuel , and the shortage of tanks forced commanders to organize tank crews into infantry companies ; the 22nd Panzer Division , which formed part of the corps , was almost completely destroyed in the fighting that ensued . The 22nd had entered the fighting with fewer than thirty working tanks , and left with a company of tanks . The Romanian 1st Armored Division , attached to the 48th Panzer Corps , engaged the Soviet 26th Tank Corps after having lost communications with their German corps commanders , and were defeated by 20 November . As the Soviets continued to advance southwards , many Soviet tank crews began to suffer from the worsening blizzard , which affected men and equipment , and blocked gunsights . It was not uncommon for tanks to lose traction on the ground , and for a crew member to have an arm broken as he was thrown around inside the hull . However , the blizzard also neutralized the German corps ' coordination . 
 The rout of the Third Romanian Army began by the end of 19 November . The Soviet 21st Army and 5th Tank Army were able to capture some 27 @,@ 000 Romanian prisoners — the bulk of three divisions — and then continue their advance southwards . Soviet cavalry was used to exploit the breakthrough , sever communications between the Romanians and the Italian 8th Army , and to block any possible counterattack against the Soviet flank . While the Red Air Force strafed retreating Romanian soldiers , the Luftwaffe provided only negligible opposition . The withdrawal of the 1st Romanian Cavalry Division , originally positioned on the German 376th Infantry Division 's flank , allowed the 65th Army to bypass German defenses . As German forces began to react late on 19 November , another attack developed on the Sixth Army 's flank to the south . 
 = = = Against the German southern flank : 20 November = = = 
 In the early morning of 20 November Stavka telephoned Stalingrad Front commander Andrei <unk> asking if he would begin his portion of the offensive on schedule , at 08 : 00 . He responded he would do so only if the fog lifted ; although the 51st Army opened its artillery barrage on time because front headquarters could not contact the division , the rest of the forces prepared for the operation received orders to postpone the attack until 10 : 00 . The 51st Army engaged the Romanian 6th Corps , taking many prisoners . As the 57th Army joined the attack at 10 : 00 , the situation developed in such a way that the Stalingrad Front could throw its armored corps into battle . The German <unk> Infantry Division watched as its Romanian support failed to put up resistance against the Red Army . However , confusion and lack of control caused the Soviet 4th and 13th Mechanized Corps to stumble as they began to exploit the breakthroughs achieved by the opening offensive . 
 The Germans responded quickly by redeploying their only reserve in the area , the 29th Panzergrenadier Division . Despite initial victories against Soviet armored forces , the Romanian collapse forced the division to again redeploy in an attempt to shore up defenses to the south . The 29th Panzergrenadier Division 's counterattack had cost the Red Army around fifty tanks , and caused Soviet commanders to worry about the safety of their left flank . However , the German division 's redeployment meant that by the end of the day only the 6th Romanian Cavalry Regiment was positioned between advancing Soviet forces and the Don River . 
 = = = Continued operations : 20 – 23 November = = = 
 While the Stalingrad Front launched its offensive on 20 November , the 65th Soviet Army continued to apply pressure to the German 11th Corps along the northern shoulder of the Sixth Army 's flank . The Red Army 's 4th Tank Corps advanced beyond the German 11th Corps , while the 3rd Guards Cavalry Corps crashed into the German unit 's rear . The German 376th Infantry Division and the Austrian 44th Infantry Division began to redeploy to face the enemy on their flanks , but were hindered by shortage of fuel . The 14th Panzer Division 's remaining panzer regiment destroyed a flanking regiment of the Soviet 3rd Guards Cavalry Corps , but its anti @-@ tank artillery suffered heavy casualties when it was overrun by Soviet forces . By the end of the day the Soviet 1st Tank Corps was chasing the retreating 48th Panzer Corps , while the Soviet 26th Tank Corps had captured the town of <unk> , almost 130 kilometers ( 81 mi ) to the northwest of Stalingrad . 
 The Red Army 's offensive continued on 21 November , with forces of the Stalingrad Front achieving penetrations of up to 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) . By this time remaining Romanian units in the north were being destroyed in isolated battles , while the Red Army began to engage flanking portions of the German Fourth Panzer and Sixth Armies . The German 22nd Panzer Division , despite attempting a short counterattack , was reduced to little more than a tank company and forced to withdraw to the southwest . The Soviet 26th Tank Corps , having destroyed a large portion of the Romanian 1st Armored Division , continued its advance to the southeast , avoiding engaging enemy left behind , although remnants of the Romanian 5th Corps were able to reorganize and put up a hastily constructed defense in the hope that it would be aided by the German 48th Panzer Corps . That day German General Friedrich Paulus , commander of the Sixth Army , received reports that the Soviets were less than 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) from his headquarters ; furthermore , there were no remaining units which could contest the Soviet advance . In the south , after a brief halt , the Soviet 4th Mechanized Corps continued its advance north , removing German defenders from several towns in the area , towards Stalingrad . As German forces in and around Stalingrad were at risk , Hitler ordered German forces in the area to establish an " all @-@ around defensive position " and designated forces between the Don and Volga rivers as " Fortress Stalingrad " , rather than allow the Sixth Army to attempt to break out . The Sixth Army , other Axis units , and most of the Fourth Panzer Army 's German units were caught inside the growing Soviet encirclement . Only the 16th Panzergrenadier Division began to fight its way out . Lack of coordination between Soviet tanks and infantry as the Red Army 's tank corps attempted to exploit the breakthrough along the Germans ' southern flank allowed much of the Fourth Romanian Army to escape destruction . 
 On 22 November Soviet forces began to cross the Don River and continued their advance towards the town of Kalach . German forces defending Kalach , mostly composed of maintenance and supply personnel , were not aware of the Soviet offensive until 21 November , and even then did not know in what strength the Red Army was approaching . The task of taking the bridge at Kalach was given to the Soviet 26th Tank Corps , which used two captured German tanks and a reconnaissance vehicle to approach it and fire on the guards . Soviet forces broke into the town by mid @-@ morning and drove the defenders out , allowing themselves and the 4th Tank Corps to link up with the Red Army 's 4th Mechanized Corps approaching from the south . The encirclement of German forces in Stalingrad was completed on 22 November 1942 . That day Soviet formations also continued to fight pockets of Romanian resistance , such as that put up by the Romanian 5th Corps . 
 Fighting continued on 23 November as the Germans attempted in vain to mount local counterattacks to break the encirclement . By this time Axis personnel inside the encirclement moved east towards Stalingrad to avoid Soviet tanks , while those that managed to escape the encirclement moved west toward German and other Axis forces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Uranus trapped between 250 @,@ 000 and 300 @,@ 000 Axis soldiers within an area stretching 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) from east to west and 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) north to south . The pocket contained four infantry corps , a panzer corps belonging to the Fourth Panzer and Sixth Armies , and surviving elements of two Romanian divisions , a Croat infantry regiment and other specialist units . Trapped equipment included around 100 tanks , 2 @,@ 000 artillery pieces and mortars and 10 @,@ 000 trucks . The withdrawal to Stalingrad left lines of retreat littered with helmets , weapons and other equipment , and heavy equipment which had been destroyed was left on the side of the road . Bridges spanning the Don River were jammed with traffic , as surviving Axis soldiers hastily made their way eastwards in the cold weather , attempting to escape Soviet armor and infantry threatening to cut them off from Stalingrad . Many wounded Axis personnel were trampled , and many of those who attempted to cross the river on foot on the ice fell through and drowned . Hungry soldiers filled Russian villages scouring for supplies , while supply dumps were often looted in search of cans of food . The last stragglers crossed the Don River by 24 November , and demolished the bridges to seal off the Fourth Panzer and Sixth Armies from the Soviets in Stalingrad . 
 The Sixth Army , in the midst of chaos , began to build defensive lines , hampered by the lack of fuel , ammunition and rations , and further burdened by the advancing Russian winter . It was also tasked with plugging gaps in the line caused by the disintegrating Romanian forces . On 23 November , some German units destroyed or burned everything not necessary for a breakout operation and began to pull back towards the northern end of Stalingrad . However , after the Germans had abandoned their winter bunkers , the Soviet 62nd Army was able to destroy the German 94th Infantry Division on the open ground ; survivors of the German division were attached to the 16th and 24th Panzer Divisions . Although German military commanders were of the opinion that Wehrmacht forces caught in the encirclement should break out , between 23 and 24 November Hitler decided instead to hold the position and attempt to resupply the Sixth Army by air . The personnel trapped in Stalingrad would require at least 680 metric tons ( 750 short tons ) of supplies per day , a task which the depleted Luftwaffe was actually in no condition to carry out . Furthermore , the revived Red Air Force was a threat to German aircraft attempting to fly over the encirclement . Although by December the Luftwaffe had assembled a fleet of around 500 aircraft , this was still insufficient to supply the Sixth Army and elements of the Fourth Panzer Army with the required supplies . During the first half of December the Sixth Army received less than 20 % of their daily requirements . 
 In the meantime , the Red Army strengthened its outer encirclement with the intention of destroying the encircled German units . Soviet armies would attack German units to the east and the south , aiming to split German units into smaller groups . These orders became effective on 24 November , and were to be executed without a major regrouping or movement of reserves . The outer encirclement ran for an estimated 320 kilometers ( 200 mi ) , although only three @-@ quarters of that distance was actually covered by Soviet troops ; the distance between the outer and inner <unk> was around 16 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) . The Soviet high command also began planning for Operation Saturn , which was aimed at destroying the Italian Eighth Army and cutting off German forces in the Caucasus . The Soviet Stavka planned Saturn to start on about 10 December . 
 German forces in the area had been further split up , as German general Erich von Manstein was given command of the newly created Army Group Don , comprising the German Fourth Panzer and Sixth Armies , and the Third and Fourth Romanian Armies . Although the situation looked bleak for the Germans , a moment of relative calm had settled after the end of Operation Uranus ; German and Soviet forces were planning their next movements . 
 = Hue – Da Nang Campaign = 
 The Hue – Da Nang Campaign was a series of military actions conducted by the Vietnam People 's Army ( VPA ) and the Viet Cong against the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) during the Vietnam War , also known in Vietnam as the American War . The campaign was centred on the cities of Huế ( Thừa Thiên @-@ Huế Province ) and Da Nang ( Quảng Nam Province ) , with secondary fronts in the provinces of Quảng Trị and Quảng Ngãi . The campaign began on March 5 and concluded on April 2 , 1975 . 
 During the spring season of 1975 , the Vietnam People 's Army High Command in Hanoi made the decision to seize the major South Vietnamese cities of Huế and Da Nang , and also destroy the various South Vietnamese units in I Corps Tactical Zone , led by ARVN General Ngô Quang Trưởng . Originally , the campaign was planned to take place over two phases ; during the seasons of spring @-@ summer and autumn . However , as the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces rolled over South Vietnamese defences on the outskirts of Huế and Da Nang , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu ordered General Trưởng to abandon all territories under his control , and pull his forces back to the coastal areas of I Corps . However , the South Vietnamese withdrawal quickly turned into a rout , as the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps picked off one South Vietnamese unit after another , until Huế and Da Nang was completely surrounded . By March 29 , 1975 , North Vietnamese troops had full control of Huế and Da Nang , while South Vietnam lost all territories in I Corps and most of the units belonging to the ARVN 1st Brigade . 
 The fall of Huế and Da Nang did not spell the end of the misery suffered by the Army of the Republic of Vietnam . On March 31 , ARVN General Phạm Văn Phú — commander of II Corps Tactical Zone — attempted to form a new defensive line from Qui Nhơn to cover the retreat of the ARVN 22nd Infantry Division into the Mekong Delta , but they too were destroyed by the North Vietnamese . By April 2 , South Vietnam had lost control of the northern provinces , as well as two army corps . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = North Vietnam = = = 
 During the Huế – Da Nang Campaign of 1975 , North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces were organised into three formations ; the Vietnam People 's Army 2nd Corps , Tri Thien Military Zone , and Military Region 5 Command . The 2nd Corps of the Vietnam People 's Army fielded three infantry divisions ( 304th , <unk> and <unk> Divisions ) , the <unk> Air @-@ Defence Division , the 164th Artillery Brigade , the 203rd Armoured Regiment , the 219th Combat Engineers Brigade , and the 463rd Communications Regiment . The 2nd Corps was led by Major @-@ General Nguyễn Hữu An , with Major @-@ General Le Linh as Political Commissar . Colonel Hoang Dan was the deputy commander , and Colonel Nguyen Cong Trang was the deputy political commissar . 
 Led by Brigadier @-@ General Lê Tự Đồng , the Tri Thien Military Zone had three infantry regiments ( 4th , 46th and 271st Regiments ) , and two battalions ( the 21st Independent Battalion and the 6th Local Force Battalion ) . Military Region 5 had one infantry division ( 2nd Division ) , which was supported by the 141st Regiment ( from the 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ Division ) , the 52nd Independent Brigade , two artillery regiments ( 368th and 572nd Artillery Regiments ) , two local battalions ( 70th and 72nd Local Force Battalions ) , and two local regiments ( 94th and 96th Local Force Regiments ) . North Vietnamese and Viet Cong units of Military Region 5 were placed under the responsibility of Major @-@ General Chu Huy Mân , with Vo Chi Cong as political commissar . 
 = = = Objectives = = = 
 = = = = Tri Thien = = = = 
 On February 21 , 1975 , North Vietnamese field commanders from Tri @-@ Thien Military Zone and the 2nd Army Corp held a conference to establish their objectives , which were planned to occur in two phases ; the spring @-@ summer phase that would begin in March and probably conclude in May , and the autumn phase to last from July to August 1975 . The North Vietnamese objective was to take control of Quảng Trị Province , isolate the city of Huế and if the opportunity presents itself , they would capture the entire Tri Thien @-@ Huế area . To isolate Huế , the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps would move against their target from the north @-@ west direction along Route 12 down to the south @-@ west along Highway 14 , thereby isolating the region from South Vietnamese forces in II Corps Tactical Zone . 
 In preparation for the Huế – Da Nang Campaign , the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps had successfully captured several important base areas that surrounded South Vietnamese units in Quảng Trị Province and Thừa Thiên Province . Those areas included Đông Hà @-@ <unk> <unk> to the north , Khe Sanh @-@ Ba Long to the west , and A <unk> @-@ Nam Dong in southern Huế . The main body of the 304th Division and the 3rd Regiment , 324th Division , had assembled in Nong Son and Thường Đức to attack Da Nang from the west . In Military Region 5 , the 2nd Division had established its positions in Tiên Phước , Tra My and Trà <unk> in Quảng Ngãi Province , and Đắk Tô and Tân Cảnh in Kon Tum Province . 
 = = = = Quảng Tin @-@ Quảng Ngãi = = = = 
 Once Huế had been isolated , Military Region 5 Command would initiate the Nam @-@ Ngai Campaign from the provinces of Quảng Tin and Quảng Ngãi , to isolate Da Nang from the Central Highlands . North Vietnamese units such as the 2nd Division , the 141st Regiment , the 52nd Brigade , along with two artillery regiments ( 368th and 572nd Artillery Regiments ) would coordinate their efforts with the Viet Cong 94th and 96th Local Force Regiments , and the 70th and 72nd Local Force Battalions . As part of their overall objective , they would tie down the ARVN 2nd Division ( South Vietnam ) , the 11th Armoured Squadron and the 912th Regional Force Company in Quảng Ngãi Province . And , if the opportunity arises , they would also capture Bình Định Province and the city of Qui Nhơn . 
 = = = = Da Nang = = = = 
 In the final phase of their operation , the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong would cut off Da Nang from the surrounding regions which made up I Corps Tactical Zone , and prevent reinforcements from retaking the city . Then , depending on the situation , the North Vietnamese would organize an attack to capture the major South Vietnamese army , navy and air force installations in Da Nang . 
 = = = South Vietnam = = = 
 South Vietnamese military forces in Huế and Da Nang belonged to the ARVN 1st Brigade , I Corps Tactical Zone . Commanded by Lieutenant General Ngô Quang Trưởng , the South Vietnamese I Corps was considered to be the strongest amongst all the military formations of South Vietnam . It had three infantry divisions ( 1st , 2nd and 3rd Infantry Divisions ) , the Airborne Division ( led by Major General Le Quang Luong ) , the Marine Corps Division ( led by Major General Bui The Lan ) , and four ranger groups ( 11th , 12th , 14th and 15th Ranger Groups ) . The Airborne and Marine Corps Division each had an assigned strength of four brigades . In addition to the infantry units , there were also the 5th Armoured Brigade , five squadrons of armored vehicles ( 4th , 7th , 11th , 17th and 20th Armored Squadrons ) , 13 armored companies , and 21 artillery battalions . 
 Local defense in I Corps was provided by 50 battalions and five companies of Regional and Popular Forces , and six companies of military police . Support for ground forces in the area came in the form of the 1st Air Force Division ( commanded by Brigadier @-@ General Nguyen Van Khanh ) , with two naval squadrons operating on the coast and another two along the rivers . Overall , I Corps fielded about 134 @,@ 000 soldiers ; 84 @,@ 000 were regular soldiers and 50 @,@ 000 belonged to the Regional and Popular Forces . Those forces were equipped with 449 tanks and armored vehicles , 418 artillery pieces , 64 M @-@ 42 Duster light air @-@ defense weapons , 373 aircraft of different types , and 165 naval vessels of different sizes . 
 = = = Defensive strategy = = = 
 In combination with the ‘ Ly Thuong Kiet Military Plan ’ and experiences gained during the North Vietnamese Nguyễn <unk> Offensive , Lieutenant General Ngô Quang Trưởng organised the defenses of I Corps into three phases , to be staged from three different areas . 
 = = = = Defensive phases = = = = 
 The first phase , known as the ‘ orange phase ’ , was considered to be the most important because it provided South Vietnamese units in I Corps with a platform to stop enemy attacks , and even attack them if necessary . To accomplish the objectives of the ‘ orange phase ’ , General Trưởng placed several elite combat units such as the Ranger groups and armoured forces on constant combat alert . The second phase , known as the ‘ green phase ’ , was designed to delay enemy forces and buy more time for the South Vietnamese to regroup in order to stage a counter @-@ attack , in the scenario that enemy forces managed to overcome the ‘ orange phase ’ . In the final phase , or the ‘ blue phases ’ , require South Vietnamese units to secure their areas of defence , then destroy and push enemy forces out of I Corps . 
 = = = = Areas of defence = = = = 
 General Trưởng 's areas of defence were centred on Tri Thien @-@ Huế , Da Nang , and Quảng Nam @-@ Quảng Ngãi . 
 = = = = Tri Thien @-@ Huế = = = = 
 The task of holding Tri Thien and Huế was entrusted to the ARVN 1st Division ( South Vietnam ) , the 4th and 15th Ranger Groups , the <unk> and 914th Regional Forces Companies , the 17th and 20th Armoured Squadrons , 10 artillery battalions , one squadron of helicopters , two squadrons of reconnaissance aircraft , and one coastal patrol squadron . Those forces were commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Lâm Quang Thi . 
 = = = = Nam @-@ Da Nang = = = = 
 Da Nang was under the direct responsibility of Lieutenant @-@ General Ngô Quang Trưởng . It was home of the ARVN 3rd Division ( South Vietnam ) , the 4th and 7th Armoured Squadrons , the 11th and 14th Ranger Groups , the <unk> Regional Force Company , the 1st Air Force Division , one coastal patrol squadron and two riverine squadrons . 
 = = = = Quảng Tin @-@ Quảng Ngãi = = = = 
 Quảng Tin and Quảng Ngãi was held by the ARVN 2nd Division ( South Vietnam ) , the 12th Ranger Group , the 11th Armoured Squadron , three artillery battalions , the 912th Regional Force Company , one coastal patrol squadron and one riverine squadron . Brigadier @-@ General Trần Văn Nhựt commanded the 3rd Infantry Division , and all other units in Quảng Nam and Quảng Ngãi . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On March 5 , 1975 , the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps officially commenced its campaign against South Vietnamese forces of I Corps . The opening shots of the campaign was marked by an attack on South Vietnamese military convoys on Mount Hai Van , and the destruction of An Lo Bridge on National Highway 1 , located north of Huế . Positions held by the ARVN <unk> Regional Force at Dong Ong Do and Hill @-@ 368 also came under attack , as Phu Bai Airbase was subjected to intense artillery bombardment . While the South Vietnamese were busy dealing with those attacks , General Nguyen Huu An secretly redeployed the 325th Division and the 9th Regiment of the 304th Division , from Quảng Trị towards Huế in the south . The 46th and 271st Regiment then moved into positions previously held by the 325th Division and 9th Regiment . And , to fool South Vietnamese intelligence agencies , the North Vietnamese also moved tank and artillery units to Cua Viet , Thanh Hoi and Ai Tu to cover their main thrust . 
 Between March 6 and 7 , the Viet Cong 4th Local Force Battalion assaulted and overran Mai Linh and 11 other surrounding military sub @-@ sectors in Quảng Trị Province . On the following day , General Lâm Quang Thi requested reinforcements from General Ngô Quang Trưởng in Da Nang , as a response to Communist attacks in his area of control . Meanwhile , the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps continued their onslaught , with the 324th Division launching attacks on South Vietnamese positions in Mo Tau , and on Hills 75 , 76 , 224 , 273 , and 303 all located south of Huế . 
 By March 10 , several South Vietnamese units were defeated in their attempts to hold off the North Vietnamese ; the 1st battalion of 54th Infantry Regiments of ARVN 1st Division ( South Vietnam ) was destroyed on Hill 224 and 273 ; the ARVN 47th Armoured Squadron was overrun by the VPA 1st Regiment , 324th Division , on Mount Nghe ; and the ARVN 113th Regional Force Battalion conceded Pho Lai to the VPA 4th Regiment , which was supported by the 223rd Artillery Regiment . General Thi then ordered the 15th Ranger Group and the 2nd Battalion of the 54th Infantry Regiment , with support from the 27th and 37th Tank Squadrons , to mount a counter @-@ attack on Hill 224 . Over the period of one week , both sides fired over 8 @,@ 000 rounds of artillery shells on Hill 224 , and the South Vietnamese air force conducted over 60 bombing sorties in an attempt to halt the advances of the North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps . 
 On March 13 , amidst heavy fighting in the northern provinces of South Vietnam , General Ngô Quang Trưởng flew out to Saigon for a meeting with President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu . In this meeting , President Thiệu outlined his decision to abandon most of the provinces in I Corps Tactical Zone , and ordered General Trưởng to withdraw his forces towards the coastal regions of central Vietnam instead . In addition , the Airborne Division ( South Vietnam would be redeployed to the Mekong Delta region , where it could protect the nation 's capital . Unwilling to concede the northern provinces to the enemy , General Trưởng tried unsuccessfully to convince President Thiệu to reverse his decision in the believe that he could hold onto I Corps , and recapture lost territories by using the Airborne and Marine Corps Divisions . After he returned to his headquarters that afternoon , General Trưởng decided to redeploy his forces instead of carrying out President Thiệu 's order straightaway , for several reasons . Firstly , he wanted to convince the President that most South Vietnamese units were still intact , and that they still had the time to recapture lost territories . And secondly , General Trưởng did not want to create confusion amongst his subordinates , when the military situation in I Corps was still under control . 
 Thus , General Trưởng reorganised his defences in order to deal with the threat posed by North Vietnamese formations located south of I Corps ; he designated Da Nang to be the main centre of South Vietnamese defence in I Corps , with Tri Thien in the north , and with Quảng Nam and Quảng Ngãi in the south . To make up for the loss of the Airborne Division , General Trưởng ordered the 369th Marines Brigade to replace the 3rd Airborne Brigade in Quảng Nam Province , and the 258th Marines Brigade to take over from the 2nd Airborne Brigade on Mount Phu Gia , located north of Hai Van . 
 Meanwhile , between March 13 and 15 , the VPA 6th Regiment launched several attacks on <unk> Meo , La Son , Hill 300 and Hill 511 located west of Huế , forcing elements of the ARVN 1st Infantry Division to pull back towards Dong <unk> and Binh Dien . 
 On March 17 , the North Vietnamese High Command predicted that South Vietnamese units could withdraw into the cities of Huế and Da Nang , so the following orders were issued to North Vietnamese field commanders : General Lê Tự Đồng 's forces were to capture Phu Bai Air Base to prevent aerial transportation , and cut off a section of Highway 1 north of Huế , and General Nguyen Huu An 's 2nd Army Corps must secure Highway 1 south of the city , with the aim of isolating both Huế and Da Nang from the rest of the country . 
 On the following day , General Dong 's forces staged their attacks from two main directions , from Thanh Hoi and Tich Tuong @-@ Nhu Le , moving along Route 68 and National Highway 1 respectively . The North Vietnamese 2nd Army Corps , on the other hand , assaulted South Vietnamese positions in Phu Loc and Phu Gia . 
 By 8 : 30pm on the evening of March 18 , most of northern Quảng Trị was under North Vietnamese control . ARVN Colonel Do Ky , also the provincial chief of Quảng Trị Province , tried to lead what was left of his troops back to Huế but was pursued by the North Vietnamese along National Highway 1 until they reached An Lo . 
 As the fighting in Quảng Trị unfolded , General Ngô Quang Trưởng flew back from Saigon where he tried to obtain approval from President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu for his new defensive plan , and hastily reorganised South Vietnamese defences in the northern regions of I Corps . Subsequently , General Trưởng sent out the following orders : the 480th Marines Brigade to leave Da Nang and to guard the north @-@ western flank of Huế ; the 1st Infantry Division , the 15th Ranger Group and the 7th Tank Squadron to protect south @-@ western Huế ; and the 258th Marines Brigade and the 914th Regional Force Battalion were to secure a section of Highway 1 which connected Huế with Da Nang . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Fall of Huế = = = 
 While General Ngô Quang Trưởng was still busy reorganising South Vietnamese units in I Corps , on March 20 the Tri Thien Command finalised their plan to capture Huế , with the objective of preventing South Vietnamese forces from regrouping there . At 2 : 30pm on the same day , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu phoned the ARVN 1st Brigade Headquarters , and ordered General Trưởng to defend only Da Nang due to the lack of resources . Beginning at 5 : 40am on March 21 , the VPA 325th and 324th Divisions attacked South Vietnamese units positioned astride Highway 1 . At the same time , elements of the K5 Special Forces Battalion destroyed <unk> Luu Bridge , which connected a stretch of road on Highway 1 between Huế and Da Nang , forcing thousands of South Vietnamese civilian and military vehicles heading towards Da Nang to turn back . The ARVN 20th Tank Squadron was then sent out to reopen Highway 1 , but was defeated by the VPA 203rd Armoured Regiment . 
 In light of the worsening military situation on the evening of March 22 , General Ngô Quang Trưởng authorised General Lâm Quang Thi to pull his forces back to Da Nang . However , as the main roads were blocked by the North Vietnamese , General Thi 's only option was to use a coastal corridor between Thuan An and Tu Hien , and board transport vessels belonging to the 106th Navy Squadron and head back to Da Nang . 
 On the morning of March 23 , the VPA 324th Division advanced through Hill @-@ 303 and Mo Tau , and assaulted northern Phu Loc , while the VPA 325th Division captured Mui Ne , Phuoc Tuong , and encircled Tu Hien located south of Huế . In the north , the Viet Cong 4th , 46th and 271st Regiments pursued a retreating South Vietnamese formation consisted of the 147th Marines Brigade , the 14th Ranger Group , 5th Infantry Regiment of the 1st Infantry Division ) , and the 17th Armoured Squadron , heading towards Thuan An . And , at 4.30pm on March 23 , the VPA 101st Regiment ( part of the 325th Division ) overran Luong Dien , and surrounded Phu Bai Air Base , to close the main corridor leading into Huế from the south . Simultaneously , the Viet Cong 46th Regiment destroyed South Vietnamese defences on Bo River , captured the districts of Quang Dien , Quang Loi and Huong Can , and secured the main roads on the outskirts of northern Huế . 
 Between March 24 and 25 , the VPA 3rd ( 324th Division ) and 101st Regiments continued their drive towards Huế , after they successfully captured Phu Bai Air Base . At the same time , the 1st Regiment ( 324th Division ) along with the Viet Cong 4th and 271st Regiments were able to destroy the last elements of the ARVN 147th Marines Brigade and the 15th Ranger Group , before they could board navy vessels anchored off the shores of Huong Thuy , Luong Thien and Ke Sung and Cu Lai . 
 By the evening of March 25 , the North Vietnamese had secured all major points surrounding Huế , and South Vietnamese units that failed to escape were completely surrounded . Consequently , the North Vietnamese claimed to have captured large numbers of South Vietnamese prisoners and military hardware . In all , a total of 58 @,@ 722 South Vietnamese soldiers became prisoners of war , with one colonel and 18 lieutenant @-@ colonels amongst the ranks , as well as about 14 @,@ 000 South Vietnamese government officials and employees , who reported to the North Vietnamese military authorities . The South Vietnamese military in Huế also surrendered vast quantities of weaponry , which included 140 tanks and armoured vehicles . 
 = = = Tin @-@ Ngai Campaign = = = 
 From the beginning of March 1975 , the combined North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces of Military Region 5 had been coordinating their efforts with the 2nd Army Corp and Tri Thien Command to isolate General Ngô Quang Trưởng 's I Corps from II Corps , led by Major @-@ General Phạm Văn Phú . North Vietnamese and Viet Cong areas of operations in the southern regions of I Corps mainly centred in south @-@ western Quảng Tin and north @-@ western Quảng Ngãi , which included Tien Phuoc , Tam Kỳ , Nui Thanh , Tra Bong and Binh Son . 
 Regular units of the Vietnam People 's Army such as the 2nd Division , the 141st Regiment ( 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ Division ) , the 52nd Independent Brigade , the 368th and 572nd Artillery Regiments operated alongside local Viet Cong units , namely the 94th and 96th Local Force Regiments , and 70th and 72nd Local Force Battalions . The southern region of I Corps was considered to be the weakest area of defence , which was under the responsibility of ARVN General Trần Văn Nhựt , who also led the 2nd Infantry Division . Also included in General Nhut 's order of battle were the 12th Ranger Group , the 916th Regional Force Battalion , the 11th Armoured Brigade , three battalions of artillery , one navy coastal squadron and riverine squadron . 
 Beginning at 4 : 30am on March 10 , North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces proceeded to capture the following targets : the VPA 38th Regiment overran the highpoints of Nui Vu , Nui Ngoc , Duong Con , <unk> Da and Nui Vy ; the 36th Regiment destroyed South Vietnamese strong points at Trung Lien , Mount Da , Mount Khong ten , Ho Bach and Hill @-@ 215 ; the Viet Cong ‘ Ba Gia ’ Regiment held their positions on Hill @-@ 269 and Hill @-@ 310 , to stop South Vietnamese counter @-@ attacks from Tuan Duong ; while the 52nd Independent Brigade captured Go Han , Phuoc Tien , Duong Ong Luu , Duong Huế , Nui My , Hon Nhon , Deo Lieu , and Mount <unk> <unk> . Thus , 23 positions held by units of the ARVN 12th Ranger Groups were captured , just after four hours of fighting . 
 At 9 : 00am on March 10 , North Vietnamese soldiers of the 368th Artillery Regiment dragged 12 pieces of artillery which included 85mm , 105mm and <unk> guns onto the top of Nui Vu and Han Thon , and aimed their guns directly on Hill @-@ 211 and the administrative centre of Tien Phuoc , to support the 31st Regiment attacking those areas . At 1 : 30pm , following two failed counter @-@ attacks , South Vietnamese units in Phuoc Lam deserted from the battlefield . In the mean time , however , South Vietnamese troops in Tien Phuoc could bare held their ground with support from two A @-@ 37 bombers , after South Vietnamese commanders on the ground had called for reinforcement from Chu Lai . By 4 : 00pm , Tien Phuoc was captured by the VPA 2nd Division . 
 Due to the lost of Tien Phuoc and Phouc Lam , the ARVN 916th Regional Force Battalion retreated from the area . Thus , Tam Kỳ , the capital of Quảng Tin Province , was threatened to be overrun by the North Vietnamese . 
 On March 11 , General Ngô Quang Trưởng ordered General Trần Văn Nhựt to mobilise the 2nd Division ( South Vietnam ) , the 12th Ranger Group , elements of the 11th Armoured Squadron and one regional force battalion to mount a counter @-@ attack from Tuan Duong to Cam Khe and Duong Con. General Trưởng also ordered the ARVN 2nd Infantry Regiment ( 3rd Infantry Division ) to depart from Da Nang , and protect Tam Kỳ , so that General Nhut 's forces could be free up to fight the North Vietnamese . 
 However , between March 14 and 15 , the ARVN 2nd Infantry Regiment was forced to turn back from Tam Kỳ to deal with an attack on Thang Binh , by the Viet Cong 70th and 72nd Local Force Battalions . In southern Quảng Ngãi , the Viet Cong 94th Local Force Regiment attacked Binh Son , cut off a section of National Highway 1 near Chau O , and the ARVN 4th Infantry Regiment ( 2nd Infantry Division ) was pinned down trying to deal with Viet Cong attacks . Thus , South Vietnamese attempts to stage an effective counter @-@ attack were quickly blunted by the combined Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces in Quảng Ngãi Province . Recognising that he no longer has the manpower to mount a counter @-@ attack , General Nhut ordered his troops to abandon Tra Bong and Son Ha , and concentrate his units in Tam Kỳ and Chu Lai instead . 
 Following the failed counter @-@ attack , South Vietnamese forces in I Corps was further weakened when President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu pulled the Airborne Division back to Saigon . Now that the South Vietnamese 2nd Infantry Division and the 12th Ranger Group was overstretched between Quảng Ngãi and Hội An , with Tam Kỳ only defended by the ARVN 5th Infantry Regiment and one battalion from the ARVN 4th Infantry Regiment , North Vietnamese General Chu Huy Mân decided to utilise the advantage to capture Tam Kỳ . Beginning at 5 : 30am on March 21 , the North Vietnamese 2nd Division attacked Suoi Da , the last South Vietnamese outpost outside Tam Kỳ . At around 12 : 00pm , ARVN General Trần Văn Nhựt ordered the rest of the 4th Infantry Regiment out from Quảng Ngãi in an attempt to hold Tam Kỳ , so South Vietnamese defences in that province was further weakened . Again , taking advantage of the situation , General Chu Huy Mân ordered the 52nd Independent Brigade and the 94th Local Force Regiment to attack Quảng Ngãi . By 7 : 00am on March 24 , the cities of Tam Kỳ and Quảng Ngãi were simultaneously attacked by North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces . In Tam Kỳ , the ARVN 4th and 5th Infantry Regiments were destroyed after two hours of heavy fighting , while the 37th and 39th Ranger Battalions ( from the ARVN 12th Ranger Group ) in the outskirts of the city simply fled from the battlefield . At 10 : 00am on March 24 , North Vietnamese and Viet Cong soldiers of the 2nd Division , the ‘ Ba Gia ’ Regiment , and the 31st Regiment successfully captured Tam Kỳ . 
 In Quảng Ngãi , the VPA 52nd Independent Brigade , with support from two special forces battalions , as well as tanks and armoured vehicles from the 574th Regiment , rolled over South Vietnamese defences . At around 2 : 00pm , the surviving elements of the ARVN 6th Infantry Regiment , the rest of the 12th Ranger Group and the 4th Tank Squadron was ambushed by the Viet Cong 94th Local Force Regiment along National Highway 1 , when they tried to retreat towards Chu Lai without a fight . As a result , over 600 South Vietnamese soldiers were killed , and around 3 @,@ 500 others were captured . At 11 : 30pm on March 24 , the North Vietnamese was in full control of Quảng Ngãi City . O 
 n March 25 , 1975 , the Tin @-@ Ngai Campaign concluded with North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces exercising full control over the provinces of Quảng Tin and Quảng Ngãi , leaving Da Nang as the only major city in I Corps still held by the South Vietnamese . 
 As such , out of the 44 provinces in South Vietnam , 10 were occupied by the Vietnam People 's Army , while three ARVN infantry divisions were rendered ineffective . In addition , the elite ARVN 147th Marines Brigade ceased to exist as a fighting force . 
 = = = Fall of Da Nang = = = 
 = = = = South Vietnamese dispositions = = = = 
 By 1975 , Da Nang had been become the second largest city in South Vietnam , with close to a million inhabitants . It was a major economic and political centre in I Corps Tactical Zone , and was home to the largest military installations which incorporated the South Vietnamese army , navy and air force . Logistically , the military infrastructure within the city could hold several thousand tons of weaponry , ammunition , food supplies and other essential war materials . It also had four large seaports , and a major airport at Da Nang and Nuoc Man . So , on March 25 , following the loss of Quảng Trị , Thừa Thiên , Quảng Nam and Quảng Ngãi , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu ordered South Vietnamese commanders at all levels to hold what was left of I Corps till the very end . On March 26 , General Ngô Quang Trưởng gathered what was left of his units , about 75 @,@ 000 soldiers , and organised them into the following order : 
 Outer Defensive Line : The 258th Marines Brigade and the 914th Regional Force Battalion to hold all areas between Phuoc Tuong and Lien Chieu . The 369th Marines Brigade and the 57th Infantry Regiment ( 3rd Infantry Division ) were to protect Dai Loc and Dong Lam . The surviving elements of the 147th Marines Brigade , and the Marine Corps Division Headquarters would hold Nuoc Man airfield . Meanwhile , the remnants of the 3rd Infantry Division would hold Vinh Dien and Ninh Que , while the 15th Ranger Group held Ba Ren . 
 Inner Defensive Line : The 912th Regional Force Battalion , and the last elements of the 11th and 20th Armoured Squadrons held Phuoc Tuong @-@ Hoa My . The last three battalions of the 1st Infantry Division , the 2nd Infantry Division , the 12th Ranger Group , and about 3 @,@ 000 freshly trained soldiers from the Hoa Cam Training Camp were ordered to defend all key areas between Hoa Cam and Nuoc Man . All independent Regional and Popular Force battalions were placed in reserve , and could go into combat when required . 
 General Trưởng also had 12 artillery battalions at his disposal , as well as the 1st Air Force Division based at Da Nang and Nuoc Man , which were still intact despite the early clashes in I Corps . 
 = = = North Vietnamese plan of attack = = = 
 Following the conclusion of the Tri Thien and Tin @-@ Ngai Campaigns , the Vietnam People 's Army High Command ordered General Lê Trọng Tấn to journey south from Hanoi and personally take charge of the Da Nang Campaign . Subsequently , on March 25 , the North Vietnamese came up with a plan to attack Da Nang from four directions : 
 North : The 325th Division ( without the 95th Regiment ) , with support from one tank battalion and one artillery battalion , were ordered to advance along National Highway 1 and capture the ARVN 1st Brigade Headquarters , the South Vietnamese 1st Air Force Division at Da Nang , and then move on to the Son Tra Peninsula to capture the main seaport there . 
 North @-@ West : The 9th Regiment ( 304th Division ) , with support from one tank battalion , one artillery battalion and one anti @-@ aircraft gun battalion , were ordered to advance along Highway 14B , and capture the ARVN 3rd Infantry Division Headquarters at Phuoc Tuong , and then move on to Da Nang Air Base . 
 South & South @-@ East : The 2nd Division , with support from one artillery unit ( the 36th Artillery Regiment ) , one artillery battalion , one tank @-@ armoured vehicles battalion , one anti @-@ aircraft gun battalion , and one anti @-@ tank weapons company , were ordered to take Da Nang Air Base and the ARVN 1st Brigade Headquarters , then capture the city itself . The 3rd and 68th Regiments were placed in reserve . 
 South @-@ West : The 2nd Army Corps ( without the 9th Regiment , 304th Division ) was ordered to take all positions held by the ARVN 369th Marines Brigade along the defensive line at Thuong Duc @-@ Ai Nghia @-@ Hiep Duc , then advance toward Nuoc Man airfield . The 24th Regiment ( 304th Division ) was required to capture Hoa Cam , and then move on to Da Nang . 
 = = = = The fight begins = = = = 
 Before the North Vietnamese finalised their plan to capture Da Nang , the 2nd Army Corps had already begun making preparations for the final attack on the city . On March 24 , the VPA 325th Division fought with the ARVN 258th Marines Brigade and the 914th Regional Force Battalion at North Hai Van , and overran Phuoc Tuong , Nuoc <unk> , Tho Son and <unk> Luu . Consequently , North Vietnamese forces captured enemy artillery positions in Phuoc Tuong , and made good use of it during the following weeks . On March 27 , with air @-@ support from A @-@ 37 attack aircraft from Da Nang , the 258th Marines Brigade and the 914th Regional Force Battalion tried to hold off North Vietnamese forces at Phu Gia and Hai Van , but they were pushed back and sustained heavy casualties in the process . The VPA 325th Division then continued their advance through So Hai , Loan Ly , An Bao and Lang Co . Soon afterwards , more than 30 artillery pieces belonging to the VPA 84th and 164th Artillery Regiments were placed at various high points in Son Thach , Son Khanh and Mui <unk> ; beginning at 5 : 30am on March 28 , North Vietnamese artillery units bombarded South Vietnamese positions around Da Nang . Meanwhile , the ARVN 369th Marines Brigade quickly abandoned their position at Son Ga , after they had detected elements of the VPA 304th Division conducting reconnaissance missions on the battlefield . On March 28 , the VPA 66th Regiment ( 304th Division ) attacked and captured the administrative area of Ai Nghia and Nuoc Man airfield , while the VPA 24th Regiment attacked Hoa Cam and Toa in the outskirts of Da Nang . 
 The ARVN 369th Marines Brigade then tried to pull back towards An Dong and My Khe , but they were pursued by the VPA 2nd Division . Meanwhile , the 3 @,@ 000 South Vietnamese soldiers at Hoa Cam mutinied against their commanding officers , and surrendered to the North Vietnamese . South of Da Nang , the VPA 2nd Division , with support from tank and artillery units was able to overrun Ba Ren at around 9 : 00am on March 28 . In response , ARVN General Ngô Quang Trưởng ordered Air Force Brigadier @-@ General Nguyen Van Khanh to send a squadron of four A @-@ 37 bombers to destroy the main bridges at Ba Ren and Cau Lau , but they could not prevent the VPA 2nd Division from crossing the river using canoes , and other small river crafts . At 5 : <unk> on March 29 , the outer South Vietnamese defence line located south of Da Nang succumbed to the North Vietnamese . At <unk> on the same day , the last South Vietnamese strongholds in and around Hai Van were overrun by the North Vietnamese . The VPA 325th Division then secured Lien Chieu , the Nam O Bridge and the Trinh Me The Bridge , thereby clearing the main road for the supporting tank and armoured units to advance on Son Tra . As North Vietnamese troops were closing in , General Ngô Quang Trưởng and other high @-@ ranking South Vietnamese officers were airlifted out to the coastal areas , where they boarded the navy transport ship HQ @-@ 404 . At 12 : 00pm , the ARVN 1st Brigade Headquarters was finally captured . At 12 : 30pm , the 9th Regiment ( 304th Division ) also captured the ARVN 3rd Infantry Division Headquarters , and quickly established their control over the entire Phuoc Tuong area . 
 By the time Da Nang fall into North Vietnamese hands , South Vietnamese commanders on the ground simply lost control of their men as military discipline collapsed . On March 28 , about 6 @,@ 000 South Vietnamese soldiers of the 2nd Infantry Division deserted , and left the battlefield . And then the soldiers of the ARVN 3rd Infantry Division also retreated , thereby leaving the rear of the Marine Corps Division exposed to enemy attacks . Since March 25 , from the CIA Station in Da Nang , Al Francis and the U.S. Embassy in Saigon began formulating an evacuation plan , in order to evacuate U.S. citizens and South Vietnamese government officials out from Da Nang . As part of the plan , aircraft belonging to civilian airliners were to be used . And in addition to the South Vietnamese navy vessels of I Corps , U.S. General Homer Smith also provided five barges , six passenger liners , and three cargo ships to help with the evacuation process . Even though the evacuation plan was designed to be carried out in an orderly manner , chaos and confusion quickly descended on the civilian and military population of Da Nang as people fought each other to board the vessels anchored off the coast . On the afternoon of March 29 , North Vietnamese soldiers of the 2nd , 304th , 324th and 325th Divisions , as well as the 203rd Armoured Regiment , entered the city of Da Nang . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The struggle for Huế and Da Nang had cost South Vietnam its entire army corps , namely the units of the ARVN 1st Brigade , I Corps Tactical Zone . According to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam 's official history , apart from the 16 @,@ 000 soldiers and civilians who managed to escape , over 120 @,@ 000 South Vietnamese soldiers were killed , wounded or captured after the fall of Huế and Da Nang . In their attempt to abandon the territories of I Corps , the South Vietnamese military left behind vast quantities of <unk> military hardware . The North Vietnamese claimed to have captured 129 aircraft of different models , 179 tanks and armoured vehicles , 327 artillery pieces , 184 transport vehicles and 47 naval crafts . More than 10 @,@ 000 tons of bombs , ammunition , grenades , food supplies , combat rations , and other materials were also captured . Total North Vietnamese and Viet Cong casualties are largely unknown . 
 = = = South Vietnam and the loss of the northern provinces = = = 
 President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu 's decision to abandon the Central Highlands and the coastal regions of I Corps had a negative impact on the fighting ability of South Vietnamese troops , especially as the northern provinces of South Vietnam were driven into chaos . On March 31 , after the fall of Huế and Da Nang , ARVN General Phạm Văn Phú @-@ commander of II Corps Tactical <unk> held a meeting with his General Staff and the provincial chiefs of Bình Định , Khánh Hòa , Phú Yên , Ninh Thuận and Bình Thuận , and requested them to form a defensive line from Qui Nhơn into the Mekong Delta to cover the retreat of the ARVN 2nd Brigade from the Central Highlands . Subsequently , General Phu issued the following orders : Rear Admiral Hoang Co Minh was to oversee military operations in the Qui Nhơn region , Brigadier @-@ General Trần Văn Cẩm to hold Phú Yên , Brigadier @-@ General Nguyen Ngoc <unk> and Brigadier @-@ General Nguyen Van Luong was tasked with holding Nha Trang . Meanwhile , General Phan Dinh <unk> commander of the ARVN 22nd Infantry <unk> was required to form a defensive line linking Qui Nhơn with <unk> <unk> and Deo Ca , with the purpose of delaying North Vietnamese forces . 
 The withdrawal plan formulated by General Phạm Văn Phú and his General Staff was made with the belief that North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces would stop and consolidate their territorial gains before they could go on the attack again . However , during the spring offensive of 1975 , North Vietnamese commanders were more than willing to manoeuvre their units away from newly captured territories , in order to pursue retreating South Vietnamese units . Furthermore , South Vietnamese commanders never realised that Hanoi had given its field commanders the full flexibility to respond to the changing circumstances on the battlefield , and had supplied North Vietnamese units with weaponry required to achieve their objectives . Ultimately , the average South Vietnamese soldiers would have to pay for the miscalculation of their commanders . At 5 : 15am on March 31 , the 47th Infantry Regiment ( ARVN 22nd Infantry Division ) was ambushed by the 2nd Regiment ( VPA 3rd ‘ Gold Star ’ Division ) , while withdrawing towards Phu An @-@ Lai Nghi . Upon arrival at Phu Cat , the remnants of the ARVN 47th Infantry Regiment was encircled and assaulted by the VPA 198th Regiment , and ceased to exist as a fighting unit by 12 : 30pm . 
 The 41st Infantry Regiment ( ARVN 22nd Infantry Division ) also came under attack from the VPA 95th Regiment , as they moved from Nui Mot to Phu Phong . Throughout the evening of March 31 , the ARVN 41st Infantry Regiment fought with the VPA 141st Regiment , as soon as they reached Phat Giao . In contrast to the other units , the 42nd Infantry Regiment ( ARVN 22nd Infantry Division ) was able to escape the North Vietnamese onslaught , but their strength was significantly reduced before they reached Dieu Tri . On April 1 , Quy Nhon fall into the hands of the North Vietnamese , which was followed by Tuy Hòa on April 2 . ARVN General Trần Văn Cẩm was captured in Tuy Hòa after his helicopter had landed on the ground , where he tried to survey the battlefield . The destruction of the ARVN 22nd Infantry Division , which had about 10 @,@ 000 fully equipped men , stirred up chaos in Nha Trang ; more than 3 @,@ 000 South Vietnamese recruits from the Lam Son Army Training Centre retreated into the city , while another 1 @,@ 000 soldiers went on a rampage and looted goods on the main streets . The chief of Khánh Hòa Province , Colonel Ly Ba Pham , boarded a military aircraft and flew out to Phan Rang , after he had notified Saigon that " the situation is irreversible " . On the afternoon of April 2 , Nha Trang was overrun by the North Vietnamese , and not a single battle was fought in its defence . By 2 : 00pm on April 2 , ARVN General Phạm Văn Phú had lost every military unit and territory under his control . 
 = = = The decisions of President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu = = = 
 According to many academics , both in Vietnam and in the West , the major factor which contributed to the rapid collapse of South Vietnamese defences in 1975 was the numerous , and contradictory orders issued by President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu . During the various phases of the South Vietnamese retreat from the northern provinces , namely in I and II Corps Tactical Zones , President Thiệu had at least three different plans and decisions laid out before him , and each one either lacked consistency or simply contradicted one another . For example , on March 13 , President Thiệu ordered General Ngô Quang Trưởng to abandon I Corps , and return the elite Airborne Division to the Mekong Delta region of III Corps . Soon afterwards , similar orders were issued to Major @-@ General Phạm Văn Phú to evacuate from the Central Highlands . Then , on March 17 , with intervention from General Cao Văn Viên , President Thiệu contradicted his previous orders when he approved General Trưởng 's defensive plan to hold the major cities of Huế and Da Nang . 
 However , the very next day , President Thiệu ordered General Ngô Quang Trưởng and General Lâm Quang Thi to abandon Huế , and only concentrate sufficient numbers of South Vietnamese units to hold Da Nang . On March 29 , as General Trưởng was about to board the navy transport ship HQ @-@ 404 , he received a phone call from President Thiệu , who ordered him to turn back and retake Da Nang from the North Vietnamese forces . By that stage , however , South Vietnamese units in I Corps had virtually disappeared , while their commanding officers had fled from their posts . So General Trưởng refused to carry out President Thiệu 's orders . Between April 3 and 4 , President Thiệu reprimanded General Phạm Văn Phú and General Lâm Quang Thi for the debacles in II and I Corps respectively , and Generals Pham Quoc Thuan and <unk> Quốc <unk> for the fall of Phước Long in 1974 . Even though President Thiệu used the defeat of South Vietnamese forces as a justification for the arrest of those generals , his real intention behind the arrests was to avert an imaginary military coup against him . For that reason , he chose to pull the Airborne Division back to III Corps , which was commanded by loyalist officers , instead of the Marine Corps Division . 
 General Ngô Quang Trưởng and General Lê Nguyên Khang were spared , but both men responded strongly to President Thiệu 's reaction . In General Trưởng 's view , the aforementioned generals were victims of injustice , as they were far more competent than Thiệu 's loyalists in Saigon . In addition to the military disasters suffered on the battlefield , President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu also caused instability within his own government during the final days of South Vietnam 's existence . For example , on April 2 , President Thiệu requested the country 's National Assembly to dissolve Prime Minister Trần Thiện Khiêm 's cabinet , and replace him with Nguyễn Bá Cẩn . The National Assembly quickly approved President Thiệu 's request . Then on the same day , President Thiệu also ordered the arrest of seven individuals who had worked for Air @-@ Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ , believing they were plotting to overthrow him . William Colby — CIA Chief of Station in Saigon — wrote in a report back to Washington that the balance of power had leaned in Hanoi 's favour . As such , if South Vietnam were to survive the North Vietnamese onslaught , whoever replaced President Thiệu would have to accept a resolution to the conflict on North Vietnamese terms . 
 = Baccano ! = 
 Baccano ! ( Japanese : <unk> ! , Hepburn : <unk> ! , Italian for " ruckus " , Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a Japanese light novel series written by Ryohgo Narita and illustrated by Katsumi Enami . The series , often told from multiple points of view , is mostly set within a fictional United States during various time periods , most notably the Prohibition era . It focuses on various people , including alchemists , thieves , thugs , Mafiosi and <unk> , who are unconnected to one another . After an immortality elixir is recreated in 1930 Manhattan , the characters begin to cross paths , setting off events that spiral further and further out of control . 
 The first novel was released in February 2003 under ASCII Media Works ' ( formerly MediaWorks ) Dengeki Bunko imprint , and as of March 2013 , twenty novels have been released . The novels were adapted into a sixteen episode anime television series directed by Takahiro Omori and produced by Brain 's Base and Aniplex . The first thirteen episodes were aired on WOWOW from July 26 , 2007 , to November 1 , 2007 ; the final three were released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD . The series was also adapted into a two @-@ volume manga , an adventure video game for the Nintendo DS and two drama CDs . An additional novel was released with the first drama CD and two gaiden novels were released in parts with the DVDs of the anime adaption . 
 Funimation has dubbed the anime episodes in English , and has licensed them for release in the United States and Canada . The series was also licensed by Manga Entertainment for English releases in the United Kingdom , and by Madman Entertainment for releases in Australia and New Zealand . The entire English @-@ dubbed series was streamed through Hulu during October 2009 and English @-@ subtitled episodes continue to be streamed . Funimation streams English @-@ subtitled and English @-@ dubbed episodes through their website . The series has also aired in the Philippines , Hong Kong and Southeast Asia on Animax Asia . On January 25 , 2016 , it was announced that the streaming and DVD home distribution rights for the North American distributor of the anime , Funimation , would expire , which occurred on February 8 , 2016 . 
 The light novels of the series have been well received by readers and have also been awarded . The first light novel , The Rolling Bootlegs , was awarded the Gold Prize of the ninth Dengeki Novel Prize , held by ASCII Media Works in 2002 , after reaching third place . The anime adaptation of the series has been popular in Japan and the United States , and has also received significant praise for its plot , characters , strong dubbing , animation and musical score . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Aboard the ship <unk> Avis in 1711 , a group of alchemists summon a demon in the hopes of gaining eternal life . The demon gives them an elixir of immortality and the method of ending their existence , by " devouring " one another , and grants the summoner Maiza Avaro the formula of the elixir . Maiza and most of the alchemists decide that no one else must become immortal ; only Szilard <unk> opposes . That night , the alchemists begin to disappear , devoured by Szilard . Realizing the threat posed by staying together , they scatter across the globe . 
 In New York City during November 1930 , Szilard succeeds in recreating the elixir , only to have it stolen by young thug Dallas Genoard . The elixir continually moves around the city because of Dallas , with the three mafiosi Gandor brothers , the two idiotic thieves Isaac Dian and Miria <unk> , and Maiza 's protege Firo Prochainezo and their Camorra family , the Martillo , all passing it around . Szilard makes Dallas an incomplete immortal ( meaning he still ages ) to retrieve the elixir . However , all other parties accidentally consume the elixir , mistaking it for alcohol , at a party for Firo . Firo falls in love with Szilard 's immortal homunculus Ennis , who betrays Szilard by telling Firo how to devour Szilard , which he does . The Gandor then cement Dallas to a barrel at the bottom of the Hudson River to punish him for killing Gandor members . 
 In late 1931 , the Gandor fight the <unk> family for control of the same area after a new drug surfaces . In an attempt to resolve the situation , Luck Gandor asks his adoptive brother Claire Stanfield , a psychopathic assassin , to travel to New York . Claire agrees to and boards the transcontinental train the Flying Pussyfoot , on which he works as a conductor . The train is hijacked by the Russo and Lemure gangs , who are trying to kidnap a senator 's family , and a battle ensues between the two gangs . Meanwhile , Jacuzzi Splot , Nice Holystone and their gang attempt to protect the passengers and fight the hijackers , while Claire assumes the identity of the Rail Tracer , a monster that eats train passengers , and slaughters much of the Russo and the Lemure , only to successfully propose to one of the Lemure , Chane Laforet , who is a daughter of immortals . The last remaining members of the Lemure are eventually defeated by Jacuzzi 's gang , while sadistic murderer Ladd Russo is incarcerated and loses his arm to Claire . At the same time , Ennis writes to Isaac and Miria , inviting them to Manhattan . The duo boards the same train and meets Jacuzzi , and unwittingly sway immortal Czeslaw Meyer from enacting malevolent acts by abandoning selling a series of homemade bombs meant for <unk> to counter the Gandors . 
 The train arrives in New Year 1932 with the survivors going their separate ways : Jacuzzi and Nice escape custody and go into hiding after their base of operations in Chicago was taken over by the Russo family ; information gatherer Rachel returns to the Daily Days mostly unscathed ; Isaac and Miria introduce <unk> to the Martillo family and is subsequently adopted by Firo and Ennis , who later marry , as the latter 's brother ; and Claire begins his mission to exterminate the enemies of his adoptive brothers , implying his intentions to find Chane and marry her after the job is done . 
 Later that year Dallas ' sister Eve searches for Dallas , putting her at odds with Luck . These stories involved the Daily Days News Information company and the <unk> ' drug plot with Begg , a drug addicted immortal alchemist acquaintance of Maiza 's encroaching Gandor turf through his miracle drugs , testing it on innocent bystanders including a young man named Roy Maddock . Eventually Eve is caught up in the turf war involving drugs with the <unk> family and Gandors , the ramifications of the turf war affecting two lovers : Gandor speakeasy waitress Edith and her boyfriend , revealed to be Roy . The climax of the conflict results in Luck secretly telling Eve where Dallas is to spare her from bloodshed , and with Claire 's help , the turf war ends with bittersweet results for Edith and Roy now associated with the Gandors until they finish the debt they compiled in the story albeit in happier terms . 
 Eventually , Dallas is pulled out of the river , but shortly after , he is abducted by the Larvae , a group working for Huey Laforet . Meanwhile , Jacuzzi 's operations begin to encroach on Gandor and Martillo turf . Representatives ( Ronnie <unk> , Ennis and Tick Jefferson ) from both groups converge on Eve 's home , where his gang is staying along with Isaac and Miria . At the same time , the Larvae arrive to enlist Jacuzzi 's help ; they have kidnapped Dallas to prove that immortality is possible , and attempt to convince Jacuzzi into join them . Elsewhere in 1933 New York , Mist Wall , the largest branch office of the military equipment researcher and developer Nebula , is bombed as according to Huey 's plans with the help of Lamia , another faction of homunculus made by him . 
 The next year in 1934 at Alcatraz Island , Ladd befriends Firo , who was framed for a public bombing , and Isaac , who was finally caught for his thefts , and they meet Chane 's immortal father Huey , who was charged with treason and conspiracy years ago with affiliation to the Lemures among other terrorist acts . Meanwhile , Christopher <unk> , Huey 's homunculus , and Graham Specter , Ladd 's loyal follower , cause an all out war in Chicago through various battles enacted by the Lamia and Russo family . Afterwards , Jacuzzi and his gang return to Chicago while Ladd attempts to kill Huey and fails thanks to the efforts of Isaac and Firo however the scuffle resulted in Huey 's eye taken with the help of Lamia operative Sham , a homunculus who can take over one 's consciousness by contact through his body in the form of water . The homunculus group Lamia ( associated with Larvae , the group previously encountered by the cast ) cause trouble for the Russo family while this happens . Several of the Lamia join their forces and others split for other purposes , particularly Christopher joining with the Russo family to protect their heir named Ricardo Russo along with Lamia member Sickle and Graham Spector . Isaac is eventually released from Alcatraz along with Firo . Placido Russo , Ricardo 's grandfather and Ladd 's uncle , is eventually turned immortal and consumed by Nebula scientist Renee for his failure in stopping the rampage of Chicago , resulting in Ricardo inheriting the crime family . 
 The remainder of the plot focuses of an even older faction of Immortals led by Huey 's mentor and former lover , Renee <unk> <unk> detailed their relationship with the 1711 immortals from the 1700s till the later 1930s and how the corporation Nebula involves themselves against the other crime families by allying themselves with Senator <unk> , who has a grudge against the immortals and wishes to rid the world of them . One particular immortal named <unk> targets Firo in 1935 by endangering Ennis in order to extract the memories of Szilard Quaites by eating Firo , unaware that his bodyguard is Claire Stanfield , resulting in his defeat . Later , Renee continues to pursue Huey by attempting to reclaim Chane for a purpose which put her at odds with Claire who intends to marry their daughter . As of this writing , the conflict appears to remain unresolved . 
 In 2001 , Maiza and a few immortals appear in a rural European town to apprehend a fellow alchemist and immortal Elmer C. Albatross , who had been masquerading as a demon and was imprisoned by the locals . They uncover an age old conspiracy detailing the origins of water homunculi from the 1930s ( Sham and Leeza Laforet , sister of Chane ) and also putting a stop the experiments on the people that had been ongoing in the town as they remained unaware of Szilard <unk> 's demise for almost the remaining century , his descendant Bild Quaites later encounters the immortals and reveals the horrific secrets of the village . Phil and Felt <unk> , homunculi resulting from Szilard 's experiments are subsequently freed from the village and allowed to wander the earth , ending up in New York after the ordeal . 
 In 2002 , a cult named <unk> launches a heist to replicate the Flying Pussyfoot incident via a twin cruise ship named Exit and Entrance only to be thwarted by Claire Stanfield and Chane Laforet 's descendants , Claudia and Charon Walken with <unk> Splot and Nice Holystone 's descendant , Bobby Splot along with his gang with unwitting aide from another faction called Mask Makers led by Huey 's descendant Luchino B. Campanella . It is eventually revealed that <unk> 's tormentor <unk> is in fact the mastermind and overall villain of the series after Szilard Quaites . 
 = = Production = = 
 Ryohgo Narita wanted to write a story set during the Prohibition and chose a light novel as the medium because not many of them had that setting . He believed that this choice would better attract the interest of the ASCII Media Works judges . After Narita saw The Untouchables , he spent about ten days working with inspirations and created Baccano ! " out of [ his ] useless calculations . " While writing the first novel The Rolling Bootlegs , he consulted many books while writing and mixed fictional elements with historical situations to create a unique plot flow . The story he originally planned was about an ancient magician who was revived during the Prohibition and began to terrorize New York City . A group of mafiosi then violently oppose the magician . However , the story became very different from the original concept . Narita never wrote a detailed outline for the novel and is relieved by that fact because it allowed the characters to " move on their own . " The original stages of the series included more supernatural elements . Maiza Avaro was a hypnotist ; Ennis was a succubus ; Szilard was a magician . In addition , every member of the Camorra , except for Firo , did not survive . Despite the great differences between the characters ' initial concepts and the result , Narita is " glad " that these ideas were not used in the finished novel . 
 Narita did not begin work on a second novel during the six months after the publication of The Rolling Bootlegs because his chief editor asked him to write nothing until after he graduated from university . After his graduation , he was offered to publish his next book in August , and he submitted his manuscripts in late April , a bit behind original deadlines . He had written over 400 pages , making the price over ¥ 700 , which is a high price for a novel written by a newcomer . This worried Narita because it was unlikely anyone would buy the novel . As a result , he and his chief editor decided that the novel would be released in two parts . However , Narita was still anxious about publishing such a long novel . To motivate himself to write more , he would often refer back to the dialogue he had written for Ladd Russo . As with the first novel , the plot changed because of the characters ' " movements " , most notably Claire Stanfield . Narita noted that all of the Lemure and Russo , with the exception of a character named <unk> , were originally planned to die , but Claire 's presence in the novel left that concept " in ruins " . In addition , Chane Laforet , who was not well liked by the author , was also supposed to die , but as time passed , Narita became attached to her and changed her fate . 
 While creating the anime series , art director Ito Satoshi and other staff members scouted Manhattan and surrounding neighborhoods to accurately portray the area . They visited the Hell 's Kitchen neighborhood , Chinatown , Little Italy , Grand Central Terminal and various locations in Brooklyn and along the East River , many of which provide the backdrop for the events in Baccano ! . The staff also visited the Steamtown National Historic Site to create accurate steam locomotives . 
 Tyler Walker , the ADR director of the English dub of the series , held auditions for six days , during which about 140 people came for the eighteen main roles . Walker states that this is probably the longest casting process Funimation has held . He comments that because there are a lot of characters and most of them are older men , a character type he does not work with often , choosing voice actors and familiarizing them with their characters was difficult . He asked many directors and actors for recommendations and mainly aimed to cast newcomers , as he felt Baccano ! provided him a chance to discover newer talent . Walker wished to find actors who could provide the dialect and accents of the various time periods and locations , especially when casting for the characters with heavy European accents . 
 To prepare to write the script , Walker watched various movies featuring gangsters . He attempted to take what he could from The Untouchables , especially Robert De Niro 's portrayal of Al Capone . Walker watched movies created and set in the 1930s , including but not limited to The Public Enemy , Little Caesar , Once Upon a Time in America , Miller 's Crossing and various movies starring James Cagney , because he believed they would give him a truer feel on how people of the era sounded and talked . He wanted to capture the lingo and rhythm . Because Baccano ! is a " stylized gangster flick " and because of the nature of anime , he made the dialogue more flowery and lingo @-@ ridden than it would have been in reality . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Light novels = = = 
 The Baccano ! light novels are written by Ryohgo Narita and illustrated by Katsumi Enami . Originally , Narita entered the first novel into ASCII Media Works ' ninth Dengeki Novel Prize in 2002 and the novel won the Gold Prize , placing third . The first novel was released in February 2003 under ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Bunko imprint , and as of March 3 , 2013 , twenty novels have been released . In addition , one novel accompanied the first drama CD , released on March 31 , 2006 , and two gaiden novels were released in parts with DVDs of the anime adaption , released from October 24 , 2007 to May 28 , 2008 . 
 Daewon C.I. licensed the Korean @-@ language release of the series in South Korea and releases the novels under their NT Novels imprint . A Chinese @-@ language release in Taiwan and Hong Kong is published by the Taiwan branch of Kadokawa Media under their Fantastic Novels imprint . 
 It was announced at the 2015 Anime Expo that Yen Press will start publishing the Baccano ! novels in English in 2016 . 
 = = = Drama CDs = = = 
 The series has been adapted into two drama CDs . The first , titled 1931 Local Chapter ・ Express Chapter ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> ・ <unk> ) The Grand Punk Railroad , was released March 31 , 2006 by MediaWorks . Named after the second and third light novels , the CD retells the events occurring aboard the Flying Pussyfoot train . 
 The second CD , Firo Prochainezo witnesses the 53rd death of Pietro Gonzalez ( <unk> ・ <unk> 、 <unk> ・ <unk> , Firo <unk> , <unk> <unk> no <unk> no shi o <unk> su ) , was released by Movic on October 24 , 2007 . It follows Firo and Luck as they chase two men to a small village in Mexico and attempt to retrieve money stolen from the Martillo and Gandor families . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 16 @-@ episode anime series directed by Takahiro Omori and produced by Brain 's Base , Aniplex and Movic was adapted from the light novels . The episodes describe the events spanning from 1930 to 1932 in a non @-@ linear fashion , including the recreation of the immortality elixir , the hijacking of the Flying Pussyfoot , Eve 's hunt for her brother and the gang war between the Gandor and the <unk> . The first thirteen episodes aired in Japan from July 26 , 2007 to November 1 , 2007 on WOWOW , a Japanese pay @-@ per @-@ view station , and the final three were released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD . The series made its North American television debut when it started airing on the Funimation Channel September 6 , 2010 . 
 Eight DVD compilations were released by Aniplex , each containing two episodes , with the first released on October 24 , 2007 and the eighth on May 28 , 2008 . A Blu @-@ ray Baccano ! limited edition boxset was released on January 26 , 2011 by Aniplex . On July 21 , 2008 , Funimation announced that it has licensed Baccano ! for a North American release . Four DVD compilations were released , with the first on January 27 , 2009 and the fourth on June 16 , 2009 . A complete DVD collection boxset was released December 29 , 2009 , and re @-@ released on December 28 , 2010 as part of a lower @-@ priced Viridian Collection . A limited edition Blu @-@ ray boxset was released May 17 , 2011 . The entire English @-@ dubbed series was streamed through Hulu during October 2009 and English @-@ subtitled episodes continue to be streamed , and Funimation streamed subtitled and dubbed episodes through their website . In Australia and New Zealand , the series is licensed by Madman Entertainment , who released the series over four DVDs between June 24 , 2009 and October 21 , 2009 . A boxset was released on March 17 , 2010 . Baccano ! is licensed in the United Kingdom by Manga Entertainment and was released as a complete boxset on October 11 , 2010 . The series is aired in the Philippines , Hong Kong , India , Pakistan and Southeast Asia on Animax Asia . 
 It was announced on January 25 , 2016 , that Funimation 's DVD home distribution and streaming rights for the anime would expire on February 8 , 2016 and the series will be transferred to Aniplex of America . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The series ' original soundtrack was released as Spiral Melodies on October 24 , 2007 by Aniplex . Two singles , " Gun 's & Roses " by Paradise Lunch and " Calling " by Kaori Oda , were released on August 22 , 2007 . " Gun 's and Roses " contained the opening theme , a vocal version of the opening , two songs and karaoke versions of the three tracks . The " Calling " single included the ending theme , another track and the karaoke versions of the two . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga adaption titled Baccano ! 1931 The Grand Punk Railroad was written by Narita and illustrated by <unk> <unk> . It was published in MediaWorks ' Dengeki Comic Gao ! magazine from December 27 , 2006 to February 27 , 2008 and was collected in two volumes released July 27 , 2007 and April 26 , 2008 . The chapters center around the hijacking of the Flying Pussyfoot train . The Chinese @-@ language release is published by the Taiwan branch of Kadokawa Media . 
 A second adaptation , written by Shinta Fujimoto and published in Square Enix 's Young Gangan magazine , began publication on October 16 , 2015 . The series is licensed by Yen Press , who publishes the chapters simultaneously with Japan . 
 Volume list 
 Chapter not yet in tankōbon format 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 On February 28 , 2008 , MediaWorks released an adventure game , simply titled Baccano ! , for the Nintendo DS . Based on the two Grand Punk Railroad light novels , the game recounts the events aboard the Flying Pussyfoot train from multiple perspectives . The player 's goal is to help the passengers arrive safely in New York City by selecting the correct choices . The game can conclude with one of about fifty scenarios , depending on the player 's decisions . 
 = = = Artbook = = = 
 On February 20 , 2009 , ASCII Media Works released an art book titled Katsumi Enami Artbook Baccano ! ( <unk> ! , Enami Katsumi <unk> Baccano ! ) . The book not only featured illustrations drawn by Enami , but also included a story titled Boy Czeslaw , Fellows of the Forest ( of Buildings ) ( <unk> 、 ( <unk> ) <unk> , <unk> <unk> to , ( <unk> no ) Mori no <unk> ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While reviewing the first light novel , Gabriella Ekens from Anime News Network said " he prose in Baccano ! is extremely punchy , moving quickly by focusing heavily on dialogue and action . " She also praised it by saying " blast moment to moment . " Nevertheless , she found the its gore as a con to enjoying it . 
 The anime adaptation of Baccano ! has received critical acclaim . Several critics from various websites have praised the series for its plot , characters , animation , musical score and its voice acting , especially the English dubbed version . For example , THEM Anime Reviews gave the entire series a score of 5 out of 5 stars , with reviewer Bradley Meek stating that the show was " a joy to watch " and despite the fact that " the series ends on an epilogue that feels a bit flat " , it left him with " the best possible feeling : a mixture of contentment and a hunger to see more " . He also praised the series for its animation which looked " great throughout , especially for a TV series " before summarizing the series as a " beautiful , confounding mess of chaos and delight " . 
 Baccano ! has received significant praise from Anime News Network reviewers . Theron Martin described the anime as " sometimes humorous , occasionally brutal , and nearly always fun " . He claimed that the anime 's " complex plotting and voluminous casting , combined with strong dubbing , animation , and musical score , make this a must @-@ see series for fans of American mobster stories , " and concluding that " this could be one of the year 's best series . " In his review , Carl Kimlinger claimed Baccano ! to be " one of the best , and certainly the most cleverly written series in recent years " and described it as " lethally fun " before giving the series an ' A ' rating for both the subbed and dubbed versions . 
 Davey C. Jones of Active Anime praised the anime , stating that , " Like Pulp Fiction changed the way we saw movies , Baccano will be the story that will change the way we see anime , " concluding that " this all over the map anime is one unique and crazy ride from start to its never ending finale " and that " Baccano offers something truly unique in anime . " 
 Daryl Surat and Mike Toole of Anime World Order Podcast consider Baccano ! to be their " pick for best series of 2007 ( or 2009 depending on how you want to count it ) . " Bryce Coulter of Mania Entertainment gave the complete series a ' B ' rating , stating that it is " a drastic and welcome departure from your typical anime formula and that ’ s what makes it so intriguing , " and concluding that it has a " little bit of comedy , drama , action , and romance all swirled up into one giant ruckus of fun ! " 
 = Michael Schumacher = 
 Michael Schumacher ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 3 January 1969 ) is a German retired racing driver . He is a seven @-@ time Formula One World Champion and is widely regarded as one of the greatest Formula One drivers of all time . He was named Laureus World Sportsman of the Year twice . He won two titles with Benetton in 1994 and 1995 before moving to Ferrari where he drove for eleven years . His time with Ferrari yielded five consecutive titles between 2000 and 2004 . 
 Schumacher holds many of Formula One 's driver records , including most championships , race victories , fastest laps , pole positions and most races won in a single season – 13 in 2004 ( the last of these records was equalled by fellow German Sebastian Vettel nine years later ) . In 2002 , he became the only driver in Formula One history to finish in the top three in every race of a season and then also broke the record for most consecutive podium finishes . According to the official Formula One website , he is " statistically the greatest driver the sport has ever seen " . 
 After beginning in karting , Schumacher won the German drivers ' championships in Formula König and Formula Three before joining Mercedes in the World Sportscar Championship . In 1991 , his Mercedes @-@ funded race debut for the Jordan Formula One team resulted in Schumacher being signed by Benetton Formula One team as their driver for the rest of that season . Establishing himself as a top driver , finishing third in 1992 and fourth in 1993 , Schumacher became the first German World Drivers ' Champion in 1994 by one point over Damon Hill . In 1995 he repeated the success , this time with a greater margin . Schumacher moved to Ferrari in 1996 . Schumacher came close to winning the 1997 and 1998 titles , before breaking his leg at the 1999 British Grand Prix , ending another title run . Things then came good for Schumacher who won another five consecutive drivers ' titles from 2000 to 2004 . Schumacher retired from Formula One driving in 2006 staying with Ferrari as an advisor . He came close to an eighth title that year , but due to technical problems in the final two races he fell short to Fernando Alonso . Schumacher agreed to return for Ferrari part @-@ way through 2009 , as cover for the badly injured Felipe Massa , but was prevented by a neck injury . Schumacher returned to Formula One on a permanent basis from 2010 with the Mercedes team before retiring for a second time at the conclusion of the 2012 season . 
 His career was not without controversy , including being twice involved in collisions in the final race of a season that determined the outcome of the World Championship , with Damon Hill in 1994 in Adelaide , and with Jacques Villeneuve in 1997 in Jerez . Off the track , Schumacher is an ambassador for UNESCO and a spokesman for driver safety . He has been involved in numerous humanitarian efforts throughout his life and donated tens of millions of dollars to charity . Schumacher and his younger brother , Ralf , are the only brothers to win races in Formula One , and they were the first brothers to finish 1st and 2nd in the same race , a feat they repeated in four subsequent races . 
 In December 2013 , Schumacher suffered a serious head injury while skiing . He was airlifted to a hospital and placed in a medically induced coma , having suffered a traumatic brain injury . He was in the coma for six months from 29 December 2013 until 16 June 2014 . He left the hospital in Grenoble for further rehabilitation at the University Hospital ( CHUV ) in Lausanne . On 9 September 2014 , Schumacher was relocated to his home where he continues to receive medical treatment and rehabilitation privately . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Schumacher was born in <unk> , North Rhine @-@ Westphalia , to Rolf Schumacher , a bricklayer , and his wife Elisabeth . When Schumacher was four , his father modified his pedal kart by adding a small motorcycle engine . When Schumacher crashed it into a lamp post in Kerpen , his parents took him to the karting track at Kerpen @-@ <unk> , where he became the youngest member of the karting club . His father soon built him a kart from discarded parts and at the age of six Schumacher won his first club championship . To support his son 's racing , Rolf Schumacher took on a second job renting and repairing karts , while his wife worked at the track 's canteen . Nevertheless , when Michael needed a new engine costing 800 DM , his parents were unable to afford it ; he was able to continue racing with support from local businessmen . 
 Regulations in Germany require a driver to be at least fourteen years old to obtain a kart license . To get around this , Schumacher obtained a license in Luxembourg at the age of 12 . 
 In 1983 , he obtained his German license , a year after he won the German Junior Kart Championship . From 1984 on , Schumacher won many German and European kart championships . He joined <unk> dealer Adolf <unk> in 1985 and by 1987 he was the German and European kart champion , then he quit school and began working as a mechanic . In 1988 he made his first step into single @-@ seat car racing by participating in the German Formula Ford and Formula König series , winning the latter . 
 In 1989 , Schumacher signed with Willi Weber 's <unk> Formula Three team . Funded by Weber , he competed in the German Formula 3 series , winning the title in 1990 . He also won the Macau Grand Prix . At the end of 1990 , along with his Formula 3 rivals Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen and Karl Wendlinger , he joined the Mercedes junior racing programme in the World Sports @-@ Prototype Championship . This was unusual for a young driver : most of Schumacher 's contemporaries would compete in Formula 3000 on the way to Formula One . However , Weber advised Schumacher that being exposed to professional press conferences and driving powerful cars in long distance races would help his career . In the 1990 World Sportscar Championship season , Schumacher won the season finale at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez in a Sauber – Mercedes C11 , and finished fifth in the drivers ' championship despite only driving in three of the nine races . He continued with the team in the 1991 World Sportscar Championship season , winning again at the final race of the season at <unk> in Japan with a Sauber – Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> , leading to a ninth @-@ place finish in the drivers ' championship . He also competed at Le Mans during that season , finishing 5th in a car shared with Karl Wendlinger and Fritz <unk> . In 1991 , he competed in one race in the Japanese Formula 3000 Championship , finishing second . 
 = = Formula One career = = 
 Schumacher was noted throughout his career for his ability to produce fast laps at crucial moments in a race and to push his car to the very limit for sustained periods . Motor sport author Christopher Hilton observed in 2003 that a " measure of a driver 's capabilities is his performance in wet races , because the most delicate car control and sensitivity are needed " , and noted that like other great drivers , Schumacher 's record in wet conditions shows very few mistakes : up to the end of the 2003 season , Schumacher won 17 of the 30 races in wet conditions he contested . Some of Schumacher 's best performances occurred in such conditions , earning him the nicknames " <unk> " ( rain king ) or " Regenmeister " ( rain master ) , even in the non @-@ German @-@ language media . He is known as " the Red Baron " , because of his red Ferrari and in reference to the German Manfred von Richthofen , the famous flying ace of World War I. Schumacher 's nicknames include " <unk> " , " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Schumacher is often credited with popularising Formula One in Germany , where it was formerly considered a fringe sport . When Schumacher retired in 2006 , three of the top ten drivers were German , more than any other nationality and more than have ever been present in Formula One history . Younger German drivers , such as Sebastian Vettel , felt Schumacher was key in their becoming Formula One drivers . In the latter part of his Formula One career , and as one of the senior drivers , Schumacher was the president of the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association . In a 2006 FIA survey , Michael Schumacher was voted the most popular driver of the season among Formula One fans . 
 = = = Jordan ( 1991 ) = = = 
 Schumacher made his Formula One debut with the Jordan @-@ Ford team at the 1991 Belgian Grand Prix , driving car number 32 as a replacement for the imprisoned Bertrand Gachot . Schumacher , still a contracted Mercedes driver , was signed by Eddie Jordan after Mercedes paid Jordan $ 150 @,@ 000 for his debut . 
 = = = = Belgian Grand Prix debut = = = = 
 The week before the race , Schumacher impressed Jordan designer Gary Anderson and team manager Trevor Foster during a test drive at Silverstone . His manager Willi Weber assured Jordan that Schumacher knew the challenging Spa track well , although in fact he had only seen it as a spectator . During the race weekend , team @-@ mate Andrea de Cesaris was meant to show Schumacher the circuit , but was held up with contract negotiations . Schumacher then learned the track on his own , by cycling around the track on a fold @-@ up bike he had brought with him . He impressed the paddock by qualifying seventh in this race . This matched the team 's season @-@ best grid position , and out @-@ qualified 11 @-@ year veteran de Cesaris . Motorsport journalist Joe Saward reported that after qualifying " clumps of German journalists were talking about ' the best talent since Stefan Bellof ' " . Schumacher retired on the first lap of the race with clutch problems . 
 = = = Benetton ( 1991 – 1995 ) = = = 
 Following his Belgian Grand Prix debut , and despite an agreement in principle between Jordan and Schumacher 's Mercedes management that would see the German race for the Irish team for the remainder of the season , Schumacher was engaged by Benetton @-@ Ford for the following race . Jordan applied for an injunction in the UK courts to prevent Schumacher driving for Benetton , but lost the case as they had not yet signed a final contract . 
 = = = = 1991 – 1993 = = = = 
 Schumacher finished the 1991 season with four points out of six races . His best finish was fifth in his second race , the Italian Grand Prix , in which he finished ahead of his team @-@ mate and three @-@ time World Champion Nelson Piquet . 
 At the start of the 1992 season the Sauber team , planning their Formula One debut with Mercedes backing for the following year , invoked a clause in Schumacher 's contract that stated that if Mercedes entered Formula One , Schumacher would drive for them . It was eventually agreed that Schumacher would stay with Benetton , Peter Sauber said that " [ Schumacher ] didn 't want to drive for us . Why would I have forced him ? " . The year was dominated by the Williams of Nigel Mansell and Riccardo Patrese , featuring powerful Renault engines , semi @-@ automatic gearboxes and active suspension to control the car 's ride height . In the " conventional " Benetton <unk> Schumacher took his place on the podium for the first time , finishing third in the Mexican Grand Prix . He went on to take his first victory at the Belgian Grand Prix , in a wet race at the Spa @-@ Francorchamps circuit , which by 2003 he would call " far and away my favourite track " . He finished third in the Drivers ' Championship in 1992 with 53 points , three points behind runner @-@ up Patrese . 
 The Williams of Damon Hill and Alain Prost also dominated the 1993 season . Benetton introduced their own active suspension and traction control early in the season , last of the <unk> teams to do so . Schumacher won one race , the Portuguese Grand Prix where he beat Prost , and had nine podium finishes , but retired in seven of the other 15 races . He finished the season in fourth , with 52 points . 
 = = = = 1994 – 1995 : World Championship years = = = = 
 The 1994 season was Schumacher 's first Drivers ' Championship . The season , however , was marred by the deaths of Ayrton Senna ( witnessed by Schumacher , who was directly behind in 2nd position ) and Roland Ratzenberger during the San Marino Grand Prix , and by allegations that several teams , but most particularly Schumacher 's Benetton team , broke the sport 's technical regulations . 
 Schumacher won six of the first seven races and was leading the Spanish Grand Prix , before a gearbox failure left him stuck in fifth gear . Schumacher finished the race in second place . Following the San Marino Grand Prix , the Benetton , Ferrari and McLaren teams were investigated on suspicion of breaking the FIA @-@ imposed ban on electronic aids . Benetton and McLaren initially refused to hand over their source code for investigation . When they did so , the FIA discovered hidden functionality in both teams ' software , but no evidence that it had been used in a race . Both teams were fined $ 100 @,@ 000 for their initial refusal to cooperate . However , the McLaren software , which was a gearbox program that allowed automatic shifts , was deemed legal . By contrast , the Benetton software was deemed to be a form of " launch control " that would have allowed Schumacher to make perfect starts , which was explicitly outlawed by the regulations . However , there was no evidence to suggest that this software was actually used . At the British Grand Prix , Schumacher was penalised for overtaking on the formation lap . He then ignored the penalty and the subsequent black flag , which indicates that the driver must immediately return to the pits , for which he was disqualified and later given a two @-@ race ban . Benetton blamed the incident on a communication error between the stewards and the team . Schumacher was also disqualified after winning the Belgian Grand Prix after his car was found to have illegal wear on its <unk> , a measure used after the accidents at Imola to limit downforce and hence cornering speed . Benetton protested that the <unk> had been damaged when Schumacher spun over a kerb , but the FIA rejected their appeal because of the pattern of wear and damage visible on the block . These incidents helped Damon Hill close the points gap , and Schumacher led by a single point going into the final race in Australia . On lap 36 Schumacher hit the guardrail on the outside of the track while leading . Hill attempted to pass , but as Schumacher 's car returned to the track there was a collision on the corner causing them both to retire . As a result , Schumacher won a very controversial championship , the first German to do so ( Jochen Rindt raced under the Austrian flag ) . At the FIA conference after the race , the new World Champion dedicated his title to Ayrton Senna . 
 In 1995 Schumacher successfully defended his title with Benetton . He now had the same Renault engine as Williams . He accumulated 33 more points than second @-@ placed Damon Hill . With team @-@ mate Johnny Herbert , he took Benetton to its first Constructors ' Championship and became the youngest two @-@ time World Champion in Formula One history . 
 The season was marred by several collisions with Hill , in particular an overtaking manoeuvre by Hill took them both out of the British Grand Prix on lap 45 and again on lap 23 of the Italian Grand Prix . Schumacher won nine of the 17 races , and finished on the podium 11 times . Only once did he qualify worse than fourth ; at the Belgian Grand Prix , he qualified 16th , but went on to win the race . 
 = = = Ferrari ( 1996 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In 1996 , Schumacher joined Ferrari , a team that had last won the Drivers ' Championship in 1979 and the Constructors ' Championship in 1983 , for a salary of $ 60 million over 2 years . He left Benetton a year before his contract with them expired ; he later cited the team 's damaging actions in 1994 as his reason for opting out of his deal . A year later Benetton employees Rory Byrne ( designer ) and Ross Brawn ( Technical Director ) joined Ferrari . 
 Ferrari had previously come close to the championship in 1982 and 1990 . The team had suffered a disastrous downturn in the early 1990s , partially as its famous V12 engine was no longer competitive against the smaller , lighter and more fuel efficient V10s of its competitors . Various drivers , notably Alain Prost , had given the vehicles labels such as " truck " , " pig " , and " accident waiting to happen " . Furthermore , the poor performance of the Ferrari pit crews was considered a running joke . At the end of 1995 , though the team had improved into a solid competitor , it was still considered inferior to front @-@ running teams such as Benetton and Williams . Schumacher declared the Ferrari <unk> good enough to win the Championship . 
 Schumacher , Ross Brawn , Rory Byrne , and Jean Todt ( hired in 1993 ) , have been credited as turning this once struggling team into the most successful team in Formula One history . Three @-@ time World Champion Jackie Stewart believes the transformation of the Ferrari team was Schumacher 's greatest feat . Eddie Irvine also joined the team , moving from Jordan . During winter testing , Schumacher first drove a Ferrari , their 1995 Ferrari 412 T2 , and was two seconds faster than former regulars Jean Alesi and Gerhard Berger had been . 
 = = = = 1996 – 1999 = = = = 
 Schumacher finished third in the Drivers ' Championship in 1996 and helped Ferrari to second place in the Constructors ' Championship ahead of his old team Benetton . He won three races , more than the team 's total tally for the period from 1991 to 1995 . Early in the 1996 season the car had reliability trouble and Schumacher did not finish six of the 16 races . He took his first win for Ferrari at the Spanish Grand Prix , where he lapped the entire field up to third place in the wet . Having taken the lead on lap 19 , he consistently lapped five seconds faster than the rest of the field in the difficult conditions . In the French Grand Prix Schumacher qualified in pole position , but suffered engine failure on the race 's formation lap . However at Spa @-@ Francorchamps , Schumacher used well @-@ timed pit @-@ stops to fend off Williams 's Jacques Villeneuve . Following that , at Monza , Schumacher won in front of the tifosi . Schumacher 's ability , combined with the improving reliability of Ferrari , enabled him to end the season putting up a challenge to eventual race and championship winner Damon Hill at the Suzuka . 
 Michael Schumacher and Jacques Villeneuve vied for the title in 1997 . Villeneuve , driving the superior Williams <unk> , led the championship in the early part of the season . However , by mid @-@ season , Schumacher had taken the championship lead , winning five races , and entered the season 's final Grand Prix with a one @-@ point advantage . Towards the end of the race , held at Jerez , Schumacher 's Ferrari developed a coolant leak and loss of performance indicating he may not finish the race . As Villeneuve approached to pass his rival , Schumacher attempted to provoke an accident , but got the short end of the stick , retiring from the race . Villeneuve went on and scored four points to take the championship . Schumacher was punished for unsportsmanlike conduct for the collision and was disqualified from the Drivers ' Championship . 
 In 1998 , Finnish driver Mika Häkkinen became Schumacher 's main title competition . Häkkinen won the first two races of the season , gaining a 16 @-@ point advantage over Schumacher . Schumacher then won in Argentina and , with the Ferrari improving significantly in the second half of the season , Schumacher took six victories and had five other podium finishes . Ferrari took a 1 – 2 finish at the French Grand Prix , the first Ferrari 1 – 2 finish since 1990 , and the Italian Grand Prix , which tied Schumacher with Häkkinen for the lead of the Drivers ' Championship with 80 points , but Häkkinen won the Championship by winning the final two races . There were two controversies ; at the British Grand Prix Schumacher was leading on the last lap when he turned into the pit lane , crossed the start finish line and stopped for a ten @-@ second stop go penalty . There was some doubt whether this counted as serving the penalty , but , because he had crossed the finish line when he came into the pit lane , the win was valid . At Spa , Schumacher was leading the race by 40 seconds in heavy spray , but collided with David Coulthard 's McLaren when the Scot , a lap down , slowed in very poor visibility to let Schumacher past . After both cars returned to the pits , Schumacher leaped out of his car and headed to McLaren 's garage in an infuriated manner and accused Coulthard of trying to kill him . 
 Rumours circulated that Coulthard may be replaced by Schumacher for the 1999 season and beyond and , in a previous edition of the F1 Racing magazine , Ron Dennis revealed that he had approached Schumacher to sign a deal with McLaren . However , peripheral financial issues that tied Schumacher with Ferrari , such as sponsorship agreements and payment , could not be rectified in a move to the rival team and so no deal came to fruition . 
 Schumacher 's efforts helped Ferrari win the Constructors title in 1999 . He lost his chance to win the Drivers ' Championship at the British Grand Prix at the high @-@ speed Stowe Corner , his car 's rear brake failed , sending him off the track and resulting in a broken leg . During his 98 @-@ day absence , he was replaced by Finnish driver Mika Salo . After missing six races he made his return at the inaugural Malaysian Grand Prix , qualifying in pole position by almost a second . He then assumed the role of second driver , assisting team mate Eddie Irvine 's bid to win the Drivers ' Championship for Ferrari . In the last race of the season , the Japanese Grand Prix , Häkkinen won his second consecutive title . Schumacher would later say that Häkkinen was the opponent he respected the most . 
 = = = = 2000 – 2004 : World Championship years = = = = 
 During this period Schumacher won more races and championships than any other driver in the history of the sport . Schumacher won his third World Championship in 2000 after a year @-@ long battle with Häkkinen . Schumacher won the first three races of the season and five of the first eight . Midway through the year , Schumacher 's chances suffered with three consecutive non @-@ finishes , allowing Häkkinen to close the gap in the standings . Häkkinen then took another two victories , before Schumacher won at the Italian Grand Prix . At the post race press conference , after equalling the number of wins ( 41 ) won by his idol , Ayrton Senna , Schumacher broke into tears . The championship fight would come down to the penultimate race of the season , the Japanese Grand Prix . Starting from pole position , Schumacher lost the lead to Häkkinen at the start . After his second pit @-@ stop , however , Schumacher came out ahead of Häkkinen and went on to win the race and the championship . 
 In 2001 , Schumacher took his fourth drivers ' title . Four other drivers won races , but none sustained a season @-@ long challenge for the championship . Schumacher scored a record @-@ tying nine wins and clinched the World Championship with four races yet to run . He finished the championship with 123 points , 58 ahead of runner @-@ up Coulthard . Season highlights included the Canadian Grand Prix , where Schumacher finished 2nd to his brother Ralf , thus scoring the first ever 1 – 2 finish by brothers in Formula One ; and the Belgian Grand Prix in which Schumacher scored his 52nd career win , breaking Alain Prost 's record for most career wins . 
 In 2002 , Schumacher used the Ferrari <unk> to retain his Drivers ' Championship . There was again some controversy , however , at the Austrian Grand Prix , where his teammate , Rubens Barrichello was leading , but in the final metres of the race , under team orders , slowed down to allow Schumacher to win the race . The crowd broke into outraged boos at the result and Schumacher tried to make amends by allowing Barrichello to stand on the top step of the podium . At the United States Grand Prix later that year , Schumacher dominated the race and was set for a close finish with Barrichello . At the end he slowed down to create a formation finish with Barrichello , but slowed too much allowing Barrichello to take the victory . In winning the Drivers ' Championship he equalled the record set by Juan Manuel Fangio of five World Championships . Ferrari won 15 out of 17 races , and Schumacher won the title with six races remaining in the season , which is still the earliest point in the season for a driver to be crowned World Champion . Schumacher broke his own record , shared with Nigel Mansell , of nine race wins in a season , by winning eleven times and finishing every race on the podium . He finished with 144 points , a record @-@ breaking 67 points ahead of the runner @-@ up , his teammate Rubens Barrichello . This pair finished nine of the 17 races in the first two places . 
 Schumacher broke Juan Manuel Fangio 's record of five World Drivers ' Championships by winning the drivers ' title for the sixth time in 2003 , a closely contested season . The biggest competition came once again from the McLaren Mercedes and Williams BMW teams . In the first race , Schumacher ran off track , and in the following two , was involved in collisions . He fell 16 points behind Kimi Räikkönen . Schumacher won the San Marino Grand Prix and the next two races , and closed within two points of Räikkönen . Aside from Schumacher 's victory in Canada , and Barrichello 's victory in Britain , the mid @-@ season was dominated by Williams drivers Ralf Schumacher and Juan Pablo Montoya , who each claimed two victories . After the Hungarian Grand Prix , Michael Schumacher led Montoya and Kimi Räikkönen by only one and two points , respectively . Ahead of the next race , the FIA announced changes to the way tyre widths were to be measured : this forced Michelin , supplier to Williams and McLaren among others , to rapidly redesign their tyres before the Italian Grand Prix . Schumacher , running on Bridgestone tyres , won the next two races . After Montoya was penalised in the United States Grand Prix , only Schumacher and Räikkönen remained in contention for the title . At the final round , the Japanese Grand Prix , Schumacher needed only one point whilst Räikkönen needed to win . By finishing the race in eighth place , Schumacher took one point and assured his sixth World Drivers ' title , ending the season two points ahead of Räikkönen . 
 In 2004 , Schumacher won a record twelve of the first thirteen races of the season , only failing to finish in Monaco after an accident with Juan Pablo Montoya during a safety car period when he briefly locked his car 's brakes . He clinched a record seventh drivers ' title at the Belgian Grand Prix . He finished that season with a record 148 points , 34 points ahead of the runner @-@ up , teammate Rubens Barrichello , and set a new record of 13 race wins out of a possible 18 , surpassing his previous best of 11 wins from the 2002 season . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2006 = = = = 
 Rule changes for the 2005 season required tyres to last an entire race , tipping the overall advantage to teams using <unk> over teams such as Ferrari that relied on Bridgestone tyres . The rule changes were partly in an effort to dent Ferrari 's dominance and make the series more interesting . The most notable moment of the early season for Schumacher was his battle with Fernando Alonso in San Marino , where he started 13th and finished only 0 @.@ 2 seconds behind the Spanish driver . Less than halfway through the season , Schumacher said " I don 't think I can count myself in this battle any more . It was like trying to fight with a blunted weapon .... If your weapons are weak you don 't have a chance . " Schumacher 's sole win in 2005 came at the United States Grand Prix . Prior to that race , the Michelin tyres were found to have significant safety issues . When no compromise between the teams and the FIA could be reached , all but the six drivers using Bridgestone tyres dropped out of the race after the formation lap . Schumacher retired in six of the 19 races . He finished the season in third with 62 points , fewer than half the points of World Champion Alonso . 
 2006 became the last season of Schumacher 's Ferrari career . After three races , Schumacher had just 11 points and was already 17 points behind Alonso . He won the following two races . His pole position at San Marino was his 66th , breaking Ayrton Senna 's 12 @-@ year @-@ old record . 
 Schumacher was stripped of pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix and started the race at the back of the grid . This was due to his stopping his car and blocking part of the circuit while Alonso was on his qualifying lap ; he still managed to work his way up to 5th place on the notoriously cramped Monaco circuit . By the Canadian Grand Prix , the ninth race of the season , Schumacher was 25 points behind Alonso , but he then won the following three races to reduce his disadvantage to 11 . After his victories in Italy ( in which Alonso had an engine failure ) and China , in which Alonso had tyre problems , Schumacher led in the championship standings for the first time during the season . Although he and Alonso had the same point total , Schumacher was in front because he had won more races . 
 The Japanese Grand Prix was led by Schumacher with only 16 laps to go , when , for the first time since the 2000 French Grand Prix , Schumacher 's car suffered an engine failure . Alonso won the race , giving himself a ten @-@ point championship lead . With only one race left in the season , Schumacher could only win the championship if he won the season finale and Alonso scored no points . 
 Before the Brazilian Grand Prix , Schumacher conceded the title to Alonso . In pre @-@ race ceremonies , football legend Pelé presented a trophy to Schumacher for his years of dedication to Formula One . During the race 's qualifying session , Schumacher had one of the quickest times during the first session and was fastest in the second session ; but a fuel pressure problem prevented him from completing a single lap during the third session , forcing him to start the race in tenth position . Early in the race Schumacher moved up to sixth place . However , in overtaking Alonso 's teammate , Giancarlo Fisichella , Schumacher experienced a tyre puncture caused by the front wing of Fisichella 's car . Schumacher pitted and consequently fell to 19th place , 70 seconds behind teammate and race leader Felipe Massa . Schumacher recovered and overtook both Fisichella and Räikkönen to secure fourth place . His performance was classified in the press as " heroic " , an " utterly breath @-@ taking drive " , and a " performance that ... sums up his career " . 
 = = = = 2007 – 2009 : retirement at Ferrari = = = = 
 While Schumacher was on the podium after winning the 2006 Italian Grand Prix , Ferrari issued a press release stating that he would retire from racing at the end of the 2006 season . Schumacher confirmed his retirement . The press release stated that Schumacher would continue working for Ferrari . It was revealed on 29 October 2006 that Ferrari wanted Schumacher to act as assistant to the newly appointed CEO Jean Todt . This would involve selecting the team 's future drivers . After Schumacher 's announcement , leading Formula One figures such as Niki Lauda and David Coulthard hailed Schumacher as the greatest all @-@ round racing driver in the history of Formula One . The tifosi and the Italian press , who did not always take to Schumacher 's relatively cold public persona , displayed an affectionate response after he announced his retirement . 
 = = = = 2007 : Ferrari adviser = = = = 
 He attended several Grands Prix during the season . Schumacher drove the Ferrari F2007 for the first time on 24 October at Ferrari 's home track in Fiorano , Italy . He ran no more than five laps and no lap times were recorded . A Ferrari spokesman said the short drive was done for the Fiat board of directors who were holding their meeting in Maranello . 
 During the 2007 season Schumacher acted as Ferrari 's adviser and Jean Todt 's ' super assistant ' . On 13 November 2007 Schumacher , who had not driven a Formula One car since he had retired a year earlier , undertook a formal test session for the first time aboard the F2007 . He returned in December 2007 to continue helping Ferrari with their development programme at Jerez circuit . He focused on testing electronics and tyres for the 2008 Formula One season . 
 = = = = 2008 : Ferrari road car development = = = = 
 In 2007 , former Ferrari top manager Ross Brawn said that Schumacher was very likely and also happy to continue testing in 2008 ; Schumacher later explained his role further saying that he would " deal with the development of the car inside <unk> Sportiva " and as part of that " I 'd like to drive , but not too often " . 
 During 2008 Schumacher also competed in motorcycle racing in the IDM Superbike @-@ series , but stated that he had no intention of a second competitive career in this sport . He was quoted as saying that riding a Ducati was the most exhilarating thing he had done in his life , the second most being sky diving . 
 = = = = 2009 : planned Massa substitution = = = = 
 In his capacity as racing advisor to Ferrari , Schumacher was present in Budapest for the Hungarian Grand Prix when Ferrari driver Felipe Massa was seriously injured after being struck by a suspension spring during qualifying . As it became clear that Massa would be unable to compete in the next race at Valencia Schumacher was chosen as a replacement for the Brazilian driver and on 29 July 2009 , Ferrari announced that they planned to draft in Schumacher for the European Grand Prix and subsequent Grands Prix until Massa was able to race again . Schumacher tested in a modified F2007 to prepare himself as he had been unable to test the 2009 car due to testing restrictions . Ferrari appealed for special permission for Schumacher to test in a 2009 spec car , but Williams , Red Bull and Toro Rosso were against this test . In the end , Schumacher was forced to call off his return due to the severity of the neck injury he had received in a motorcycle accident earlier in the year . Massa 's place at Ferrari was instead filled by Luca Badoer and Giancarlo Fisichella . 
 = = = Mercedes ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In December 2009 it was announced that Schumacher would be returning to Formula One in the 2010 season alongside fellow German driver Nico Rosberg in the new Mercedes GP team . The new Mercedes team was their first majority involvement in an F1 team since 1955 . Schumacher stated that his preparations to replace the injured Massa for Ferrari had initiated a renewed interest in F1 , which , combined with the opportunity to fulfil a long @-@ held ambition to drive for Mercedes and to be working again with team principal Ross Brawn , led Schumacher to accept the offer once he was passed fit . After a period of intensive training medical tests , it was confirmed that the neck injury that had prevented him driving for Ferrari the year before had fully healed . Schumacher signed a three @-@ year contract , reportedly worth £ 20m . 
 Schumacher 's surprise return to F1 was compared to Niki Lauda 's in 1982 aged 33 and Nigel Mansell 's return in 1994 at age 41 . Schumacher turned 41 in January 2010 and his prospects with Mercedes were compared with the record set by the oldest F1 champion Juan Manuel Fangio who was 46 when he won his fifth championship . 
 = = = = 2010 : return from retirement = = = = 
