 Schumacher 's first drive of the 2010 Mercedes car – the Mercedes MGP <unk> – was at an official test in February 2010 in Valencia . He finished sixth in the first race of the season at the Bahrain Grand Prix . After the Malaysian race former driver Stirling Moss suggested that Schumacher , who had finished behind his team @-@ mate in each of the first four qualifying sessions and races , might be " past it " . Many other respected former Formula One drivers thought otherwise , including former rival Damon Hill , who warned " you should never write Schumacher off " . GrandPrix.com identified the inherent understeer of the Mercedes car , exacerbated by the narrower front tyres introduced for the 2010 season , as contributing to Schumacher 's difficulties . Jenson Button would later claim that Mercedes 2010 car was designed for him , and that their differing driving styles may have contributed to Schumacher 's difficulties . 
 Mercedes upgraded their car for the Spanish Grand Prix where Schumacher finished fourth . At the Monaco Grand Prix Schumacher finished sixth after passing Ferrari 's Fernando Alonso on the final corner of the race when the safety car returned to the pits . However , he was penalised 20 seconds after the race by the race stewards dropping him to 12th . The stewards judged the pass to be in breach of the FIA 's sporting code . Mercedes ' differing interpretation of the regulation would later lead to it being clarified by the FIA . 
 In Turkey , Schumacher qualified fifth , and finished fourth in the race , both his best results since his return . In European Grand Prix in Valencia , Schumacher finished 15th , the lowest recorded finish in his career . In Hungary , Schumacher finished outside the points in eleventh , but was found guilty of dangerous driving at 180 mph ( 290 km / h ) while unsuccessfully defending tenth position against Rubens Barrichello . As a result , he was demoted ten places on the grid for the following race , the Belgian Grand Prix , where he finished seventh , despite starting 21st after his grid penalty . 
 At the season finale in Abu Dhabi , Schumacher was involved in a major accident on the first lap , which occurred after a spin . In recovering from the incident Vitantonio Liuzzi 's car collided with Schumacher , barely missing his head . Nobody was hurt in the crash , but Schumacher said the crash had been " frightening " . 
 It was Schumacher 's first season since his début in 1991 that he finished without a win , pole position , podium or fastest lap . He finished the season 9th with 72 points . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Schumacher 's first points of 2011 were scored in Malaysia , he later came sixth in Spain and had a strong race at the Canadian Grand Prix finishing fourth , after running as high as second in a wet race . Schumacher was passed late in the race by eventual winner Jenson Button . 
 Schumacher clashed with Vitaly Petrov in Valencia , and with Kamui Kobayashi in Britain , and marked the 20th anniversary of his Formula One début at the Belgian Grand Prix . Despite starting last in Belgium , Schumacher raced well and finished fifth . Schumacher again raced well in Italy , duelling with Lewis Hamilton for fourth place . The Japanese Grand Prix saw Schumacher lead three laps during the race , marking the first time he had led a race since 2006 . In doing so , he became the oldest driver to lead a race since Jack Brabham in 1970 . 
 At the Indian Grand Prix Schumacher started well and finished fifth after overtaking Rosberg at the end of the race . Schumacher diced again with Rosberg in Abu Dhabi Grand Prix , battling over sixth position on the first lap . Schumacher finished the season in eighth place in the Drivers ' Championship , with 76 points . 
 = = = = 2012 : final season = = = = 
 Schumacher was again partnered by Rosberg at Mercedes for the 2012 season . Schumacher retired from the inaugural race of the season Australian Grand Prix , and scored a point in the second race in Malaysia . In China Schumacher started on the front row alongside Rosberg on pole , but retired due to a loose wheel after a mechanics error during a pit stop . 
 After causing a collision with Bruno Senna in Spain , Schumacher received a five @-@ place grid penalty for the Monaco Grand Prix . Schumacher was fastest in qualifying in Monaco ; but started sixth owing to his penalty . He later retired from seventh place in the race . 
 At the European Grand Prix , Schumacher finished third in the race , his only podium finish since his return to F1 with Mercedes . At the age of 43 years and 173 days , he became the oldest driver to achieve a podium since Jack Brabham 's second @-@ place finish at the 1970 British Grand Prix . Further records were set by Schumacher in Germany , where he set the fastest lap in a Grand Prix for the 77th time in his career , and in Belgium where he became the second driver in history to race in 300 Grands Prix . 
 Schumacher 's indecision over his future plans in F1 led to him being replaced by Lewis Hamilton at Mercedes for the 2013 season . In October 2012 , Schumacher announced he would retire for a second time at the conclusion of the season . The following week he was quoted as saying : " There were times in the past few months in which I didn 't want to deal with Formula One or prepare for the next Grand Prix . " The season and his 21 @-@ year F1 career concluded with the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix , in which Schumacher finished seventh . He placed 13th in the 2012 Drivers ' Championship . 
 = = Helmet = = 
 Schumacher , in conjunction with <unk> , helped develop the first lightweight carbon helmet . In 2004 , a prototype was publicly tested by being driven over by a tank ; it survived intact . The helmet keeps the driver cool by funneling directed airflow through fifty holes . Schumacher 's original helmet sported the colours of the German flag and his sponsor 's decals . On the top was a blue circle with white <unk> . When Jos Verstappen was his team @-@ mate , Schumacher added four red diagonal strokes over the visor to differentiate his helmet from his team @-@ mate . After Schumacher joined Ferrari a prancing horse was added on the back . From the 2000 Monaco Grand Prix , in order to differentiate his colours from his new teammate Rubens Barrichello , Schumacher changed the upper blue colour and some of the white areas to red . Since 2004 , the helmet sported a white diagonal line with a white vertical line in the zone of the German Flag colors ( originally to accommodate sponsor AMD ) , but then these lines remained in the Suzuka 2006 design . He sported one @-@ off helmet designs four times . For the 1998 Japanese Grand Prix , a title decider with Mika Häkkinen , he replaced the German flag with a chequered flag motif and reflective silver replacing the white areas . At the 2004 Italian Grand Prix , the German flag design was replaced with an Italian flag in honour of his team 's home race . For the Brazilian Grand Prix race of 2006 ( at the time intended to be his final Grand Prix ) , he wore an all @-@ red helmet that included the names of his ninety @-@ one Grand Prix victories . For the 2011 Belgian Grand Prix , Schumacher 's 20th anniversary in Formula One , he wore a commemorative gold @-@ leafed helmet . The helmet , very similar to his current helmet , included the year of his début to the present , and the years of his seven World titles . For the 2012 Belgian Grand Prix , Schumacher 's 300th Grand Prix appearance , he wore a special platinum @-@ leafed helmet with a message of his achievement . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Schumacher was honoured many times during his career . In April 2002 , for his contributions to sport and his contributions in raising awareness of child education , he was named as one of the UNESCO Champions for sport , joining the other eight , which include Pelé , Sergey Bubka and Justine Henin . He won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award twice , in 2002 and 2004 for his performances in the 2001 and 2003 seasons respectively . He also received nominations for the 2001 , 2003 , 2005 and 2007 awards . He shares the record for having the second @-@ most nominations for the award with Roger Federer with six nominations , and is eclipsed only by Tiger Woods who has been nominated seven times . He holds the distinction of having the most nominations for a motorsport athlete , ( Fernando Alonso has been nominated only twice , Sebastian Vettel three times , and Valentino Rossi five times ) and being the only motorsport athlete to have won the award more than once . 
 In honour of Schumacher 's racing career and his efforts to improve safety and the sport , he was awarded an FIA Gold Medal for Motor Sport in 2006 . In 2007 , in recognition of his contribution to Formula One racing , the Nürburgring racing track renamed turns 8 and 9 ( the Audi and Shell <unk> ) as the Schumacher S , and a month later he presented A1 Team Germany with the A1 World Cup at the <unk> World Cup of Motorsport 2007 awards ceremony . He was nominated for the Prince of Asturias Award for Sport for 2007 , which he won both for sporting prowess and for his humanitarian record . 
 In 2008 , the Swiss Football Association appointed long @-@ time Swiss resident Schumacher as the country 's ambassador for the 2008 European football championship . 
 On 30 April 2010 , Schumacher was honored with the Officier of Légion d 'honneur title from French prime minister François Fillon . 
 On 13 November 2014 , Schumacher was awarded the Millenium Trophy at the Bambi Awards . 
 = = Racing controversies = = 
 = = = Championship @-@ deciding collisions = = = 
 Going into the 1994 Australian Grand Prix , the final race of the 1994 season , Schumacher led Damon Hill by a single point in the Drivers ' Championship . Schumacher led the race from the beginning , but on lap 35 he went off track and hit the wall with his right side wheels , returning to the track at reduced speed , and with car damage , but still leading the race . At the next corner Hill attempted to pass on the inside , but Schumacher turned in sharply and they collided . Both cars were eliminated from the race and , as neither driver scored , Schumacher took the title . The race stewards judged it a racing accident and took no action against either driver , but public opinion is divided over the incident , and Schumacher was vilified in the British media . 
 At the 1997 European Grand Prix at Jerez , the last race of the season , Schumacher led Williams 's Jacques Villeneuve by one point in the Drivers ' Championship . As Villeneuve attempted to pass Schumacher at the Dry Sac corner on lap 48 , Schumacher turned in and the right @-@ front wheel of Schumacher 's Ferrari hit the left sidepod of Villeneuve 's car . Schumacher retired from the race as a result , but Villeneuve finished in third place , taking four points and so becoming the World Champion . The race stewards did not initially award any penalty , but two weeks after the race Schumacher was disqualified from the entire 1997 Drivers ' Championship after an FIA disciplinary hearing found that his " manoeuvre was an instinctive reaction and although deliberate not made with malice or premeditation . It was a serious error . " Schumacher accepted the decision and admitted having made a mistake . Schumacher 's actions were widely condemned in British , German , and Italian newspapers . This made Schumacher the only driver in the history of the sport , as of 2014 , to be disqualified from a Driver 's World Championship . 
 = = = Team orders = = = 
 Historically , team orders have always been an accepted part of Formula One . However , in the final metres of the 2002 Austrian Grand Prix , Schumacher 's teammate , Rubens Barrichello , slowed his car under orders from Ferrari to allow Schumacher to pass and win the race . Although the switching of positions did not break any actual sporting or technical regulation , it angered fans and it was claimed that the team 's actions showed a lack of sportsmanship and respect to the spectators . Many argued that Schumacher did not need to be " given " wins in only the 6th race of the season , particularly given that he had already won four of the previous five grands prix , and that Barrichello had dominated the race weekend up to that point . At the podium ceremony , Schumacher pushed Barrichello onto the top step , and for this disturbance , the Ferrari team incurred a US $ 1 million fine . Later in the season at the end of the 2002 United States Grand Prix , Schumacher slowed down within sight of the finishing line , allowing Barrichello to win by 0 @.@ 011 seconds , the 2nd closest margin in F1 history . Schumacher 's explanation varied between it being him " returning the favour " for Austria ( now that Schumacher 's title was secure ) , or trying to engineer a dead @-@ heat ( a feat derided as near @-@ impossible in a sport where timings are taken to within a thousandth of a second ) . The FIA subsequently banned " team orders which interfere with the race result " , but the ban was lifted for the 2011 season because the ruling was difficult to enforce . 
 = = = Dangerous driving = = = 
 During his spell in Sauber , in the 1991 Sportscar World Championship , Schumacher was involved in a serious incident with Derek Warwick in that year 's 430 km of Nürburgring . While trying to set his flying lap in qualifying , Schumacher encountered Warwick 's Jaguar on a slow lap resulting in lost time for Schumacher . As retaliation for being in his way , Schumacher swerved the Sauber into Warwick 's car , hitting the Jaguar 's nose and front wheel . Enraged by the German 's attitude , Warwick drove to the pits and chased a fleeing Schumacher on foot through the Sauber pits . He eventually caught up with Schumacher , and it took intervention from Jochen Mass to prevent Warwick physically assaulting Schumacher . 
 Toward the end of the 2010 Hungarian Grand Prix , Rubens Barrichello attempted to pass Schumacher down the inside on the main straight . Schumacher closed the inside line to force Barrichello onto the outside , but Barrichello persisted on the inside at 180 mph ( 290 km / h ) , despite the close proximity of a concrete wall and Schumacher leaving him only inches to spare . Barrichello said " It is the most dangerous thing that I have been through " , and " There is not a rule for that , but between ourselves we should take a line , stick to it and that 's it . " Schumacher said that " Obviously there was space enough to go through . We didn 't touch , so I guess I just left enough space for him to come through . " Ross Brawn said " at the end of the day he gave him enough space . You can argue that it was marginal , but it was just tough – tough racing . " A range of ex @-@ drivers and commentators were highly critical of Schumacher . Although there was no accident , the race steward , the same Derek Warwick of the 1991 Nürburgring incident , wanted to black flag Schumacher since that " would have shown a better example to our young drivers " . The Hungaroring incident was ruled to be dangerous and Schumacher received a 10 place grid penalty for the next race . Schumacher accepted the decision , and apologised . 
 = = = Other incidents = = = 
 In 1994 , suspicion of foul play by the Benetton team ( who were eventually found to have been responsible for some technical violations over the course of the season ) was said to have troubled Ayrton Senna that season . For example , in the words of his then team mate , Damon Hill , Senna had chosen to spend a bit of time at the first corner of the Aida circuit following his retirement from the Pacific Grand Prix . After listening to Schumacher 's Benetton <unk> as it went past , Senna " concluded that there was , what he regarded , as unusual noises from the engine " . The FIA subsequently issued a press release setting out action that it required teams to take prior to the German Grand Prix , given that various cars were found to have an advanced engine management systems emulating launch and traction control . 
 In 1995 , Schumacher and Williams driver David Coulthard were disqualified for fuel irregularities , after a switch to Renault engines and Elf oils . On appeal , both drivers had their results and points reinstated , but both teams lost the points the results would normally have earned in the Constructors ' Championship . 
 The 1998 Canadian Grand Prix saw Schumacher accused of dangerous driving when his exit from the pit @-@ lane forced Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen off the track and into retirement . Despite receiving a 10 @-@ second penalty , Schumacher recovered and won the race . 
 Two laps from the finish of the 1998 British Grand Prix , Schumacher was leading the race when he was issued a stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty for overtaking a lapped car ( Alexander Wurz ) during the early moments of a Safety Car period . This penalty involves going into the pit lane and stopping for 10 seconds , and the rules state that a driver must serve his penalty within three laps of the penalty being issued . On the third lap after receiving the penalty , Schumacher turned into the pit lane to serve his penalty , but as this was the last lap of the race , and as Ferrari 's pit box was located after the start / finish line , Schumacher technically finished the race before serving the penalty . The stewards initially resolved that problem by adding 10 seconds to Schumacher 's race time , then later rescinded the penalty completely due to the irregularities in how the penalty had been issued . 
 In the 1998 Belgian Grand Prix , Schumacher was involved in a race @-@ ending collision whilst trying to lap David Coulthard in heavy spray . After the race he stormed into the McLaren garage and accused Coulthard of trying to kill him , and McLaren and Ferrari team members had to separate the drivers . Coulthard admitted some five years later that the accident had been his mistake . 
 During qualifying for the 2006 Monaco Grand Prix Schumacher set the fastest time , but his car stopped in the Rascasse corner on the racing line , leaving the corner partially blocked , while his main contender for the season title , Fernando Alonso , was on his final qualifying lap . Schumacher stated that he simply locked up the wheels going into the corner and that the car then stalled while he attempted to reverse out . Alonso believed he would have been on pole if the incident had not happened , and Schumacher was stripped of pole position by the race stewards and started the race at the back of the grid . In the same qualifying session , Giancarlo Fisichella was similarly found to have blocked David Coulthard from improving his time , but Fisichella was only demoted five places on the grid . At the 2010 Monaco Grand Prix , the safety car was deployed after an accident , involving Karun <unk> and Jarno Trulli , and pulled into the pits on the last lap . Schumacher passed Alonso before the finish line . Mercedes held that " the combination of the race control messages ' Safety Car in this lap ' and ' Track Clear ' and the green flags and lights shown by the marshals after safety car line one indicated that the race was not finishing under the safety car and all drivers were free to race . This opinion appears to have been shared by the majority of the teams with cars in the top ten positions who also gave their drivers instructions to race to the finish line . " However an FIA investigation found Schumacher guilty of breaching Safety Car regulations and awarded him a 20 @-@ seconds penalty , which cost him six places . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Schumacher 's younger brother Ralf was a Formula One driver until the end of 2007 . Their stepbrother Sebastian Stahl has also been a racing driver . 
 In August 1995 , Michael married Corinna Betsch . They have two children , a daughter Gina @-@ Marie , born in 1997 and a son Mick , born March 22 , 1999 . He has always been very protective of his private life and is known to dislike the celebrity spotlight . The family moved to a newly @-@ built mansion near Gland , Switzerland in 2007 , covering an area of 650 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 7 @,@ 000 sq ft ) with a private beach on Lake Geneva and featuring an underground garage and petrol station . The family has two dogs – one stray that Corinna fell in love with in Brazil , and an Australian Shepherd named " Ed " whose arrival in the family made headlines . In fact , in 2007 , Schumacher personally drove a taxi through the Bavarian town of Coburg to collect the dog and enable the family to make their return flight to Switzerland . Both Schumacher and the taxi driver were reprimanded by local police . 
 One of his main hobbies is horse riding , and he plays football for his local team FC <unk> . He has appeared in several charity football games and organised games between Formula One drivers . 
 On 23 June 2003 , Schumacher was appointed as an Ambassador @-@ at @-@ Large for the Most Serene Republic of San Marino . 
 Schumacher is a special ambassador to UNESCO and has donated 1 @.@ 5 million euros to the organization . Additionally , he paid for the construction of a school for poor children and for area improvements in Dakar , Senegal . He supports a hospital for child victims of war in Sarajevo , which specialises in caring for amputees . In Lima , Peru he funded the " Palace for the Poor " , a centre for helping homeless street children obtain an education , clothing , food , medical attention , and shelter . He stated his interest in these various efforts was piqued both by his love for children and the fact that these causes had received little attention . While an exact figure for the amount of money he has donated throughout his life is unknown , it is known that in his last four years as a driver , he donated at least $ 50 million . In 2008 , it was revealed that he had donated between $ 5M and $ 10M to the William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park of Bill Clinton . 
 Since his participation in an FIA European road safety campaign , as part of his punishment after the collision at the 1997 European Grand Prix , Schumacher continued to support other campaigns , such as Make Roads Safe , which is led by the FIA Foundation and calls on G8 countries and the UN to recognise global road deaths as a major global health issue . In 2008 , Schumacher was the figurehead of an advertising campaign by Bacardi to raise awareness about responsible drinking , with a focus on communicating an international message ' drinking and driving don 't mix ' . He featured in an advertising campaign for television , cinema and online media , supported by consumer engagements , public relations and digital media across the World . 
 On the eve of the 2002 British Grand Prix , on behalf of Fiat , Schumacher presented a Ferrari 360 Modena to the Indian cricketer Sachin Tendulkar at Silverstone . 
 On 21 June 2009 , Schumacher appeared on the BBC 's motoring programme Top Gear as the Stig . Presenter Jeremy Clarkson hinted later in the programme that Schumacher was not the regular Stig , and the BBC has since confirmed that this is the case . Schumacher was there on that occasion because Ferrari would not allow anyone else to drive the one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind black Ferrari FXX that was featured in the show . The FXX was presented to Schumacher upon his retirement at Monza in 2006 . 
 During his interview with Clarkson , Schumacher stated that his road cars are a Fiat 500 Abarth , and a Fiat Croma , which is his family car . 
 = = = Finance and sponsorship = = = 
 In 2004 , Forbes magazine listed him as the second highest paid athlete in the World . In 2005 , <unk> magazine identified Schumacher as the World 's first billionaire athlete . His 2004 salary was reported to be around US $ 80 million . Forbes magazine ranked him 17th in its " The World 's Most Powerful Celebrities " list . A significant share of his income came from advertising . For example , Deutsche <unk> paid him $ 8 million over three years from 1999 for wearing a 10 by 8 centimetre advertisement on his post @-@ race cap . The deal was extended until 2010 . He donated $ 10 million for aid after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . His donation surpassed that of any other sports person , most sports leagues , many worldwide corporations and even some countries . Schumacher 's bodyguard Burkhard Cramer and Cramer 's two sons were killed in the tsunami . 
 In 2010 , his personal fortune was estimated at £ 515 million . He reportedly received a salary of £ 21 million each year from the Mercedes team , plus a further £ 9 million in endorsements . 
 = = = 2013 skiing accident = = = 
 On 29 December 2013 , Schumacher was skiing with his 14 @-@ year @-@ old son Mick descending the Combe de <unk> below the Dent de <unk> above <unk> in the French Alps . While crossing an unsecured off @-@ piste area between Piste Chamois and Piste Mauduit he fell and hit his head on a rock , sustaining a head injury despite wearing a ski helmet . According to his physicians , he would most likely have died had he not been wearing a helmet . Schumacher was put into a medically induced coma because of traumatic brain injury ; his doctors reported on 7 March 2014 that his condition was stable . On 4 April 2014 , Schumacher 's agent reported that he was showing " moments of consciousness " as he was gradually withdrawn from the medically induced coma , adding to reports by relatives of " small encouraging signs " over the preceding month . In mid @-@ June he was moved from intensive care into a rehabilitation ward . By 16 June 2014 , Schumacher had regained consciousness and left Grenoble Hospital for further rehabilitation at the University Hospital ( CHUV ) in Lausanne , Switzerland . On 9 September 2014 , Schumacher left CHUV and was brought back to his home for further rehabilitation . In November 2014 , it was reported that Schumacher was " paralysed and in a wheelchair " ; he " cannot speak and has memory problems " . In a video interview released in May 2015 , Schumacher 's manager Sabine <unk> said that his condition is slowly improving " considering the <unk> of the injury he had " . 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 Source : Hilton , Christopher ( 2006 ) . Michael Schumacher : The Whole Story . Haynes . ISBN 1 @-@ 84425 @-@ 008 @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Complete Japanese Formula 3000 Championship results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 ‡ Schumacher was disqualified from the 1997 World Drivers ' Championship due to dangerous driving in the European Grand Prix , where he caused an avoidable accident with Jacques Villeneuve . His points tally would have placed him in second place in that year 's standings . † Driver did not finish the Grand Prix , but was classified as he completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = 24 Hours of Le Mans results = = = 
 = = = Formula One records = = = 
 Schumacher holds the following records in Formula One . 
 = = Books and films = = 
 Allen , James ( 1999 ) . Michael Schumacher : Driven to Extremes . Bantam Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Allen , James ( 2007 ) . Edge of Greatness . Headline . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1678 @-@ 6 . 
 Collings , Timothy ( 2004 ) . The Piranha Club . Virgin Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 7535 @-@ 0965 @-@ 2 . 
 Collings , Timothy ( 2005 ) . Team Schumacher . Highdown . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 03 @-@ 0 . 
 Domenjoz , Luc ( 2002 ) . Michael Schumacher : Rise of a genius . <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Henry , Alan ( ed . ) ( 1992 ) . Autocourse 1992 – 93 . Hazleton Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ 905138 @-@ 96 @-@ 1 . 
 Henry , Alan ( 1996 ) . Wheel to Wheel : Great Duels of Formula One Racing . Weidenfeld Nicolson Illustrated . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Hilton , Christopher ( 2003 ) . Michael Schumacher : The greatest of all . Haynes . ISBN 1 @-@ 84425 @-@ 044 @-@ X. 
 Hilton , Christopher ( 2006 ) . Michael Schumacher : The Whole Story . Haynes . ISBN 1 @-@ 84425 @-@ 008 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Sabine ( 2003 ) . Michael Schumacher . Driving Force . Random House . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Steve ( 1995 ) . Life in the Fast Lane : The Story of the Benetton Grand Prix Year . London : Weidenfeld and Nicolson . ISBN 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , Steve ( 1999 ) . The Mechanic 's Tale : Life in the Pit Lanes of Formula One . Osceola , Wisconsin : MBI Pub . ISBN 0 @-@ 7603 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Williams , Richard ( 1999 ) . The Death of Ayrton Senna . Bloomsbury . ISBN 0 @-@ 7475 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Schumacher had a voice role in the Disney / Pixar film Cars . His character is himself as a car ( Ferrari F430 ) . The French film Asterix and <unk> at the Olympic Games features Schumacher in a cameo role , also as himself . 
 = Adamussium = 
 Adamussium is a monotypic genus of bivalve molluscs in the large family of scallops , the Pectinidae . The Antarctic scallop ( Adamussium colbecki ) is the only species in the genus though its exact relationship to other members of the family is unclear . It is found in the ice @-@ cold seas surrounding Antarctica , sometimes at great depths . 
 Adamussium colbecki is a large , slow @-@ growing scallop that lives on the seabed . The shell consists of a pair of ribbed calcareous valves which enclose the soft body and are joined by a ligament at a hinge . It feeds on microscopic green algae and is sometimes present in great numbers . It is able to move around by flapping its valves and to dart backwards to escape threats . The species is an important member of the Antarctic seabed community as the upper valve often acts as a substrate for seaweeds , sponges and other organisms . In addition , juveniles bind themselves by threads to the upper valve of older shells , using these as a base for several years as they grow . The adult scallops have been used in research to study the accumulation of heavy metals in marine organisms . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Antarctic scallop was first described by the British zoologist Edgar Albert Smith in 1902 as Pecten colbecki . He worked at the British Museum and was responsible for examining and describing shells from collections made over the years that had been deposited there . The German malacologist Johannes Thiele determined in 1934 that the characteristics of the Antarctic scallop were sufficiently different from those of other members of the genus Pecten to warrant its inclusion in a separate genus , Adamussium . More recently , examinations of the chromosome structure and of the mitochondrial DNA of A. colbecki have been undertaken , but the exact phylogenetic relationship it has with other <unk> is still unclear . 
 = = Description = = 
 The shell of the Antarctic scallop grows to about 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) long and 7 centimetres wide and has a nearly circular outline . The two purplish @-@ red valves are paper thin and only slightly convex and are attached by a long , slightly sinuous , hinge . Near the hinge there is an umbo or beak on each valve , a raised hump from which the ribs radiate . The umbones are not very prominent and on either side of them are irregular winged processes , the auricles . In smaller specimens there are around 12 shallow ribs diverging from the umbones and further low ridges appear between these as the shell grows larger . There is a fine sculpturing of concentric lines on the outside of the valves . The auricles are also finely sculpted with the annual growth lines visible . The interior of the valves is pink . A fringe of numerous small tentacles project from the mantle between the two valves and there are a number of simple eyes in a row around the rim . The valves are held closed by powerful adductor muscles which work in opposition to an elastic ligament that lies just behind the umbones and which tends to open the valves . The flanges of the auricles provide a wide attachment for this ligament . The Antarctic scallop could be confused with other scallops , other bivalves or lamp shells . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Antarctic scallop is endemic to the waters surrounding Antarctica . These are mostly within the Antarctic Circle and include the Ross Sea , the Weddell Sea , the Davis Sea , McMurdo Sound and the Southern Ocean . Although it is commonly found at depths of less than 100 metres ( 330 ft ) , remotely operated underwater vehicles armed with lights and cameras have recorded the scallop at much greater depths , including one recording at 4 @,@ 840 metres ( 15 @,@ 880 ft ) . It is found on many different substrates including sand , gravel and silt , either on the surface or semi @-@ submerged in the sediment . It can flap its gills slightly to create a hollow in which to settle . In shallow waters it is usually attached by byssus threads to hard surfaces so as not to be swept away by water movement . At greater depths it is usually free living . 
 Although the Antarctic scallop has a circum @-@ polar distribution , this is very disjunct , and overall it is not common . In some places it is found at densities of up to 90 per square metre and in Terra Nova Bay in the Ross Sea , at depths between 40 metres ( 130 ft ) and 80 metres ( 260 ft ) , some scallop beds were found to be so crowded that adult individuals were lying on top of others . In other locations that seem eminently suitable in many ways , it was entirely absent . A possible explanation for this lies in the fact that its paper thin shell is characteristic of bivalves living in stable , deep water areas with little water movement . The shallower locations in which it now thrives are characterised by being protected bays or by having extensive sea ice coverage , each of which provides a stable environment unaffected by storm waves and where iceberg scouring does not normally occur . It is also absent from habitats dominated by other benthic suspension feeding communities whereas it is found in habitats with soft sediments and no dominant cnidarian and sponge communities . This might be because its larvae face such heavy predation in these locations that it is unable to establish itself . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 The Antarctic scallop can swim rather slowly by opening and closing its valves . It advances in this way with the rim of the shell to the front . It can detect the movement of nearby objects with its rudimentary eyes and , in order to escape predators , can move much more swiftly umbones first , by clapping its valves shut . A remotely controlled camera stationed on the sea bed is apt to find that all the scallops that were originally in its field of view have moved off to other locations . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Like other members of the Pectinidae family , the Antarctic scallop is a suspension feeder , extracting its nourishment from the sea water that surrounds it . Bands of cilia on the velum , a curtain @-@ like fold of the mantle , waft particles towards the gills . Oxygen is absorbed by the gills and food particles , mostly microscopic algae , are trapped in mucous and transported to the mouth by cilia . There is a seasonal increase in microscopic ice algae which become available to suspension feeders when the sea ice melts in the summer , and most of the annual growth takes place at this time . Research has shown that this is as a result of the rise in sea temperature and not the greater availability of food . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The rate of growth of the Antarctic scallop is very slow compared to that of scallops living in warmer seas . It matures at 5 to 7 years old and spawning takes place in late summer . Little is known about the development of the veliger larvae but they may be planktonic for 4 or 5 months . Besides feeding on phytoplankton and small zooplankton , they may absorb dissolved organic matter and consume <unk> . When they settle , metamorphosis takes place and the juveniles attach themselves with byssus threads , often attaching these to the upper valves of scallops , and remain attached for 3 to 5 years . While attached to the adult shell , the juveniles benefit from food particles in the fine detritus thrown up into the water column by movements of the adult . While studying the sizes and growth rates of adults , researchers came to realize that there were gaps in their records which were due to the fact that , in some years , no juveniles had survived . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The Antarctic scallop is monitored in connection with the Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems ( VME ) classification set up by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources ( <unk> ) . As such , notification is required to be made by vessels that land the scallop as by @-@ catch during their fishing activities . 
 The Antarctic scallop is often found living in association with the Antarctic sea urchin , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> validus , a species of sea star . Predatory invertebrates found in the vicinity of the Antarctic scallop include the gastropod <unk> eatoni , and the ribbon worm <unk> <unk> . The Antarctic scallop does not itself have many predators and large individuals are adept at jumping and swimming to escape attackers . Any attached juveniles benefit from this . However , the scallops are intolerant of low salinity levels , and mortality sometimes occurs as a result of a pool of relatively fresh water that sometimes forms during the summer months under the sea ice as it melts . 
 There are a large number of <unk> organisms living on the shells of Antarctic scallops , which may represent 90 % of the hard substrate available in a region where rocky surfaces are not common and much of the seabed consists of sediment . Because a diverse community of invertebrates and algae use its shell as a base , the Antarctic scallop is considered to be a " foundation species " ; a species of great importance in its habitat . The fact that the scallops can swim and move to other locations aids in the dispersal of these organisms . The epiphytes include benthic diatoms , <unk> , bacteria , bryozoans , sponges and algae . The <unk> <unk> refulgens lives parasitically on the scallop 's shell and also grazes on the algae and bacteria growing there . In a research study , 10 different species of demosponge were found growing on a single Antarctic scallop . The demosponge <unk> <unk> was one of the commonest epibionts growing harmlessly on the scallop 's shell . The relationship between sponge and scallop may be symbiotic ; the sponge avoids being engulfed in sediment while the scallop benefits from the protection provided by the sponge , which is distasteful to many predators . 
 The hydroid <unk> <unk> has a mutualistic relationship with the scallop . A study showed that its larvae preferentially settled in the vicinity of other epibionts , usually on scallop shells , and that the scallop larvae were deterred from settling in the vicinity of colonies of the hydroid . It is surmised that the hydroid benefits from a solid substrate on which to live , and although the scallop benefits from the protection from predators provided by the stinging cells of the hydroid , it is disadvantaged by the failure of its larvae to establish themselves in their preferred location , on the shells of mature scallops . 
 = = Research = = 
 A laboratory study examined the effects on the Antarctic scallop of an increase in lead , copper and mercury content in the water . It was found that a rise in levels of heavy metals led to quite severe morphological changes in the scallop and a reduction in lysosomal membrane stability . Another experiment involved transplanting scallops from a clean water area to a bay where effluent from an Antarctic base was released . It was found that the scallops were relatively unaffected by the outflows and this resulted in the belief that benthic marine communities were unlikely to be severely affected by such discharges . 
 Another study analysed the tissues of Adamussium colbecki and compared them with those of Pecten <unk> , a temperate water species of scallop . It was found that copper , iron , cadmium and chromium were concentrated in the digestive organ of the Antarctic scallop . Cadmium levels in particular were higher in the Antarctic scallop than in P. <unk> and other <unk> , but zinc and manganese , found in the kidney , were considerably lower . 
 = War of the Euboeote Succession = 
 The War of the Euboeote Succession was fought in 1256 – 1258 between the Prince of Achaea , William II of Villehardouin , and a broad coalition of other rulers from throughout Frankish Greece who felt threatened by William 's aspirations . The war was sparked by William 's attempt to gain control of a third of the island of Euboea , which was resisted by the local Lombard barons ( " <unk> " or " triarchs " ) with the aid of the Republic of Venice . The Lord of Athens and Thebes , Guy I de la Roche , also entered the war against William , along with other barons of Central Greece . Their defeat at the Battle of Karydi in May / June 1258 effectively brought the war to an end in an Achaean victory , although a definite peace treaty was not concluded until 1262 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the Fourth Crusade , southern Greece had been divided among several Latin lordships , the most powerful of which was the Principality of Achaea , which controlled the entire Peloponnese peninsula . William II of Villehardouin , who in 1246 had succeeded his elder brother as prince , was a most energetic ruler , who aimed to expand and consolidate his rule over the other Latin states . Guy I de la Roche , the " Great Lord " of Athens and Thebes , was already his vassal for the fief of Argos and Nauplia , which lay in the Peloponnese , and William was also suzerain of the three Lombard baronies ( <unk> , " thirds " ) of Negroponte ( the medieval name of both the island of Euboea and its capital , modern Chalkis ) . 
 In 1255 , William 's second wife , <unk> dalle Carceri , baroness of the northern third of the island , died , and her husband laid claim to her inheritance , even minting coins presenting himself as " <unk> of Negroponte " . The other two triarchs , however , Guglielmo I da Verona and Narzotto dalle Carceri , rejected his claim . Although they were William 's nominal subjects and , in Guglielmo 's case , even related to him by marriage , they were loath to surrender Euboeote territory to someone outside their own families . Instead , they ceded <unk> 's barony to their kinsman , <unk> dalle Carceri . In this , they were supported by Paolo Gradenigo , the Venetian bailo ( representative ) at Negroponte , the capital of Euboea . Venice had a long presence at Negroponte , which was an important trading station , and exercised considerable influence over the island and the triarchs . 
 = = Contest for Negroponte = = 
 On 14 June 1256 , a treaty was signed between the Lombard triarchs and Gradenigo . In exchange for the Venetian alliance against Achaea , the triarchs renewed their previous agreements , ceded possession of the fortress of Negroponte , which controlled the bridge over the <unk> Strait , and of extensive lands on the island . The triarchs and their domains were freed from any duties and the considerable tribute that they paid to Venice until then , but in turn , they gave up the rights to all customs revenue to the Republic . Venice also received further concessions , such as the right to regulate the weights , measures and scales for all Euboea , and privileges for its citizens . Soon after , according to the historian Marino Sanudo , William called upon Guglielmo and Narzotto to present themselves to him . Constrained by their feudal oaths of fealty , they did so and were imprisoned by the Achaean prince . The triarchs ' wives , accompanied by many knights and other kinsmen , then went to Marco Gradenigo , the newly arrived bailo , and beseeched his aid . " Moved alike by policy and sympathy " , as the historian William Miller states , Gradenigo assented . 
 William , moving quickly in support of his own claims , had already seized Negroponte . Gradenigo and his Venetians attacked and took the city , but William responded by sending his nephew the baron of Karytaina , Geoffroy de Bruyères , who recaptured Negroponte and launched devastating raids in Euboea . Venice then laid siege to the city , which dragged on for thirteen months until its defenders capitulated in early 1258 . An Achaean counterattack was repulsed by Venetian infantry sallying forth and defeating the famed Achaean cavalry before the city 's walls . 
 = = League against Achaea and the Battle of Karydi = = 
 Faced with the opposition of Venice , William of Villehardouin turned to her rival , Genoa , for support . The Genoese , ever eager to thwart their rivals , Venice , and owing a debt for William 's assistance to them at Rhodes a few years before , readily accepted . Based at Monemvasia , Genoese @-@ crewed galleys preyed upon Venetian shipping . Othon de <unk> , the lord of Karystos in southern Euboea , in control of the strategic passage of the Cavo D 'Oro , also sided with William . Elsewhere , however , William 's appeals were met with hostility and mistrust , due to the Achaean ruler 's claims of suzerainty over all the Latin princes of southern Greece . From the summer of 1256 , Guy I de la Roche , the " Great Lord " ( " <unk> " ) of Athens and Thebes , and his kinsman William de la Roche , had joined the Venetian camp , although they were both vassals to the <unk> ( Guy as Lord of Argos and Nauplia and his brother as baron of Veligosti and Damala ) : the treaty between Venice and the triarchs had been signed at Guy 's capital , Thebes , while both Guy and William actively aided the Venetians in their siege of Negroponte . Thomas II de <unk> , the Lord of Salona , and <unk> Pallavicini , the Margrave of Bodonitsa , also entered in the anti @-@ Achaean coalition , to be joined soon after by Geoffroy de Bruyères , " the best soldier in all the realm of Romania [ i.e. Latin Greece ] " , who deserted his uncle 's cause . 
 William of Villehardouin responded by what William Miller described as " restless activity " : he unsuccessfully besieged the Venetian fortress of Coron , and led a raid into Attica , where he was nearly captured , before resolving on launching a full @-@ scale invasion of the de la Roche domains . His army assembled at Nikli , crossed the Isthmus of Corinth , and at the pass of Mount Karydi , on the way from Megara to Thebes , his army decisively defeated the coalition army . Guy de la Roche and the other barons fled the field and found refuge in the citadel of Thebes . William of Villehardouin followed after them and prepared to lay siege to the city , but relented after the Latin archbishop and many of his own nobles pleaded to show restraint and end the conflict . After extracting a pledge by Guy de la Roche to appear before the Achaean High Court , the assembly of the Achaean barons , and be judged , William 's troops withdrew . 
 The High Court quickly assembled at Nikli . Guy de la Roche presented himself before it accompanied by his own knights , but the assembled barons decided that they did not have the authority to judge him , and referred the matter to King Louis IX of France ( r . 1226 – 1270 ) . Guy travelled to France in 1259 , but Louis not only pardoned him , but awarded him the title of Duke , which he and his successors were to bear thereafter . The renegade Geoffroy de Bruyères too was brought for judgement before William , and it was only the determined and passionate intercession of the other barons that saved his life and secured a pardon from the vengeful prince . He was however deprived of the possession of his domains by the inalienable right of conquest , and retained them henceforth as a gift from the Prince , meaning that they would be forfeit upon his death unless he had any immediate descendants . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 William 's victory at Karydi , coupled with a victory of his troops against the Venetians near <unk> , brought an effective end to the conflict ; on 6 August 1258 , Guglielmo da Verona and Narzotto dalle Carceri consented to begin negotiations for peace through the Doge of Venice , and in early 1259 , the Doge authorized the new bailo , Andrea Barozzi , to sign a treaty with William . But due to William 's subsequent involvement in the great Epirote @-@ Achaean @-@ Sicilian alliance against the Empire of Nicaea , his defeat and capture at the Battle of Pelagonia and his captivity at the hands of the Nicaean emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1259 – 1261 ) , a final peace treaty was delayed until William 's release in 1262 . The treaty , signed at the residence of the Archbishop of Thebes , essentially restored the status quo ante : William recognized Guglielmo , Narzotto , and <unk> as triarchs , and they in turn swore their allegiance to him . The fortress of Negroponte was razed , but Venice retained and even increased its quarter in the city , as well as retaining its exclusive right to levy customs in Euboea , except for the triarchs , the Prince , and their agents . Thus , Venice retained some of its 1256 gains , but overall the treaty was regarded as a setback , in view of the considerable expenses incurred . For some time afterwards , Venice was content to exercise her financial privileges , and refrained from meddling with the island 's politics . 
 = Southern black bream = 
 The southern black bream ( Acanthopagrus butcheri ) ( also known as the black bream , southern bream and blue @-@ nosed bream ) is a species of marine and freshwater fish of the <unk> family , Sparidae . It is a deep @-@ bodied fish , occasionally confused with other similar species that occur within its range , but is generally distinguished from these species by a lack of yellow ventral and anal fins . Southern black bream are endemic to Australia , inhabiting the southern coast from Shark Bay in Western Australia to Mallacoota , Victoria , as well as Tasmania . 
 The species is primarily an inhabitant of estuaries and coastal lakes , rarely entering the ocean , as it cannot complete its life cycle in a fully marine environment . During the breeding season , the species is known to penetrate into the upper reaches of rivers to spawn , causing an influx of juveniles in the estuaries a few months later . Southern black bream are opportunistic predators , consuming a wide range of crustaceans , molluscs , polychaetes and fish . 
 The southern black bream is a major target for both commercial and amateur fishermen due to its high quality flesh , with over 300 tonnes of fish taken each year by commercial fisheries . Anglers also seek out the fish for its sporting qualities , with the development of lure fishing for bream adding to this attraction . Aquaculture techniques for the species are being developed , with a slow growth rate the major hurdle to large scale food production . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The southern black bream is one of eleven species in the genus Acanthopagrus , part of the <unk> family Sparidae . The Sparidae are perciform fish in the suborder <unk> . The southern black bream was at first confused with its nearly identical east coast relative , the surf bream ( Acanthopagrus australis ) , with specimens initially grouped under the name Mylio australis by Rudall , Hale and <unk> . In a 1949 review of the Australian " silver breams , " Ian Munro found that M. australis was in fact two separate species , creating the new species name of Mylio butcheri to accommodate the southern black bream . Munro based this classification on a number of new specimens , one of which was from the Gippsland Lakes , Victoria , which he designated to be the holotype . Mylio butcheri was later changed to Acanthopagrus butcheri when the true genus of the species was identified . 
 Acanthopagrus butcheri has a number of common names , many of which are applied to a number of related fish species , both in Australia and worldwide . The species is commonly referred to in publications as the " southern black bream " to avoid confusion with the black sea bream and other closely related species loosely given the name " black bream . " The species is known regionally by the names " black bream , " " Perth bream , " " Gippsland bream " and the " blue @-@ nose bream . " The latter name is given to mature fish over 1 kg in weight , as at this point their snouts begin to develop a bluish tinge . The Department of the Environment , Water , Heritage and the Arts of the Federal Government designated black bream as preferred name . Black bream has also been designated the standard name by the CSIRO Division of Marine and Atmospheric Research in commercial fishing in Australia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The southern black bream has a deep , moderately compressed body , with both the dorsal and ventral profiles equally curved . The mouth is of moderate size in comparison with the body , and contains six curved , peg like incisors in the front of both upper and lower jaws . The molars are set in series of four or five on each side of the upper jaw , and in series of three or four on the sides of the lower jaw , becoming smaller in size anteriorly . The body is covered with large scales , which may be cycloid or weakly ctenoid in shape . The head is mostly scale @-@ free , with the exception of parts of the operculum . A low , scaly sheath covers the bases of the soft dorsal , anal and caudal fins . The lateral line scale count is 52 – 58 . There is a single dorsal fin originating a little behind the posterior edge of the operculum , consisting of 10 to 13 spines set in front of 10 to 13 soft rays . The anal fin consists of 3 spines anterior to 8 to 10 soft rays , while the pectoral fin has 14 to 16 rays and the ventral has one large spine and 5 soft rays . The southern black bream is golden brown or bronze coloured on the back and sides , with greenish reflections when fresh , while the belly and chin are white . The fins are all dusky in colour , with the caudal fin often a dusky olive brown . The species has been known to reach a total maximum length of 60 cm ( 23 1 ⁄ 2 in ) and a weight of 4 kg ( 8 3 ⁄ 4 lb ) , but is much more common around 23 – 25 cm ( 9 – 9 3 ⁄ 4 in ) and under 2 kg . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The southern black bream is endemic to southern Australia , inhabiting coastal waters from Shark Bay , Western Australia in the west to Mallacoota , Victoria in the east and south around the entire Tasmanian coastline . The species is primarily an inshore species , although has been found on rare occasions on deeper reefs on the continental shelf . Southern black bream primarily inhabit estuarine environments , penetrating into the far reaches of freshwater creeks and rivers during the summer spawning season . They are also known from a number of coastal lakes and intermittently open estuaries . In estuarine and freshwater environments they seek out the cover of structures such as fallen tree branches , jetties , oyster leases and rocky areas , while in deeper areas of coastal lakes , they are often found over bare mud and sand substrates . The species is rarely found in the ocean , but are often washed out of creeks during times of high river flow and are able to survive in the marine environment , where they inhabit inshore reefs and rocky shorelines . 
 The species is most common in southern Victoria , where it inhabits numerous estuaries . The Gippsland Lakes , Mallacoota Inlet and Lake Tyers are the most densely populated bodies of water in the state and the species is often found along the coast . It is not as prolific in South Australia , with the Coorong and Kangaroo Island being the main bream @-@ producing areas in the state . The low numbers may be correlated with the state 's lack of rivers and estuaries , although bream have been caught in unexpected areas , including the <unk> , as well as deep rocky reefs off Streaky Bay in lobster traps . Southern black bream are prevalent in southern Western Australia , with large numbers of estuaries holding the species . The Culham and Stokes Inlets are known to have large populations of the fish . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 Southern black bream are opportunistic omnivores , consuming a wide range of prey , including sessile , burrowing , benthic and pelagic species . The diet of the species varies between rivers , with their opportunistic feeding methods showing little pattern between seasons , although they appear to have certain prey preferences when two or more possible prey species are present . Crustaceans , including crabs , prawns , amphipods and copepods , are commonly taken , as are a number of polychaete and annelid worms . Bivalves such as mussels and cockles are crushed in the bream 's powerful jaws , with small fish such as gobies and anchovies also taken . Algae of the genus <unk> are also a major component of most fish 's diets . Fish feeding in the upper reaches of river have different prey , reflecting the freshwater fauna , with insects , <unk> , tadpoles , brine shrimp and gastropods taken . Studies from the Swan River suggest that there is a shift in diet with age . Younger fish consume amphipods , polychaetes and small individuals of various molluscs . The number of amphipods consumed decreased in the diets of older fish while the number of large molluscs , crabs and teleosts taken increased . The fish actively forage the substrate while swimming with their head down , snapping their prey down with little chewing . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Southern black bream become sexually mature at different ages throughout their range , with Western and South Australian fish maturing by two to three years of age , while Victorian fish mature at five years . There is also a difference in maturation age between the sexes , as females generally mature one year later than males . The timing of spawning is also variable over the species range , with fish in Western Australia able to spawn from July to November , South Australian fish spawning between November and January and Victorian fish in October to November . Reproducing fish migrate into the upper reaches of rivers and streams , where they shed their eggs , with each fish producing up to three million per season . The eggs are small and pelagic , hatching two days or so after fertilisation . The young bream spend the next four years of their lives living in rivers , estuaries and parts of the coastline , often seen schooling over seagrass beds in shallow reaches of estuaries . It is when they reach five years in age that fish living in the marine environment move offshore to deeper reefs , returning to the rivers to spawn , as they cannot complete their life cycle in the ocean . Southern black bream are known to live to 29 years of age . 
 A number of unusual reproductive features have been observed in the species including a number hermaphroditic individuals which have both functional ovaries and testes , with the ability for a change to the preference of one sex also occasionally observed . The species has also been known to hybridise with the closely related species Acanthopagrus australis forming viable offspring , themselves able to backcross with the parent species . This is only known from one coastal lake where the two species are landlocked together for extended periods , promoting interbreeding and the production of offspring with morphological traits intermediate between the two species . The setting required to cause hybridisation , however is too rare to consider the two species subspecies , or even a single species . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Apart from humans , a variety of seabirds are the southern black bream 's main predators , with the pelican , little black cormorant and great cormorant prominent . The species is also taken by larger fish including sharks , rays and a number of large predatory teleosts such as <unk> and flathead . A number of ectoparasites are known from the species , including species from the <unk> , Monogenea , Branchiura , Isopoda and <unk> . 
 = = Relationship to humans = = 
 Southern black bream are one of the most important species to both commercial and recreational fisheries throughout its range , valued for its flavoursome and moist flesh . Due to its marketability , as well as its high tolerance to a wide range of salinity , the species has become a candidate for inland aquaculture in saline dams . 
 = = = Commercial fishery = = = 
 The southern black bream is one of the most important species to the commercial fisheries in both Victoria and southern Western Australia , although only small numbers are harvested in South Australian waters due to the lower populations . Victoria produces the majority of the catch , with the Gippsland region alone producing 80 % of the state 's haul . A. butcheri has been taken from the Gippsland Lakes since the 1880s when they were the predominantly targeted species , although during the 1920s mullet became the most frequently caught species in the lakes . The bream catch from the lakes now fluctuates between 200 and 400 tonnes per year . The Mallacoota inlet and Lake Tyers make up the other important bream @-@ producing regions of the state . In South Australia , bream are only commercially taken from the Coorong which has yielded 10 to 70 tonnes of the species per year since the 1970s . In lower Western Australia the Culham and Stokes inlet produce the bulk of the state 's catch , with annual hauls far greater now than during the early 1990s . During the 1970s and 1980s , Western Australia had a modest bream catch of around 26 tonnes per year , a figure which rocketed to 103 @.@ 9 tonnes in the 1992 / 3 season before receding to around 28 tonnes per year since 2000 . The species is commonly taken by gill nets , beach seine and haul nets , as well as by <unk> . The fish are normally sold fresh whole or as fillets in local markets throughout the states they are taken in . 
 = = = Recreational fishery = = = 
 Southern black bream have long been a favourite target for anglers who seek out the species for both its fighting qualities and high quality flesh . Bream are also popular due to their accessibility , with fish commonly caught from harbour and estuary banks , piers and rock walls , therefore eliminating the need for a boat in most regions . Research in Western Australia has shown that anglers take more bream than commercial fishermen , with a 1979 study indicating that at least 232 tonnes were taken , more than double that of the commercial harvest at its peak , although with the advent of catch and release fishing this figure has dropped . 
 Bream are commonly caught around structures within an estuary , including fallen branches , piers , rock walls , bridge abutments and other man made structures as well as on mud and sand banks where shellfish and crustaceans dwell . Although bream are opportunistic feeders , they can often be very difficult to catch in areas subject to high fishing pressure . Light fishing lines and sinkers are used to avoid <unk> the fish and , as with all fishing , live bait produces the best results . Various crustaceans such as nippers , prawns and crabs are commonly used alongside various species of beach and tube worm . Frozen and cut bait such as prawns , mussels , cockles and fish pieces are also effective . <unk> are usually kept simple and light , with running ball or bean sinkers used on a light line from two up to four kilograms in breaking strength tied to a size 6 – 1 hook . In fast flowing waters , heavier sinkers may be needed to keep the bait in the target area long enough to be noticed by a fish . Burley is often introduced into the water , with chopped pilchards or chicken pellets soaked in fish oil popular amongst anglers . In recent years , the use of lures and flies on southern black bream has been successfully developed , with the species known to attack both hard bodied minnow and <unk> type lures , as well as soft plastic lures and saltwater flies . 
 The southern black bream is protected by size and bag limits in all the states it inhabits , which anglers must be aware of or face fines . In Western Australia the size limit is 25 cm with only 2 fish over 40 cm allowed to be taken from the Swan or Canning Rivers , while the bag limit varies throughout the state with West Coast allowing 4 per angler , Gascoyne 8 per angler , and Southern and Northern 20 per angler . In South Australia the daily bag limit is 10 per person , with a minimum legal size of 28 cm , which is the same limit as Victoria . 
 = = = Aquaculture = = = 
 Southern black bream are relatively easy to grow in captivity , with fish usually spawning during their natural season without needing the addition of hormones . Despite this , bream are not bred on a commercial basis due to a comparatively slow growth rate and a low fillet recovery . Studies by Sarre in 1999 , however , showed that the species can survive well in saline ponds with deep enough waters as long as food is supplemented to the ponds . This has led to the proposal of the breeding of the species to stock inland saline ponds for the use of recreational fishing , much like trout and barramundi are stocked elsewhere in Australia . Although the growth rate is currently too slow for food production purposes , genetic selection may allow the breeding of faster @-@ growing fish for market purposes . Southern black bream are currently bred to stock depleted estuaries , and thus their requirements for farming are already well known . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 A number of other members of the Sparidae inhabit Australian waters and maybe confused with A. butcheri . The yellowfin bream , Acanthopagrus australis is the most similar species to A. butcheri , overlapping in northern Victoria , with hybridisation events suggesting a recent divergence time , allowing few genetic differences to accumulate between the species . As its name suggests , the yellow fins of the yellowfin bream are distinctive . Overlapping the distribution of A. butcheri in the west is Acanthopagrus latus , the western yellowfin bream , which can be distinguished by the prominent yellow ventral , anal and lower caudal fins . The <unk> , <unk> <unk> , is also similar in shape , but possesses gold horizontal stripes which allow for identification . 
 = French battleship Gaulois = 
 Gaulois was a Charlemagne @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the French Navy in the mid @-@ 1890s . She spent most of her career assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron ( Escadre de la Méditerranée ) . The ship accidentally rammed two other French warships early in her career , although neither was seriously damaged , nor was the ship herself . 
 When World War I began , she escorted troop convoys from French North Africa to France for a month and a half . Gaulois was ordered to the Dardanelles in November 1914 to guard against a sortie into the Mediterranean by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . In 1915 , she joined British ships in bombarding Turkish fortifications . She was badly damaged during one such bombardment in March and had to beach herself to avoid sinking . She was refloated and sent to Toulon for permanent repairs . Gaulois returned to the Dardanelles and covered the Allied evacuation in January 1916 . On 27 December 1916 , she was en route for the Dardanelles after a refit in France when she was torpedoed and sunk by the German submarine UB @-@ 47 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Gaulois was 117 @.@ 7 metres ( 386 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 26 metres ( 66 ft 6 in ) . At deep load , she had a draught of 7 @.@ 4 metres ( 24 ft 3 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 4 metres ( 28 ft ) aft . She displaced 10 @,@ 361 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 197 long tons ) normally , and 11 @,@ 325 metric tons ( 11 @,@ 150 long tons ) at deep load . 
 The ship used three 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines , one engine per shaft . They produced 14 @,@ 420 ihp ( 10 @,@ 750 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials using steam generated by 20 Belleville water @-@ tube boilers . Gaulois reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 024 knots ( 33 @.@ 380 km / h ; 20 @.@ 742 mph ) on her trials . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 101 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 084 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 3 @,@ 776 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 993 km ; 4 @,@ 345 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Gaulois carried her main armament of four 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of ten 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 138 mm Modèle 1893 guns , eight of which were mounted in individual casemates and the remaining pair in shielded mounts on the forecastle deck amidships . She also carried eight 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 100 mm Modèle 1893 guns in shielded mounts on the superstructure . The ship 's anti @-@ torpedo boat defences consisted of twenty 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 47 mm Modèle 1885 Hotchkiss guns , fitted in platforms on both masts , on the superstructure , and in casemates in the hull . Gaulois mounted four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . Two of these were submerged , angled 20 ° from the ship 's axis , and the other two were above the waterline . They were provided with twelve Modèle 1892 torpedoes . As was common with ships of her generation , she was built with a plough @-@ shaped ram . 
 The Charlemagne @-@ class ships carried a total of 820 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 807 @.@ 7 long tons ) of Harvey armour . They had a complete waterline armour belt that was 3 @.@ 26 metres ( 10 ft 8 in ) high . It tapered from its maximum thickness of 400 mm ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) to a thickness of 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) at its lower edge . The armoured deck was 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick on the flat and was reinforced with an additional 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) plate where it angled downwards to meet the armoured belt . The main turrets were protected by 320 mm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) of armour and their roofs were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Their barbettes were 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The outer walls of the casemates for the 138 @.@ 6 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 46 in ) guns were 55 mm thick and they were protected by transverse bulkheads 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The conning tower walls were 326 mm ( 12 @.@ 8 in ) thick and its roof consisted of 50 mm armour plates . Its communications tube was protected by armour plates 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Gaulois , named after the tribes that inhabited France during Roman times , was ordered on 22 January 1895 from the Arsenal de Brest . Her sister ship Charlemagne was being built in the slipway intended for Gaulois so the latter ship 's construction was delayed until the former was launched . Gaulois was laid down on 6 January 1896 and launched on 6 October of the same year . She was commissioned on 23 October 1899 after completing her sea trials . 
 Together with Charlemagne , the ship was assigned to the 1st Battleship Division of the Mediterranean Squadron and they arrived at Toulon in January 1900 . Stormy weather during this voyage caused her captain to complain about her forward turret and casemates being flooded out in a head sea . The following month , while exercising in the harbour at Hyères , Gaulois accidentally rammed the destroyer Hallebarde , gouging a 4 @-@ by @-@ 1 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 13 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 9 ft ) hole in the smaller ship . Hallebarde reached Toulon where she was repaired while the battleship was barely damaged . On 18 July , after combined manoeuvres with the Northern Squadron ( Escadre du Nord ) , the ship participated in a naval review conducted by the President of France , Émile Loubet , at Cherbourg . The following year , Gaulois and the Mediterranean Squadron participated in an international naval review by President Loubet in Toulon with ships from Spain , Italy and Russia . 
 In October 1901 , the 1st Battleship Division , under the command of Rear Admiral ( contre @-@ amiral ) Leonce Caillard , was ordered to proceed to the port of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos , then owned by the Ottoman Empire . After landing two companies of marines that occupied the major ports of the island on 7 November , Sultan Abdul Hamid II agreed to enforce contracts made with French companies and to repay loans made by French banks . The 1st Division departed Lesbos in early December and returned to Toulon . In May 1902 , the ship became the flagship of Vice Admiral ( vice @-@ amiral ) François Fournier who led a small delegation to celebrate the unveiling of the statue of Comte de Rochambeau in Lafayette Square , Washington , D.C. President Theodore Roosevelt was received aboard on 23 May and the ship made port visits to New York City and Boston before heading back to France . She made another port visit to Lisbon before arriving back at Toulon on 14 June . 
 During exercises off Golfe @-@ Juan , Gaulois accidentally rammed the battleship Bouvet on 31 January 1903 . Neither ship was seriously damaged in the accident . In April 1904 , she was one of the ships that escorted President Loubet during his state visit to Italy . Later that year , the ship made port visits in Thessaloniki and Athens with the rest of the Mediterranean Squadron . A wireless telegraph was installed aboard Gaulois in December 1905 . Together with the battleships Iéna and Bouvet , the ship aided survivors of the April 1906 eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Naples . For the rest of the decade , she participated in various exercises with the Mediterranean Squadron and made a number of port visits in France and its dependencies . Gaulois was briefly transferred to the Northern Squadron in August 1910 and she participated in a large naval review by President Armand Fallières off Cap Brun on 4 September 1911 . The ship was reassigned to the Mediterranean Squadron in October 1912 and she participated in a naval review by President Raymond Poincaré on 10 June 1913 . In June 1914 , the Navy planned to assign Gaulois to the Training Division of the Squadron as of October , but this was cancelled upon the outbreak of war in August . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Together with the older French pre @-@ dreadnoughts , the ship 's first mission in the war was to escort troop convoys from North Africa to France . Later in September , her main turrets required repairs in Bizerte as the forward turret was having difficulty traversing . Following these repairs , Gaulois was ordered to Tenedos Island , not far from the Gallipoli Peninsula of Turkey , in November to guard against a sortie by the German battlecruiser Goeben . She relieved the battleship Suffren which needed a refit in Toulon . She became flagship of Rear Admiral Émile Guépratte upon her arrival on 15 November . He transferred his flag back to Suffren when she returned on 10 January 1915 . 
 During the bombardment of 19 February , Gaulois supported Suffren as the latter ship bombarded Turkish forts covering the mouth of the Dardanelles . Late in the day , she bombarded the fort at <unk> Tepe on the Asiatic side of the strait . During the subsequent bombardment on 25 February , the ship anchored some 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 yd ) from the Asiatic shore and engaged the forts at Kum Kale and Cape Helles . Their return fire was heavy enough to force Gaulois to up anchor before she could suppress their guns . Later in the day , she closed to within 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 yd ) of the forts and engaged them with her secondary armament . During the day 's action , the ship was hit twice , but these did little damage . 
 On 2 March , the French squadron bombarded targets in the Gulf of Saros , at the base of the Gallipoli Peninsula . Five days later , the French squadron attempted to suppress the Turkish guns while British battleships bombarded the fortifications . Gaulois was hit by a 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) shell during this attack that caused little damage as it failed to detonate . Admiral Guépratte and his squadron returned to the Gulf of Saros on 11 March where they again bombarded Turkish fortifications . 
 They returned to assist in the major attack on the fortifications planned for 18 March . British ships made the initial entry into the Dardanelles , but the French ships passed through them to engage the forts at closer range . Gaulois was hit twice during this bombardment ; the first shell struck the quarterdeck , but caused little damage other than deforming the deck . The second shell hit just above the waterline on the starboard bow and did little obvious damage . In reality , however , it pushed in the armour plates below the waterline and opened up a hole 7 metres ( 23 ft 0 in ) by 22 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) through which water flooded in . Little could be done to staunch the inflow and Captain <unk> decided to head for the Rabbit Islands , north of Tenedos , where he could beach his ship for temporary repairs . He ordered the non @-@ essential crewmen off the ship in case she foundered en route , but managed to reach the islands , escorted by Charlemagne . 
 Gaulois was refloated on 22 March and departed for Toulon via Malta three days later , escorted by Suffren . They encountered a storm on 27 March off Cape Matapan and the ship began taking on water as the repairs began to leak under the pressure of the storm . She radioed for assistance later that night and the armoured cruiser Jules Ferry and three torpedo boats arrived several hours later . The ship arrived in the Bay of Navarin the following morning and more repairs were made . Gaulois arrived without further incident at Toulon on 16 April and entered drydock the following day . The Navy took the opportunity to increase her stability by lightening her masts , removing some armour from the superstructure and conning tower as well as dismounting two 100 mm and six 47 mm guns . In addition , the ship was fitted with an anti @-@ torpedo bulge that stretched between her bridge and aft superstructure to increase her beam and thus her stability . 
 Her repairs were completed by early June and Gaulois departed for the Dardanelles on 8 June . She reached Lemnos on 17 June and relieved her sister St Louis on 27 July . The ship anchored 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) off the shore on 11 August to bombarded a Turkish artillery battery at Achi Baba . Splinters from return fire detonated a 100 mm shell and started a small fire , but it was put out without much trouble . On her voyage home , Gaulois ran aground at the harbour entrance and had to unload most of her ammunition before she could be refloated on 21 August . Together with the pre @-@ dreadnought République , the ship covered the Allied evacuation from Gallipoli in January 1916 . Badly in need of a refit , she sailed for Brest on 20 August where her captain argued that the range of her main armament needed to be increased by 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) if she was to be considered fit for the battleline . Some thought was given to disarming her and converting her into a barracks ship , but nothing was done before the ship was ordered back to the Eastern Mediterranean on 25 November . 
 = = = = Fate = = = = 
 By 27 December 1916 , Gaulois had reached the Aegean Sea and was off the southern coast of Greece when she was torpedoed by the submarine UB @-@ 47 despite her escort of one destroyer and two armed trawlers . The explosion of the single torpedo hit slightly abaft the mainmast . It killed two crewmen and another pair drowned as they attempted to abandon ship . The ship capsized 22 minutes after being hit and sank 14 minutes later off Cape <unk> at 36 ° 15 ′ N 23 ° 42 ′ E. 
 = <unk> Kydd = 
 <unk> Kydd ( née Neele ; born 18 September 1981 in Kyabram , Victoria ) is a former Australian professional netball player . Kydd achieved some success in netball and swimming in her early life , and played in the Dairy Farmers State League at the age of 16 . She was also selected for the national under @-@ 21 team in 1999 and was accepted by the Australian Institute of Sport , before launching her professional career . 
 Kydd was a goal shooter for the Melbourne Kestrels in the Commonwealth Bank Trophy from 2000 to 2006 , serving as club captain for the last two years . An accurate and high @-@ scoring shooter , she was one of the league 's top players of that era , winning the competition 's Most Valuable Player award for 2004 . She was also a frequent member of the Australian national netball team from 2003 to 2005 . Her career was hampered by injury and poor form in later years , and she struggled after being dropped from the national side in early 2005 and missing out on a return in time for the 2006 Commonwealth Games after sustaining a serious concussion late in the year . 
 Kydd made the surprise decision at the beginning of the 2006 season to transfer from the Kestrels , where she had been captain , to the club 's more successful rival , the Melbourne Phoenix , but she lasted only one season before walking away from the club to travel overseas . She subsequently signed with New Zealand club Canterbury Flames for the 2007 National Bank Cup season , but withdrew her services before playing a game due to injury . She subsequently moved to England , where she currently plays mixed minor grade netball . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kydd was born in the Victorian regional town of Kyabram , and began playing competitive netball at age nine . Though also a talented swimmer , she was forced to make a choice between the two sports , and ultimately chose netball . She played for local and Goulburn Valley representative teams as a teenager and , in 1998 at the age of 16 , was selected to play for the dominant Eastside Netball Club in the state Dairy Farmers State League competition , alongside three national league players . Despite a regular three @-@ hour commute and having to juggle sporting commitments with studies at Kyabram Secondary College , she played an integral role in Eastside 's premiership that year . She was subsequently named in the state under @-@ 21 squad for the annual Australian National Netball Championships and in the Melbourne Kestrels squad for the 1999 season . 
 Despite never having played a national league game , Kydd was selected in the national under @-@ 21 ( U @-@ 21 ) team in 1999 , which , as a result of reforms made that year , automatically saw her admitted to the Australian Institute of Sport ( AIS ) . She spent the 1999 season playing for the AIS team in the Victorian state league , before switching to their South Australian counterparts for the 2000 season . Kydd , at 188 cm ( 6 ft 2 in ) tall , established a reputation as an effective shooter , and despite often missing matches as a result of her national U @-@ 21 team was a key part of the team . 
 = = Commonwealth Bank Trophy debut = = 
 Kydd made her debut for the Melbourne Kestrels in April 2000 but , because of her relative inexperience , was asked to play only two games for them over the season . She earned selection in the U @-@ 21 national squad to tour Jamaica in May , followed by a successful stint with the team as part of the squad for the Youth World Cup in Wales . At season 's end Kydd was named in the state open team for the national championships and , while remaining in the U @-@ 21 squad , was also named in the initial national open squad , despite having only played two national league games . However , the national squad was at the time enjoying an unusual glut of shooters , and she was cut amidst fierce competition from six other prominent players , all aiming at just three positions in the final team . Her disappointment was , however , partly offset when she won the Commonwealth Bank Trophy 's Best New Talent award , worth A $ 5 @,@ 000 , in February 2001 . 
 Kydd graduated from high school at the end of 2000 , and moved to Kensington , an inner suburb of Melbourne , in February 2001 to study tourism and hospitality at Victoria University . At the beginning of the 2001 season , two of the Kestrels ' main stars , Shelley O 'Donnell and Janine Ilitch , both announced that they would be sidelined for most or all of the season because of pregnancy , and Kydd was called upon to fill the vacancy . She became a core player instantly , and although the Kestrels struggled , Kydd formed an effective combination with goal shooter Amanda Burton ( who she had previously played with in the interstate competition ) . Kydd was among the team 's standout performers and was frequently praised in the media for both her accuracy and consistency , coming away at season 's end with 390 goals and the fifth highest scoring average in the competition . She continued to represent Australia in under @-@ 21 competition , being selected for several home matches against England and a tour of New Zealand , and was again selected in the national open squad in the lead @-@ up to the 2002 Commonwealth Games , but was once again cut from the final team . 
 = = Furthering her career = = 
 Though she had missed out on Commonwealth Games selection , Kydd had established a reputation as a particularly difficult opponent by the beginning of the 2002 Commonwealth Bank Trophy season . She was consistently among the league 's top <unk> , particularly after she was again paired with Burton , due to the axing of struggling new recruit Kristy Doyle . She scored her 500th goal with the Kestrels in the middle of the season , and excelled against some particularly difficult opponents , including then @-@ Australian captain Kathryn Harby @-@ Williams . She was integral in helping the Kestrels make the semifinals for the first time since 1999 , and was the third @-@ highest scorer in the league . Kydd was again named in the extended national squad at the end of the season , and finally survived the cut , being named in the squad to tour Jamaica in early 2003 , beating rival shooters Jane <unk> and Megan Dehn ( née Anderson ) for the vacancy caused by the retirement of veteran player Jacqui Delaney . 
 = = = International selection = = = 
 At only 21 Kydd was the youngest player on the tour of Jamaica and , while she toured with the remainder of the team , was overlooked for a Test position . She finally made her full début against South Africa not long afterwards , and managed to cement her position with a superb performance , managing an accuracy rate of 94 % in the third Test . This performance , along with similar form in the national league , led to her selection in the starting squad for the 2003 Netball World Championships . She played every game in the world championships in July at the expense of ageing veteran Eloise Southby , a decision which was the cause of some controversy . She subsequently helped the Kestrels to the elimination final and , at the end of the season , was named as the team 's new vice @-@ captain , with predecessor Janine Ilitch assuming the captaincy . She also won the coveted Commonwealth Bank Trophy Player 's Player Award , and tied for third in the Most Valuable Player count . 
 = = = Career peak = = = 
 With the experience gained from several seasons in the national league , Kydd reached her peak in 2004 . She was rarely troubled in the national league all year , scoring 436 goals at an average accuracy of 79 % ; statistics among the best in the league . Although Burton had retired , creating a supporting void that the Kestrels struggled to fill , she again played a vital role in the team reaching the finals series . She also established her place as a regular member of the national team , playing in Test series against South Africa and New Zealand and a practice match against England . Though she struggled initially against the Silver Ferns , Kydd improved over the space of the series and was awarded player of the match in the third Test . At the end of the tour , she was given some praise for being among Australia 's best in what had been an otherwise disastrous series . She was rewarded for her form when she was a surprise choice for the 2004 Commonwealth Bank Trophy Most Valuable Player Award , being selected over favourite veteran internationals Catherine Cox and <unk> McMahon . When captain Ilitch was ruled out for 2005 because of pregnancy , Kydd was the natural choice to replace her , and she was soon announced as the Kestrels ' new leader . 
 = = Form slump and injuries = = 
 Kydd graduated from university at the end of 2004 , but had significant difficulty finding employment as her netball commitments scared off prospective employers . She also became engaged to Garth Kydd , a member of the Australian men 's netball team , whom she married in April 2006 . Kydd was widely expected to again feature among the league 's best , however , she was disappointing against South Africa in February . She also struggled in the opening games of the national league season , a result largely attributed to nerves associated with the captaincy . She began to recover her form , but in May broke her finger . She continued to play but the injury severely inhibited her performance for four weeks . In June she was dropped from the national team for the first time in two years as a result of poor form and injury , with national coach Norma Plummer stating that she was " very disappointed that [ Kydd had ] let it drop " and that she " never thought she would have to [ cut her from the team ] " . The ageing Southby @-@ Halbish was brought in to replace her and Kydd admitted that her accuracy had been well below ideal levels . She improved markedly over the following two rounds , but on 23 July suffered major concussion after being hit hard in the head during a match against the Adelaide Thunderbirds , which required her to be taken to hospital . A brilliant performance against the Perth Orioles the following week seemed to suggest a quick recovery , however she was dogged with complications for the remainder of the season . 
 In an attempt to regain her position in the national squad , Kydd attended the extended squad 's first training camp in September 2005 , but was one of several players forced out after succumbing to a virus . She was subsequently left out of the team for a practice tour of Jamaica and New Zealand in the lead @-@ up to the 2006 Commonwealth Games , but continued her efforts to make the team for the Games . Finally , on 10 December 2005 , she voluntarily withdrew her name from selection , noting ongoing complications from the earlier concussion ( team doctors stated that she had probably attempted to return too quickly ) and low motivation . 
 = = Defection to the Melbourne Phoenix = = 
 After withdrawing from the Commonwealth Games squad , Kydd took a four @-@ month hiatus from the sport in order to recover from injury and regain motivation . She married fiancée Garth in April 2006 , and though widely known by her maiden name , decided to take on her husband 's surname . Kydd began the process of re @-@ signing with the Kestrels for the 2006 season , and returned to training with the club with March 2006 , but stunned the team when she defected to more successful rival Melbourne Phoenix only three weeks before the start of the season . The defection caused notable antagonism between the traditional rivals with Kydd 's former coach , Jane Searle and several team @-@ mates expressing shock at the suddenness of the switch . 
 After six years at the Kestrels , the defection saw Kydd forced to adapt to a new shooting combination with veteran international <unk> McMahon . As she had had little opportunity to train with the new team before the opening of the season , the pair initially had some difficulty adjusting to each other 's style . After a tenuous start , however , the pair found form , and were able to form a relatively successful combination . Kydd scored 360 goals in the season , and assisted the Phoenix in becoming the top scoring side for the season , although occasionally patchy form from the team as a whole saw the Phoenix slip outside the top two at season 's end . Kydd was overlooked for a return to international selection during the 2006 – 07 season . 
 In October 2006 , Kydd announced that she was leaving the Phoenix after just one season , a move that stunned coach Julie <unk> . Kydd said that she was travelling overseas with her husband , leading to speculation she would play in New Zealand . <unk> said that if she had known that Kydd would not keep her long term commitment , then she would have rather invested in young talent , referring to Kydd as a " player at risk " . In November , New Zealand 's Canterbury Flames announced Kydd in their squad for the 2007 National Bank Cup . Her contract was to start in February 2007 , so that she could fulfil work commitments with Youth Hostels Association , Victoria . However , Kydd withdrew her services to the Flames without playing a match , citing medical advice , due to a concussion incident . In late 2007 , Kydd was playing mixed netball in the United Kingdom in the PIM Mixed A competition . 
 = Cake ( band ) = 
 Cake ( stylized CAKE ) is an American alternative rock band from Sacramento , California . Consisting of singer John McCrea , trumpeter Vince DiFiore , guitarist Xan McCurdy , bassist Gabe Nelson and drummer Paulo Baldi , the band has been noted for McCrea 's sarcastic lyrics and monotone vocals , DiFiore 's trumpet parts , and their wide @-@ ranging musical influences , including country music , Mariachi , rock , funk , Iranian folk music and hip hop . There is also an UK based alternative rock band existent with the same name . 
 Cake was formed in 1991 by McCrea , DiFiore , Greg Brown , Frank French and Shon Meckfessel , who soon left and was replaced by Nelson . Following the self @-@ release of its debut album , Motorcade of Generosity , the band was signed to Capricorn Records in 1995 and released its first single , " Rock ' n ' Roll Lifestyle " , which hit number 35 on the Modern Rock Tracks music chart and was featured on MTV 's 120 Minutes ; French and Nelson then left the band , and were replaced by Todd Roper and Victor Damiani . Cake 's second album , 1996 's Fashion Nugget , went platinum on the strength of its lead single , " The Distance " . Following a tour of Europe and the United States , both Brown and Damiani announced they were leaving Cake , which led to speculation about the band 's future ; McCrea eventually recruited Xan McCurdy to take over on guitar , and persuaded Nelson to return . 
 Prolonging the Magic , the band 's third album , was released in 1998 and went platinum , having shipped over one million units ; this was followed three years later by Comfort Eagle , the band 's first album on Columbia Records , featuring the single " Short Skirt / Long Jacket " which hit number 7 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . Following a series of tours , including several versions of the Unlimited Sunshine Tour , the band released Pressure Chief in 2004 , its second and last album on Columbia . After creating its own label , Upbeat Records , the band released Showroom of Compassion in 2011 , which became its first album to debut at the top of the Billboard charts , selling 44 @,@ 000 copies in the first week after release . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Motorcade of Generosity ( 1991 – 1996 ) = = = 
 Cake was formed in 1991 when John McCrea , a Sacramento , California native who had moved to Los Angeles with a band only to see it " quickly crumble around him " , returned to Sacramento . He began looking for a new band to play with , having " grown tired of Sacramento 's coffeehouse circuit " , and quickly attracted trumpet player Vince DiFiore , guitarist Greg Brown , bassist Shon Meckfessel and drummer Frank French . All were active in the music scene at the time ; DiFiore notes that " [ McCrea ] came back and stole us from other bands " . The band soon came up with the name " Cake " ; rather than referring to the foodstuff , the name is meant to be " like when something insidiously becomes a part of your life ... [ we ] mean it more as something that cakes onto your shoe and is just sort of there until you get rid of it " . <unk> soon left to attend college , and was replaced by Gabe Nelson . After touring and becoming part of the club scene in San Francisco , the band independently recorded and released Motorcade of Generosity in 1994 , selling copies from their van as a method of paying touring expenses . 
 Motorcade was named one of the best indie releases of 1994 by Pulse ! , and after a concert at the Great American Music Hall Bonnie Simmons agreed to manage the band , leading to them signing a deal with Capricorn Records , who re @-@ released the album in 1995 . The first single , Rock ' n ' Roll Lifestyle , hit number 35 on the Modern Rock Tracks music chart and was featured on MTV 's 120 Minutes . Critical reactions to the album were largely positive ; Stephen Thompson in the Wisconsin State Journal described it as possessing " great lyrics , creative instrumentation and production that 's about as simple as production gets " , Thomas Conner praised it for being " soulful and smooth , witty and gritty , this record makes the ghosts of Bob Wills , Buddy Holly and Lou Reed smile " in the Tulsa World , and Matt Weitz in the Dallas Observer noted its " gimlet eye and sardonic humor " . The album was eventually nominated for a <unk> Award in the category of " Outstanding Debut Album " . 
 Nevertheless , some critics were less appreciative ; John Wirt , in The Advocate , praised the album 's sense of humor and " delicious " irreverence but noted that " [ the ] musicianship in Motorcade of Generosity suggests the Cake guys are mediocre players " . Mindy <unk> , in The Austin Chronicle , described the album as " cover @-@ free , and , since we 're on the subject , genre @-@ free . A quartet made five by a trumpet player , Cake carry themselves with the <unk> of technically proficient , lyrically aware music lovers , who are almost anachronistically <unk> and brazenly proud of it " . The signing to Capricorn and re @-@ release of Motorcade led to both French and Nelson leaving the band , citing their dislike of " the prospect of extensive national touring " ; they were replaced by Todd Roper and Victor Damiani respectively . 
 = = = Fashion Nugget ( 1996 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Fashion Nugget , Cake 's second album , was released on September 17 , 1996 . Like Motorcade , it was produced by the band and released on Capricorn Records . Cake considered the album more professionally produced than Motorcade , despite references to its " raw " sound , and the reception was again generally positive ; critics noted the broadening of Cake 's sound , with Joshua Green noting in the Westword that " Nugget spans a broader range of topics than did Motorcade , with similarly appealing results " , and Matt Weitz in the Dallas Observer saying that " The gimlet eye and sardonic humor of 1994 's Motorcade of Generosity is intact , but Fashion Nugget is aptly named ; it updates Motorcade with <unk> soul and hip @-@ hop rhythms " . The album 's first single , " The Distance " , written by Greg Brown , became the band 's biggest hit to date and is considered their " ubiquitous " song ; it hit number 5 on the RPM Alternative 30 , and entered the Modern Rock Tracks top 5 . 
 On the strength of " The Distance " , Fashion Nugget was certified gold on December 9 , 1996 and platinum on April 10 , 1997 . The second single from Fashion Nugget , a cover of the Freddie Perren and Dino Fekaris song " I Will Survive " , hit number 38 on the US Modern Rock Tracks chart . Although the band described it as a serious take on the original , one they 'd been playing live for years , original performer Gloria Gaynor considers it her least favorite version of the song due to its use of profanity . Following Fashion Nugget 's release , the band toured the United States , playing in cities including Tulsa , Chicago , Salt Lake City , Los Angeles , San Antonio , and Dallas . They later toured overseas , visiting the United Kingdom as a support act for Counting Crows , playing their own shows alongside the tour at venues including Dingwalls in London . The band also toured Japan ; a later tour of the US , starting in Minneapolis in June 1997 , was cancelled due to illness when McCrea was diagnosed with " fatigue and extreme exhaustion " . After McCrea recovered , the band continued touring , playing at the Big Stink festival in Vancouver , Washington , and the Jayhawk Music Festival in Lawrence , Kansas . 
 1997 also saw lineup changes ; bassist Victor Damiani and guitarist Greg Brown both left , prompting speculation about the band 's survival ; McCrea noted that " Musically , there was a really great symbiosis and I really felt that it ( their departures , especially Brown 's ) was the most stupid thing in the world " , and said that he had considered dissolving the band . Brown and Damiani formed the " new @-@ wave influenced " <unk> ; their places within Cake were taken by Xan McCurdy and Gabe Nelson , whom McCrea persuaded to rejoin the band . 
 = = = Prolonging the Magic ( 1998 – 2001 ) = = = 
 With Brown and Damiani 's departure , McCrea felt " freer to experiment " with the next album , 1998 's Prolonging the Magic ; he wrote and produced every song . As a result of this experimentation , the album was noted as " loaded with spiced @-@ up instrumentation , including a few new ingredients like the pedal steel guitar and musical saw thrown in for extra flavour " . McCrea stated that he deliberately " approached writing this record without the guitar as the central assumption of all life in the universe " . Music Week described it as an " inspired collection of leftfield rock " , while Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News said that it " brims with the same dry humor the Sacramento band displayed in past hits such as ' The Distance ' and ' Rock and Roll Lifestyle ' : The leadoff track , ' Satan Is My Motor , ' puts a devilish new spin on the rock ' n ' roll car @-@ song tradition , while ' When You Sleep ' revolves around the question of what your fingers do while the rest of the body <unk> " . Other reviewers were less complimentary , with Mike Pattenden in The Times writing that " Prolonging the Magic suggests that [ Cake ] may well be destined to go down as one @-@ hit wonders ... While a handful stand out – the country waltz Mexico , You Turn the <unk> and Hem of Your Garment – Prolonging the Magic shows <unk> and company to be little more than an above average bar @-@ room act . Cake are surviving on songwriting crumbs " . The album peaked at number 33 on the Billboard 200 , was listed in The Columbian as the second best album of 1998 , and eventually went platinum after shipping over 1 million units . 
 The album 's first single , " Never There " , hit number 1 on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks , and was followed by " Let Me Go " in 1999 , which hit number 30 . Following Prolonging the Magic 's release , the band toured the United States , playing in cities including San Diego and Los Angeles . A tour of Europe was temporarily postponed in March after McCrea broke a bone in his hand while moving furniture , which also led to the delay of the European release of Prolonging the Magic . Both the album release and the tour happened in mid @-@ April , with Cake playing at the London Astoria . Later show locations in North America included Chicago , St. Louis , Missouri , and Toronto . A third single , " Sheep Go to Heaven " , was released in 2001 . 
 = = = Comfort Eagle ( 2001 – 2004 ) = = = 
 For their fourth album , Comfort Eagle , the band signed a deal with Columbia Records . Comfort Eagle was both produced and arranged by the band , and was recorded at Paradise Studios in Sacramento and Hyde Street Studios in San Francisco . Following the recording , drummer Todd Roper left the band , citing the demands extended touring would put on his time , and the commitments his two children , Griffin and Bella represented . He was replaced by Pete McNeal . The album 's release was preceded by the release of its first single , " Short Skirt / Long Jacket " , described as a parable about " the relationship between prosperity and the population boom ... There 's nothing more <unk> than economic prosperity " . An accompanying video was directed by McCrea , and recorded using the DV system ; it featured vox populi recordings of members of the public listening to the song and giving their opinion . " Short Skirt / Long Jacket " hit number 2 on the Bear Rock Top 10 in Canada and number 7 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks ; the video became one of the 30 most requested tracks on MTV ; Billboard writers later listed the video as the 5th best of 2001 . 
 Comfort Eagle itself was released on July 24 , 2001 , to good reviews ; Michael D. Clark of The Houston Chronicle described it as " Cake at its best " , while a reviewer for The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution stated that the album 's songs were " among the best of the band 's career " , praising McCrea for widening his vocal repertoire . James Montgomery , writing for <unk> , noted a stylistic change , saying that " While the core sound of the band – honky tonk guitars , mariachi horns and salsa rhythms – remain intact , they have been stripped down to the core , replaced instead with ill Casio beats , rubbery funk and Stax @-@ style horn bleats " . The album sold 22 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , the highest sales in the band 's history , and eventually went gold . With the exception of a slot at the Atlanta On The Bricks Festival , playing for 90 @,@ 000 people , the band chose to start the tour with small rather than large shows , such as in the Sacramento area , where they played for around 100 people . They launched their first full tour for the album in September , playing in the United States , Canada and across Europe . 
 A second single , " Love You Madly " , was released in 2002 , with an accompanying video again produced by McCrea . The video featured DiFiore and McNeal competing in a cooking competition , judged by Rick James , Phyllis Diller and Jeff Smith , and was noted by Billboard as " continuing the fresh , witty , and downright fun style seen in the " Short Skirt " video " . Cake had planned a second tour of Europe , followed by a series of shows around the United States , but in view of the September 11 attacks chose not to travel overseas . Instead , the band streamed a performance internationally from the Yahoo ! headquarters in California , playing emailed requests . The United States tour went ahead as planned , with Cake playing concerts in Birmingham , Alabama , St. Petersburg , Florida , Salt Lake City , and Las Vegas . This was followed by the Unlimited Sunshine Tour , a traveling festival headlined and planned by the band and featuring Modest Mouse , De La Soul and The Flaming Lips . A second Unlimited Sunshine Tour was undertaken in 2003 , featuring Cake , Cheap Trick and The <unk> Boys . 
 = = = Pressure Chief / B @-@ Sides and Rarities ( 2004 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Cake 's fifth album , Pressure Chief , was recorded in June 2004 in a converted house in Sacramento ; the album was again released on Columbia Records . Before its official release date on October 5 , the band played at the Austin City Limits Music Festival and <unk> 's World Class Rockfest . The album was also preceded by its first single , " No Phone " , which hit number 13 on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart ; the song covered the ubiquitous and privacy @-@ invading use of cell phones , and was described by Jeremy Mahadevan of the New Straits Times as " a traditionally minimalist Cake anthem , with a killer melody and , unique to this album , fairly extensive use of synths " . A second single , " Wheels " , was also released but failed to chart . Pressure Chief itself hit number 17 on the Billboard top 200 , spending 7 weeks in the charts , and received mixed reviews from critics . Although it was acknowledged as a continuation of their old work , albeit with an increased use of synthesisers , Sam Spies of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch noted that " the experiments in style that made Cake fun to listen to have all but disappeared from ' Pressure Chief ' ... What 's left is mostly uninspired , so @-@ called alternative rock " , and Graeme Hammond of the Sunday Herald Sun wrote that " the melodies are listless , the album bereft of anything with the verve of Short Skirt / Long Jacket or Comfort Eagle " . 
 Other critics were more generous ; Doug Elfman of the Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal called it " another great and bizarre , twangy album of alternative @-@ singer @-@ songwriting stories about cars and horrible relationships " , while a reviewer in the New Straits Times noted its " smart , subtly dissident , and always catchy pop " . Following Pressure Chief 's release , the band toured North America , playing in cities including Albany , New York , and Montreal . A second tour , in 2005 , saw the band headline the 20 @-@ city Virgin College Mega Tour , playing alongside Gomez ; while the Tour was in California , the band announced that it had been dropped from Columbia Records . This was followed by a tour of Europe , as well as concerts in Australia and Jakarta , along with a 2006 repeat of the Unlimited Sunshine Tour , featuring Cake , Tegan and Sara and Gogol Bordello . 
 Cake later formed their own label , Upbeat Records , which allowed them to release the compilation album B @-@ Sides and Rarities on August 14 , 2007 . This was followed by a series of concerts , including at the <unk> in London , and a performance in Anchorage , Alaska . Reviews of B @-@ Sides and Rarities were generally good ; Devin Grant of The Post and Courier wrote that " For an album full of odds and ends , this Cake release is every bit as good , and every bit as fun , as the band 's previous studio releases " , while Catherine P. Lewis of The Washington Post noted that , although several live tracks reduced the album 's strength , " there are still enough charming nuggets to make this album less disposable than the typical rarities compilation " . 
 = = = Showroom of Compassion and upcoming seventh studio album ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 After six years without a new studio album , Cake recorded Showroom of Compassion in 2010 and released it on January 11 , 2011 . Rather than having it professionally recorded , the band built their own solar @-@ powered studio in Sacramento over five years and chose to produce the album themselves there . The album was preceded by its first single , " Sick of You " , which was released in September 2010 , hitting number 4 on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart . The album itself opened at number 1 on the Billboard Top 200 Albums , selling 44 @,@ 000 copies ; this marked not only the first time a Cake album had hit the number 1 spot in an opening week , but also the lowest sales numbers for an album at the top of that chart . 
 The album received fairly good reviews ; Scott Bergen of The Record described it as " one of their best albums " , while Jim Farber of the Daily News wrote that " Fifteen years after they batted out their first left @-@ field hit with ' The Distance , ' the band 's sound and words still have bite " . George Lang of The Oklahoman , however , wrote that it was " frustratingly lacking in many more songs worthy of the band 's late- ' 90s boom period " . To promote the album , Cake performed on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno before releasing Showroom of Compassion 's second single , " Long Time " . This was followed by a spring tour of both Europe and North America , concluding with a show in Toronto on May 21 . 
 On February 26 , 2011 , Cake performed a live set for " Guitar Center Sessions " on DirecTV . The episode included an interview with program host Nic Harcourt . In September 2011 , Cake released a 24 @-@ page , hand @-@ made visual book for their song , Bound Away . They will release a vinyl box set consisting of their six studio albums , their rarities album and the previously unreleased , Live at the Crystal Palace for Record Store Day 2014 . A new studio album was announced for an early 2014 release , although in September 2014 McCrea admitted they hadn 't yet begun to record a new album . 
 = = Influences and musical style = = 
 Cake incorporates a wide range of genres into its music , including country music , Mariachi , new wave , college rock , jazz , funk , Iranian folk music , Brazilian music and hip hop . McCrea himself cites Hank Williams , Tom Zé , the Golden Gate Quartet and Sly and the Family Stone as particular influences . The band is most often noted for three things : the prominence of DiFiore 's trumpet lines , McCrea 's ironic , sarcastic lyrics , and his " droll , deadpan ... monotone " vocals . DiFiore 's trumpet work originated with McCrea 's desire for a second melodic instrument to go with a song he had written ; " A lead guitar playing those lines would have been really hokey . I like it when it 's a contrapuntal thing , where the guitar is doing one melody , the vocal is doing another melody , and the trumpet plays this third melody . If the music can be transparent enough , you can hear all three at the same time " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Motorcade of Generosity ( 1994 ) 
 Fashion Nugget ( 1996 ) 
 Prolonging the Magic ( 1998 ) 
 Comfort Eagle ( 2001 ) 
 Pressure Chief ( 2004 ) 
 Showroom of Compassion ( 2011 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 Cake have been nominated for five awards : four California Music Awards and one MTV Video Music Award . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Current members 
 John McCrea – lead vocals , acoustic guitar , piano , organ , <unk> ( 1991 – present ) 
 Vince DiFiore – trumpet , keyboards , melodica , auxiliary percussion , background vocals ( 1991 – present ) 
 Gabe Nelson – bass , background vocals ( 1992 – 1994 , 1997 – present ) 
 Xan McCurdy – electric guitar , background vocals ( 1997 – present ) 
 Paulo Baldi – drums , percussion , background vocals ( 2004 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Shon Meckfessel – bass , background vocals ( 1991 ) 
 Frank French – drums , background vocals ( 1991 – 1994 ) 
 Greg Brown – electric guitar , organ , background vocals ( 1991 – 1997 ) 
 Victor Damiani – bass , background vocals ( 1994 – 1997 ) 
 Todd Roper – drums , background vocals ( 1994 – 2001 ) 
 Pete McNeal – drums , background vocals ( 2001 – 2004 ) 
 Timeline 
 = USS Montana ( ACR @-@ 13 ) = 
 USS Montana ( ACR @-@ 13 / CA @-@ 13 ) , also referred to as " Armored Cruiser No. 13 " , later renamed Missoula and reclassified CA @-@ 13 , was a Tennessee @-@ class armored cruiser of the United States Navy . She was built by the Newport News Drydock & Shipbuilding Co . ; her keel was laid down in April 1905 , she was launched in December 1906 , and she was commissioned in July 1908 . The final class of armored cruisers to be built for the US Navy , Montana and her sisters were armed with a main battery of four 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns , and were capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 Montana spent her active duty career in the Atlantic Fleet . She made two cruises to the Mediterranean Sea to protect American citizens in the Ottoman Empire , the first in 1909 in the aftermath of the Young Turk Revolution and the second during the Balkan Wars in 1913 . Montana was also involved in political unrest in Central American countries , sending landing parties ashore in Haiti and in Mexico during the Occupation of Veracruz , both in 1914 . 
 After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Montana was tasked with convoy escort and training ship duties . With the end of the war in November 1918 came a new task , transporting American soldiers back from the battlefields of Europe . She made six round trips to France and carried back a total of 8 @,@ 800 men . Montana was then transferred to the Puget Sound Naval Yard in Washington State , where she was decommissioned and renamed Missoula . She remained in the reserve fleet until 1930 , when she was stricken under the terms of the London Naval Treaty . The ship was eventually sold for scrap in 1935 and broken up . 
 = = Design = = 
 Montana was 504 ft 6 in ( 153 @.@ 77 m ) long overall and had beam of 72 feet 10 inches ( 22 @.@ 20 m ) and a draft of 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 500 long tons ( 14 @,@ 700 t ) normally and up to 15 @,@ 981 long tons ( 16 @,@ 237 t ) at full load . The ship was propelled by two 4 @-@ cylinder , vertical triple @-@ expansion engines , with steam provided by sixteen coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox water @-@ tube boilers trunked into four funnels . The engines were rated at 23 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 17 @,@ 000 kW ) , which produced a top speed of 22 knots ( 25 mph ; 41 km / h ) . She had a storage capacity for up to 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) of coal , which allowed her to steam for 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 914 officers and men . Originally fitted with a pair of military masts , Montana had her foremast replaced with a cage mast in 1911 . 
 Montana was armed with a main battery of four 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber Mark 3 guns in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . These were supported by a secondary battery of sixteen 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber Mark 8 guns mounted in casemates , eight on each broadside . For defense against torpedo boats , she carried twenty @-@ two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns in single pedestal mounts either in casemates or sponsons in the hull . She also carried a variety of smaller guns , including twelve 3 @-@ pounder automatic guns and four 1 @-@ pounders . Like other contemporary armored cruisers , she was also armed with four 21 inches ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes located below the waterline in her hull . Montana was protected by a combination of Krupp cemented steel and older Harvey steel . The ship 's armored belt was 5 in ( 127 mm ) thick and the maximum thickness of the armor deck was 3 in thick . The main battery turret faces were 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick , as were the sides of the conning tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Montana was laid down at the Newport News Drydock & Shipbuilding Co. in Newport News on 29 April 1905 . Her completed hull was launched on 15 December 1906 , and after fitting @-@ out work was completed , the new cruiser was commissioned into the United States Navy on 21 July 1908 . She was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet and was transferred to Norfolk , Virginia . Montana steamed out of Norfolk on 5 August for a cruise off the eastern coast of the United States that lasted until 25 January 1909 . 
 After a stop in Charleston , South Carolina , she continued south through the Caribbean Sea , arriving at Colón , Panama on 29 January . There , she joined the Special Service Squadron . This duty was interrupted twice ; the first came in February , when she returned to Hampton Roads , Virginia , where she and the rest of the Atlantic Fleet greeted the Great White Fleet at the conclusion of its circumnavigation of the globe . The second came in April , owing to instability in the Ottoman Empire following the Young Turk Revolution that threatened American interests . Montana departed Guantanamo Bay , Cuba , on 2 April , when she was sent to the Mediterranean to protect Americans in the region . She remained there until 23 July , when she left Gibraltar , arriving in Boston on 3 August . She thereafter returned to her normal operations patrolling the eastern coast of the United States . 
 Montana departed Hampton Roads on 8 April 1910 , bound for South America for the Argentina Centennial . She steamed in company with her sister ship North Carolina , eventually reaching Maldonado , Uruguay , where the two cruisers met their sister Tennessee and the armored cruiser South Dakota , which had steamed down independently . The four ships then continued on to Bahía Blanca , Argentina , for the centennial celebrations . The ship left Argentina on 30 June and arrived back in Hampton Roads on 22 July . After resuming her normal peacetime routine for the following three months , Montana was tasked with escorting President William Howard Taft aboard Tennessee for a trip to Panama . The two ships departed Charleston on 10 November for the visit , which lasted a week . On 26 July 1911 , Montana was transferred to the Atlantic Reserve Fleet and she began an overhaul at the Portsmouth Navy Yard that lasted until 11 November 1912 . During the overhaul , a cage mast was installed in place of her original fore military mast . 
 After returning to service in late 1912 , Montana made another trip to the eastern Mediterranean , departing in December . Montana again joined Tennessee for the patrol , which was ordered in response to the Balkan Wars between the Ottoman Empire and the Balkan League , which again threatened American interests in the region . The ships operated under the command of Rear Admiral Austin M. Knight . During the trip , which lasted until June 1913 , she made stops in Beirut , İskenderun , and Mersin . After returning to the United States , the ship resumed her peacetime routine of training cruises off the American east coast , as well as cruises to Mexico , Cuba , and Haiti , over the following year . During this period , on 23 January 1914 , Montana was in Haiti when Michel Oreste abdicated from the presidency . Montana and the German protected cruiser SMS Vineta landed marines in Port @-@ au @-@ Prince to prevent rioting in the capital . Later that year , Montana took part in the United States occupation of Veracruz , where the ship 's commander , Louis McCoy <unk> , led a landing party in the city during the occupation . Montana also carried the remains on the seventeen sailors and marines who had been killed in the fighting back to New York City , arriving on 10 May . There , the Navy held a ceremony attended by President Woodrow Wilson and Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After the United States entered World War I on 6 April 1917 , Montana initially was tasked with transporting men and materiel in the York River area , along with conducting training exercises . On 17 July , she was assigned to the Cruiser and Transport Force ; she spent the majority of 1917 and 1918 escorting convoys from Hampton Roads , New York City , and Halifax , Nova Scotia to France . These operations included a troopship convoy of four transports — Finland , Henderson , Antilles , and San Jacinto — carrying part of the American Expeditionary Forces on 6 August 1917 . In early 1918 , she was briefly used as a training ship for naval cadets from the United States Naval Academy in the Chesapeake Bay . A troopship convoy followed in June 1918 in company with the cruisers South Dakota and Huntington and the destroyers Gregory and Fairfax , protecting the Italian steamers Re d 'Italia , Caserta , and Duca d 'Aosta , the French Patria , and American transports Pocahontas and Susquehanna . 
 In September 1918 , Montana took part in another troopship convoy to France with the battleship Georgia , the armored cruiser North Carolina , and the destroyer Rathburne . The convoy consisted of the transports Princess Matoika , President Grant , Mongolia , Rijndam , Wilhelmina , British steamer Ascanius . The following month she joined the battleship Nebraska to escort twelve British merchant ships bound for Liverpool . Following the Allied victory in November 1918 , Montana was sent to France to begin the process of transporting American soldiers back from Europe . By July 1919 , she had made six round trips between France and the United States , carrying a total of some 8 @,@ 800 American soldiers . 
 After the conclusion of the repatriation effort , Montana was transferred to the west coast of the United States . She arrived in the Puget Sound Navy Yard in Seattle on 16 August , where she remained until 2 February 1921 , when she was decommissioned . During this period of inactivity , she was renamed Missoula on 7 June 1920 so her original name could be used for one of the planned South Dakota @-@ class battleships , and she reclassified with the hull number CA @-@ 13 . Though decommissioned in 1921 , the ship remained in the Navy 's inventory until 15 July 1930 , when she was formally stricken from the naval register , according to the terms of the London Naval Treaty , which placed aggregate tonnage limits on the cruiser fleets of the signatory countries . She was sold to John Irwin Jr. on 29 September and was eventually broken up in 1935 . 
 = Simone Russell = 
 Simone Russell is a fictional character on the American soap opera Passions , which aired on NBC from 1999 to 2007 and on DirecTV in 2007 – 08 . Passions followed the romantic and supernatural adventures in the fictional New England coastal town of Harmony . 
 Simone , a member of Passions ' Russell family , is introduced as the youngest daughter of Eve Russell and T. C. Russell , as well as the younger sister of Whitney Russell . While her early appearances center her love triangle with Chad Harris @-@ Crane and her sister Whitney , the character later receives more prominence on the show through her experience coming out as a lesbian to her family , and her relationship with Rae Thomas . The network defended the show 's treatment of Simone 's sexuality as a serious commentary on the topic . 
 Created by the soap 's founder and head writer James E. Reilly , the role was portrayed by three actresses over the course of the show : Lena Cardwell ( July 5 , 1999 to April 16 , 2001 ) , Chrystee Pharris ( April 17 , 2001 to April 22 , 2004 ) , and Cathy Jenéen Doe ( July 23 , 2004 – September 4 , 2007 ) . The character was created as a part of the show 's effort to represent a full African @-@ American family and full @-@ realized African @-@ American characters on television . The exact reasons behind Cardwell 's departure remain unknown while Pharris chose to leave to pursue other acting opportunities . Doe was the third and final actress to play Simone before the character was written off the show shortly before its transition to DirecTV . 
 Her storyline made daytime television history by having the first instance in a soap opera of two women in bed making love . The character is also notable for being daytime TV 's first African @-@ American lesbian . At the 17th GLAAD Media Awards , the show won Outstanding Daily Drama for its portrayal of Simone 's sexual orientation . The show 's representation of LGBT topics , and Cathy Jenéen Doe 's performance as Simone , received a mixed response from critics ; Doe was the principal actress during the storylines focusing on the character 's sexuality . 
 = = Character creation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Sheraton Kalouria , senior vice president of NBC ’ s daytime programming , described the decision to create and cast a racially diverse ensemble , as seen with the inclusion of " the African American Russells and the Hispanic Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds " in the soap 's four core families , as reflective of the show 's " truly color @-@ blind storytelling . " The cast emphasized the representation of an African @-@ American family and fully realized African @-@ American characters as the main attraction to the roles . Charles Divins , one of the actors who played Chad Harris @-@ Crane , viewed the show 's treatment of the Russells as " a strong African American family " as " refreshing . " Rodney Van Johnson praised the incorporation of a complete African @-@ American family as distinguishing Passions from other soap operas . He attributed the cast as bringing more positive portrayals of African @-@ Americans to daytime television : 
 " We are the only daytime drama with a full African @-@ American family . The Russells have a key role in the community . There aren 't just a flash in the pan . The storylines are heavy . The show has received a huge response from the African @-@ American community for that reason . " 
 = = = Characterization and casting = = = 
 Over the course of the show , Simone was played by three actresses : Lena Cardwell ( 1999 to 2001 ) , Chrystee Pharris ( 2001 to 2004 ) , and Cathy Jenéen Doe ( 2004 to 2007 ) . After seeing her audition , producers Reilly and Lisa de <unk> considered the role ideal for Lena Cardwell . The show initially constructed the character primarily around her " major crush on street @-@ kid Chad Harris since he came to town . " Daniel R. Coleridge of TV Guide characterized Simone 's early behavior as " bitchy to her older sister , who was nothing but kind to her . " Variety 's Josef referred to the character as a " daredevil teen . " Cast members expressed disappointment at Cardwell 's departure from the show and the re @-@ casting of Simone . Tracey Ross described Cardwell as being " very sincere , completely authentic and without malice " in her performance . Johnson viewed himself as " a father figure to her " and said their close relationship helped make the Russell family more authentic and relatable to viewers . After leaving the show , Cardwell said she " received so much fan mail , it was overwhelming " and the experience " made me feel loved and appreciated . " 
 When assuming the role in 2001 , Pharris said her preparation consisted of asking her friends " as many questions as I could think of about Simone , Whitney and Chad " in order to make " the character my own by putting my own life experiences in the situation " . She commented that the ability to work closely with the producers allowed her to use her own family background as inspiration for her performance as Simone . While discussing the connection to her family , she stated : " my father had a temper so I made Simone have a temper too ! " Pharris explained she did not renew her contract in order to pursue other projects . 
 Doe was hired for the third and final recasting after moving to Los Angeles from New York , where she was primarily offered the role of " a runaway teenager , a prostitute , a drug dealer " . Initially hesitant to assume a character already established by other actors , she shaped her performance through her friendship with Pharris ; she described Pharris as " a really [ positive ] person " who answered her questions about the character . When discussing the decision to portray Simone as a lesbian , Kalouria emphasized " sexual identity isn 't a passing fancy " and " this is where [ Simone ] is ... I can assure you we 're not going to make light of this particular topic . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Born in 1983 , Simone Russell is the youngest daughter of T.C. and Eve Russell , and the younger sister of Whitney Russell . Her early storylines concentrate on her reluctant participation in her friend Kay Bennett 's schemes to separate Miguel Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald from Charity Standish and her attraction to Chad @-@ Harris Crane . Chad and Whitney hide their relationship from Simone to the point where Chad pretends to be Simone 's boyfriend to keep her happy . After catching Chad and Whitney having sex , she breaks with him and tells everyone in Harmony about his relationship with her sister . 
 Disconnected from her sister , Simone becomes close friends with Kay 's younger sister Jessica Bennett and Miguel 's younger sister Paloma Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and turns to them for support . Simone acts primarily in a supporting role for these two character 's storylines , such as advising Paloma to divorce her abusive husband Spike Lester and seek professional help for her drug addiction . She briefly dates John Hastings , who is the son of David Hastings . At the time , John was falsely believed to be Grace Standish 's son and the half @-@ brother of Kay and Jessica . Simone 's relationship with John ends in 2004 when he moves to Italy with David and Grace . 
 In the summer of 2005 , Simone comes out as a lesbian by revealing her relationship with Rae Thomas to her family . Her family reacts negatively to her sexual orientation . T.C. beats her and says he is ashamed to be her father . Eve panics and is concerned that her daughter 's reputation will suffer if the rest of Harmony learns of her sexuality . Simone 's sexuality is regarded as " a badge of shame " by the characters Simone 's great @-@ aunt , Irma Johnson , describes homosexuality as a sin and calls her " vile " and " disgusting " . Simone turns to her mother for emotional support after Rae rebukes her declarations of love by revealing that she has no interest in a committed relationship . In December 2005 , Eve , Julian , Liz , and T.C. find a video from Alistair Crane , in which he claims to have hired Rae to seduce Simone and " turn " her into a lesbian . Rae later explains that the money is intended to start a lesbian club and that she was never hired to " turn " Simone gay . As she reconciles with Rae , Simone reconnects with her family . Her father , who recently suffered from a stroke following a car accident , apologizes for his homophobic behavior toward her . Her mother also becomes more supportive of her relationship . 
 Viewers saw the set @-@ up for the ending of Simone 's romance with Rae through the beginning of 2007 . Rae finds out Vincent Clarkson was framing Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald for his girlfriend Fancy Crane 's rape . On February 12 , 2007 , Vincent stabs Rae to death before she can reveal his identity to Luis . Simone attempts to cope with Rae 's death by helping Jessica through her pregnancy . She invites Jessica to live in Rae 's old apartment so they can protect the baby from Spike . Eve , who was previously being blackmailed by Vincent , tells Simone the truth about Rae 's murder . Simone leaves Harmony with her sister Whitney to start a new life in New Orleans . She does not make a physical appearing during the show 's run on DirecTV or in the series finale . In July 2008 , Simone sends a letter to Kay congratulating her on her wedding to Miguel and includes a pair of earrings as the " something new . " 
 = = Impact and reception = = 
 Passions won the award for Outstanding Daily Drama at the 17th GLAAD Media Awards for its portrayal of Simone 's sexuality and her relationship with Rae . Doe accepted the award during the ceremony on the show 's behalf . The soap opera made daytime television history by having the first representation of two women in bed making love . 
 Simone 's storyline about coming out as a lesbian received mixed feedback from critics and media outlets . The Atlantic 's Aaron Foley connected the show 's inclusion of a black , lesbian character as a sign of " America bec [ oming ] more comfortable with seeing blacks on screen " and viewers " bec [ oming ] more comfortable with risky , sometimes hilarious storylines " . Foley commented the storyline was " short @-@ lived " . An article on Soaps.com noted that Simone would be remembered as " a character who broke down some barriers for the depiction of lesbians on daytime TV and earned the show awards and accolades from civil rights groups " . Damon <unk> , media entertainment director of GLAAD ( 2005 @-@ 2009 ) , reported the introduction of gay characters makes soap operas " worth tuning in " and emphasized the show 's capability of normalizing LGBT topics with a wider audience : 
 " These stories have the ability to reach the many different generations of viewers who watch daytime and share with them stories of our lives , he says . What viewers are seeing is that more and more of their own neighbors and friends are dealing with these issues , and the soaps are merely reflecting the reality of the world we live in . " 
 Sarah Warn , former editor of entertainment website AfterEllen.com , gave the show a negative review calling the relationship " a poorly developed plot that has reduced Simone to a one @-@ dimensional character who happened to sleep with a girl . " Warn points out that viewers " haven 't had the chance to see this woman through her eyes " as the show does not attempt to fully explore her sexuality ; she expressed disappointment that Simone 's past relationships with men , and her possible bisexuality , are never addressed on the show . Despite the criticism , Warn praised the show for providing a more realistic representation of lesbian sexuality than the " one three @-@ minute scene than All My Children did in five years " . 
 Cathy Jenéen Doe received mixed feedback for her performance of the character . Doe was listed as a pre @-@ nominee for the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for the 34th Daytime Emmy Awards alongside co @-@ star Emily Harper , but was not chosen as one of the final nominees . Warn criticized Doe and <unk> for being " horribly matched as scene partners " and lacking chemistry . 
 Simone 's storyline received frequent comparisons by critics to the soap 's treatment of Chad 's struggle with his sexuality , and Vincent 's identification as intersex . Herndon L. Davis of Windy City Times described the representation of Simone as daytime 's first African @-@ American lesbian as overshadowed by how the show " recklessly wrote a down @-@ low storyline which involved an African @-@ American man but eventually turned it into an outrageous intersex serial killer storyline " . Davis said the soap opera tackled " daytime 's bitter issue with race " . 
 = Cupid at the Circus = 
 Cupid at the Circus is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is a romance with a storyline focused around a country boy who follows a circus parade to the circus grounds and becomes intent on sneaking into the show . He is discovered , but before he can be ejected , a girl asks her father to buy him a ticket of admission . Thankful , the boy gives her his pocket knife . Years later the two meet again and when he sees her using his pocket knife . He proposes and she accepts . Not too much is known for certain about the production of this film , including the writer , director and photographer credits . The circus scenes were done with special arrangement by Barnum & Bailey . The film was released on May 20 , 1910 to favorable reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a surviving official synopsis was published in The Moving Picture World . It states : " Tom Wilk is a poor country lad , living alone with his stepfather , who ill @-@ treats him . Tom leaves his work one day to follow a circus parade . He is fascinated with the wonders of the parade and follows it to the circus grounds , around which he stays all morning , and is finally tempted by his great wish to see the show , to crawl under the tent . He is discovered by a circus guard , and ordered off the ground . A small girl , Lillie Lockwood , and her father come to the circus , and witness Tom 's ejection . Urged by his daughter , Lillie 's father buys Tom a ticket of admission , giving him his first happy day . In return , Tom gives Lillie , as a keepsake , his most treasured possession , his pocket knife . On returning home , Tom is severely chastised by his step @-@ father , after which he decides to run away . He walks to a neighboring town , and is there engaged as an office boy by Gates , a lawyer . After some years of faithful service , in various capacities , Tom becomes a member of the firm . Lillie obtains a position as a stenographer in their office . She and Tom do not recognize each other , until Tom accidentally sees in her hand the little knife he had given her in the long ago . He declares he had loved her through the years , and has been patiently waiting for her , so the romance that began at the circus finds a happy climax at the altar . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Frank H. Crane as Tom Gates ( adult ) / alternatively Tom Wilk in the synopsis 
 Anna Rosemond as Lillie Lockwood ( adult ) 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it may have been Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . While the director of the film is not known , two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production nor does Bowers credit a cameraman . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The two known credits in the film are for the leading players , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company and joined in the autumn of 1909 . Crane was involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company from 1909 . Crane 's was the first leading man of the company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 The setting of the film included Barnum and Bailey circus that were shot by a special arrangement with Mr. Barnum and Bailey . The date of the filming is unknown , but the 1910 route of Barnum & Bailey 's Greatest Show on Earth indicates that it the circus was in New York between March 24 through April 30 . The circus was at Madison Square Garden from March 24 through April 22 and it moved to Brooklyn , New York for April 25 through April 30 . The circus would go to Philadelphia , Washington D. C. , Baltimore , Maryland , and Wilmington , Delaware before moving back up through New Jersey on May 14 through May 18 . According to one review in the Santa Cruz Sentinel , the film showed " ... the Barnum and Bailey circus from the time they arrive at the lot until after the show . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel film was released on Friday May 20 , 1910 . There are different records for the length of the reel . According to Bowers , the film was 975 feet long , but one trade publication listed it as being 940 feet long . The film was advertised in theaters in Kansas , Nebraska , Pennsylvania , Missouri , Minnesota , Indiana , and California . The film was released one day before the Barnum and Bailey tent caught fire in Schenectady , New York . The May 21 fire did not result in injury or loss of life , but was caused an estimated $ 10 @,@ 000 in damages , equivalent to $ 254 @,@ 000 in 2015 . 
 The film was met with favorable reviews from critics . The Morning Telegraph offers general praise for the good photography and the well @-@ told story . The Nickelodeon was equally positive and began to reflect the acting , staging and photography was up to the regular standard of the Thanhouser company . The New York Dramatic Mirror offered additional comments on the Thanhouser company 's higher standards in their productions , but gave an otherwise positive review that focused on the novelty of the circus scenes . 
 = Good Mourning ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Good Mourning " is the first episode of the sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 103rd episode overall . It was written by Krista Vernoff and directed by Ed Ornelas . The episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on September 24 , 2009 . In " Good Mourning " , the physicians are seen dealing with the revelation that a dead John Doe is their beloved co @-@ worker Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) , and dealing with the aftermath of Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) ' s near @-@ death experience . Further storylines include Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Stevens trying to decide whether or not to donate O 'Malley 's organs and Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) being offered Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) ' s chief of surgery job . 
 The episode was the first part of the two @-@ hour season six premiere , the second being " Goodbye " , and took place at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital . " Good Mourning " was the first episode that Knight did not appear in , following an early release from his contract , and Jessica Capshaw ( Dr. Arizona Robbins ) ' first episode in which she received star billing , having been upgraded from a recurring star . Mitch Pileggi reprised his role as a guest star , in addition to Debra Monk , Shannon Lucio and Zoe Boyle . " Good Mourning " opened to generally positive critical reviews , with Ramirez 's performance praised in particular . Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed by 17 @.@ 03 million Americans , and garnered a 6 @.@ 7 / 17 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , ranking first for the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens to a voice @-@ over narrative from Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , explaining the Kübler @-@ Ross model , that is the five stages of grief . At the conclusion of season five 's finale , Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) both <unk> , from cancer and being dragged by a bus , respectively , and the opening of the episode reveals Stevens to have been revived , while O 'Malley has been pronounced brain dead . O 'Malley 's former wife Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) informs her colleagues that he has died , and suffers an emotional breakdown , hyperventilating . O 'Malley 's death had been implied in the first episode when he asks " We 're gonna survive this , right ? " with Grey answering nothing . 
 It is unknown whether or not O 'Malley is an organ donor , and the chief of surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) calls O 'Malley 's mother , Louise ( Debra Monk ) , as she is his next of kin . Following Stevens ' resuscitation , she is unaware that O 'Malley has died , and her husband Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) decides not to tell her , with fear that she might go into circulatory shock and lose consciousness again . Pediatric surgeon Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) is introduced to a patient , with body pain , whom she diagnoses with growing pains . 
 Louise O 'Malley arrives at the hospital , and asks Torres to decide if O 'Malley 's organs will be donated . The victim of a speedboat accident , Clara Ferguson ( Zoe Boyle ) , arrives at the hospital in an ambulance , with both of her arms and one of her legs amputated . She is attended to by plastic surgeon Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , who informs her that her cut @-@ off arms can be reattached . The hospital 's president , Larry Jennings ( Mitch Pileggi ) , explains to <unk> Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) that Webber has not been substantially completing his role as chief of surgery , and offers Shepherd the job . Karev reveals O 'Malley 's death to Stevens , and Torres seeks her help in deciding whether or not to donate O 'Malley 's organs . Stevens <unk> that O 'Malley would give all his organs , and the two come to a mutual conclusion that donation is the correct option . Prior to the harvesting of his organs , O 'Malley 's former mentor Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) is uneasy about donating his organs , but soon comes to terms with the situation . Several days later , at O 'Malley 's funeral , the woman O 'Malley saved , Amanda ( Shannon Lucio ) is shown hysterically crying while Karev , Stevens , Meredith , and Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) are laughing — unable to deal with their true emotions . After the funeral , O 'Malley 's former best friend Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) is designated the job of emptying out his locker , but breaks down . Bailey subsequently discharges Stevens , and Robbins ' body pain patient returns , with chronic pain , though Robbins is unable to diagnose him . Torres approaches Webber , seeking information as to whether or not her application to become an attending surgeon has been accepted . Webber explains that the job is no longer available , as the surgeon who was going to retire , ultimately did not . Torres becomes enraged , saying that the current surgeon who has the job is a dinosaur , and storms out while yelling : " I 'm a superstar " . The episode closes with Lexie consoling the speedboat victim , Ferguson . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Good Mourning " was written by Krista Vernoff and directed by Ed Ornelas . Joe <unk> edited the episode and Donald Lee Harris served as production designer . Featured music includes Sweet Honey in the Rock 's " Wade in the Water " and Joy Williams ' " Speaking a Dead Language " . " Good Mourning " is the first episode not to feature Knight 's character , O 'Malley . Knight was released from his contract at the conclusion of season five , following a disagreement with series creator Shonda Rhimes over lack of screen time for his character . When asked to make a ' flashback ' appearance in season six , Knight declined . 
 Vernoff offered her thoughts on the death of O 'Malley : " It 's heartbreaking . I fell in love with George , like many of you did , in season one . He was impulsive , big @-@ hearted , and yeah , it 's that heart that had him jump in front of a moving bus to save a life . It 's a devastating end to a beloved character , but I would argue with anyone who said it wasn 't a fitting end . " In the episode , Shepherd was offered the position of chief of surgery , but postponed his decision , due to Webber being his friend . Vernoff offered her insight on this : 
 " Derek was pretty freakin ' noble . So noble ! Cause you KNOW how much he wants that job . It was the promise of the <unk> that brought him to Seattle from NYC to begin with . And right here , the job was his for the taking . And out of loyalty and friendship , he went to [ Webber ] and warned him . " 
 The scene in which O 'Malley 's colleagues were laughing at his funeral was one of Vernoff 's favorite scenes . She added : " Shonda gave me smart notes that enhanced the writing and then the wonderful director Ed Ornelas and the amazing DP Herb Davis and the whole crew that support them made it visually beautiful and then the actors … damn , did they all bring their A game to this scene . And then there are the editors and music folks and the people who color correct everything and mix the sound … It 's a collaboration . What it takes to make good TV is a huge coming together of a great many artists . What it takes to make great TV is all that plus a little magic and a little luck . And that ’ s what I feel like we had with this scene . It 's so funny and so bittersweet and so , so sad . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 " Good Mourning " was originally broadcast on September 24 , 2009 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . It was viewed by a total of 17 @.@ 04 million Americans , in its 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot . The episode was the series ' second least @-@ viewed season premiere , up to that point , just ahead of the season one premiere — " A Hard Day 's Night " . In comparison to the previous episode , " Good Mourning " made a 0 @.@ 08 % decrease in terms of viewership . However , the episode 's viewership ranked first in both its time @-@ slot and the entire night , beating out CBS 's juggernaut CSI . In addition to being a success in viewership , the episode also did well in ratings . " Good Mourning " ' s 6 @.@ 7 / 17 Nielsen rating ranked first in its time @-@ slot and the entire night , for both the rating and share percentages of the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode also received a rating of 10 @.@ 9 / 18 in the 18 @-@ 34 demographic , beating out CBS 's The Mentalist , and ranking first in the ratings and shares for the demographic . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode opened to generally positive feedback , and aired back @-@ to @-@ back with the next episode , " Goodbye " , as a two @-@ hour season premiere special . Alan Sepinwall of NJ.com commented on the two episodes being conjoined into one week : " I keep going back and forth on whether it was a good idea to do that , or if we 'd have been better off spacing out the tearful speeches over two weeks . That isn 't to say that there shouldn 't have been tears , or speeches . George 's death , no matter how marginal he had become last season , is and should be a huge event in the lives of these characters . Had the show raced through Elizabeth Kubler @-@ Ross 's famous five stages of grief , it would have rang false , as if everyone making the show was in a hurry to move past the events of the wildly uneven fifth season . My problem is , when you put two episodes back @-@ to @-@ back , those rhythms - the pace at which the acts build to emotional crescendos and then briefly recede - start to become too predictable , and it sucks some of the life and emotion away . " Sepinwall also praised Wilson 's , Ramirez 's , and Chamber 's performances , in addition to the laughing at O 'Malley 's funeral . 
 Michael Pascua of The Huffington Post also praised Ramirez 's performance , calling her " the most genuine character " . Although he enjoyed Ramirez 's performance , Pascua was critical of the rest of the episode , writing : " The funeral wasn 't as sad as I thought it would be . There were so many pre @-@ episode pictures up that I thought the funeral would take up half the show , then it was five minutes and it wasn 't sad at all . The core group walked away and Izzie spread the giggles . She laughs at the fact that she has cancer , like this was all some really badly written show . Oh wait , it is . " 
 Kelly West of TV Blend was also critical of the episode , writing : " I don 't think based on the first episode that we can say that Grey 's is headed in a new direction , nor do I think the writers are making much of an effort to bring the series back to the greatness that was its earlier seasons . That said , this is Grey 's Anatomy and with that comes the usual drama , sex , love and <unk> medical mysteries thrown in the mix to keep things moving . If that 's what you ’ re looking for , I think you 'll enjoy the season premiere just fine . " Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV noted that the special foreshadowed a " very dark " season , adding : " The talk between George 's mom and one of the surgeons [ Torres ] proved to be one of the more heart @-@ breaking scenes in an episode that in itself is heartbreaking enough . " 
 = Dick Padden = 
 Richard Joseph " Dick " Padden ( September 17 , 1870 – October 31 , 1922 ) , nicknamed " Brains " , was an American professional baseball player , born in Wheeling , West Virginia , who played mainly as a second baseman in Major League Baseball for nine seasons from 1896 to 1905 . 
 After playing a season and a half in the minor leagues , the right @-@ handed infielder began his major league career for the Pittsburgh Pirates . He played three seasons in Pittsburgh , from 1896 to 1898 , before playing one season for the Washington Senators in 1899 . He returned to the minor leagues for the 1900 season , where he was the player @-@ manager for the Chicago White Sox , then a minor league team . When the Chicago club entered the American League , a major league , the following season , he moved on to play one season for the St. Louis Cardinals , before becoming Captain of the St. Louis Browns from 1902 and 1905 . In total , Padden played in 874 games , and collected 814 hits in <unk> at bats , for a lifetime batting average of .258 . He finished in the league 's top @-@ ten finishers in being hit by pitches six times , including a league @-@ leading 18 in 1904 . 
 Padden 's post @-@ career activities included duties as a talent scout for the St. Louis Browns and the Washington Senators , as well a lengthy career in the flint glass industry in Ohio . After retiring , he attempted to gain the Democratic Party nomination for the 1912 mayoral race in his hometown of Martin 's Ferry , Ohio . He died there , in 1922 , at the age of 52 of apoplexy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Pittsburgh = = = 
 Padden began his professional career with the Roanoke Magicians , a minor league club in the Virginia State League in 1895 , where he played with and managed the team to a 52 – 74 win – loss record . During the 1896 season , the Pittsburgh Pirates manager , Connie Mack , was seeking a replacement for Harry Truby , his second baseman , who was not performing well , when Padden caught his attention . Padden was playing for the Toronto Canadiens in the Eastern League , and had a reputation of being a smart and quick player with good instincts , as well as a " careful , timely batsman " . Based on his need to upgrade his second base position , and Padden 's good reputation , Mack traded Truby for him . He began his major league career shortly thereafter on July 15 , one day after Truby 's final game in the majors . When Padden did not bat well to start the season , Mack and Pittsburgh 's president and part owner , William Kerr , began to feud over the decision , with Kerr questioning Mack over whether they should have traded Truby . However , his hitting improved and he completed the season with a .242 batting average in 61 games played . 
 In 1897 , with the Pirates , he led all National League second basemen with 134 games played , and 369 putouts . Besides games played , he established career highs in several batting categories that season , including ; 517 at bats , 84 runs scored , 146 hits , 10 triples , and tied his career high in home runs with two . He made 128 appearances in 1898 , again as their starting second baseman . His statistical output dropped from his previous season ; his batting average lowered to .257 , and scored 61 runs in 463 at bats . 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 On December 14 , 1898 , after the season was completed , Padden was traded , along with Jack O 'Brien and Jimmy Slagle , to the Washington Senators in exchange for Heinie Reitz . He played the 1899 season in Washington , and appeared in 134 games as their starting shortstop . He had a batting average of .277 , established his career high in stolen bases ( 27 ) , and was ejected from the game by the umpire three times , which led the league . 
 = = = Chicago = = = 
 Following the 1899 season , the Senators franchise ceased operations , which resulted in Padden 's sale , along with O 'Brien , to the Detroit Tigers of the American League , which was a minor league at the time . However , before the 1900 season began , he joined the Chicago White Sox , also a minor league team , as their player @-@ manager instead . On May 16 , he was involved in a physical altercation with Ducky Holmes and another Detroit player . While playing a doubleheader on September 16 , against Connie Mack and his Milwaukee team , Padden suggested to Mack that the second game be shortened to five innings due to the fact that the first game lasted just over three hours , and they might not finish the second game before darkness . Mack , who estimated that he could get five more good innings from his game one starting pitcher , Rube Waddell , quickly agreed . Padden 's suggestion backfired , and turned into a successful strategy for Mack , whose team , with Waddell pitching , won the game . Despite that incident , Padden and his leadership skills led the White Sox to the American League championship that season . 
 = = = St. Louis = = = 
 The White Sox stayed with the American League as they became a major league in 1901 , but Padden moved on to play for the St. Louis Cardinals of the National League . He was the team 's starting second baseman , and played in a total of 123 games . He had a batting average of .256 that season , and again led the league in ejections , with five ; however , he stole 26 bases , he had 62 RBIs , his highest single season total . 
 After his lone season with the Cardinals , Padden , along with many of his teammates deserted to the newly created St. Louis Browns franchise , which was scheduled to begin playing in 1902 in the American League . Padden was Captain of the Browns during his time on the team . In both 1902 and 1904 , he was the Browns ' starting second baseman , and were the only two of his four seasons with the club in which he played in more than 29 games . He led the league in hit by a pitches with 18 in 1904 , the only time in which he led the league in this category , although he did finish in the league 's top @-@ ten five times previously . On May 19 , 1905 , after 16 games , Padden was released by the Browns , and his major league career came to an end . 
 = = Post @-@ major league career = = 
 Padden was the player @-@ manager for the minor league team St. Paul Saints of the American Association for the 1906 season . He had a batting average of .288 that year , and hit three home runs . He stayed with the Saints for the 1907 season , but as a player only . After 52 games played , his season ended when he sprained his ankle . After his injury , he and his Saints manager , Mr. <unk> attempted to buy the Daytona team of the Eastern League , but were unsuccessful . He had hoped that his ankle would heal , so that he could be ready for the next season , but he never appeared as a player after the injury . 
 Following his retirement as a player , Padden returned to his old team and became a talent scout for the Browns in 1909 . He also became a talent scout for the Senators and worked in the flint glass industry in Ohio . Alfred Henry Spink described him as " one of the real foxy fellows of the baseball world . He could field beautifully and was never better than when being hard driven . " Padden retired to Martins Ferry , Ohio where in 1912 , he tried to secure the Democratic Party nomination for the mayoral race . He died in Martins Ferry of apoplexy on October 31 , 1922 at the age of 52 , and is interred at St. Marys Cemetery . 
 = Cyclone Monica = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Monica was the most intense tropical cyclone , in terms of maximum sustained winds , on record to impact Australia . The 17th and final storm of the 2005 – 06 Australian region cyclone season , Monica originated from an area of low pressure off the coast of Papua New Guinea on 16 April 2006 . The storm quickly developed into a Category 1 cyclone the next day , at which time it was given the name Monica . Travelling towards the west , the storm intensified into a severe tropical cyclone before making landfall in Far North Queensland , near Lockhart River , on 19 April 2006 . After moving over land , convection associated with the storm quickly became disorganised . 
 On 20 April 2006 , Monica emerged into the Gulf of Carpentaria and began to re @-@ intensify . Over the following few days , deep convection formed around a 37 km ( 23 mi ) wide eye . Early on 22 April 2006 , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) assessed Monica to have attained Category 5 status , on the Australian cyclone intensity scale . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also upgraded Monica to a Category 5 equivalent cyclone , on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm attained its peak intensity the following day with winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) and a barometric pressure of 916 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 05 inHg ) . On 24 April 2006 , Monica made landfall about 35 km ( 22 mi ) west of Maningrida , at the same intensity . Rapid weakening took place as the storm moved over land . Less than 24 hours after landfall , the storm had weakened to a tropical low . The remnants of the former @-@ Category 5 cyclone persisted until 28 April 2006 over northern Australia . 
 In contrast to the extreme intensity of the cyclone , relatively little structural damage resulted from it . No injuries were reported to have occurred during the storm 's existence and losses were estimated to be A $ 6 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) . However , severe environmental damage took place . In the Northern Territory , an area about 7 @,@ 000 km2 ( 4 @,@ 300 mi2 ) was defoliated by Monica 's high wind gusts . In response to the large loss of forested area , it was stated that it would take several hundred years for the area to <unk> . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Monica originated from an area of low pressure that formed early on 16 April 2006 off the coast of Papua New Guinea . The low quickly became organised , with deep convection developing over the low @-@ pressure centre . Later that day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as the system became increasingly organised . Early the next day , the Bureau of Meteorology in Brisbane , Australia declared that the low had developed into a Category 1 cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone scale , with winds reaching 65 km / h ( 40 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . Upon being classified as a cyclone , the storm was given the name Monica . At the same time , the <unk> designated Monica as Tropical Cyclone 23P . Monica tracked generally westward , towards Far North Queensland , in response to a low to mid @-@ level ridge to the south . 
 Low wind shear and good divergence in the path of the storm allowed for continued intensification as continued westward . Late on 17 April 2006 , Monica intensified into a Category 2 Cyclone , with winds reaching 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . By 1200 UTC on 18 April 2006 , the Bureau of Meteorology upgraded Monica to a severe tropical cyclone , a Category 3 on the Australian scale . This followed an increase in the storm 's outflow and a fluctuating central dense overcast . Several hours later , the JTWC upgraded Monica to the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . During the afternoon of 19 April 2006 , the storm made landfall roughly 40 km ( 25 mi ) south @-@ southeast of the Lockhart River with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . At the same time , the JTWC assessed Monica to have intensified into a Category 2 equivalent storm with winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . 
 Shortly after making landfall , convection associated with the storm deteriorated and the outflow became fragmented . A shortwave trough to the south caused the ridge steering Monica to weaken , leading to the cyclone moving slower . After moving over land , the storm began to weaken , with the Bureau of Meteorology downgrading the storm to weaken to Category 1 cyclone and the JTWC downgraded the cyclone to a tropical storm . The following day , Monica moved offshore , entering the Gulf of Carpentaria . Once back over water , favourable atmospheric conditions allowed the storm to quickly intensify . Within 24 @-@ hours of moving over water , Monica re @-@ attained severe tropical cyclone status . Following a shift in steering currents , the storm slowed significantly and turned north @-@ westward . Steady intensification continued through 22 April 2006 as the storm remained in a region of low wind shear and favourable diffluence . Early on 22 April 2006 the Bureau of Meteorology upgraded Monica to a Category 5 severe tropical cyclone , the third of the season . By this time , a 37 km ( 23 mi ) wide eye had developed within the central dense overcast of the cyclone . Later that day , the JTWC assessed Monica to have intensified into a Category 5 equivalent storm . 
 Cyclone Monica attained its peak intensity on 23 April 2006 near Cape Wessel with a barometric pressure 916 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 05 inHg ) . Maximum winds were estimated at 250 km / h ( 155 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) by the Bureau of Meteorology while the JTWC assessed it to have attained winds of 285 km / h ( 180 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . Using the Dvorak technique , the peak intensity of the cyclone was estimated at T @-@ number of 7 @.@ 5 according to the Satellite Analysis Branch ( SAB ) , yet the Advanced Dvorak Technique of the CIMSS automatically estimated at T8.0 , the highest ranking on the Dvorak Scale . However , since the JTWC , SAB and CIMSS are not the official warning centres for Australian cyclones , these intensities remain unofficial . 
 On 24 April 2006 , the mid @-@ level ridge south of Monica weakened , causing the storm to turn towards the south @-@ west . Following this , the storm made landfall in the Northern Territory , roughly 35 km ( 22 mi ) west of Maningrida , as a Category 5 cyclone with winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . Not long after making landfall , the storm weakened extremely quickly . Most convective activity associated with the storm dissipated within nine hours of moving onshore . This resulted in the storm 's maximum winds decreasing by 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) in a 12 @-@ hour span . After this rapid weakening , the storm turned sharply west moving over the town of Jabiru as a Category 2 cyclone . Within six hours of passing this town , the Bureau of Meteorology downgraded Monica to a tropical low , no longer producing gale @-@ force winds . The JTWC issued their final advisory on the storm at 1800 UTC that day . The remnants of Monica persisted for several more days , tracking near Darwin on 25 April 2006 before turning south @-@ east and accelerating over the Northern Territory . The remnants eventually dissipated on 28 April 2006 over central Australia . 
 = = = Intensity estimates = = = 
 The Bureau of Meteorology uses 10 @-@ minute sustained winds , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses one @-@ minute sustained winds . The Bureau of Meteorology 's peak intensity for Monica was 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Monica was 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained , or 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 While the storm was active the Bureau of Meteorology 's Darwin Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre estimated that Monica , had peaked with a minimum pressure of 905 hPa ( 26 @.@ 72 inHg ) . However , during their post analysis of Monica , the Darwin Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre estimated using the Love @-@ Murphy pressure @-@ wind relationship , that the system had a minimum pressure of 916 hPa ( 27 @.@ 05 inHg ) . However , since then the BoM has started to use the <unk> , Zehr and Courtney pressure @-@ wind relationship , which has estimated that Monica had a minimum pressure of 905 hPa ( 26 @.@ 72 inHg ) . Other pressure estimates include the Joint Typhoon Warning Center 's post analysis estimated pressure of 879 hPa ( 25 @.@ 96 inHg ) and the University of Wisconsin @-@ Madison 's Advanced Dvorak Technique which estimated a minimum pressure of 868 @.@ 5 hPa ( 25 @.@ 65 inHg ) . The Advanced Dvorak Technique pressure estimate would suggest that the system was the most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded worldwide as the pressure is below that of the current world record holder , Typhoon Tip of 1979 . In 2010 , Stephen Durden of NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory studied Cyclone Monica 's minimum pressure and suggested that the system likely peaked between 900 – 920 hPa ( 26 @.@ 58 – 27 @.@ 17 inHg ) and strongly refuted claims that Monica was the strongest tropical cyclone on record . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Queensland = = = 
 Upon being declared as Tropical Cyclone Monica on 17 April 2006 , the Bureau of Meteorology issued a gale warning for areas along the eastern coast of Far North Queensland . Several hours later , a cyclone warning was issued for north @-@ eastern areas as the storm intensified . An estimated 1 @,@ 000 people were planned to be evacuated in Far North Queensland before officials shut down major highways in the area . Ferry services in the Great Barrier Reef and flights in and out of the region were cancelled . However , no evacuations took place according to the Emergency Management in Australia . An aborigine community of 700 , located around the mouth of the Lockhart River , were in the direct path of the storm . The chief executive officer of the community stated that they were ready for the storm , having suffered no losses from Cyclone Ingrid which impacted the same area in 2005 . 
 Little damage was recorded in Queensland , despite Cyclone Monica being a Category 3 cyclone , as the storm impacted a sparsely populated region of the Cape York peninsula . A storm surge of 1 @.@ 23 m ( 4 ft ) was recorded in Mossman and waves were recorded up to 4 @.@ 24 m ( 13 @.@ 91 ft ) in Weipa . Heavy rainfall was also associated with the storm , exceeding 400 mm ( 16 in ) near where Monica made landfall . Wind gusts up to 109 km / h ( 68 mph ) were recorded as the storm traversed the peninsula . Officials reported about 15 % of the structures along the Lockhart River sustained minor damages and no fatalities were caused as a result of the cyclone . Minor coastal flooding was also reported due to Monica . Three Torres Strait Islanders were rescued after 22 days drifting at sea in the wake of the cyclone passing through the Torres Strait , north of mainland Queensland . 
 = = = Northern Territory = = = 
 Officials closed schools throughout the region in advance of the storm on 24 April 2006 and advised people to evacuate . A 10 pm curfew was also put in place to keep people off the streets during the night . Local tours in the territory were postponed or cancelled due to the storm . Several flights in and out of Darwin were also cancelled , as was the Darwin Anzac Day march . Alcan , the world 's second @-@ largest aluminium producer , warned customers of potential interruptions to supplies on contracts from its Gove refinery . Rio Tinto 's Ranger Uranium Mine ceased operations on 24 April 2006 , " as a precautionary measure " . 
 At one point , Monica was forecast to pass directly over Goulburn Island . In response , officials evacuated the island 's 337 residents to shelters set up in Pine Creek . Numerous schools in the threatened region , especially in Darwin , were closed ahead of Monica 's arrival . Several shelters were opened in Darwin early on 24 April in anticipation of an influx of evacuees . Stores throughout the area reported increased sales for storm supplies , with some reducing prices on specific items . The same day , the Darwin Returned and Services League of Australia cancelled all ANZAC Day services and marches in Darwin that were to be held the next day , to ensure the safety of prospective participants . 
 The Wessel Islands , located off the coast of the region , suffered significant damage from the storm . Mangrove trees were uprooted throughout the islands and sand dunes were destroyed . An outstation located on one of the islands was destroyed by the cyclone . The highest 24 @-@ hour rainfall from the storm was recorded near Darwin at 340 mm ( 13 in ) . A storm total for the same area was recorded at 383 mm ( 15 @.@ 1 in ) , surpassing the rainfall record for the entire month of April set in 1953 . Although the storm made landfall at peak intensity in Australia 's Northern Territory , the impacted areas were sparsely populated . Around the region where Monica made landfall , evidence of a 5 – 6 m ( 16 @.@ 4 – 19 @.@ 6 ft ) storm surge was present in Junction Bay . Along an area 50 km ( 30 mi ) wide and 130 km ( 80 mi ) long , countless trees were snapped or uprooted by the storm . Nearly 70 % of the forested areas around the bay were destroyed or defoliated by the storms ' 360 km / h ( 225 mph ) wind gusts . An estimated 7 @,@ 000 km2 ( 4 @,@ 350 mi2 ) of trees were downed by the storm with large areas of trees being uprooted . 
 Power lines were felled by high winds in Maningrida , 12 homes sustained damage from fallen trees in Jabiru , and extensive damage was reported in <unk> . Roughly 1 @,@ 000 people also lost phone service in the region . Several highways were blocked by fallen trees throughout the area . A resort in Jabiru sustained significant damage and was closed for two weeks following the storm . Insured damages to the national parks amounted to A $ 1 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 766 @,@ 000 ) . According to the Northern Territory Insurance Office , structural damage from Cyclone Monica amounted to A $ 5 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 4 million ) . The remnants of Monica produced significant rainfall over parts of the Northern Territory several days after the system weakened below cyclone status . Flash flooding was reported throughout the Adelaide River basin as up to 261 mm ( 10 @.@ 3 in ) of rain fell in a 24 @-@ hour span . On 26 April 2006 , the remnants of Monica spawned a small tornado near Channel Point ; several mangrove trees were snapped and branches were thrown to nearby beaches . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Queensland Government State Disaster Management Group dispatched relief helicopters to remote communities for evacuation of people in flood zones and transport of relief workers . Relief efforts were already underway in relation to Cyclone Larry which caused significant damage in Queensland . The Government of Australia assisted affected business by providing disaster loans up to A $ 25 @,@ 000 for severely impacted areas and A $ 10 @,@ 000 for less affected areas . Farmers were also provided with up to $ 200 @,@ 000 in loans over a period of nine years . Following the impacts in the Northern Territory , two cleanup teams were dispatched from Darwin to assist in cleanup efforts in the hardest hit regions . In a study of the Arnhem forests which were devastated by the cyclone , environmentalists reported that it would take over 100 years for the forest to recover . The storm 's winds snapped numerous trees , estimated to have been over 200 years old and more than 60 cm ( 23 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter . It is estimated that it would take several hundred years before trees of similar sizes would flourish in the region . Despite the minimal damage caused by Monica , the name was retired from the circulating lists of tropical cyclone names for the Australian Region . 
 Within weeks of the storm , the Alligator Rivers Region Advisory Committee began planting seedlings in deforested areas . By August 2006 , a review of the growth of the new plants found that 81 % to 88 % of the seeds had survived and begun growing . To fully restore the South Alligator valley , environmentalists requested A $ 7 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 6 million ) in funds . In a study at <unk> Creek a year after the storm , it was determined that between 8 % and 19 % of the tree canopy lost due to the storm had begun to recover . Additional studies at the <unk> Creek and the Alligator Rivers region revealed that suspended sediment values in flowing water had temporarily increased in the wake of Monica . The above @-@ average values persisted for roughly a year before the streams returned to pre @-@ cyclone sediment levels . 
 = The Boat Race 2002 = 
 The 148th Boat Race took place on 30 March 2002 . Oxford won the race by three @-@ quarters of a length , one of the narrowest margins of victory in the history of the contest . 
 In the reserve race Isis beat Goldie ; Oxford also won the Women 's race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual competition between Oxford University and Cambridge University . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2001 race by 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) , and led overall with 77 victories to Oxford 's 69 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Aberdeen Asset Management for the third consecutive year . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Despite weighing just over 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) less per man than their opponents , Cambridge were the pre @-@ race favourites . Both boats contained four Blues ; the Oxford cox Peter Hackworth attended St Paul 's School while Cambridge 's cox Ellie Griggs attended St Paul 's Girls ' School , so both were familiar with the course . Oxford 's crew contained two American international rowers in Dan Perkins and Luke McGee , and <unk> <unk> , a Dutch international . Cambridge 's stroke , Rick Dunn , cousin of Oxford 's bow Andrew Dunn , was a world champion in coxless fours , and he rowed alongside fellow British internationals Tom Stallard and Josh West . Cambridge 's other international rowers included American Sam Brooks , German Sebastian Mayer and Australian Stu Welch . 
 ( P ) – Boat Club President 
 = = Race description = = 
 Cambridge won the coin toss and elected to start from the northern bank ( the " Middlesex side " ) of the Thames . Despite Cambridge 's cox Griggs having her hand raised ( to indicate that she and the Cambridge crew were not yet ready to commence ) , race umpire Simon Harris started the race . With a stroke rate of 51 , Oxford took an early lead , but Cambridge pulled level as the crews passed Craven Cottage . Taking a slight lead round the Surrey bend , Cambridge 's number four , Mayer suffered an asthma attack and collapsed , allowing Oxford to draw up to within a second as they approached Barnes Bridge . In a sprint finish , Oxford pulled away to be three @-@ quarters of a length clear at the finishing post . 
 Oxford finished with a time of 16 minutes , 54 seconds , Cambridge finishing two seconds behind them , three @-@ quarters of a length behind . It was Oxford 's second victory in the previous three years , and brought the overall result to 77 – 70 in Cambridge 's favour . At the finish , following tradition , the Oxford crew threw their cox , Hackworth , into the water in celebration . Mayer was hospitalised minutes after the race , initially considered a result of exhaustion , but later diagnosed as following an asthma attack . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie . Earlier at Henley , Oxford won the 57th women 's race by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Hackworth said " it was neck and neck , but I had absolute belief we could do it " . Four @-@ time Olympic gold medallist Matthew Pinsent said of the race " it truly was amazing " . Cambridge coach Robin Williams was generous in defeat : " Credit to Oxford . They did an awesome job and took their chance . It was a fantastic race " , while Oxford 's coach Sean Bowden said " I believed that if we could get through Barnes Bridge well we could still do it . They were rowing so well and I knew how much they wanted it . " Simon Barnes of The Times noted that " Cambridge reeled in an early Oxford lead and went ahead themselves ... that should have been the end of it ... But this Oxford crew just kept pestering away ... and , with the finish in sight , Cambridge ... yielded . " 
 = Dwarf ( Dungeons & Dragons ) = 
 A dwarf , in the Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) fantasy roleplaying game , is a humanoid race , one of the primary races available for player characters . The idea for the D & D dwarf comes from European mythologies and J. R. R. Tolkien 's novel The Lord of the Rings ( 1954 @-@ 1955 ) , and has been used in D & D and its predecessor Chainmail since the early 1970s . Variations from the standard dwarf archetype of a short and stout <unk> are commonly called subraces , of which there are more than a dozen across many different rule sets and campaign settings . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept of the dwarf comes from Norse and Teutonic mythology . In particular , the dwarves in the Germanic story The Ring of the Nibelungen and the Brothers Grimm fairy tale " Rumpelstiltskin " have been called " ancestors " of Dungeons & Dragons dwarves . Along with giants , dwarves were one of the first types of non @-@ humans to be introduced into the Chainmail game , the forebear of D & D , when miniature figures of varying sizes were used together in the same wargame . 
 The dwarf first appears as a player character class in the original 1974 edition of Dungeons & Dragons , with a design that is strongly influenced by the dwarves of Poul Anderson 's 1961 novel Three Hearts and Three Lions . This early version of the D & D dwarf is limited to playing a fighter , and can not progress beyond the sixth level . The dwarf is again a character class in the original Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set ( 1977 ) . With the arrival of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons , the dwarf was modified into a player character race in the Player 's Handbook ( 1978 ) and detailed as a monster in the original Monster Manual ( 1977 ) . A number of dwarven subraces are presented as character races in the original Unearthed Arcana ( 1985 ) . 
 In 1989 , the hill dwarf , the most common dwarven <unk> , appears as a character race in the second edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Player 's Handbook and as a monster in the Monstrous Compendium Volume Two . Dwarves are detailed as a race for the Forgotten Realms setting in Dwarves Deep ( 1990 ) . Several dwarven races are detailed as player character races in The Complete Book of Dwarves ( 1991 ) . The dwarf appears as a character race in the third edition Player 's Handbook ( 2000 ) , the 3 @.@ 5 revised Player 's Handbook ( 2003 ) , the fourth edition Player 's Handbook ( 2008 ) , and the fifth edition Player 's Handbook ( 2014 ) . The arctic dwarf , gray dwarf , gold dwarf , shield dwarf , <unk> , and wild dwarf are all detailed in Races of Faerûn ( 2003 ) . Dwarves are one of the races detailed in Races of Stone ( 2004 ) . The dwarf , including the dwarf bolter and the dwarf hammerer , appears as a monster in the fourth edition Monster Manual ( 2008 ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dwarves average four feet in height , with squat , broad bodies . Male dwarves grow thick facial hair . The female dwarves in The Lord of the Rings novels , which greatly inspired D & D , were able to grow beards as well . Some authors , such as R. A. Salvatore , have followed suit in their writing , though the game rules ' official position is that females do not grow beards — the fourth edition of Dungeons and Dragons portrayed female dwarves as " beardless and even attractive " . In specific campaign settings , the potential for female dwarven facial hair sees much variation : In the World of Greyhawk some females can grow beards but those generally shave , in the Forgotten Realms they can grow full beards but also usually shave , and in Eberron they do not grow facial hair at all . In older editions of the game , female dwarves did grow beards in various campaign settings . 
 The book Three Hearts and Three Lions by Poul Anderson strongly influenced Dungeons & Dragons , having a dwarf named <unk> with a Scottish accent . Most popular portrayals of dwarves feature such an accent . Dwarves tend to be more useful for combat @-@ oriented players , as they gain a number of special abilities and bonuses in combat , mostly related to their hardiness and smaller stature compared to humans . Dwarves are also resistant to poison and magic , can see in the dark ( a skill called <unk> in earlier editions and <unk> beginning with third edition ) , and can detect different types of mining @-@ related features underground , such as sloping tunnels . The dwarven ability to detect a sloping passage underground is also taken directly from Anderson 's book . 
 Dwarves are generally good in alignment . Ilan Mitchell @-@ Smith wrote that dwarves , along with other races allowed for use by players such as elves and halflings , are " defined in terms of subjectivity , and ultimately , humanity " as opposed to many other creatures who serve as a type of " monstrous other " . 
 Dwarves usually worship Moradin , whom they believe is their creator . According to their legends , Moradin fashioned the dwarves into a likeness of himself using gems and metal . He then breathed life into them . In many campaign settings , the dwarven pantheon of gods consists of the leader Moradin , as well as <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> . Other dwarven gods may be present in different campaign settings . 
 Dwarves get along well with gnomes , who are often regarded as close cousins of the dwarven race . Dwarves are accepting of humans , half @-@ elves and halflings . Dwarves often do not get to know humans well as they live longer than the average human , and prefer to become friendly with the human 's family in general . Dwarves do not trust half @-@ orcs , and fail to appreciate elves , with whom they only ally in their many battles against orcs , goblins , evil giants and trolls . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Over the history of D & D publications and rules editions , more than a dozen subraces of dwarf have been described . Hill dwarves are the standard dwarven race . Mountain dwarves live deeper underground and have fairer skin than hill dwarves . <unk> dwarves are deep @-@ dwelling psionic dwarves who follow the dragon god <unk> . In the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd editions of D & D , <unk> physically resembled dwarves , though they were unrelated . In the 4th Edition of the game , they are a product of the enslavement of dwarves by giants and titans . Badlands dwarves have adapted to life in the inhospitable wastes , developing a natural knack for finding water and tolerance to heat and thirst . Deep dwarves dwell underground and have a greater ability to see in the dark , but are sensitive to light . They are more resistant to magic and poison than standard dwarves . Dream dwarves are contemplative dwarves in touch with the world around them , which they call the " earth dream . " The duergar are an " evil and avaricious " <unk> that live in the Underdark . Frost dwarves are extra @-@ planar dwarves who reside on the Iron Wastes of the Infinite Layers of the Abyss . They were once duergar enslaved by frost giants . Glacier dwarves reside in cold glaciers , mining a special material known as blue ice . These dwarves have great skill at crafting with ice and magical ice , and are tolerant to cold weather . <unk> dwarves make their home in high seaside cliffs and are excellent swimmers . 
 = = = Dwarves in campaign settings = = = 
 On <unk> , the planet of the Dark Sun campaign setting , dwarves stand less than 5 ' tall and weigh nearly 200 lbs . Each dwarf pursues a singular obsession , called a focus , that requires at least a week to complete . <unk> dwarves do not live underground , but some communities focus on unearthing long @-@ lost dwarven strongholds . Physically , the dwarves of <unk> are unique among their kind , having no hair at all . <unk> dwarves can breed with humans to produce <unk> , who are sterile offsprings that share the strength and resiliency of dwarves with the size of humans . 
 In the Dragonlance setting , the dwarves are divided into three distinct groups , which are sub @-@ divided into clans . Hill dwarves consist of a single clan called the <unk> . They are very similar to the mountain dwarves but are slightly more forthcoming towards other races and cultures . Flint Fireforge , one of the Heroes of the Lance , is a <unk> . Mountain dwarves consist of several clans , two of these being the <unk> and the <unk> clans . Gully dwarves , or <unk> ( " the Anguished " ) are thought to be the offspring of gnomes and dwarves . Gully dwarves are first referred to in the Dragonlance Chronicles , by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman , as a " miserable lot . " Several clans live together , following the rule of their chieftains or one particular powerful leader . 
 The Forgotten Realms world of Faerûn has several major dwarven subraces . Shield dwarves , also known as mountain dwarves , are the dominant dwarves in the northern parts of Faerûn . These dwarves tend to be fatalistic due to generations of declining numbers . Gold dwarves , also known as hill dwarves , are the dominant dwarves in southern Faerûn . They are generally a more upbeat group than their northern cousins . They primarily reside in and around the Deep Realm , an underground realm surrounding a Grand Canyon @-@ like gorge . Arctic dwarves ( also known as the <unk> ) , found in the northernmost reaches of Faerûn , are smaller and stronger than most other dwarves , and immune to cold . <unk> , also known as <unk> dwarves , have the magical ability to shape metal and stone , and can walk through the latter . Wild dwarves are short , primitive dwarves found in the deep jungles of Faerûn . Gray dwarves , or duergar , are mainly found in the Underdark , and have an aversion to light . Bruenor <unk> , a Shield Dwarf , is the king of Mithril Hall in the Forgotten Realms setting who reclaims his homeland from monsters including a shadow dragon named <unk> that he kills single @-@ handedly . 
 In the World of Greyhawk setting , the group of humans known as <unk> call dwarves <unk> . They are found throughout the <unk> , and are particularly numerous in the <unk> , Principality of <unk> , <unk> , Iron Hills , <unk> , and <unk> . Lord <unk> is a notable dwarf of the setting , a servant of <unk> and member of the <unk> organization . 
 Dwarves of the Spelljammer setting operate in huge spacefaring asteroids , honeycombed with tunnels . 
 = = Novels = = 
 Notable D & D novels prominently featuring dwarves include the following : 
 Dragonlance 
 Dragons of the Dwarven Depths ( July 2006 ) , by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman , ( ISBN 0 @-@ 7869 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 ) 
 Dark Thane by Jeff Crook 
 The Dwarf Home trilogy by Douglas Niles 
 The Dwarven Nations trilogy by Dan Parkinson 
 The Gates of <unk> by Dan Parkinson 
 Gully Dwarves by Dan Parkinson 
 <unk> , Gully Dwarves , and Gnomes ( August 1987 ) , edited by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman , ( ISBN 0 @-@ 88038 @-@ 382 @-@ 8 ) 
 Forgotten Realms 
 The War of the Spider Queen series by R.A. Salvatore 
 The Icewind Dale Trilogy by R.A. Salvatore 
 = Dan Deacon : U.S.A. = 
 " Dan Deacon : U.S.A. " ( also known as the " Dan Deacon Special " ) is the first television special of the American anthology series Off the Air . The special was edited and directed by creator and executive producer Dave Hughes . The episode incorporates surreal footage of landscapes in the United States , with music by Dan Deacon from the album America . The special was commissioned by Williams Street Records as part of the Adult Swim 2013 Singles Program . The episode coincided with the release of another track by Deacon entitled " Why Am I on This Cloud ? " , featuring samples from other Adult Swim programming . 
 Promoted as a " one @-@ time airing " by members of the production staff , the episode premiered on Adult Swim on July 6 , 2013 . The special was viewed by 962 @,@ 000 viewers and received a 0 @.@ 8 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received positive critical reception from music journalist websites for its psychedelic visuals and uses of American iconography . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Similar to other episodes of Off the Air , the episode is presented without explanation or narration as a showcase of surreal animations , viral internet videos , archival footage and morphing psychedelic imagery , arranged around a single loose theme and blended without pause into a single continuous presentation . Excluding its closing credits , the special features the last four tracks from the album America by Dan Deacon ( referred to as the " ' U.S.A. ' suite " ) . The episode incorporates the following works , which center on landscapes in the United States : 
 El hombre y la Tierra excerpt 
 Radical Updates by Andrew Benson 
 Cityscape Chicago by Eric Hines 
 Space Station footage provided by Image Science and Analysis Laboratory at the NASA John Space Center 
 <unk> by Dutch National Ballet 
 CGI space objects by Adam Bruneau 
 American Harvest provided by Prelinger Archives 
 Head On by Lior Ben Horin 
 <unk> by Liberty Smith and Sophie Windsor Clive 
 Cy 's Sunrise <unk> by Cyrus Sutton and <unk> 
 Moonwalk performance by Dean Potter 
 Primavera Concert Footage by Tom Bingham , Gill Austin , Jonathan Rej , and Jeff Crocker 
 Stone Mountain <unk> Suits ; cinematography by Alan Steadman , featuring Cody DeMatteis and Zach White 
 Additional stock footage provided by <unk> and <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was produced by Williams Street Records as part of the Adult Swim 2013 Singles Program . Director and editor Dave Hughes had previously collaborated with Deacon in 2008 for his song " Okie Dokie " from the album Spiderman of the Rings . The short film Head On by Lior Ben Horin was featured in the a previous episode of the series entitled " Color " . According to Hughes , the special was commissioned to coincide with the release of Deacon 's track for the compilation album . Deacon 's track was released on William Street Record 's website on June 26 , 2013 ; entitled " Why Am I on This Cloud ? " , the song features samples from other Adult Swim programming . Despite the special 's national focus , the episode culls works from artists worldwide . 
 Hughes , along with associate producer Cody DeMatteis , utilized Adobe After Effects for some aspects of post @-@ production editing . The special makes extensive use of compression artifacts for artistic effect , namely " <unk> " , where two videos are interleaved so intermediate frames are interpolated from two separate sources . The technique referred to as " photo stacking " , in which time @-@ lapse photographs are composited on top of one another , was also utilized for the NASA John Space Center footage . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Dan Deacon : U.S.A. " aired on July 6 , 2013 on Cartoon Network 's late @-@ night programming block , Adult Swim . Promoted as a " one @-@ time airing " by members of the production staff , the episode was broadcast as part of DVR Theater at 4 a.m. ; former episodes of the series aired in the 4 a.m. timeslot preceding the premiere of the special as well . The special was viewed by 962 @,@ 000 viewers and received a 0 @.@ 8 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode was previously released onto Adult Swim 's website on July 1 , 2013 ; it was published on Adult Swim 's official YouTube channel on July 3 . 
 Critical reception was positive , especially from music journalist websites , who praised its psychedelic visuals and uses of American iconography . Consequence of Sound 's Michael Roffman compared the scenic visuals to Koyaanisqatsi and 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Exclaim ! magazine 's Alex Hudson called the special accompanied by the soundtrack " ambitious and shapeshifting " , but described some of the CGI featured as " corny " . Jamie Milton of This Is Fake DIY described the episode as a " bold slice of national pride , beloved to the landscapes that inspired the making of the excitable producer 's latest album " . In his review , he compared it to the theory of " Broken Britain " in the United Kingdom , stating between the special and " a 20 minute documentary about ' Broken Britain ' , you know which one you should go for . " An article by Fact magazine described the episode as a compilation of " eye @-@ popping scenes . " 
 Nancy Hoang of CMJ praised the episode 's visuals , highlighting the incorporation of the short film <unk> by Liberty Smith and Sophie Windsor Clive . Chris Martins of Spin magazine enjoyed the colorful and psychedelic visuals . He found the episode appealing to stoner culture , ending his review stating that the special is " tailor @-@ made for late nights in haze @-@ filled dorm rooms . " Tom Breihan of Stereogum reviewed the special positively , calling the episode an " oddly patriotic work that pulls in all sorts of American iconography " . Rachel Haas of Paste magazine praised the special being released close to Independence Day , stating " this suite would possibly soundtrack the coolest , weirdest fireworks show ever . " <unk> Galil of the Chicago Reader featured the video for his " 12 O 'Clock Track " , praising Hughes ' manipulation of Cityscape Chicago by cinematographer Eric Hines . However , given the tracks ' length , he argued the episode would best be enjoyed " through a nice pair of speakers at a barbecue instead of spending that time with your eyes affixed to a computer screen . " 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = On Her Majesty 's Secret Service ( film ) = 
 On Her Majesty 's Secret Service ( 1969 ) is the sixth spy film in the James Bond series , based on the 1963 novel of the same name by Ian Fleming . Following Sean Connery 's decision to retire from the role after You Only Live Twice , Eon Productions selected an unknown actor and model , George Lazenby , to play the part of James Bond . During the making of the film , Lazenby decided that he would play the role of Bond only once . 
 In the film Bond faces Blofeld ( Telly Savalas ) , who is planning to sterilise the world 's food supply through a group of brainwashed " angels of death " , unless his demands are met for an international amnesty for his previous crimes , recognition of his title as the Count De Bleuchamp ( the French form of Blofeld ) , and to be allowed to retire into private life . Along the way Bond meets , falls in love with , and eventually marries Contessa Teresa di Vicenzo ( Diana Rigg ) . 
 This is the only Bond film to be directed by Peter R. Hunt , who had served as a film editor and second unit director on previous films in the series . Hunt , along with producers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , decided to produce a more realistic film that would follow the novel closely . It was shot in Switzerland , England , and Portugal from October 1968 to May 1969 . Although its cinema release was not as lucrative as its predecessor You Only Live Twice , On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was still one of the top performing films of the year . Critical reviews upon release were mixed , but the film 's reputation has improved over time , although reviews of Lazenby 's performance continue to vary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Portugal , James Bond – agent 007 , sometimes referred to simply as ' 007 ' – saves a woman on the beach from committing suicide by drowning , and later meets her again in a casino . The woman , Contessa Teresa " Tracy " di Vicenzo , invites Bond to her hotel room to thank him , but when Bond arrives he is attacked by an unidentifiable man . After subduing the man , Bond returns to his own room and finds Tracy there , who claims she didn 't know the attacker was there . The next morning , Bond is kidnapped by several men , including the one he fought with , who take him to meet Marc @-@ Ange Draco , the head of the European crime syndicate Unione Corse . Draco reveals that Tracy is his only daughter and tells Bond of her troubled past , offering Bond a personal dowry of one million pounds if he will marry her . Bond refuses , but agrees to continue romancing Tracy under the agreement that Draco reveals the whereabouts of Ernst Stavro Blofeld , the head of SPECTRE . 
 Bond returns to London , and after a brief argument with M at the British Secret Service headquarters , heads for Draco 's birthday party in Portugal . There , Bond and Tracy begin a whirlwind romance , and Draco directs the agent to a law firm in Bern , Switzerland . Bond investigates the office of Swiss lawyer Gumbold , and learns that Blofeld is corresponding with London College of Arms ' genealogist Sir Hilary Bray , attempting to claim the title ' Comte Balthazar de Bleuchamp ' . 
 Posing as Bray , Bond goes to meet Blofeld , who has established a clinical allergy @-@ research institute atop Piz Gloria in the Swiss Alps . Bond meets twelve young women , the " Angels of Death " , who are patients at the institute 's clinic , apparently cured of their allergies . At night Bond goes to the room of one patient , Ruby , for a romantic encounter . At midnight Bond sees that Ruby , apparently along with each of the other ladies , goes into a sleep @-@ induced hypnotic state while Blofeld gives them audio instructions for when they are discharged and return home . In fact , the women are being brainwashed to distribute bacteriological warfare agents throughout various parts of the world . 
 Bond tries to trick Blofeld into leaving Switzerland so that MI6 can arrest him without violating Swiss sovereignty . Blofeld refuses and Bond is eventually caught by henchwoman Irma Bunt . Blofeld reveals that he identified Bond after his attempt to lure him out of Switzerland , and tells his henchmen to take the agent away . Bond eventually makes his escape by skiing down Piz Gloria while Blofeld and his men give chase . Arriving at the village of Lauterbrunnen , Bond finds Tracy and they escape Bunt and her men after a car chase . A blizzard forces them to a remote barn , where Bond professes his love to Tracy and proposes marriage to her , which she accepts . The next morning , as the flight resumes , Blofeld sets off an avalanche ; Tracy is captured , while Bond is buried but manages to escape . 
 Back in London at M 's office , Bond is informed that Blofeld intends to hold the world to ransom by threatening to destroy its agriculture using his brainwashed women , demanding amnesty for all past crimes , and that he be recognised as the current Count de Bleuchamp . M tells 007 that the ransom will be paid and forbids him to mount a rescue mission . Bond then enlists Draco and his forces to attack Blofeld 's headquarters , while also rescuing Tracy from Blofeld 's captivity . The facility is destroyed , and Blofeld escapes the destruction alone in a bobsleigh , with Bond pursuing him . The chase ends when Blofeld becomes snared in a tree branch and injures his neck . Bond and Tracy marry in Portugal , then drive away in Bond 's Aston Martin . When Bond pulls over to the roadside to remove flowers from the car , Blofeld ( wearing a neck brace ) and Bunt commit a drive @-@ by shooting of the couple 's car ; Bond survives , but Tracy is killed in the attack . A police officer then approaches Bond 's car , Bond looks at the police officer . All choked up , Bond says : " it 's all right , it 's quite all right really . She 's having a rest , we 'll be going on soon . There 's no hurry you see , we have all the time in the world ..... " Bond starts to cry , and cradle Tracy 's body . 
 = = Cast = = 
 George Lazenby as James Bond – MI6 agent , codename 007 . 
 Diana Rigg as Countess Tracy di Vicenzo – A vulnerable countess and Marc @-@ Ange Draco 's daughter , who captures Bond 's heart . Like Honor Blackman in Goldfinger before her , Rigg had come to the notice of Eon Productions through her work on The Avengers , where she played Emma Peel from 1965 – 68 . 
 Telly Savalas as Ernst Stavro Blofeld aka Comte Balthazar de Bleuchamp – Bond 's nemesis , leader of SPECTRE and in hiding . Savalas had appeared in The Dirty Dozen in 1967 , leading to Broccoli suggesting him to director Peter Hunt , for the role , in place of Donald Pleasence , who had appeared in You Only Live Twice . Both Broccoli and Hunt felt Pleasence was unsuited to the more physical side of the Blofeld role in On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . 
 Gabriele Ferzetti as Marc @-@ Ange Draco – Head of the Union Corse , a major crime syndicate and Tracy 's father ( uncredited voice by David de Keyser ) . 
 Ilse <unk> as Irma Bunt – Blofeld 's henchwoman who assists in the attempts to eliminate Bond , and although they fail to finish him off Bunt eventually manages to kill Tracy . Said to be the most successful piece of casting in the film , the Bunt character did not appear in the film You Only Live Twice , although she did appear in the novel . On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was <unk> 's last role : she died on 22 December 1969 , four days after the film premiered . 
 Bernard Lee as M – Head of the British Secret Service . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny . 
 George Baker as Sir Hilary Bray – Herald in the London College of Arms , whom Bond impersonates in Piz Gloria . Baker also provided the voice of Bond while he was imitating Bray . 
 Yuri <unk> as <unk> – Blofeld 's brutish chief of security at Piz Gloria . In his role as a stuntman , <unk> was one of the people assisting with Lazenby 's audition : Lazenby accidentally broke his nose , which helped him get the part of Bond . 
 Bernard Horsfall as Shaun Campbell – 007 's colleague who tries to aid Bond in Switzerland as part of Operation Bedlam . Campbell has been called the film 's " Official Sacrificial Lamb " . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q. 
 Virginia North as Olympe – Draco 's female assistant . Nikki van der Zyl provided the uncredited voice for Olympe , making On Her Majesty 's Secret Service her sixth Bond film in succession . 
 Geoffrey Cheshire as Toussaint 
 Irvin Allen as Che Che 
 Terry Mountain as Raphael 
 James Bree as Gumbold 
 John Gay as Hammond 
 = = = Blofeld 's Angels of Death = = = 
 The Angels of Death are twelve beautiful women from all over the world being brainwashed by Blofeld under the guise of allergy or phobia treatment to spread the Virus Omega . A number appeared in the representative styles of dress of their particular nation . Their mission is to help Blofeld contaminate and ultimately sterilise the world 's food supply . 
 Julie Ege as Helen , a Scandinavian girl . Ege was a former Miss Norway who also starred in a number of Hammer Film Productions . 
 Jenny Hanley as an Irish girl . 
 <unk> Hempel as an Australian girl . 
 Joanna Lumley as an English girl . Like Diana Rigg ( and Honor Blackman in Goldfinger ) , Lumley would appear alongside Patrick Macnee , although her role was in a spin @-@ off from The Avengers , as <unk> in The New Avengers . 
 Catherina von Schell as Nancy , a Hungarian girl at the clinic whom Bond seduces . 
 Angela Scoular as Ruby Bartlett , an English girl at the clinic suffering from an allergy to chickens , whom Bond also beds . Scoular also played Buttercup in the 1967 comedy Casino Royale . 
 Mona Chong as a Chinese girl . 
 Sylvana Henriques as a Jamaican girl . 
 Dani Sheridan as an American girl . 
 Zara as an Indian girl . 
 <unk> Back as a German girl . 
 Helena <unk> as an Israeli girl . 
 = = Production = = 
 The novel On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was first published after the film series started and contains " a gentle dig at the cinematic Bond 's gadgets , Broccoli and Saltzman had originally intended to make On Her Majesty 's Secret Service after Goldfinger and Richard Maibaum worked on a script at that time . However , Thunderball was filmed instead after the ongoing rights dispute over the novel were settled between Fleming and Kevin McClory . On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was due to follow that , but problems with a warm Swiss winter and inadequate snow cover led to Saltzman and Broccoli postponing the film again , favouring production of You Only Live Twice . 
 Between the resignation of Sean Connery at the beginning of filming You Only Live Twice and its release , Saltzman had planned to adapt The Man with the Golden Gun in Cambodia and use Roger Moore as the next Bond , but political instability meant the location was ruled out and Moore signed up for another series of The Saint . After You Only Live Twice was released in 1967 , the producers once again picked up with On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . 
 Peter Hunt , who had worked on the five preceding films had impressed Broccoli and Saltzman enough to earn his directorial debut as they believed his quick cutting had set the style for the series ; it was also the result of a long @-@ standing promise from Broccoli and Saltzman for a directorial position . Hunt also asked for the position during the production of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , and he brought along with him many crew members , including cinematographer Michael Reed . Hunt was focused on putting his mark – " I wanted it to be different than any other Bond film would be . It was my film , not anyone else 's . " On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was the last film on which Hunt worked in the series . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Screenwriter Richard Maibaum , who worked on all the Bond films bar You Only Live Twice , was responsible for On Her Majesty 's Secret Service 's script . Saltzman and Broccoli decided to drop the science fiction gadgets from the earlier films and focus more on plot as in From Russia With Love . Peter Hunt asked Simon Raven to write some of the dialogue between Tracy and Blofeld in Piz Gloria , which was to be " sharper , better and more intellectual " ; one of Raven 's additions was having Tracy quoting James Elroy Flecker . When writing the script , the producers decided to make the closest adaptation of the book possible : virtually everything in the novel occurs in the film and Hunt was reported to always enter the set carrying an annotated copy of the novel . 
 With the script following the novel more closely than the other film adaptations of the eponymous source novels , there are several continuity errors due to the film taking place in a different order , such as Blofeld not recognising Bond , despite having met him face @-@ to @-@ face in the previous film You Only Live Twice . In the original script , Bond undergoes plastic surgery to disguise him from his enemies ; the intention was to allow an unrecognisable Bond to infiltrate Blofeld 's hideout and help the audience accept the new actor in the role . However , this was dropped in favour of ignoring the change in actor . To make audiences not forget it was the same James Bond , just played by another actor , the producers inserted many references to the previous films , some as in @-@ jokes . These include Bond breaking the fourth wall by stating " This never happened to the other fellow " , the credits sequence with images from the previous instalments , Bond visiting his office and finding objects from Dr. No , From Russia with Love and Thunderball , and a caretaker whistling the theme from Goldfinger . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In 1967 , after five films , Sean Connery retired from the role of James Bond and — during the filming of You Only Live Twice — was not on speaking terms with Albert Broccoli . The confirmed front runners were Englishman John Richardson , Dutchman Hans De Vries , American Robert Campbell , Englishman Anthony Rogers and Australian George Lazenby . 
 Broccoli and Hunt eventually chose Lazenby after seeing him in a Fry 's Chocolate Cream advertisement . Lazenby dressed the part by sporting several sartorial Bond elements such as a Rolex Submariner wristwatch and a Savile Row suit ( ordered , but uncollected , by Connery ) , and going to Connery 's barber at the Dorchester Hotel . Broccoli noticed Lazenby as a Bond @-@ type man based on his physique and character elements , and offered him an audition . The position was consolidated when Lazenby accidentally punched a professional wrestler , who was acting as stunt coordinator , in the face , impressing Broccoli with his ability to display aggression . Lazenby was offered a contract for seven films ; however , he was convinced by his agent Ronan O 'Rahilly that the secret agent would be archaic in the liberated 1970s , and as a result he left the series after the release of On Her Majesty 's Secret Service in 1969 . 
 For Tracy Draco , the producers wanted an established actress opposite neophyte Lazenby . Brigitte Bardot was invited , but after she signed to appear in <unk> opposite Sean Connery the deal fell through , and Diana Rigg — who had already been the popular heroine Emma Peel in The Avengers — was cast instead . Rigg said one of the reasons for accepting the role was that she always wanted to be in an epic film . Telly Savalas was cast following a suggestion from Broccoli , and Hunt 's neighbour George Baker was offered the part of Sir Hilary Bray . Baker 's voice was also used when Lazenby was impersonating Bray , as Hunt considered Lazenby 's imitation not convincing enough . Gabriele Ferzetti was cast as Draco after the producers saw him in an Italian mafia film , but Ferzetti 's heavy Italian accent also led to his voice being redubbed by English actor David de Keyser for the final cut . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began in the Canton of Bern , Switzerland , on 21 October 1968 , with the first scene shot being an aerial view of Bond climbing the stairs of Blofeld 's mountain retreat to meet the girls . The scenes were shot atop the now famous revolving restaurant Piz Gloria , located atop the Schilthorn near the village of Mürren . The location was found by production manager Hubert Fröhlich after three weeks of location scouting in France and Switzerland . The restaurant was still under construction , but the producers found the location interesting , and had to finance providing electricity and the aerial lift to make filming there possible . Various chase scenes in the Alps were shot at Lauterbrunnen and <unk> @-@ Fee , while the Christmas celebrations were filmed in Grindelwald , and some scenes were shot on location in Bern . Production was hampered by weak snowfall which was unfavourable to the skiing action scenes . The producers even considered moving to another location in Switzerland , but it was taken by the production of Downhill Racer . The Swiss filming ended up running 56 days over schedule . In March 1969 , production moved to England , with London 's Pinewood Studios being used for interior shooting , and M 's house being shot in Marlow , Buckinghamshire . In April , the filmmakers went to Portugal , where principal photography wrapped in May . The pre @-@ credit coastal and hotel scenes were filmed at Hotel Estoril Palacio in Estoril and <unk> Beach , Cascais , while Lisbon was used for the reunion of Bond and Tracy , and the ending employed a mountain road in the Arrábida National Park near Setúbal . Harry Saltzman wanted the Portuguese scenes to be in France , but after searching there , Peter Hunt considered that not only were the locations not photogenic , but were already " overexposed " . 
 While the first unit shot at Piz Gloria , the second unit , led by John Glen , started filming the ski chases . The downhill skiing involved professional skiers , and various camera tricks . Some cameras were handheld , with the operators holding them as they were going downhill with the stuntmen , and others were aerial , with cameramen Johnny Jordan – who had previously worked in the helicopter battle of You Only Live Twice — developing a system where he was dangled by an 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) long parachute harness rig below a helicopter , allowing scenes to be shot on the move from any angle . The <unk> chase was also filmed with the help of Swiss Olympic athletes , and was rewritten to incorporate the accidents the stuntmen suffered during shooting , such as the scene where Bond falls from the sled . Blofeld getting snared with a tree was performed at the studio by Savalas himself , after the attempt to do this by the stuntman on location came out wrong . Glen was also the editor of the film , employing a style similar to the one used by Hunt in the previous Bond films , with fast motion in the action scenes and exaggerated sound effects . 
 The avalanche scenes were due to be filmed in co @-@ operation with the Swiss army who annually used explosions to prevent snow build @-@ up by causing avalanches , but the area chosen naturally <unk> just before filming . The final result was a combination of a man @-@ made avalanche at an isolated Swiss location shot by the second unit , stock footage , and images created by the special effects crew with salt . The stuntmen were filmed later , added by optical effects . For the scene where Bond and Tracy crash into a car race while being pursued , an ice rink was constructed over an unused aeroplane track , with water and snow sprayed on it constantly . Lazenby and Rigg did most of the driving due to the high number of close @-@ ups . 
 For the cinematography , Hunt aimed for a " simple , but glamorous like the 1950s Hollywood films I grew up with " , as well as something realistic , " where the sets don 't look like sets " . Cinematographer Michael Reed added he had difficulties with lighting , as every set built for the film had a ceiling , preventing spotlights from being hung from above . While shooting , Hunt wanted " the most interesting framings possible " , which would also look good after being cropped for television . 
 Lazenby said he experienced difficulties during shooting , not receiving any coaching despite his lack of acting experience , and with director Hunt never addressing him directly , only through his assistant . Lazenby also declared that Hunt also asked the rest of the crew to keep a distance from him , as " Peter thought the more I was alone , the better I would be as James Bond . " Allegedly , there also were personality conflicts with Rigg , who was already an established star . However , according to director Hunt , these rumours are untrue and there were no such difficulties — or else they were minor — and may have started with Rigg joking to Lazenby before filming a love scene " Hey George , I 'm having garlic for lunch . I hope you are ! " Hunt also declared that he usually had long talks with Lazenby before and during shooting . For instance , to shoot Tracy 's death scene , Hunt brought Lazenby to the set at 8 o 'clock in the morning and made him rehearse all day long , " and I broke him down until he was absolutely exhausted , and by the time we shot it at five o 'clock , he was exhausted , and that 's how I got the performance . " Hunt said that if Lazenby had remained in the role , he would also have directed the successor film , Diamonds Are Forever , and that his original intentions were concluding the film with Bond and Tracy driving off following their wedding , saving Tracy 's murder for the pre @-@ credit sequence of Diamonds Are Forever . The idea was discarded after Lazenby quit the role . 
 On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was the longest Bond film until Casino Royale was released in 2006 . Despite that , two scenes were deleted from the final print : Irma Bunt spying on Bond as he buys a wedding ring for Tracy , and a chase over London rooftops and into the Royal Mail underground rail system after Bond 's conversation with Sir Hilary Bray was overheard . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack for On Her Majesty 's Secret Service has been called " perhaps the best score of the series . " It was composed , arranged and conducted by John Barry ; it was his fifth successive Bond film . Barry opted to use more electrical instruments and a more aggressive sound in the music – " I have to stick my oar in the musical area double strong to make the audience try and forget they don 't have Sean ... to be Bondian beyond Bondian . " 
 Barry felt it would be difficult to compose a theme song containing the title " On Her Majesty 's Secret Service " unless it were written operatically , in the style of Gilbert and Sullivan . Leslie Bricusse had considered lyrics for the title song but director Peter R. Hunt allowed an instrumental title theme in the tradition of the first two Bond films . The theme was described as " one of the best title cuts , a wordless Moog @-@ driven monster , suitable for skiing at breakneck speed or dancing with equal abandon . " 
 Barry also composed the love song " We Have All the Time in the World " , with lyrics by Burt Bacharach 's regular lyricist Hal David , sung by Louis Armstrong . It is heard during the Bond – Tracy courtship montage , bridging Draco 's birthday party in Portugal and Bond 's burglary of the Gebrüder Gumbold law office in Bern , Switzerland . It was Louis Armstrong 's last recorded song as he died of a heart attack two years later . Barry recalled Armstrong was very ill , but recorded the song in one take . The song was re @-@ released in 1994 , achieving the number three position during a 13 @-@ week spell in the UK charts . A Hal David song entitled " Do You Know How Christmas Trees Are Grown ? " performed by Danish singer Nina also featured in the film in several scenes . 
 The theme , " On Her Majesty 's Secret Service " , is used in the film as an action theme alternative to Monty Norman 's " James Bond Theme " , as with Barry 's previous " 007 " themes . " On Her Majesty 's Secret Service " was covered in 1997 by the British big beat group , the Propellerheads for the Shaken and Stirred album . Barry @-@ orchestrator Nic Raine recorded an arrangement of the escape from Piz Gloria sequence and it was featured as a theme in the trailers for the 2004 Pixar animated film The Incredibles . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was released on 18 December 1969 with its premiere at the Odeon Leicester Square in London . Lazenby appeared at the premiere with a beard , looking " very un @-@ Bond @-@ like " , according to the Daily Mirror . Lazenby claimed the producers had tried to persuade him to shave it off to appear like Bond , but at that stage he had already decided not to make another Bond film and rejected the idea . The beard and accompanying shoulder @-@ length hair " strained his already fragile relationship with Saltzman and Broccoli " . As On Her Majesty 's Secret Service had been filmed in stereo , the first Bond film to use the technology , the Odeon had a new speaker system installed to benefit the new sounds . 
 Because Lazenby had informed the producers that On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was to be his only outing as Bond and because of the lack of gadgets used by Bond in the film , few items of merchandise were produced for the film , apart from the soundtrack album and a film edition of the book . Those that were produced included a number of Corgi Toys , including Tracey 's Cougar , Campbell 's Volkswagen and two versions of the bobsleigh — one with the 007 logo and one with the Piz Gloria logo . On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was nominated for only one award : George Lazenby was nominated in the New Star of the Year – Actor category at the 1970 Golden Globe Award ceremony , losing out to Jon Voight . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film topped the North American box office when it opened with a gross of $ 1 @.@ 2 million . The film closed its box office run with £ 750 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom ( the highest @-@ grossing film of the year ) , $ 64 @.@ 6 million worldwide , half of You Only Live Twice 's total gross , but still one of the highest @-@ grossing films of 1969 . It was one of the most popular movies in France in 1969 , with admissions of 1 @,@ 958 @,@ 172 . Nonetheless this was a considerable drop from You Only Live Twice . After re @-@ releases , the total box office was $ 82 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worldwide . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 The majority of reviews were critical of either the film , Lazenby , or both , while most of the contemporary reviews in the British press referred to George Lazenby at some point as " The Big Fry " , a reference to his previous acting in Fry 's Chocolate advertisements . Derek Malcolm of The Guardian was dismissive of Lazenby 's performance , saying that he " is not a good actor and though I never thought Sean Connery was all that stylish either , there are moments when one yearns for a little of his louche panache . " For all the criticism of Lazenby , however , Malcolm says that the film was " quite a jolly frolic in the familiar money @-@ spinning fashion " . Tom Milne , writing in The Observer was even more scathing , saying that " I ... fervently trust ( OHMSS ) will be the last of the James Bond films . All the pleasing oddities and eccentricities and gadgets of the earlier films have somehow been lost , leaving a routine trail through which the new James Bond strides without noticeable signs of animation . " 
 Donald Zec in the Daily Mirror was equally damning of Lazenby 's acting abilities , comparing him unfavourably to Connery : " He looks uncomfortably in the part like a size four foot in a size ten <unk> . " Zec was kinder to Lazenby 's co @-@ star , saying that " there is style to Diana Rigg 's performance and I suspect that the last scene which draws something of a performance out of Lazenby owes much to her silken expertise . " The New York Times critic AH Weiler also weighed in against Lazenby , saying that " Lazenby , if not a spurious Bond , is merely a casual , pleasant , satisfactory replacement . " 
 One of the few supporters of Lazenby amongst the critics was Alexander Walker in the London Evening Standard who said that " The truth is that George Lazenby is almost as good a James Bond as the man referred to in his film as ' the other fellow ' . Lazenby 's voice is more suave than sexy @-@ sinister and he could pass for the other fellow 's twin on the shady side of the casino . Bond is now definitely all set for the Seventies . " Judith Crist of New York Magazine also found the actor a strong point of the movie , stating that " This time around there 's less suavity and a no @-@ nonsense muscularity and maleness to the role via the handsome Mr. Lazenby " . 
 The feminist film critic Molly Haskell also wrote an approving review of the film in the Village Voice : " In a world , an industry , and particularly a genre which values the new and improved product above all , it is nothing short of miraculous to see a movie which dares to go backward , a technological artefact which has nobly deteriorated into a human being . I speak of the new and obsolete James Bond , played by a man named George Lazenby , who seems more comfortable in a wet tuxedo than a dry martini , more at ease as a donnish genealogist than reading ( or playing ) Playboy , and who actually dares to think that one woman who is his equal is better than a thousand part @-@ time playmates . " Haskell was also affected by the film 's emotional ending : " The love between Bond and his Tracy begins as a payment and ends as a sacrament . After ostensibly getting rid of the bad guys , they are married . They drive off to a shocking , stunning ending . Their love , being too real , is killed by the conventions it defied . But they win the final victory by calling , unexpectedly , upon feeling . Some of the audience hissed , I was shattered . If you like your Bonds with happy endings , don 't go . " 
 = = = Reflective reviews = = = 
 Critical response to On Her Majesty 's Secret Service has become much more positive in recent years . Film critic James Berardinelli summed this up in his review of the movie : " with the exception of one production aspect , [ it ] is by far the best entry of the long @-@ running James Bond series . The film contains some of the most exhilarating action sequences ever to reach the screen , a touching love story , and a nice subplot that has agent 007 crossing ( and even threatening to resign from ) Her Majesty 's Secret Service . The problem is with Bond himself ... George Lazenby is boring , and his <unk> lowers the picture 's quality . Lazenby can handle the action sequences , but that 's about all he masters . " 
 The American film reviewer Leonard Maltin has suggested that if it had been Connery in the leading role instead of Lazenby , On Her Majesty 's Secret Service would have epitomised the series . On the other hand , Danny Peary wrote , " I 'm not sure I agree with those who insist that if Connery had played Bond it would definitely be the best of the entire Bond series ... Connery 's Bond , with his boundless humor and sense of fun and self @-@ confidence , would be out of place in this picture . It actually works better with Lazenby because he is incapable of playing Bond as a bigger @-@ than @-@ life hero ; for one thing he hasn 't the looks ... Lazenby 's Bond also hasn 't the assurance of Connery 's Bond and that is appropriate in the crumbling , depressing world he finds himself . He seems vulnerable and jittery at times . At the skating rink , he is actually scared . We worry about him ... On Her Majesty 's Secret Service doesn 't have Connery and it 's impossible to ever fully adjust to Lazenby , but I think that it still might be the best Bond film , as many Bond cultists claim . " Peary also described On Her Majesty 's Secret Service as " the most serious " , " the most cynical " and " the most tragic " of the Bond films . 
 Brian Fairbanks differed in his opinion of Lazenby , saying that the film " gives us a James Bond capable of vulnerability , a man who can show fear and is not immune to heartbreak . Lazenby is that man , and his performance is superb . " Fairbanks also thought On Her Majesty 's Secret Service to be " not only the best Bond , it is also the last truly great film in the series . In fact , had the decision been made to end the series , this would have been the perfect final chapter . " 
 The filmmaker Steven Soderbergh writes that " For me there 's no question that cinematically On Her Majesty 's Secret Service is the best Bond film and the only one worth watching repeatedly for reasons other than pure entertainment ... Shot to shot , this movie is beautiful in a way none of the other Bond films are " The director Christopher Nolan also saw On Her Majesty 's Secret Service as his favourite Bond film ; in describing its influence on his own film , Inception , Nolan said , " What I liked about it that we 've tried to emulate in this film is there 's a tremendous balance in that movie of action and scale and romanticism and tragedy and emotion . " 
 Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 82 % rating based on 44 reviews . IGN ranked On Her Majesty 's Secret Service as the eighth best Bond film , Entertainment Weekly as the sixth , and Norman Wilner of MSN , as the fifth best . The film also became a fan favourite , seeing " ultimate success in the home video market " . In September 2012 it was announced that On Her Majesty 's Secret Service had topped a poll of Bond fans run by 007 Magazine to determine the greatest ever Bond film . Goldfinger came second in the poll and From Russia With Love was third . 
 = The Getaway ( Dexter ) = 
 " The Getaway " is the fourth season finale of the American television drama series Dexter , and the 48th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Showtime on December 13 , 2009 . In the episode , Dexter goes to great lengths to stop Arthur , who now knows Dexter 's true identity . Meanwhile , Debra learns the truth about Dexter 's mother , the homicide division closes in on the Trinity Killer , and Rita reaffirms her support for Dexter , even as she acknowledges his hidden demons . 
 The teleplay was written by Wendy West and Melissa Rosenberg , based on a story by Rosenberg and Scott Reynolds . Directed by Steve Shill , " The Getaway " marked the conclusion of the Trinity Killer plotline , as well as the final regular appearance of guest star John Lithgow , who portrayed Arthur Mitchell . The episode also included the death of Rita Morgan , Dexter 's wife , who had been portrayed by Julie Benz , a regular cast member since the beginning of the series . To protect the twist ending of Rita 's death , Dexter producers imposed strict security measures , which included the distribution of fake alternate endings and forcing staff members to sign non @-@ disclosure agreements . 
 " The Getaway " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators calling the twist ending shocking , unexpected and likely to change the direction of the entire series . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 6 million households , making it the most @-@ watched original series episode in Showtime 's history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Having learned the truth about Dexter 's identity , Arthur ( John Lithgow ) confronts Dexter ( Michael C. Hall ) at the police station , where nobody else knows Arthur is the Trinity Killer . He warns Dexter to leave him alone from now on . When he leaves , Dexter follows Arthur in his car , and accidentally strikes another car on his way . Dexter follows Arthur to a bank , where he sees Arthur bring a large envelope back to his van . Dexter attacks Arthur , knocking him out and dragging him into the van , and Dexter realizes the envelope is filled with cash . Dexter plans to take Arthur 's van away and kill Arthur , but he spots the driver of the car he struck earlier talking to police officers next to Dexter 's car . Dexter hides the envelope and confronts the driver , who acts very irritable . A frustrated Dexter attacks him and is detained by the police . By the time he is released , Arthur is gone , but Dexter recovers the envelope of money . 
 Meanwhile , Debra ( Jennifer Carpenter ) continues looking into the mysterious woman who had a secret affair with her and Dexter 's father , Harry ( James Remar ) . An old informant of Harry takes Debra to the woman 's house , which Debra recognizes as the house of Brian Moser . Moser was the Ice Truck Killer , the main villain from the first season who was engaged to Debra , then tried to kill her . The informant reveals the woman 's name was Laura Moser ( Sage Kirkpatrick ) , and while researching her , Debra learns Laura was Dexter 's mother , and that the Ice Truck Killer was Dexter 's brother . The police discovered the real identity of Trinity , and at Arthur 's house , Debra confronts Dexter , who feigns surprise and fears Debra is close to realizing his secret life as a serial killer . Instead , Debra says she believes the Ice Truck Killer used her to get to him , and she reasserts how much she loves her foster brother . 
 Inspired partially by Debra , and partially by his desire to be a better family man than Arthur , Dexter considers giving up killing people . After convincing his wife Rita ( Julie Benz ) to go safely out of town , Dexter searches for Arthur , eventually tracking him down and capturing him . Dexter insists he is not like Arthur , but Arthur insists they are both the same . Right before he is killed with a framing hammer , Arthur tells Dexter " It 's already over . " Disposing of Arthur 's body on his boat afterwards , Dexter comes to realize that his love for his family is starting to outweigh his need to kill , and he begins to hope for a future without killing . But upon returning home , he finds a message from Rita that she came home from the airport because she forgot her identification . Dexter returns her phone call , only to find that Rita 's cell phone and bags are in the house . Dexter hears Harrison crying in the bathroom and finds Rita dead in the bathtub . Harrison sits in a pool of Rita 's blood on the bathroom floor , in the same manner that Dexter was left in a pool of his mother 's blood during his youth , which gave Dexter his murderous tendencies . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Getaway " , the Dexter fourth season finale , was directed by Steve Shill . The teleplay was written by Wendy West and Melissa Rosenberg , based on a story by Rosenberg and Scott Reynolds . It was the final episode helmed by show runner and executive producer Clyde Phillips before his departure from the show to spend more time with his family . Filming on " The Getaway " ended on October 13 , 2009 , and the episode was originally aired on Showtime on December 13 . " The Getaway " marked the conclusion of a season @-@ long plotline regarding the Trinity Killer , which featured John Lithgow as a serial killer and the primary antagonist of the fourth season . The episode also included the death of Rita Morgan , who had been a regular character since the beginning of the series . Although her death is off @-@ screen and the killer is not specifically identified , it is strongly suggested she was killed by Arthur Mitchell , which Lithgow himself confirmed to be true in an interview that aired on Showtime immediately after the episode was originally broadcast . Clyde Phillips said the ramifications " The Getaway " would have on the future of the series had not yet been determined , as brainstorming for the fifth season was not set to begin until February 2010 . 
 Rita 's death was alluded to by Dexter producers , who told media outlets " The Getaway " included a series @-@ changing twist , leading to widespread speculation about the possibility of a character death , or the possibility of Debra Morgan learning the truth about her brother 's homicidal nature . Extra security precautions were taken to prevent the finale 's secrets from becoming exposed . Network staff members were forced to sign non @-@ disclosure agreements , and decoy scripts were drafted and disseminated to protect the twist ending . In one of the fake alternate endings , Dexter learned on the news about a child murderer escaping from prison , and the episode would end with Dexter trying to decide whether to join Rita on vacation or go after the escaped killer . Nobody but essential cast and staff were allowed on the set during filming of the episode , and the scripts and DVDs of the episode were watermarked before they were taken off the set . 
 Phillips claimed the Dexter staff did not know how the finale would conclude until late in the season , but Phillips said Rita 's death began to feel inevitable as the story evolved . However , Julie Benz said she had been told John Lithgow knew about it from the beginning of the season . Phillips said the staff felt obligated to do more than simply kill the Trinity Killer in the final episode , especially because he felt the death of the third season antagonist ( played by Jimmy Smits ) was not handled " as well as we could have " . The writers discussed the idea of having Debra find out about Dexter 's secret life , but it was decided they could not anticipate how drastically the series would be changed by that revelation . Benz heard rumors from David Zayas that her character would be killed in the episode , but she was not officially notified until late September , when the producers held a meeting with her the day before the season finale script was distributed to the cast . She said , " It was a tough meeting . In a bizarre way , it felt like a scene from Defending Your Life . " Benz was unhappy about the news but she handled it professionally . Benz described the death scene as " very poetic " . 
 Executive Producer Sara Colleton said it was difficult to kill off a long @-@ standing character , but they felt " this is where Dexter needed to be taken " . She also felt the motives for Arthur killing Rita were deliberately made to be open to various interpretations , including that Arthur may have killed her " in a bizarre way to trigger Dexter to deal with who he really is " . When asked whether Arthur told Rita about Dexter 's secret life before killing her , Phillips said the answer had not been determined because the fifth season was not yet planned , but he added , " I would think that he did not tell her " . Michael C. Hall called the ending a " really bold stroke " that would reset the stage of the series just as the Dexter Morgan character began to feel he could live with an emotional connection to his wife and family . Hall also said of the ending , " More than anything I felt for the audience . I think this is the kind of thing that 's really going to tie people in knots . " 
 Lithgow called Rita 's death a " fantastic choice " , which he said shed a completely different light on the final scene between Dexter and Arthur , which appears to be somewhat sympathetic before the audience learned what Arthur had done . Lithgow said he knew that Arthur would be killed from the very beginning of the season . He said he particularly enjoyed working with Michael C. Hall in " The Getaway " , and particularly cited the opening scene in the police station , where he said Hall was " so great at working out the rhythms and finding the real meaning " of the moment where Dexter realizes Arthur has the advantage over him . Lithgow also said he enjoyed their final scene together , including the moment where he realized his daughter had committed suicide : " It 's very unusual for a character that despicable to have a moment like that , a moment of such pain . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Getaway " broke several records for the Showtime cable network . The finale episode was seen by 2 @.@ 6 million households , according to Nielsen ratings , making it the most @-@ watched original series episode in the network 's history . This rating surpassed the record that had been broken just a week prior by the Dexter episode , Hello , Dexter Morgan , which was seen by 2 @.@ 1 million households . The pair of Dexter episodes were the most watched Showtime telecast since the October 23 , 1999 broadcast of a boxing match between Mike Tyson and Orlin Norris . " The Getaway " was seen by 54 percent more viewers than the third season finale , " Do You Take Dexter Morgan ? " , which aired on December 14 , 2008 . The high ratings for " The Getaway " gave a boost to the third season finale of Californication , which aired immediately after the Dexter season finale . The Californication episode , Mia <unk> , was seen by 1 @.@ 1 million households , the highest ever viewership for the series . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim and has been cited by many critics as one of the best in the series , with several commentators calling the twist ending shocking , unexpected and likely to change the direction of the entire series . Entertainment Weekly television writer Ken Tucker praised the twist of the episode , which he said " sent the series spinning into a whole new direction for next season " . Tucker praised the Dexter writing staff , " for maintaining the suspense while creating a whole new world within the Dexter world : the awful universe of Trinity and his own trapped family . " Bill Harris of the Toronto Sun said the episode was good before the final scene , but that the twist shed a whole different light on several scenes . Harris said of the twist , " It 's nice to know TV can still be that impactful , isn 't it ? But my God , what a stunner . " 
 IGN reviewer Matt Fowler gave the episode an " Incredible " rating of 9 @.@ 6 / 10 , saying that : " I 'm sure we all loved Dexter 's final moments with Arthur , down in the toy train bomb shelter , but now looking back at the scene , knowing the final moments of the episode , it 's filled with so many more eerie easter eggs . Something was definitely up when Arthur said , " It 's already over . " We all thought so because we 've heard him say those words before . We also saw Dexter take a beat after the line , confused about its meaning . We could have chalked it up to the fact that Arthur was accepting his own death , but Dexter 's furrowed brow let us know that something more sinister was in play here . Of course , the real bitch here is that Dexter , having dispatched of Trinity officially , now can 't go back and do it with the spirit of vengeance . The scene stands quite beautifully on its own , but Dexter would certainly have not given Arthur an empathetic send off if he knew what that monster had done . We can all point fingers at certain missteps that Dexter took throughout the entire season - mistakes that led to Rita 's demise - but when you take it in as a whole it 's a rather satisfying and cleverly constructed story that actually made us all buy and believe , by the end , that Dexter truly wanted to be rid of his murderous spirit . His stubborn need to kill Trinity himself wound up circumventing the entire justice system , which would have wound up catching Arthur based solely on Deb 's tenacity and expert detective work . " Also , IGN listed Arthur Mitchell as 2nd on a list of Dexter 's Top 10 Kills saying that " This was the murder that America was clamoring for . And it was <unk> ' great . " In his review of the entire fourth season , Fowler , giving the season an " Incredible " rating of 9 @.@ 5 , said of the finale that " It all just came off as a ton of creepy , guilty fun . I would bet that when we all saw the final scene of the season finale that we , simply due to the time we 've spent the characters over four years , felt a ton of emotions that we might not have even known were there . " 
 E ! writer Kristin Dos Santos called the ending " horrifying " , and said of Rita , " This death just might go down as one of the most shocking deaths ever on television . " Claire Zulkey said that the twist ending was intense , and the teleplay was woven to feature several moments that had led him to suspect different conclusions . He also praised what he expected to be a " re @-@ set " of the series with Rita 's death . Marcia White of The Express @-@ Times declared Dexter " one of the best cable dramas on TV " , and called the final scene between Dexter and Arthur particularly touching . Mark Dawidziak of The Plain Dealer said the episode was shocking and suspenseful , and called Dexter " a series that leaves you guessing as the psychological ambiguities run deeper and darker " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The director of " The Getaway " , Steve Shill , won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for this episode . In addition , Matthew V. Colonna was nominated for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series . 
 = Neverwinter Nights 2 : Mysteries of Westgate = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 : Mysteries of Westgate ( NWN2 : <unk> ) is an expansion pack for the role @-@ playing video game Neverwinter Nights 2 . It was developed by Ossian Studios and published by Atari on April 29 , 2009 . The player creates a character and controls it , along with a group of three pre @-@ designed companions , journeying through the game world . The gameplay is very similar to that of the base game . Mysteries of Westgate also includes new monsters , music , and other tools , which can be used by players to create their own Neverwinter Nights 2 levels . 
 The game takes place in the Forgotten Realms world , a Dungeons & Dragons campaign setting , in the area of Westgate . The player creates a character at the start of the game who finds a cursed mask belonging to the " Night Masks " , a thieves ' guild at war with two other organizations . The player chooses which of these other organizations to side with , and embarks on a quest to lift the mask 's curse . 
 Mysteries of Westgate was made after Ossian Studios ' successful work on the 2006 expansion pack Darkness over Daggerford . The game 's release was delayed to April 2009 , despite its completion in September 2007 , because of digital rights management issues and coordination difficulties among the three companies involved . Mysteries of Westgate met with mixed reviews ; the game 's plot and small amount of spoken dialogue were criticized by reviewers , while its music and low price for overall content were praised . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mysteries of Westgate is a role @-@ playing video game that is based on the fantasy role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons , and uses the d20 System rules , which are based on determining the results of most tasks , such as attacks , by performing the equivalent of rolling a 20 @-@ sided die . The player begins the game by either importing their character from Neverwinter Nights 2 or creating a new one that starts at character level 8 . Each character has a race ( such as human or elf ) and a class ( such as fighter or wizard ) , which determine the character 's main abilities . Mysteries of Westgate has gameplay similar to the original Neverwinter Nights 2 and uses the same systems for gameplay elements , such as character levels , combat , and magic . The gameplay takes place primarily from an overhead perspective in a three @-@ dimensional environment . The player moves and commands characters with the mouse . 
 The game 's designers estimate that Mysteries of Westgate contains over 15 hours of gameplay , part of which is provided by pursuing optional side quests unrelated to the main plot . Mysteries of Westgate 's campaign features content that does not appear in Neverwinter Nights 2 or its other expansions , including four new monsters ( such as the <unk> and sea serpent @-@ like <unk> ) , a set of " sewer " terrain tiles , and new music , all of which is available to players for use in the creation of custom levels . The pack includes over one hundred magic items , equipment which the character can use during the adventure . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The storyline of Mysteries of Westgate is unrelated to Neverwinter Nights 2 or its other expansions . It begins with the player character ( PC ) finding a cursed mask in a dungeon , which causes the PC to have nightmares , and which cannot be discarded . The player soon discovers that the mask belongs to a group of thieves known as the Night Masks of Westgate . After traveling to Westgate , a port city along the Dragon Coast , the PC discovers that the Night Masks are involved in a guild war with a rival group of thieves known as the Ebon Claws . The temple of <unk> is also fighting the Night Masks , and the PC is faced with the choice of joining the temple or the Ebon Claws . The PC is joined by three companions near the start of the game : the rogue <unk> , a former Night Mask ; <unk> , a fallen paladin ; and Charissa , a cleric of Tyr . All three travel with the PC for most of the adventure . 
 The party then undertakes a number of quests , which vary depending on which faction the PC sides with . As the quests are completed , more is revealed about the cursed mask and how to get rid of it . The party eventually learns that the Night Masks are led by vampires , and additional clues lead them to the vampires ' catacombs . After defeating the vampire <unk> , the PC travels through a portal to reach the chamber of the Night Masks ' leader , Orbakh . Orbakh gives the PC the choice to either become a vampire or keep the cursed mask . 
 The game 's ending depends on the PC 's choice . If the PC chooses to become a vampire , former allies turn against the PC . Once they are defeated , Orbakh sends the PC to destroy the Ebon Claws . If the PC instead decides to keep the mask , Orbakh attacks ; after his defeat , the leader of the Ebon Claws arrives with a group of followers and attacks the party . After the party is victorious , they kill the last of the Night Masks and free the player character from the cursed mask . 
 = = Development = = 
 Soon after the release of Darkness over Daggerford , Ossian Studios ' previous game , discussion began over the possibility of the company creating another expansion for Neverwinter Nights 2 . Ossian officially proposed the game to Atari and Wizards of the Coast , the owners of the Dungeons & Dragons license , in the fall of 2006 , with production beginning in January 2007 . When asked about why the Dungeons & Dragons setting appealed to the company , Ossian Studios CEO Alan Miranda said , " All of our team members are [ Dungeons and Dragons ] fans , so developing a [ Neverwinter Nights 2 ] game seemed like a great opportunity . " 
 During the game 's early development stages , it was set in the Forgotten Realms nation of Rashemen . The location was changed because Obsidian Studios ' Neverwinter Nights 2 : Mask of the Betrayer was to take place in the same area . At lead designer Luke Scull 's suggestion , Westgate became the new setting for the game . Ossian wanted the game 's setting to differentiate itself from both Neverwinter Nights and the Baldur 's Gate series of games . They found Westgate , situated in another area of the Forgotten Realms setting , to be ideal . Miranda compared Westgate to a city @-@ sized version of Star Wars 's Mos Eisley Cantina ; a " melting pot " of creatures from everywhere in the setting . Ossian said they decided to make Mysteries of Westgate exclusively single @-@ player in order to improve the game experience . 
 David John , who had also worked on expansion packs for the original Neverwinter Nights , composed the score for Mysteries of Westgate , which took several months . In an interview soon after the game 's release , Scull said " Some of [ the game 's ] tracks are so good , I actually listen to them alongside my usual eclectic mix . " Mysteries of Westgate 's voice acting was recorded in Edmonton , Canada , with over 12 @,@ 000 words of new voice @-@ over material . The cast included some of the same people who previously acted in Neverwinter Nights : Hordes of the Underdark and other BioWare games . Brian Dunn and Brian Watson , both of whom had also worked on Darkness over Daggerford , created the game 's artwork and graphics . 
 Development of Mysteries of Westgate ended in September 2007 , but Atari delayed the pack 's release , because the digital rights management they wanted to use was not ready . The delay was also caused by coordination problems between Ossian , Obsidian , and Atari . The game was officially announced on October 22 , 2007 , with an estimated release date of " fall 2007 " . In May 2008 , IGN reported that the game was scheduled for release that June , but it was further delayed , finally being released on April 29 , 2009 . Development of Mysteries of Westgate continued during the delays , to ensure the game 's compatibility with the expansions and patches for Neverwinter Nights 2 that were released after the game 's completion . Scull said , " Kevin Smith , our Lead Technical Designer ... had to bug fix and create new builds of the game with each [ patch and expansion ] . " 
 When IGN 's Steve Butts asked Miranda why the game was made available only through download , he replied , " From a financial perspective , digital distribution makes a lot of sense . It allows us to sell the Adventure Pack at a lower price point while still providing players with the same high quality gameplay and content that they 've come to expect from NWN2 products . " . Some of the game 's voice @-@ overs , monsters , music , and objects were released to the Neverwinter Nights 2 community for free , for use in building custom adventures , without needing to purchase the game itself . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of Mysteries of Westgate were mixed . 1UP.com 's Jason Wilson said that the game 's plot is " an intriguing tale , and even after finishing the game , a number of encounters and plot points ring in my head ... but the story 's poor stitching distracts from its arc — I felt like a great hand ... was pushing me through the plot , and the tale felt a bit muddled toward the end . " Brett Todd of GameSpot called the plot " rough around the edges " , while GameZone reviewer Michael Lafferty said , " The game may have a disjointed storyline , but there are moments where humor shines through , and the game does take a few interesting plot twists . And the exploration of the city zones , the underground areas where the trolls abound , hold that sense of joyful discovery that make an RPG worth playing . " Numerous reviewers mentioned that the impact of the mask which drives the story is minimal , having little effect on the actual gameplay . Lafferty said the side quests were not necessarily optional , as they were often a source of additional gold , and a certain point in the game 's plot required a substantial sum of it to proceed . GamesRadar 's Rich McCormick praised the game 's storyline and main quest as some of its best points . In a review for GameStar , Christian Schmidt thought that the game 's appearance and humor were poor , but recommended it because of its strong storyline . 
 Todd found the pack 's difficulty to be " wildly careening " and stated , " Some battles are amazingly easy . You can soar through many scraps in moments , with your party carving up the opposition before you can tell if you 're fighting a mummy or a zombie . However , others are absolutely brutal ... There are more than a couple of moments in the game in which your party is ambushed by enemy spellcasters that rip you to pieces before you can even think about a proper response . " He praised the game 's music as blending in seamlessly with that of the original game , but criticized it for having a minimal amount of voice acting , with sequences of dialogue that begin with audio and transition into text . Steve Butts commented on this , saying , " the dialogue here really needs some work ... you 'll even be treated to some truly tortured sentences . ' Wait till you see how deep into the backside of evil I insert my boot in the name of justice ! ' is probably my favorite . It 's too bad there 's not more voice acting in the game , because hearing someone speak lines like that out loud may have given the developers an opportunity to edit some of the worst offenders . " 
 As a result of Mysteries of Westgate 's 2007 completion and 2009 release , it did not feature the improvements present in the two previous Neverwinter Nights 2 expansion packs , and received criticism because of this . Todd stated that the game lacks the artistic improvements of Mask of the Betrayer and Storm of Zehir , a sentiment echoed by Lafferty 's review . However , Butts stated that " Westgate delivers enough engaging content that the absence of all the latest improvements isn 't " too agonizing . " Several reviews noted that the fifteen hours of story and the new objects in the adventure pack make the expansion worth its US $ 9 @.@ 99 cost . 
 = UBS = 
 UBS AG is a Swiss global financial services company , incorporated in the Canton of Zurich , and co @-@ headquartered in Zurich and Basel . The company provides wealth management , asset management , and investment banking services for private , corporate , and institutional clients worldwide , and is generally considered to be a bulge bracket bank . In Switzerland , these services are also offered to retail clients . The name UBS was originally an abbreviation for the Union Bank of Switzerland , but it ceased to be a representational abbreviation after the bank 's merger with Swiss Bank Corporation in 1998 . The company traces its origins to 1856 , when the earliest of its predecessor banks was founded . 
 UBS is considered the world 's largest manager of private wealth assets , with over CHF 2 @.@ 2 trillion in invested assets , and remains a leading provider of retail banking and commercial banking services in Switzerland . In 2014 , UBS ' assets under management ( <unk> ) amounted to US $ 1 @,@ 966 @.@ 9 billion , representing a 15 @.@ 4 % increase in <unk> compared to the equivalent data of 2013 . It is the biggest bank in Switzerland , operating in more than 50 countries with about 60 @,@ 000 employees around the world , as of 2014 . 
 In comparison to other European banks , UBS suffered among the largest losses during the subprime mortgage crisis , and the bank was required to raise large amounts of outside capital . In 2007 , the bank received a US $ 9 @.@ 7 billion capital injection from the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation ( currently GIC Private Limited effective from July 2013 ) , which remains one of the bank 's largest shareholders . The bank also received capital from the Swiss government , further complemented by a series of equity offerings in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 . 
 = = Corporate structure = = 
 UBS is a joint @-@ stock company ( " Aktiengesellschaft " ) pursuant to Swiss laws . Its shares are listed at the SIX Swiss Exchange , and the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) . As of February 2015 , UBS is present in all major financial centers worldwide , having offices in more than 50 countries , with about 35 % of its approx . 60 @,@ 000 employees working in the Americas , 36 % in Switzerland , 17 % in Europe , the Middle East and Africa and 12 % in the Asia Pacific region . 
 The bank has its major presence in the United States . Its American headquarters for investment banking are located in New York City , for private wealth management in Weehawken , New Jersey and its sales & trading headquarters can be found in Stamford , Connecticut . Company 's global business groups are ( i ) wealth management , ( ii ) investment banking and ( iii ) asset management . Additionally , UBS is the leading provider of retail banking and commercial banking services in Switzerland , as established already in 2009 . Overall invested assets are CHF 2 @.@ 689 trillion , shareholders ' equity is CHF 55 @.@ 313 billion and market capitalization is CHF 75 @.@ 147 billion by the end of 2015 . 
 In November 2014 , the shares in UBS Group AG were listed and started trading as a new holding company on the NYSE and SIX Swiss Exchange . Upon application and with the effect as of 14 January 2015 , the shares of the USB AG , the subsidiary of the UBS Group AG , were delisted from the NYSE . 
 UBS ' structure includes six divisions in total : 
 Starting already on 9 June 2003 , all UBS business groups , including UBS Paine Webber and UBS Warburg , were rebranded under the UBS moniker following company 's start of operations as a unified global entity . 
 = = = UBS Investment Bank = = = 
 UBS Investment Bank provides services covering securities , other financial products , and research in equities , rates , credit , foreign exchange , precious metals and derivatives . 
 As of the end of 2015 , the personnel employed at UBS Investment Bank totalled to 5 @,@ 243 presented in over 35 countries ( with principal offices in Hong Kong , London , New York , Singapore , Sydney , Tokyo and Zurich ) . This business division also advises and provides access to capital markets for corporate and institutional clients , governments , financial intermediaries , alternative asset managers , and private investors . UBS Investment Bank was formerly known as UBS Warburg and as Warburg Dillon Read , before the merger of Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation ( SBC ) . 
 Within the UBS Investment Bank division , the Investment Banking Department ( IBD ) provides a range of advisory and underwriting services including mergers and acquisitions , restructuring , equity offerings , investment grade and high yield debt offerings , leveraged finance and leveraged loan structuring , and the private placement of equity , debt , and derivatives . 
 The Sales & Trading division comprises equities ( brokering , dealing , market making and engaging in proprietary trading in equities , equity @-@ related products , equity derivatives , and structured products ) and FX , Rates and Credit ( FRC ) ( brokering , dealing , market making and engaging in proprietary trading in interest rate products , credit products , mortgage @-@ backed securities , leveraged loans , investment grade and high @-@ yield debt , currencies , structured products , and derivative products ) . 
 Since the early 2000s , UBS Investment Bank has been among the top fee @-@ generating investment banks globally . In 2010 , UBS ranked No.5 globally in mergers & acquisitions advisory , No.5 globally in debt capital markets bookrunning , No.5 globally in follow @-@ on equity offerings , No.3 in European follow @-@ on equity offerings , No.1 in Asia M & A advisory , No.2 in Asian equity capital markets bookrunning , No.2 in Asian follow @-@ on equity offerings , No.2 in Canadian M & A advisory , No.3 in Middle Eastern & African mergers & acquisitions advisory , and No.2 in Middle Eastern & African equity capital markets bookrunning . UBS also ranked No.1 on the 2010 M & A league tables in Australia , ahead of Macquarie Bank and Goldman Sachs . 
 = = = UBS Asset Management = = = 
 UBS Asset Management offers equity , fixed income , currency , hedge fund , real estate , infrastructure and private equity investment capabilities that can also be combined in multi @-@ asset strategies . 
 The 1998 UBS @-@ SBC merger and subsequent restructuring resulted in the combination of three major asset management operations : UBS Asset Management , Phillips & Drew ( owned by Union Bank of Switzerland ) , and Brinson Partners ( owned by SBC ) . The investment teams were merged in 2000 and in 2002 the brands were consolidated to become UBS Global Asset Management . 
 At the end of 2015 , UBS Asset Management was responsible for CHF 650 billion of invested assets and assets under administration were CHF 407 billion . With around 2 @,@ 300 employees in 24 countries , UBS Asset Management is the largest mutual fund manager in Switzerland , a leading fund house in Europe , and one of the largest hedge funds and real estate investment managers in the world . It has main offices in Chicago , Frankfurt , Hartford , Hong Kong , London , New York , Paris , Singapore , Sydney , Tokyo , and Zürich . 
 = = = UBS Wealth Management ( & Swiss Bank ) = = = 
 UBS 's wealth management division offers high @-@ net @-@ worth individuals around the world ( with the exception of those served by the division of Wealth Management Americas ) a range of advisory and investment products and services . As of the end of 2014 , UBS Wealth Management 's invested assets totaled CHF 947 billion . 
 More than 60 % of total invested assets in UBS Wealth Management belong to individuals with a net @-@ worth of CHF 10 million or more . Of the remaining 40 % of total invested assets , 30 % of the total belong to individuals with net @-@ worth between CHF 1 million and CHF 10 million and the last 10 % of total assets belong to individuals with a net @-@ worth of less than CHF 1 million . 
 UBS offers brokerage services and products as well as asset management and other investment advisory and portfolio management products and services . Additionally , UBS provides a broad range of securities and savings products that are supported by the firm 's underwriting and research activities as well as order execution and clearing services for transactions originated by individual investors . 
 The business is further divided geographically with separate businesses focused on the U.S. and other international markets . Two @-@ thirds of the total invested assets come from Europe and Switzerland with the final one @-@ third coming mainly from the Asia @-@ Pacific region . 
 With its headquarters in Switzerland , UBS Wealth Management is present in nearly 50 countries with approximately 230 offices ( 100 of which are in Switzerland ) . As of the end of 2014 , around 16 @,@ 700 people worldwide were employed by UBS Wealth Management . UBS Wealth Management in the U.S. is an outgrowth of the former Paine Webber brokerage business . The business was initially renamed UBS Paine Webber in March 2001 after it was acquired by UBS . The subsidiary was again renamed UBS Wealth Management USA in June 2003 . 
 In Switzerland , UBS Swiss Bank provides a complete set of retail banking services that includes checking , savings , credit cards , and mortgage products for individuals . They offer cash management and commercial banking services for small businesses and corporate clients as well . 
 = = = UBS Retail & Corporate = = = 
 UBS 's Retail & Corporate division delivers financial products and services to retail , corporate and institutional clients in Switzerland . It also provides stable and substantial profits for the Group and revenues opportunities for businesses within the bank . UBS maintains a leading position in the retail and corporate loan market in Switzerland ; in fact , it serves one in three pension funds , more than 85 % of the 1 @,@ 000 largest Swiss corporations and 85 % of banks that resides within the nation . In 2014 , the international financial magazine Euromoney named UBS " Best Domestic Cash Manager Switzerland " . At the end of 2014 , its lending portfolio reached CHF 137 billion . The 73 % of this sum was secured by residential property and the 15 % by commercial and industrial properties . 
 The products that this UBS division offers range from cash accounts , payments , savings and retirement solutions to investment fund products , residential mortgages and advisory services . This business division constitutes a central building block of UBS 's universal bank delivery model in Switzerland and it supports other divisions , such as Investment Bank , by referring clients to them and by assisting them to build their wealth to a level at which they can ben transferred to UBS Wealth Management . 
 The retail and corporate distribution network comprises not only customer service centers , but 1 @,@ 250 teller machines and self @-@ service terminals , as well as digital banking services . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 On a global scale , UBS competes with the large global investment banks , and it is regularly compared against its fellow Swiss banking giant , Credit Suisse . In Switzerland , UBS competes with a number of cantonal banks , such as Zürcher <unk> and other cantonal banks , as well as <unk> , PostFinance , and <unk> banks . 
 = = = UBS Young Professional Programs = = = 
 UBS is one of the major providers of young professional training in Switzerland , offering various programs , depending on applicants ' level of education . After graduation , over 70 % are permanently employed . Aside from the Apprenticeship and All @-@ round Trainee Program offered in Switzerland , UBS offers Internship program and the Graduate Training Programs ( GTP ) globally . The GTP is an 18 @-@ month development program for graduates with bachelor 's degree and above , which is specifically built around the different business groups of UBS . It consists of on @-@ the @-@ job training ( <unk> ) , tailored education and networking events . 
 = = History = = 
 UBS , as it exists today , is the result of a complex history representing a merger product of the Union Bank of Switzerland and the Swiss Bank Corporation in June 1998 ( SBC ) . The official founding date of the bank is April 1862 , the year when its nucleus Bank in Winterthur was founded . 
 Although the merged company 's new name was originally supposed to be the " United Bank of Switzerland , " the officials opted to call it simply UBS because of a name clash with the separate Swiss company United Bank Switzerland – a part of the United Bank Limited 's Swiss subsidiary . Therefore , UBS is no longer an acronym but is the company 's brand . Its logo of three keys , carried over from SBC , stands for the company 's values of confidence , security , and discretion . 
 UBS also comprises a number of well @-@ known securities firms that have been acquired by the bank and its predecessors . Among the bank 's most notable constituent parts are Paine Webber , Dillon , Read & Co . , Kidder , Peabody & Co . , Phillips & Drew , S. G. Warburg & Co . , Blyth , Eastman , Dillon & Co . , Jackson & Curtis , and Union Securities , among others . 
 = = = Swiss Bank Corporation = = = 
 = = = = Origins and early years ( 1854 – 1945 ) = = = = 
 UBS , through Swiss Bank Corporation , traces its history to 1854 when six private banking firms in Basel , Switzerland pooled their resources to form the Bankverein , a consortium that acted as an underwriting syndicate for its member banks . In 1871 , the Bankverein coordinated with the German Frankfurter Bankverein to form the Basler Bankverein , a joint @-@ stock company replacing the original Bankverein consortium . After the new bank started with an initial commitment of CHF 30 million and CHF 6 million of share capital , it soon experienced growing pains when heavy losses in Germany caused it to suspend its dividend until 1879 . Following the years 1885 and 1886 , when the bank merged with the Zürcher Bankverein and acquired the Basler Depositenbank and the Schweizerische Unionbank , it changed its name to Schweizerischer Bankverein . The English name of the bank was originally Swiss Bankverein , but was changed to Swiss Bank Corporation ( SBC ) in 1917 . 
 SBC subsequently experienced a period of growth , which was only interrupted by the onset of World War I , in which the bank lost investments in a number of large industrial companies . By the end of 1918 , the bank had recovered and surpassed CHF 1 billion in total assets and grew to 2 @,@ 000 employees by 1920 . The impact of the stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression was severe , particularly as the Swiss franc suffered major devaluation in 1936 . The bank saw its assets fall from a 1929 peak of CHF 1 @.@ 6 billion to its 1918 levels of CHF 1 billion by 1936 . 
 In 1937 , SBC adopted its three @-@ keys logo , designed by <unk> Honegger @-@ Lavater , symbolizing confidence , security , and discretion , which remains an integral part in the current @-@ day logo of UBS . 
 On the eve of World War II in 1939 , SBC , like other Swiss banks , was the recipient of large influxes of foreign funds for safekeeping . Just prior to the outbreak of the war , SBC made the timely decision to open an office in New York City . The office , located in the Equitable Building , was able to begin operations a few weeks after the outbreak of the war and was intended as a safe place to store assets in the case of an invasion . During the war , the banks ' traditional business fell off and the Swiss government became their largest client . 
 = = = = Post @-@ war years ( 1945 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 In 1945 , SBC acquired the Basler Handelsbank ( Commercial Bank of Basel ) , which was one of the largest banks in Switzerland , but became insolvent by the end of the war . SBC remained among the Swiss government 's leading underwriters of debt in the post @-@ war years . SBC , which had entered the 1950s with 31 branch offices in Switzerland and three abroad , more than doubled its assets from the end of the war to CHF 4 billion by the end of the 1950s and doubled assets again in the mid @-@ 1960s , exceeding CHF 10 billion by 1965 . 
 In 1961 , SBC acquired Banque Populaire <unk> , based in Sion , Switzerland and the Banque Populaire de Sierre . The bank opened a full branch office in Tokyo in 1970 . 
 In 1992 , SBC acquired O 'Connor & Associates , a Chicago @-@ based options trading firm and the largest market maker in the financial options exchanges in the U.S. O 'Connor was combined with SBC 's money market , capital market , and currency market activities to form a globally integrated capital markets and treasury operation . 
 In 1994 , SBC acquired Brinson Partners , an asset management firm focused on providing access for U.S. institutions to global markets , for US $ 750 million . Following the acquisition , founder Gary P. Brinson ran SBC 's asset management business and later when SBC merged with UBS was named chief investment officer of UBS Global Asset Management . 
 The acquisition of S.G. Warburg & Co . , a leading British investment banking firm , in 1995 for the price of US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion signified a major push into investment banking . S.G. Warburg & Co. had established a reputation as a daring merchant bank that grew to be one of the most respected investment banks in London . However , a Warburg expansion into the U.S. had turned out flawed and costly , and talks in 1994 with Morgan Stanley about a merger had collapsed . SBC merged the firm with its own existing investment banking unit to create SBC Warburg . 
 Two years later , in 1997 , SBC paid US $ 600 million to acquire Dillon , Read & Co . , a U.S. bulge bracket investment bank . 
 Dillon , Read & Co . , which traced its roots to the 1830s was among the powerhouse firms on Wall Street in the 1920s and 1930s , and by the 1990s had a particularly strong mergers and acquisitions advisory group . Dillon Read had been in negotiations to sell itself to ING , which owned 25 % of the firm already , but Dillon Read partners balked at ING 's integration plans . 
 After its acquisition by SBC , Dillon Read was merged with SBC @-@ Warburg to create SBC @-@ Warburg Dillon Read . Following SBC 's later merger with Union Bank of Switzerland , the SBC part was dropped from the name ; in 2000 when the new UBS got restructured the Dillon Read name was dropped , although it was brought back in 2005 as Dillon Read Capital Management , UBS 's ill @-@ fated hedge fund operations . 
 = = = Union Bank of Switzerland = = = 
 = = = = Origins and early years ( 1862 – 1945 ) = = = = 
 The Union Bank of Switzerland emerged in 1912 when the Bank in Winterthur fused with the Toggenburger Bank . The Bank in Winterthur , founded in 1862 with an initial share capital of CHF 5 million , focused on providing financing for industry and other companies , and had profited considerably from its close railroad connections and large warehousing facilities during the American Civil War when cotton prices rose dramatically . The Toggenburger Bank was founded in 1863 with an initial share capital of CHF 1 @.@ 5 million , and specialized as a savings and mortgage bank for individual customers , maintaining a branch office network in eastern Switzerland . 
 The new company was initially traded under the English name Swiss Banking Association , but in 1921 it was changed to Union Bank of Switzerland ( UBS ) to mirror its French name , Union de Banques Suisses . In German , the bank was known as the Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft ( SBG ) . 
 The combined bank had total assets of CHF 202 million and a total shareholders ' equity of CHF 46 million . In 1917 , UBS completed the construction of a new headquarters in Zurich on <unk> , considered to be the Wall Street of Switzerland . By 1923 , offices were established throughout Switzerland . Although the bank suffered in the aftermath of World War I and the Great Depression , it was able to make several smaller acquisitions ; in 1937 it established Intrag AG , an asset management business responsible for investment trusts , ( i.e. mutual funds ) . 
 = = = = Activities in World War II = = = = 
 The activities of the Union Bank of Switzerland during World War II were not publicly known until decades after the war , when it was demonstrated that UBS likely took active roles in trading stolen gold , securities , and other assets during World War II . 
 The issue of " unclaimed property " of Holocaust victims became a major issue for UBS in the mid @-@ 1990s , and a series of revelations in 1997 brought the issue to the forefront of national attention in 1996 and 1997 . 
 UBS confirmed that a large number of accounts had gone unclaimed as a result of the bank 's policy of requiring death certificates from family members to claim the contents of the account . UBS 's handling of these revelations were largely criticized and the bank received significant negative attention in the U.S. 
 UBS came under significant pressure , particularly from American politicians , to compensate Holocaust survivors who were making claims against the bank . 
 In January 1997 , Christoph Meili , a night watchman at the Union Bank of Switzerland , found employees shredding archives compiled by a subsidiary that had extensive dealings with Nazi Germany . The shredding was in direct violation of a then @-@ recent Swiss law adopted in December 1996 protecting such material . UBS acknowledged that it had " made a deplorable mistake " , but an internal historian maintained that the destroyed archives were unrelated to the Holocaust . Criminal proceedings then began against the archivist for possible violation of a recent Federal Document Destruction decree and against Meili for possible violation of bank secrecy , which is a criminal offense in Switzerland . Both proceedings were discontinued by the District Attorney in September 1997 . 
 Meili was suspended from his job at the security company that served UBS , following a criminal investigation . Meili and his family left Switzerland for the United States where they were granted political asylum . 
 In 1997 , the World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks was launched to retrieve deposits made by victims of Nazi persecution during and prior to World War II , ultimately resulting in a settlement of US $ 1 @.@ 25 billion in August 1998 . 
 = = = = Post @-@ war years ( 1945 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 Shortly after the end of World War II , Union Bank of Switzerland completed the acquisition of the Eidgenössische Bank , a large Zürich @-@ based bank that became insolvent . As a result of the merger , Union Bank of Switzerland exceeded CHF 1 billion in assets and moved its operations to Zurich . UBS opened branches and acquired a series of banks in Switzerland in the following years , growing from 31 offices in 1950 to 81 offices by the early 1960s . 
 In 1960 , Union Bank of Switzerland acquired an 80 % stake in Argor SA , a Swiss precious metals refinery founded in 1951 in the canton of Ticino . In 1973 , the bank increased the stake to full 100 % ownership , though the ownership was ultimately sold between 1986 and 1999 to Argor @-@ Heraeus SA . UBS continues to issue gold bars via Argor @-@ Heraeus which is famous for the unique <unk> holographic technology it uses to provide enhanced protection against bank gold bar counterfeiting . 
 By 1962 , Union Bank of Switzerland reached CHF 6 @.@ 96 billion of assets , narrowly edging ahead of Swiss Bank Corporation to become the largest bank in Switzerland . The rapid growth was punctuated by the 1967 acquisition of Interhandel ( <unk> und <unk> AG , the corporate successor of I.G. Chemie ) , which made UBS one of the strongest banks in Europe . Interhandel had become cash @-@ rich when a dispute concerning GAF Materials Corporation , a subsidiary formerly known as General Aniline & Film and seized by the U.S. government during the war , was resolved in 1963 and the subsidiary was disposed of . 
 By the 1980s , Union Bank of Switzerland established a position as a leading European underwriter of <unk> . Following two major acquisitions in 1986 ( Phillips & Drew and Deutsche Länderbank ) , UBS made its first purchase in the United States in 1991 with Chase Investors Management Corporation , the asset management business of Chase Manhattan Bank . At the time of the acquisition , the business managed in excess of US $ 30 billion in assets . 
 Union Bank of Switzerland entered the 1990s as the largest and most conservative of the three large Swiss Banks . The bank 's investments had been in the conservative asset management and life insurance businesses ; further , 60 % of the bank 's profits came from its even more conservative Swiss banking operations . In 1993 , Credit Suisse outbid Union Bank of Switzerland for Switzerland 's Swiss Volksbank , the fifth largest bank in Switzerland which had run into financial difficulties in the early 1990s . The acquisition propelled Credit Suisse ahead of Union Bank of Switzerland as the largest bank in Switzerland for the first time . Prior to the merger with Swiss Bank Corporation , UBS purchased a group of smaller Swiss banks in 1994 including the Cantonal Bank of Appenzell @-@ Ausserrhoden in 1996 , and in 1997 Schröder , Münchmeyer , Hengst & Co. from Lloyds Bank was acquired to improve access to the German investment banking and private wealth management markets . 
 = = = Merger of Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation = = = 
 During the mid @-@ 1990s , Union Bank of Switzerland came under fire from dissident shareholders critical of its conservative management and lower return on equity . 
 Martin Ebner , through his investment trust , BK Vision , became the largest shareholder in Union Bank of Switzerland and attempted to force a major restructuring of the bank ’ s operations . Looking to take advantage of the situation , Credit Suisse approached Union Bank of Switzerland about a merger that would have created the second largest bank in the world in 1996 . Union Bank of Switzerland 's management and board unanimously rebuffed the proposed merger . Ebner , who supported the idea of a merger , led a shareholder revolt that resulted in the replacement of Union Bank of Switzerland 's chairman , Robert Studer with Mathis Cabiallavetta , one of the key architects of the merger with Swiss Bank Corporation . 
 On 8 December 1997 , Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation announced an all stock merger . At the time of the merger , Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation were the second and third largest banks in Switzerland , respectively . Discussions between the two banks had begun several months earlier , less than a year after rebuffing Credit Suisse 's merger overtures . 
 The merger resulted in the creation of UBS AG , a huge new bank with total assets of more than US $ 590 billion . 
 Also referred to as the " New UBS " to distinguish itself from the former Union Bank of Switzerland , the combined bank became the second largest in the world at the time , behind only the Bank of Tokyo @-@ Mitsubishi . Additionally , the merger pulled together the banks ' various asset management businesses to create the world 's largest money manager , with approximately US $ 910 billion in assets under management . The combined entity was originally to be called United Bank of Switzerland , but foreseeing a problem with United Bank Switzerland , opted for UBS . 
 The merger , which was billed as a merger of equals , resulted in the Union Bank of Switzerland 's shareholders receiving 60 % of the combined company and Swiss Bank 's shareholders receiving the remaining 40 % of the bank 's common shares . Union Bank of Switzerland 's Mathis Cabiallavetta became chairman of the new bank while Swiss Bank 's Marcel Ospel was named chief executive officer . 
 Nearly 80 % of the top management positions were filled by legacy Swiss Bank professionals . Prior to the merger , Swiss Bank Corporation was considered to be further along than Union Bank of Switzerland in developing its international investment banking business , particularly in the higher margin advisory businesses where Warburg Dillon Read was considered to be the more established platform . 
 Union Bank of Switzerland had a stronger retail and commercial banking business in Switzerland , while both banks had strong asset management capabilities . After the merger was completed , it was speculated that a series of losses suffered by UBS on its equity derivative positions in late 1997 was a contributing factor in pushing UBS management to consummate the merger . 
 = = = The failure of Long Term Capital Management ( LTCM ) = = = 
