 = = = = Battle of the Strait of Otranto = = = = 
 During the Battle of the Strait of Otranto on 15 May 1917 , Sankt Georg was deployed to support the three light cruisers commanded by Captain Miklós Horthy — Novara , Saida , and Helgoland — that had raided the Otranto Barrage in the southern Adriatic . After completing their attack on the Allied defenses , the three cruisers turned north before being engaged by British and Italian warships , including the British cruiser HMS Dartmouth . Horthy called for reinforcements , which led Sankt Georg to sortie , accompanied by two destroyers and four torpedo boats . The Austro @-@ Hungarians hoped that Sankt Georg might cut off the weaker Allied cruisers and destroy them . 
 While Sankt Georg was steaming to join the battle , Novara was hit by shells from Dartmouth that damaged her boilers , significantly reducing her speed . She soon broke down but at the same time , shortly after 11 : 00 , most of the Allied warships broke off the engagement , having spotted smoke on the horizon from Austro @-@ Hungarian reinforcements . By that time , Sankt Georg was still about 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) away . While Dartmouth and the other Allied ships were withdrawing , several Italian destroyers closed to attack the stricken Novara and her sister ships . Heavy Austro @-@ Hungarian fire drove them off and by 12 : 07 they had retreated with the rest of the Anglo @-@ Italian ships . Sankt Georg arrived and Saida took Novara under tow for the voyage back to port . The four cruisers assembled in line @-@ ahead formation , with Sankt Georg the last vessel in the line , to cover the other three ships . Later in the afternoon , the old coastal defense ship Budapest and three more torpedo boats joined the ships to strengthen the escort . 
 = = = = Cattaro Mutiny = = = = 
 By early 1918 , the long periods of inactivity had begun to wear on the crews of several warships at Cattaro , including Sankt Georg . At this time , Sankt Georg was the flagship of the Cruiser Flotilla , commanded by Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Alexander Hansa . On 1 February , the Cattaro Mutiny broke out , starting aboard Sankt Georg . An enlisted man shot the ship 's commander in the head , badly injuring him , when mutineers seized control of the ship . They then rapidly gained control of Kaiser Karl VI and most of the other major warships in the harbor . There was some resistance to the mutiny by crewmembers ; the wireless operators aboard Sankt Georg prevented a message announcing the mutiny from being sent to the rest of the fleet and the crews of the more active vessels tended to oppose the rebellion . A tense stand @-@ off began between the rebel and loyalist ships in the harbor : the destroyer Csepel steamed out and trained her torpedo tubes at Sankt Georg , before being recalled by Hansa 's chief of staff . Helgoland 's commander , Erich Heyssler , also moved to prepare his ship 's torpedoes but Sankt Georg 's gunners aimed their 24 cm guns at Helgoland , which convinced Heyssler to back down . 
 The mutineers issued a lengthy list of demands , that ranged from longer periods of leave to and end to the war , based on the United States President Woodrow Wilson 's Fourteen Points . The following day , many of the mutinous ships abandoned the effort and rejoined loyalist forces in the inner harbor ; first the light cruisers and most of the torpedo boats escaped from the guns of the mutineers , followed by several of the other larger vessels . By late in the day , only the men aboard Sankt Georg and a handful of destroyers and torpedo boats remained in rebellion . Only on the morning of 3 February , after the arrival of the Erzherzog Karl @-@ class battleships of the III Division , were the last of the mutineers convinced to surrender . Trials on the ringleaders commenced quickly , and four men were executed , including the sailor who had shot Sankt Georg 's commander . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Cattaro Mutiny , most of the obsolete warships of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , including Sankt Georg , were decommissioned to reduce the number of idle warships . On 3 November 1918 , the Austro @-@ Hungarian government signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti with Italy , ending their participation in the conflict . After the end of the war , Sankt Georg was ceded as a war prize to Great Britain , under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye . She was then sold to ship breakers in Italy and broken up for scrap after 1920 . 
 = St Nicholas , Blakeney = 
 St Nicholas is the Anglican parish church of Blakeney , Norfolk , in the deanery of Holt and the Diocese of Norwich . The church was founded in the 13th century , but the greater part of the church dates from the 15th century when Blakeney was a seaport of some importance . Of the original structure only the chancel has survived rebuilding , perhaps owing to its link to a nearby Carmelite friary . An unusual architectural feature is a second tower , used as a beacon , at the east end ( the church stands just inland from , and about 30 metres ( 98 ft ) above , the small port ) . Other significant features are the vaulted chancel with a stepped seven @-@ light lancet window , and the hammerbeam roof of the nave . St Nicholas is a nationally important building , with a Grade I listing for its exceptional architectural interest . 
 Much of the original church furniture was lost in the Reformation , but a late @-@ Victorian restoration recreated something of the original appearance , as well as repairing and refacing the building . The Victorian woodwork was created to match the few older pieces that remained , or to follow a similar style ; thus , the new wooden pulpit follows the themes of the medieval font . Of the stained glass smashed in the Reformation only fragments have been recovered , and these have been incorporated in a window in the north aisle of the church . Nine Arts and Crafts windows by James Powell and Sons are featured on the east and south sides of the church , and the north porch has two modern windows of predominantly blue colour . St Nicholas contains some notable memorials , including several plaques for the Blakeney lifeboats and their crews , and much pre @-@ Reformation graffiti , particularly depictions of ships . The location of the latter suggests that they were votive in nature , although the saint concerned is now unknown . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation to 1547 = = = 
 St Nicholas is the parish church of Blakeney , Norfolk , a small English town with a history dating back to at least early Neolithic times . It was one of a number of small ports opening onto the sheltered inlet of Blakeney Haven , and exported a range of products including fish , grain , and timber . In the Domesday Book of 1086 the town is recorded under the name " <unk> " ( Snitterley ) ; the present @-@ day name first appears in 1340 . 
 Domesday recorded an early church at Snitterley , but its location is unknown , and it may not have been the present site of St Nicholas . There are scheduled monument and Grade II listed ruins of a medieval building in the salt marshes north of the present town described as " Blakeney Chapel " , but , despite the name , it now seems likely that this was a domestic dwelling rather than a religious edifice . Another possible chapel site east of the Glaven was shown on an 1835 map , but there is no documentation to support that identification . 
 The nearby Carmelite friary had its own church by 1321 , built on land donated by tenants of William de Roos , " that the Carmelite friars , by the King 's licence , and that of Sir William Roos , might inhabit therein for ever , and might build a chapel " . The friars were also given 100 marks to build their church , in return for which they undertook " to pray for the good estate of the said Sir William Roos and his Lady Maud ... and to have and to hold that lord and lady , and their heirs , for their principal founders " . 
 The original building on the present site was constructed in the late 13th or early 14th century , at around the same time as the friary , which was founded in about 1296 . Its hilltop location is unusual for the area ; most nearby churches are built on mounds near water . The new church was dedicated to Saint Nicholas , the patron saint of sailors , and the living was first recorded as being in the gift of Sir John de Cockfield , passing to his Bacon descendants before its acquisition by the Abbot and Convent of Langley in 1375 . The abbey controlled more than 60 Norfolk parishes , and the living of Blakeney was within its gift for the next sixty years , ending with the dissolution of the abbey in 1435 . The patronage seems then to have passed to the Earl of Sussex , but quickly transferred to John Calthorpe , a descendant of the original founder , John Cockfield , and it remained with his family until 1922 . Sir Alfred Jodrell then acquired the patronage , bequeathing it to Keble College , Oxford on his death in 1956 . Since 1989 , the benefice has been in the gift of Keble College , and the Bishop of Norwich . 
 Blakeney gained its market charter in 1222 , and by the early 15th century it was one of the few ports permitted to trade in horses , gold and silver , through " merchants sworn by oath to the king " , which contributed to the town 's growing wealth . Few Early English churches survive in Norfolk owing to extensive rebuilding amid the prosperity of the 15th century , and the thriving port of Blakeney was no exception . Only the chancel avoided major reconstruction in 1434 , probably because of its association with the Carmelite friary ; John Calthorpe specified in his will of 1530 that he was to buried " in the White <unk> of <unk> [ Blakeney ] in the <unk> of the chancel " . The Perpendicular nave and the 31 m ( 104 ft ) west tower were part of the 1434 rebuilding , but the unusual second , slender , tower at the north @-@ east corner of the church was of a later date . 
 = = = Reformation and after = = = 
 The English Reformation inevitably affected St Nicholas . Edward VI 's 1547 injunction decreed that all images in churches were to be dismantled or destroyed , including stained glass , shrines , roods , statues and bells , and altars were to be dismantled and replaced by wooden tables . Blakeney did not escape these changes ; an Inventory of Church Goods of 1552 and official visitations later in the century revealed that the chancel was falling into decay and " the church <unk> defiled with <unk> " . The reports continue " the pavement is much broken ... the walls are in <unk> ... east window is much broken ... the chancel needs paving " – it was even alleged that graves were left uncovered . The rector from 1590 to 1621 , Jacob Poynter , and his curate , Mr <unk> , were keen Puritan reformers who refused to wear the surplice or use the Book of Common Prayer , and seemed to have had little concern for the fabric of the church . One positive outcome of the Reformation was that registers were to be kept in every church to record baptisms , marriages and burials ; the Blakeney registers are very largely complete from 1538 . 
 By 1717 , the local population seems to have been very homogeneous in terms of belief : " Persons , servants included , above the age of sixteen , the men chiefly sea @-@ faring are supposed to be rather above three hundred . Papist none . Protestant dissenter none " . Nevertheless , in 1854 there were Non @-@ conformist chapels of three denominations , of which only the Methodist remains . 
 The church was originally constructed of flint with stone dressings , but was substantially refaced with knapped flint in the 1880s ; the tower was restored at the same time . A wall was built behind the altar in 1886 to create a separate sacristy for storing vestments and other items . The west tower was restored again in 1989 , and the current doors to the sacristy were added in the same year . 
 Electric lighting was installed in 1938 and an outer door for the north porch added in 1962 . Major renovations were carried out from 1981 to 1983 ; these comprised repairs to the north aisle roof and the east tower , plastering and <unk> of the chancel , replacement of the old electrical and heating systems , and minor work on the organ . The most recent round of restoration was the 2000 <unk> of the nave , installation of a vestry , toilet and kitchen , a new heating system with a detached boiler house , and <unk> of the north porch . Because of the remoteness of the altar from the congregation , a second altar was erected between the parclose screens ( extensions forward from the ends of the rood screen ) to enable a more intimate celebration of the Eucharist . St Nicholas was designated as a Grade I listed building in 1959 , which recognizes it as a building of exceptional interest . 
 The benefice has expanded during the long history of its church . <unk> and Little Langham parish was added in 1606 , <unk> in 1743 , Wiveton in 1922 , and Cley in 1935 . The parish is in the deanery of Holt , the Diocese of Norwich and the Province of Canterbury . The rector originally received tithes to support himself and the church , but this was later replaced by rent from the glebe ( church lands ) . Rector Pointer , for example , received tithes and also had the income from the sales of his corn and saffron crops . The state had supported poorer clergy since the introduction of Queen Anne 's Bounty in 1704 , but since 1947 the Church Commissioners have been responsible for arranging the stipends and pensions of Anglican priests . 
 = = Description = = 
 St Nicholas , Blakeney , is a large Gothic parish church with an aisled nave , a deep chancel of two bays , a large tower at the western end , and a smaller tower at the eastern end , to the north of the chancel . The north porch was rebuilt in 1896 . 
 The west tower is surmounted with crenellations and pinnacles and is supported by stepped buttresses at each corner . The buttresses are constructed from flint and stone , and have arched insets on the faces . They rest on stone plinths , each bearing carved shields , that on the north buttress with an inaccurate rendering of the arms of the see , and the other with a cross and a dolphin . The tower has three Perpendicular windows in the belfry and a large Perpendicular window in its western face , giving light to the west end of the nave . 
 The nave is 30 m ( 100 ft ) long and 14 m ( 47 ft ) , and is separated from the aisles on north and south sides by arcades of six bays . It is lit by Perpendicular windows , each aisle bay window having four lights apiece , with three @-@ light windows in the clerestory above . The nave 's oak and chestnut hammerbeam roof dates from the 15th century , and features carved angels on the hammers . These rest on arched braces , except above each window , where the hammers rest on corbels instead . The only trace of the earlier 13th @-@ century nave is the reuse of some older stone , mainly in the north aisle , and the raised chancel walls , and some Purbeck Marble fragments beneath the west tower . 
 The Lady Chapel in the south aisle and St Thomas ' Chapel in the north aisle were dedicated to St Mary and St Thomas of Canterbury respectively . They fell into disuse in the Reformation , but were restored in the 1880s . 
 The 13th @-@ century chancel has two rib vaulted bays , making it one of only six extant Early English vaulted <unk> . Its walls were raised in the 15th century by constructing a chamber above the vaulting using stone from the demolished 13th @-@ century nave , but , from the outside , this end of the church is still lower than the western section . Internally , the chancel vault is much lower than the adjacent nave because of the room above . It has three 15th @-@ century Perpendicular windows down each side , and is notable for the unusual east window with seven stepped lights , a feature found in only two other Early English churches , Lincoln Cathedral and St Martins in Ockham . The chancel contains three simple sedilia , or priest 's seats , with trefoil arches and round columns . The <unk> behind the altar has a small lancet window , and the chamber above the chancel , which is floored only by the curved upper surface of the vault below , is lit by a single two @-@ light window . 
 The polygonal eastern tower has stepped buttresses at its corners and louvred belfry windows just below the parapet . Its origins are not entirely clear , but it was possibly originally a turret for stairs leading to a room over the chancel , later extended upwards as an aesthetic enhancement and to act as a beacon for mariners . Its date is uncertain , but it is much later than the chancel . Although its lack of height compared to the west tower has led to some questioning of its suitability as a beacon , it has been suggested that lining up the two towers guided ships into the navigable channel between the inlet 's sandbanks ; this is the " leading light " practice later achieved using pairs of lighthouses at different levels . 
 = = Furnishings and fixtures = = 
 The octagonal font dates from the 15th century ; its carved panels alternate images of the symbols of the Four Evangelists with seated figures of the Doctors of the Church ( Saint Ambrose , Saint Augustine , Saint Jerome , and Pope Gregory I ) . The central column carries shields depicting the Instruments of the Passion and the Holy Wounds . The eastern shield is unusual in that a sword is shown with an ear stuck to it . This refers to the story of Saint Peter striking off the ear of <unk> , the High Priest 's servant , in the garden of Gethsemane . 
 Most East Anglian churches lost their medieval furnishings in the upheavals of the Reformation , and Blakeney is no exception . Apart from the hammerbeam roof , there is little original wood work in the nave ; a few benches in the aisles , the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis @-@ decorated beam supporting the rood , and two panels of the rood screen . The chancel retains four of its original choir stalls with their misericords , which are decorated with head and leaf motifs on the arms . St Nicholas benefited from sympathetic restoration in the late 19th and early 20th century . The new stalls and misericords match the style of the old , and the 1886 pulpit echoes the font , with the Instruments of the Passion on the stone stand , and the twelve Apostles carved on the woodwork . The pulpit has been described as " Victorian craftsmanship of matchless quality " . The north porch was restored in 1896 , and in the following year the west tower was repaired , and pews of a 15th @-@ century pattern placed in the nave . 
 1910 saw the restoration of the rood screen in a style consistent with that of the two ancient panels , the reconstruction of the rood loft , and the installation of a Norman and Beard two @-@ manual organ with more than a thousand pipes . The organ pipes are above the parclose screens ; the bellows , wind chest and electric blower are concealed in the chamber above the chancel . The stalls with their misericords were restored in 1913 . The rood crucifix , flanked by St Mary and St John , came from Germany in 1913 . 
 Much church plate , such as the chalice and pyx had been confiscated , sold or stolen in the heat of the Reformation . In the more tolerant climate of Elizabethan England , the excesses of extreme Protestantism were curbed by centralised control of the Church of England , the Act of Uniformity and the Book of Common Prayer . Most churches then had to buy a new chalice ; Blakeney 's was purchased in 1567 , and exchanged for another in 1716 . One lost treasure is a " Map of the World " ( Mappa Mundi et <unk> Mundi ) , which was recorded as present in the church in 1368 . This is thought more likely to be a version of Ranulf Higdon 's Polychronicon , a geographical text , than a true map like the Hereford Mappa Mundi . 
 The stained glass is mostly late @-@ 19th @-@ century Arts and Crafts by James Powell and Sons . Powell , coincidentally based at Whitefriars , a former Carmelite friary in London , used leading members of the movement such as Edward Burne @-@ Jones as designers , and his nine windows at Blakeney are regarded as fine examples of his work . The east window dating from 1895 represents the Te Deum , and the south windows , glazed in 1900 , tell the story of the early British church . Some 15th @-@ century fragments of the original Norwich School glass that had been buried in the churchyard during the Reformation were incorporated into one of the otherwise plain windows in the north aisle in 1938 , showing " Christ rising from the tomb " , with six figures above . Five of the figures are angels ; there would have been nine originally , one for each order . The sixth image depicts a female saint wearing a crown . The angel 's legs are clothed in " feather tights " , believed to have been derived from costumes worn in medieval religious plays . The north porch is flanked by two blue @-@ themed modern stained glass windows by Jane Gray from 2002 , one dedicated to the RAF , the other to the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) . The stained glass , taken as a whole , has been described as showing a " phenomenal standard of composition and artistry ... Few churches contain such a treasury . " The current reredos and altar were erected in 1923 , as was a wooden war memorial in the north aisle . 
 Most churches prior to the Reformation had painted walls , often with murals ; these were whitewashed by the reformers , and often religious texts or the Ten Commandments replaced the images . These inscriptions were in turn obliterated under the Catholic Queen Mary . At Blakeney , as elsewhere , the formerly coloured walls are now the plain white typical of English churches . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 John Calthorpe 's " <unk> body " lies at the eastern end of the nave under a marble gravestone and a brass plaque that carries his arms and a Latin inscription describing him as uni <unk> <unk> convent , " a founder [ benefactor ] of the convent of friars " . It is possible that he was originally buried in the chancel of the Carmelite friary , as he requested , but was re @-@ interred in the nave of St Nicholas at the Dissolution . A number of other stones carry standard tags in Latin or English requesting prayers or simply stating the identity of the internee , but Sir John Smyth 's 1460 memorial enjoined " As I am that shall you be , Pray for the <unk> of me " . 
 Blakeney was a lifeboat station from around 1825 to 1924 . Various wall plaques commemorate the boats ' rescues and crew losses from 1862 , when the RNLI took over the running of the service , up to the station 's closure . There are two blue wooden boards from the RNLI listing the earlier lifeboats and their achievements ; the Brightwell ( 1862 ) , another Brightwell ( 1863 ) , the Zaccheus Burroughs ( 1891 ) , and the Hettie ( 1873 ) . Next to these is a stone plaque listing the rescues from 1877 to 1924 , including those of the last lifeboat , the Caroline ( 1908 ) , and further along the north aisle a painting of George Long , coxswain of the Caroline , is placed above the record of its most famous rescues on consecutive days on 7 and 8 January 1918 , when 30 people were saved from two steamers in a storm . A large wooden board acts as a war memorial , listing those locals who died in various military engagements . The clock in the west tower was donated by a Mrs Cooke in 1945 in memory of her late husband and sons . 
 = = Medieval graffiti = = 
 The interiors of most Norfolk churches contain much pre @-@ Reformation graffiti , unless they have been heavily <unk> or resurfaced . The churches of the Glaven ports in general , and Blakeney in particular , conform to this pattern . St Nicholas has an extensive array of prayers , merchant 's marks and other symbols , but is notable for the large number of depictions of ships , at least 30 , heavily concentrated in the nave towards the eastern end of the south aisle . There is a side altar there of unknown dedication , and an empty niche that would have once held the image of a saint . The pillars were painted red in the Middle Ages , and ship images scratched into the soft , chalky stone would have been much more conspicuous than they are now . It is likely that the images , mostly of smaller ships , were created as votive offerings by the seafaring inhabitants of the port . The carving of ship graffiti in religious buildings is a tradition in ports going back to the Bronze Age , and has been found across Europe . 
 Mason 's marks were used by the stonemason to identify his work , and in the days of the medieval craft guilds may also have had mystical or religious significance . In England , the use of these marks became widespread after the Norman Conquest . Similarly , merchants had their own marks to identify their products , and these frequently appeared on houses , gravestones and church walls . 
 = = People = = 
 The long patronage of the Calthorpes under their various incarnations as the Lords Calthorpe , Gough @-@ Calthorpes and Anstruther @-@ Gough @-@ Calthorpes has already been noted . A Henry Calthorpe was rector from 1743 to 1781 , and was followed by Richard Thomas Gough , who held the living for 43 years . Gough and Richard Henry Tillard , incumbent from 1858 to 1906 , are commemorated by plaques in the chancel . Of the other rectors , Mowbray O <unk> had been Bishop of Accra from 1913 , but accepted the Blakeney living in 1924 , remaining until he retired in 1939 , and Clifford Leofric Purdy ( Jim ) Bishop , rector from 1949 to 1953 , rose to become Bishop of Malmesbury from 1962 . 
 The graveyard , as in many coastal parish churches , contains mainly local people and seafarers . Several stones bear the surname " Long " , a name carried by five of the crew of the Caroline on its epic rescues in January 1918 . A notable outsider buried here is Sir Henry " Tim " Birkin a leading British racing driver and one of the " Bentley Boys " of the 1920s . 
 = = Services and congregation = = 
 The rector of this Church of England parish as of 2011 is the Rev Neil <unk> . The benefice rotates its services among its five constituent churches , with typically five services in total on Sundays , and two mid @-@ week Holy <unk> . As with most Anglican churches in England , the congregation is mainly elderly , although there are monthly family services focussed on children . There is also a monthly laying on of hands for healing , and sometimes other variants from the standard format involving music or <unk> @-@ influenced worship . The parish accepts the diocese 's guidance on permitting baptism and marriage in church after a divorce , and claims to work closely with its Catholic and Methodist neighbours . 
 St Nicholas is also used for non @-@ religious events such as flower festivals , craft workshops and musical performances , and it has won diocesan tourism awards for its in @-@ church information facilities . The church appeared in Simon Jenkins ’ book , 1000 Best Churches , where it was described as having " a sense of vigorous activity " and as " a rare example of what every large parish church should aspire to being , also a community centre , market place and museum " . It was also featured in the Daily Telegraph 's list of 100 favourite churches , and a Norfolk tourism website rated it one of the top ten churches in the county . 
 = Major General George Henry Thomas = 
 Major General George Henry Thomas , also known as the Thomas Circle Monument , is an equestrian sculpture in Washington , D.C. that honors Civil War general George Henry Thomas . The monument is located in the center of Thomas Circle , on the border of the downtown and Logan Circle neighborhoods . It was sculpted by John Quincy Adams Ward , best known for his work on the George Washington statue . Attendees at the dedication in 1879 included President Rutherford B. Hayes , Generals Irvin McDowell , Philip Sheridan , and William Tecumseh Sherman , senators and thousands of soldiers . 
 The sculpture is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , which were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . It is considered by art critics and historians to be one of the best equestrian statues in the city . The statue , which rests on an oval pedestal , and the surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 George Henry Thomas was a Union general in the Civil War and a principal commander in the Western Theater . During the Battle of Chickamauga , he was responsible for saving the Union Army from being completely routed , earning him the nickname " Rock of Chickamauga " . The Society of the Army of the Cumberland , composed of veterans , chose to erect a monument to Thomas utilizing bronze cannons captured from Confederate forces . John Quincy Adams Ward was selected to sculpt the statue and began the process in 1875 . The sculpture , which cost $ 40 @,@ 000 , was paid for by the Society . On July 31 , 1876 , Congress appropriated $ 25 @,@ 000 to pay for the pedestal and base , although the final cost was only $ 20 @,@ 000 . The contract for the statue stated three of the horse 's feet had to be touching the ground . This was to make sure it wouldn 't receive the same type of criticism Andrew Jackson 's sculpture in Lafayette Square received and to avoid the " stagey , theatrical animal that poses and postures in so many of the public squares of the United States . " Thomas 's widow , Frances , gave Ward photographs of her husband and lent him Thomas ' uniform and saddle to help with the design . After he finished the plaster model in 1879 , Ward invited Thomas ' family , Society officers , and members of the press to his studio in New York to view the model . The reaction was very positive . The Society was so impressed with Ward 's work , they later selected him to design the James A. Garfield Monument and the Philip Sheridan sculpture as well , though the contract for the latter was eventually cancelled . Architects John L. <unk> and Paul J. <unk> , best known for designing the Thomas Jefferson Building and Healy Hall , were selected to design the monument base . The Bureau Brothers Foundry cast the sculpture while stonework was provided by contractor M. K. Chase . The traffic circle where the monument was erected was previously known as Memorial Circle because nearby residents planted memorial trees in honor of their respective home states . The name was changed to Thomas Circle when the monument was installed . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The memorial was dedicated on November 19 , 1879 , with an estimated 50 @,@ 000 people in attendance . Harper 's Weekly described the event as the grandest ceremony ever held in the city The ceremony featured a two @-@ mile 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) military procession , led by General Thomas Turpin Crittenden , of around 500 Army of the Cumberland veterans , 1 @,@ 000 army troops , 1 @,@ 000 marines and sailors , state troops from Maryland , New York , and Pennsylvania , and generals Irvin McDowell , Philip Sheridan , and William Tecumseh Sherman . Music in the procession was performed by seven military bands , with the United States Marine Band in the first position . The procession began east of the U.S. Capitol and marched past President Rutherford B. Hayes at the White House on its way toward the memorial site . Most of the buildings along the line of march , including nearly every building on Pennsylvania Avenue , were decorated with flags , streamers , and other decorations . The most elaborately decorated building along the line of march was the Quartermaster General 's office , located on the corner of 15th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue NW , which was decorated with numerous flags and a canvas bearing a portrait of Thomas . The circle and the homes surrounding it were extensively decorated . There were 38 poles , each 33 feet ( 10 m ) high , placed around the edge of the circle , with the flag of every U.S. state at the time . A temporary platform seating 1 @,@ 500 people was erected around part of the circle for special guests and dignitaries . 
 The ceremony began with a prayer followed by the songs " Hail to the Chief " and " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . The statue was then unveiled accompanied by a thirteen gun salute . After the unveiling , a chorus of 100 men sang hymns with music performed by the Marine Band . General Anson G. McCook , a member of the Fighting <unk> who served under Thomas , delivered the dedication speech . Senator Stanley Matthews also gave a speech which included the presentation of the statue as an offering to the country . The statue was accepted by President Hayes on behalf of the American people . Hayes stated : " In the name of the people of the United States I accept this noble statue , so worthy of its subject , erected in honor of Gen. George H. Thomas by his comrades of the illustrious Army of the Cumberland . " The monument was the sixth equestrian sculpture erected in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Influence and historic designation = = = 
 Art critics , historians , and Civil War monument researchers Kirk Savage and Kathryn <unk> Jacob consider the Thomas monument one of the best equestrian statues in Washington , D.C. According to Savage , it " enhanced the circle 's prestige by giving it a commemorative identity in this rapidly emerging landscape " and " served at once as a national monument honoring a war hero and a real estate amenity for an affluent urban setting . " It increased development at Thomas Circle and the surrounding area , although none of the stately homes around the circle are still standing . Along with seventeen other Civil War monuments , Major General George Henry Thomas was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . The sculpture and the surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The monument is located in the center of Thomas Circle , at the intersection of 14th Street , M Street , Massachusetts Avenue and Vermont Avenue NW . Following a reconstruction of Thomas Circle completed in 2006 , new sidewalks and landscaping allowed visitors easier access to the monument and surrounding park . The monument is approximately 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) high while the statue itself is around 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high . The bronze figures of Thomas and the horse are around twice life @-@ size . Thomas is depicted surveying a battlefield while at the top of a hill . He is holding the reins of the horse with his left hand and his right hand is holding his hat and gloves . Thomas is wearing a double @-@ breasted military coat and plain riding boots , while his sword hangs from his left side . The horse looks straight ahead as its mane and tail are blown by the wind . Its " dilated nostrils , erect ears , tense muscles , and waving , bushy tail " demonstrate the horse 's excitement . The horse was originally designed to be a mare . After it was pointed out that Thomas only rode stallions , additions were made to the sculpture , though the slender head and neck are still reminiscent of a mare . 
 The statue stands on an oval granite pedestal featuring two Baroque scrolls on each end . A bronze badge of the Army of the Cumberland , which Thomas had commanded , and a laurel wreath is also on each side of the pedestal . The circular granite base features four steps and four blocks protruding from the pedestal to the lowest step . Decorative gas lamps previously stood on the base 's four blocks , but these were removed sometime around 1922 . 
 Inscriptions on the monument include the following : 
 ( pedestal east side ) ERECTED BY HIS <unk> / OF THE SOCIETY OF / THE ARMY OF THE <unk> 
 ( pedestal , west side ) <unk> . GEN . GEORGE H. <unk> / SAN <unk> CAL . / <unk> 28 , 1870 
 ( bottom of sculpture , east side ) J. Q. A. <unk> <unk> 1879 
 ( bottom of sculpture , west side ) <unk> <unk> & <unk> / FOUNDERS . PHIL 
 = Jackie Robinson Day = 
 Jackie Robinson Day is a traditional event which occurs annually in Major League Baseball , commemorating and honoring the day Jackie Robinson made his major league debut . April 15 was Opening Day in 1947 , Robinson 's first season in the Major Leagues . Initiated for the first time on April 15 , 2004 , Jackie Robinson Day is celebrated each year on that day . The festivity is a result of Robinson 's memorable career , best known for becoming the first black major league baseball player of the modern era in 1947 . His debut with the Brooklyn Dodgers ( today known as the Los Angeles Dodgers ) ended approximately eighty years of baseball segregation , also known as the baseball color line , or color barrier . He also was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962 , remembered for his services with the number 42 jersey . 
 The gala is celebrated at varied ballparks by Major League team players . On that one day , all players , coaches , and managers on both teams , and the umpires , wear # 42 on their jerseys . 
 Shea Stadium was one of the prominent venues hosting the event , having commemorated the retirement of Robinson 's number 42 jersey in 1997 . Bob DuPuy , the President and Chief Operating Officer of Major League baseball , described Jackie Robinson Day as a significance " not only for baseball , but for our country in general . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 The first Jackie Robinson Day was on April 15 , 2004 . That day was a start to an annual tradition throughout Major League Baseball and an inspirational reminder about what happened on that day exactly fifty @-@ seven years earlier when Jackie Robinson became a Major League Baseball player . The day would be the first official league @-@ wide Jackie Robinson Day , having festivities taking place at all 13 ballparks where Major League games were scheduled to be played . Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig made the announcement with Sharon Robinson ( daughter of Rachel and Jackie Robinson ) . 
 " I have often stated that baseball 's proudest moment and its most powerful social statement came on April 15 , 1947 when Jackie Robinson first set foot on a Major League Baseball field " , said Selig . " On that day , Jackie brought down the color barrier and ushered in the era in which baseball became the true national pastime . Fifty years after that historic event , in April 1997 , I was proud to join Rachel Robinson and President Bill Clinton at Shea Stadium to honor Jackie by retiring his uniform number 42 in perpetuity . By establishing April 15 as ' Jackie Robinson Day ' throughout Major League Baseball , we are further ensuring that the incredible contributions and sacrifices he made — for baseball and society — will not be forgotten . " 
 It began that Thursday morning with Sharon Robinson , ringing the ceremonial Opening Bell at the New York Stock Exchange . Rachel Robinson ( Jackie Robinson 's wife ) , officials from the Major League Baseball foundation , and officials of the Jackie Robinson Foundation ( <unk> ) took part in the special ceremony honoring Jackie Robinson . Festivities took place in the 13 ballparks that had scheduled games that day . The balls had a " 42 " logo on each of them for the games that day . Jackie Robinson Foundation scholars threw out the ceremonial first pitch prior to each game . " I 'm very happy my son is in Boston today , we 're happy that the scholars and family are at different clubs and look forward to expanding the celebration as the years go on " , Robinson said . " And also continuing to come up with creative ways to reach out to the African @-@ American community and bring them into this wonderful game of baseball that we all love . " 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 April 15 , 2005 , was the 58th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's major league debut . Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig officially declared that every April 15 would be designated as Jackie Robinson Day and it would be celebrated each year throughout Major League Baseball . Every ballpark in Major League Baseball in the United States celebrated Jackie Robinson Day , unlike in 2004 when it was only celebrated in 13 ballparks . Each ballpark showed a video tribute to Robinson , and many brought out Jackie Robinson Foundation scholars onto the field before the games . In Cincinnati , Ohio , Ken Griffey , Jr. spoke of how much every African @-@ American baseball player owes Robinson , who was chosen by manager Branch Rickey to break the color line because of Robinson 's inner courage and ability to keep his temper in check . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 April 15 , 2006 , was the 59th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's major league debut . Rachel Robinson attended the ceremony , having former Negro Leagues players Robert Scott and Armando Vazquez also attending the ceremony . His widow was honored and celebrated at Shea Stadium . After a video tribute on the scoreboard of Shea Stadium of Jackie Robinson , Rachel Robinson walked to the pitcher 's mound before the New York Mets hosted the Milwaukee Brewers , along with Bob DuPuy , baseball 's chief operating officer , and New York Mets manager Willie Randolph . " I 've got a picture of Jackie in my office , so I think about that every day , " Randolph said . " I 'm just happy to be a part of this day . " A large blue , gray and white circle with " 42 " on it was put over home plate representing the colors of Jackie Robinson 's uniform with the Dodgers as a major leaguer . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 April 15 , 2007 , was the 60th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's major league debut , with ceremonies held at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles , California . Uniformed personnel ( players , coaches and managers ) were invited to wear the number 42 just for that day to commemorate Robinson . During the 2007 regular season , Ken Griffey , Jr. called Bud Selig to ask for permission to wear number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day . Griffey received special permission from Rachel Robinson to wear number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day of 2007 . 
 Number 42 had been retired for all Major League Baseball teams . This meant that no future Major League Baseball player could wear it . The number was retired in a ceremony which took place in 1997 at Shea Stadium to mark the 50th anniversary of Robinson 's first game with the Dodgers . ( The last player to wear the Number 42 is Mariano Rivera of the New York Yankees , who retired at the end of the 2013 season ) . Selig embraced the gesture and encouraged other Major League Baseball clubs to have a player wear number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day as well . 
 Several players thought having over 150 players wearing number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day was far too many . " This is supposed to be an honor " , Minnesota Twins outfielder Torii Hunter told USA Today , " and just a handful of guys wearing the number . Now you 've got entire teams doing it . I think we 're killing the meaning . It should be special wearing Jackie 's number , not just because it looks cool . " Cleveland Indians pitcher C.C. Sabathia , who decried the lack of African @-@ American players in the game in March 2007 , told USA Today that " It kind of waters it down . I could see the Dodgers since that was his team , but not everyone else . " " I didn 't know so many guys planned to wear the number . I sure wasn 't expecting whole teams to wear it " , Griffey told the USA Today . " But I 'm not going to look at it as a negative . This is a tribute for what the man has done , a day to celebrate . " Garret Anderson , Los Angeles Angels left fielder , told the USA Today that he won 't wear number 42 because " I just don 't feel I 'm worthy of it . " 
 Hank Aaron and Frank Robinson , both Baseball Hall of Famers , threw the ceremonial first pitches , and fellow Hall of Famers Joe Morgan and Dave Winfield were on hand . Actors Courtney B. Vance and Marlon Wayans also attended the Jackie Robinson Day ceremony . Academy Award winner Jennifer Hudson sang " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " before the games started . More than 240 players wore number 42 in honor of Jackie Robinson 's retired number , including the entire team rosters of the Los Angeles Dodgers , New York Mets , Houston Astros , Philadelphia Phillies , St. Louis Cardinals , Milwaukee Brewers , and Pittsburgh Pirates . All scheduled games were played that day except for several games – notably the Washington Nationals @-@ New York Mets , the Houston Astros @-@ Philadelphia Phillies ( the game and the ceremony was held on the make @-@ up date on April 23 , 2007 ) , as was the Pirates game against the San Francisco Giants ; the uniforms were worn at the team 's next home game at PNC Park – all due to a major rainstorm in the Eastern United States that postponed six games . 
 Andre Ethier , Russell Martin and Wilson Valdez managed to each earn three hits each during the Dodgers game . Ethier hit a home run which drove in the first four runs of the season for the Dodgers , who stole five bases — their most since August 23 , 1999 when they stole seven in a game at Milwaukee . " It 's kind of cool to have a decent game on Jackie Robinson Day , " Martin said . " I ’ m going to remember this probably for the rest of my life . " Randy Wolf , who was playing for the Dodgers at the time ( currently a free agent ) allowed six hits and three runs in six innings and struck out seven . " The whole team wearing No. 42 , it kind of goes sour if we don ’ t win , " Wolf said . " It was great . There were a lot of special people here . It 's a special day and I think they did it right . " The San Diego Padres ' José Cruz , Jr. hit his 200th career home run . 
 Chris Young 's streak of 25 consecutive road starts without a loss was broken that day by the Dodgers win . The only other pitcher in major league baseball history had gone as many as 25 straight road starts without losing — Allie Reynolds had a 25 @-@ game streak in 1948 – 1949 . " I was terrible , " Young said . " I just never found my rhythm and never found my groove . I put the guys in a hole early in the game and it was just too much to overcome . I can ’ t imagine , having to go through that , the courage it took , the discipline , and just how successful he was . I mean , he wasn ’ t just successful integrating the game . He was a great baseball player . He 's a Hall of Fame baseball player . He wouldn ’ t allow himself to fail , and that 's tremendous . " 
 " Oh Happy Day , " a Robinson favorite , was sung by The <unk> Gospel Choir from The First African Methodist Episcopal Church . Paintings of Minnesota Twins logos acknowledging Robinson were on both sides of the home plate with another behind second base , and " Jackie Robinson Day " was printed on the bases . A video tribute with Morgan and Aaron among those participating was shown . Several current players expressed their thanks to Robinson in the video also . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 April 15 , 2008 , was the 61st anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's major league debut . Over 330 team members wore number 42 , more than the over 240 last year . When the teams took the field , all players , managers and coaches were wearing number 42 , and was repeated at all other 14 ballparks that had scheduled games that day . All players wore number 42 at games including the Washington Nationals ' game at the New York Mets , Pittsburgh 's game at the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Los Angeles Angels ' game at the Texas Rangers . The Oakland Athletics , St. Louis Cardinals and Tampa Bay Rays also wore number 42 , increasing the total to nine teams . " The significance of Jackie Robinson Day is not lost on anyone " , said Bob DuPuy . " As more and more people realize what April 15 means , not only for baseball , but for our country in general , I think you 're going to see the celebration grow annually . " 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 The celebration for the 2009 season , commemorating the 62nd anniversary of Robinson 's debut , included the dedication for the Jackie Robinson Rotunda at Citi Field , the New York Mets ' new home in Flushing Meadows prior to the Mets playing the San Diego Padres in the second regular season game to be played there . Additionally , for the first time , all uniformed personnel ( players , managers , coaches and umpires ) wore # 42 for the day . The sole exception was when the scheduled game at Nationals Park between the Philadelphia Phillies and the Washington Nationals was rained out ; they wore the jerseys in the night game of a day @-@ night doubleheader May 16 . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 The celebration of Jackie Robinson Day , marking the 63rd anniversary of his debut , marked the second season that all uniformed personnel and umpires wearing # 42 . A total of twelve games were played that day , so as a result , several teams wore Robinson 's number in another game in April due to an off day planned for several teams . The main celebration was again in New York , but was held at the new Yankee Stadium , yards from the original stadium where Robinson played in seven World Series against the New York Yankees . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 The 64th anniversary of Robinson 's debut marked the third straight season all uniformed players and umpires wearing # 42 , with the exception of the rained @-@ out New York Mets @-@ Atlanta Braves game ; the teams wore the uniforms the following day 's makeup game . In addition , a new MLB website , <unk> , was established . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 65th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's debut and 4th straight season all uniformed players , coaches and umpires wore No. 42 . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 2013 marked the 66th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's debut and 5th straight season all uniformed players , coaches and umpires wore No. 42 . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 The 67th anniversary of Jackie Robinson 's debut was celebrated at Historic Dodgertown , where Robinson and teammates used to spend their spring training preparing for the upcoming season for the Dodgers . Owned by former Dodger owner Peter O 'Malley , Historic Dodgertown hosted the 2014 celebration by putting on a minor league exhibition game . Also , four games – Atlanta at Philadelphia , Cleveland at Detroit , Tampa Bay at Baltimore and the Chicago Cubs at the New York Yankees – were postponed due to a rainstorm that plagued much of the eastern USA . 
 = Shen Kuo = 
 Shen Kuo ( Chinese : <unk> ; 1031 – 1095 ) , courtesy name <unk> ( <unk> ) and pseudonym <unk> ( now usually given as Mengxi ) Weng ( <unk> ) , was a Han Chinese <unk> scientist and statesman of the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . <unk> in many fields of study and statecraft , he was a mathematician , astronomer , meteorologist , geologist , zoologist , botanist , pharmacologist , agronomist , archaeologist , ethnographer , cartographer , encyclopedist , general , diplomat , hydraulic engineer , inventor , academy chancellor , finance minister , governmental state inspector , poet , and musician . He was the head official for the Bureau of Astronomy in the Song court , as well as an Assistant Minister of Imperial Hospitality . At court his political allegiance was to the Reformist faction known as the New Policies Group , headed by Chancellor Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) . 
 In his Dream Pool Essays or Dream Torrent Essays ( <unk> ; Mengxi Bitan ) of 1088 , Shen was the first to describe the magnetic needle compass , which would be used for navigation ( first described in Europe by Alexander <unk> in 1187 ) . Shen discovered the concept of true north in terms of magnetic declination towards the north pole , with experimentation of suspended magnetic needles and " the improved meridian determined by Shen 's [ astronomical ] measurement of the distance between the pole star and true north " . This was the decisive step in human history to make compasses more useful for navigation , and may have been a concept unknown in Europe for another four hundred years ( evidence of German sundials made circa 1450 show markings similar to Chinese geomancer compasses in regard to declination ) . 
 Alongside his colleague Wei Pu , Shen planned to map the orbital paths of the Moon and the planets in an intensive five @-@ year project involving daily observations , yet this was thwarted by political opponents at court . To aid his work in astronomy , Shen Kuo made improved designs of the armillary sphere , gnomon , sighting tube , and invented a new type of inflow water clock . Shen Kuo devised a geological hypothesis for land formation ( geomorphology ) , based upon findings of inland marine fossils , knowledge of soil erosion , and the deposition of silt . He also proposed a hypothesis of gradual climate change , after observing ancient petrified bamboos that were preserved underground in a dry northern habitat that would not support bamboo growth in his time . He was the first literary figure in China to mention the use of the drydock to repair boats suspended out of water , and also wrote of the effectiveness of the relatively new invention of the canal pound lock . Although Ibn al @-@ Haytham ( 965 – 1039 ) was the first to describe camera obscura , Shen was the first in China to do so , several decades later . Shen wrote extensively about movable type printing invented by Bi Sheng ( 990 – 1051 ) , and because of his written works the legacy of Bi Sheng and the modern understanding of the earliest movable type has been handed down to later generations . Following an old tradition in China , Shen created a raised @-@ relief map while inspecting borderlands . His description of an ancient crossbow mechanism which he himself unearthed proved to be a Jacob 's staff , a surveying tool which wasn 't known in Europe until described by Levi ben Gerson in 1321 . 
 Shen Kuo wrote several other books besides the Dream Pool Essays , yet much of the writing in his other books has not survived . Some of Shen 's poetry was preserved in posthumous written works . Although much of his focus was on technical and scientific issues , he had an interest in divination and the supernatural , the latter including his vivid description of unidentified flying objects from eyewitness testimony . He also wrote commentary on ancient Daoist and Confucian texts . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Birth and youth = = = 
 Shen Kuo was born in Qiantang ( modern @-@ day Hangzhou ) in the year 1031 . His father Shen Zhou ( <unk> ; 978 – 1052 ) was a somewhat lower @-@ class gentry figure serving in official posts on the provincial level ; his mother was from a family of equal status in Suzhou , with her maiden name being Xu ( <unk> ) . Shen Kuo received his initial childhood education from his mother , which was a common practice in China during this period . She was very educated herself , teaching Kuo and his brother Pi ( <unk> ) the military doctrines of her own elder brother Xu Tang ( <unk> ; 975 – 1016 ) . Since Shen was unable to boast of a prominent familial clan history like many of his elite peers born in the north , he was forced to rely on his wit and stern determination to achieve in his studies , subsequently passing the Imperial Exams and enter the challenging and sophisticated life of an exam @-@ drafted state bureaucrat . 
 From about 1040 , Shen 's family moved around Sichuan province and finally to the international seaport at Xiamen , where Shen 's father accepted minor provincial posts in each new location . Shen Zhou also served several years in the prestigious capital judiciary , the equivalent of a federal supreme court . Shen Kuo took notice of the various towns and rural features of China as his family traveled , while he became interested during his youth in the diverse topography of the land . He also observed the intriguing aspects of his father 's engagement in administrative governance and the managerial problems involved ; these experiences had a deep impact on him as he later became a government official . Since he often became ill as a child , Shen Kuo also developed a natural curiosity about medicine and <unk> . 
 Shen Zhou died in the late winter of 1051 ( or early 1052 ) , when his son Shen Kuo was 21 years old . Shen Kuo grieved for his father , and following Confucian ethics , remained inactive in a state of mourning for three years until 1054 ( or early 1055 ) . As of 1054 , Shen began serving in minor local governmental posts . However , his natural abilities to plan , organize , and design were proven early in life ; one example is his design and supervision of the hydraulic drainage of an embankment system , which converted some one hundred thousand acres ( 400 km ² ) of swampland into prime farmland . Shen Kuo noted that the success of the silt fertilization method relied upon the effective operation of sluice gates of irrigation canals . 
 = = = Official career = = = 
 In 1063 Shen Kuo successfully passed the Imperial examinations , the difficult national @-@ level standard test that every high official was required to pass in order to enter the governmental system . He not only passed the exam however , but was placed into the higher category of the best and brightest students . While serving at Yangzhou , Shen 's brilliance and dutiful character caught the attention of Zhang Chu ( <unk> ; 1015 – 1080 ) , the Fiscal Intendant of the region . Shen made a lasting impression upon Zhang , who recommended Shen for a court appointment in the financial administration of the central court . Shen would also eventually marry Zhang 's daughter , who became his second wife . 
 In his career as a scholar @-@ official for the central government , Shen Kuo was also an ambassador to the Western Xia Dynasty and Liao Dynasty , a military commander , a director of hydraulic works , and the leading chancellor of the Hanlin Academy . By 1072 , Shen was appointed as the head official of the Bureau of Astronomy . With his leadership position in the bureau , Shen was responsible for projects in improving calendrical science , and proposed many reforms to the Chinese calendar alongside the work of his colleague Wei Pu . With his impressive skills and aptitude for matters of economy and finance , Shen was appointed as the Finance Commissioner at the central court . 
 As written by Li <unk> , a man married to Hu Wenrou ( granddaughter of Hu Su , a famous minister of the Song Dynasty ) , Shen Kuo was Li 's mentor while Shen served as an official . According to Li 's epitaph for his wife , Shen would sometimes relay questions via Li to Hu when he needed clarification for his mathematical work , as Hu Wenrou was esteemed by Shen as a remarkable female mathematician . Shen lamented : " if only she were a man , Wenrou would be my friend . " 
 While employed by the central government , Shen Kuo was also sent out with others to inspect the granary system of the empire , investigating problems of illegal collections , negligence , ineffective disaster relief , and inadequate water @-@ conservancy projects . While Shen was appointed as the regional inspector of Zhejiang in 1073 , the Emperor requested that Shen pay a visit to the famous poet Su Shi ( 1037 – 1101 ) , then an administrator in Hangzhou . Shen took advantage of this meeting to copy some of Su 's poetry , which he presented to the Emperor indicating that it expressed " abusive and hateful " speech against the Song court ; these poems were later politicized by Li Ding and Shu Dan in order to level a court case against Su . ( The Crow Terrace Poetry Trial , of 1079 . ) With his demonstrations of loyalty and ability , Shen Kuo was awarded the honorary title of a State Foundation Viscount by Emperor Shenzong of Song ( r . 1067 – 1085 ) , who placed a great amount of trust in Shen Kuo . He was even made ' companion to the heir apparent ' ( <unk> ; ' <unk> <unk> ' ) . 
 At court Shen was a political favorite of the Chancellor Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) , who was the leader of the political faction of Reformers , also known as the New Policies Group ( <unk> , Xin Fa ) . Shen Kuo had a previous history with Wang Anshi , since it was Wang who had composed the funerary epitaph for Shen 's father , Zhou . Shen Kuo soon impressed Wang Anshi with his skills and abilities as an administrator and government agent . In 1072 , Shen was sent to supervise Wang 's program of surveying the building of silt deposits in the Bian Canal outside the capital city . Using an original technique , Shen successfully dredged the canal and demonstrated the formidable value of the silt gathered as a fertilizer . He gained further reputation at court once he was dispatched as an envoy to the Khitan Liao Dynasty in the summer of 1075 . The Khitans had made several aggressive negotiations of pushing their borders south , while manipulating several incompetent Chinese ambassadors who conceded to the Liao Kingdom 's demands . In a brilliant display of diplomacy , Shen Kuo came to the camp of the Khitan monarch at Mt . <unk> ( near modern <unk> , Hebei ) , armed with copies of previously archived diplomatic negotiations between the Song and Liao dynasties . Shen Kuo refuted Emperor Daozong 's bluffs point for point , while the Song reestablished their rightful border line . In regard to the Lý Dynasty of Đại Việt ( in modern northern Vietnam ) , Shen demonstrated in his Dream Pool Essays that he was familiar with the key players ( on the Vietnamese side ) in the prelude to the Sino @-@ Vietnamese War of 1075 – 1077 . With his reputable achievements , Shen became a trusted member of Wang Anshi 's elite circle of eighteen unofficial core political loyalists to the New Policies Group . 
 Although much of Wang Anshi 's reforms outlined in the New Policies centered on state finance , land tax reform , and the Imperial examinations , there were also military concerns . This included policies of raising militias to lessen the expense of upholding a million soldiers , putting government monopolies on saltpetre and sulphur production and distribution in 1076 ( to ensure that gunpowder solutions would not fall into the hands of enemies ) , and aggressive military policy towards China 's northern rivals of the Western Xia and Liao dynasties . A few years after Song Dynasty military forces had made victorious territorial gains against the Tanguts of the Western Xia , in 1080 Shen Kuo was entrusted as a military officer in defense of Yanzhou ( modern @-@ day Yan 'an , Shaanxi province ) . During the autumn months of 1081 , Shen was successful in defending Song Dynasty territory while capturing several fortified towns of the Western Xia . The Emperor Shenzong of Song rewarded Shen with numerous titles for his merit in these battles , and in the sixteen months of Shen 's military campaign , he received 273 letters from the Emperor . However , Emperor Shenzong trusted an arrogant military officer who disobeyed the emperor and Shen 's proposal for strategic fortifications , instead fortifying what Shen considered useless strategic locations . Furthermore , this officer expelled Shen from his commanding post at the main citadel , so as to deny him any glory in chance of victory . The result of this was nearly catastrophic , as the forces of the arrogant officer were decimated ; <unk> Yao states that the death toll was 60 @,@ 000 . Nonetheless , Shen was successful in defending his fortifications and the only possible Tangut invasion @-@ route to Yanzhou . 
 = = = Impeachment and later life = = = 
 The new Chancellor Cai Que ( <unk> ; 1036 – 1093 ) held Shen responsible for the disaster and loss of life . Along with abandoning the territory which Shen Kuo had fought for , Cai ousted Shen from his seat of office . Shen 's life was now forever changed , as he lost his once reputable career in state governance and the military . Shen was then put under probation in a fixed residence for the next six years . However , as he was isolated from governance , he decided to pick up the ink brush and dedicate himself to intensive scholarly studies . After completing two geographical atlases for a state @-@ sponsored program , Shen was rewarded by having his sentence of probation lifted , allowing him to live in a place of his choice . Shen was also pardoned by the court for any previous faults or crimes that were claimed against him . 
 In his more idle years removed from court affairs , Shen Kuo enjoyed pastimes of the Chinese gentry and literati that would indicate his intellectual level and cultural taste to others . As described in his Dream Pool Essays , Shen Kuo enjoyed the company of the " nine guests " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a figure of speech for the Chinese zither , the older <unk> line variant of <unk> ( known today as go ) , Zen Buddhist meditation , ink ( calligraphy and painting ) , tea drinking , alchemy , chanting poetry , conversation , and drinking wine . These nine activities were an extension to the older so @-@ called Four Arts of the Chinese Scholar . 
 According to Zhu Yu 's book Pingzhou Table Talks ( <unk> ; Pingzhou Ketan ) of 1119 , Shen Kuo had two marriages ; the second wife was the daughter of Zhang Chu ( <unk> ) , who came from Huainan . Lady Zhang was said to be overbearing and fierce , often abusive to Shen Kuo , even attempting at one time to pull off his beard . Shen Kuo 's children were often upset over this , and prostrated themselves to Lady Zhang to quit this behavior . Despite this , Lady Zhang went as far as to drive out Shen Kuo 's son from his first marriage , expelling him from the household . However , after Lady Zhang died , Shen Kuo fell into a deep depression and even attempted to jump into the Yangtze River to drown himself . Although this suicide attempt failed , he would die a year later . 
 In the 1070s , Shen had purchased a lavish garden estate on the outskirts of modern @-@ day Zhenjiang , Jiangsu province , a place of great beauty which he named " Dream Brook " ( " Mengxi " ) after he visited it for the first time in 1086 . Shen Kuo permanently moved to the Dream Brook Estate in 1088 , and in that same year he completed his life 's written work of the Dream Pool Essays , naming the book after his garden @-@ estate property . It was there that Shen Kuo spent the last several years of his life in leisure , isolation , and illness , until his death in 1095 . 
 = = Scholarly achievements = = 
 Shen Kuo wrote extensively on a wide range of different subjects . His written work included two geographical atlases , a treatise on music with mathematical harmonics , governmental administration , mathematical astronomy , astronomical instruments , martial defensive tactics and fortifications , painting , tea , medicine , and much poetry . His scientific writings have been praised by sinologists such as Joseph Needham and Nathan Sivin , and he has been compared by Sivin to polymaths such as his contemporary Su Song , as well as Gottfried Leibniz and Mikhail Lomonosov . 
 = = = Raised @-@ relief map = = = 
 If the account of Sima Qian ( c . 145 – 86 BC ) in his Records of the Grand Historian is proven correct upon the unearthing of Qin Shi Huang 's ( r . 221 – 210 BC ) tomb , the raised @-@ relief map has existed since the Qin Dynasty ( 221 – 206 BC ) . Robert Temple and Joseph Needham suggest that certain pottery vessels of the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) showing artificial mountains as lid decorations may have influenced the raised @-@ relief map . The Han Dynasty general Ma Yuan ( 14 BC – 49 AD ) made a raised @-@ relief map of valleys and mountains in a rice @-@ constructed model of 32 AD . Such rice models were expounded on by the Tang Dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) author Jiang Fang in his Essay on the Art of Constructing Mountains with Rice ( c . 845 AD ) . A raised @-@ relief map made of wood representing all the provinces of the empire and put together like a giant 0 @.@ 93 m2 ( 10 ft2 ) jigsaw puzzle was invented by Xie Zhuang ( 421 – 466 AD ) during the Liu Song Dynasty ( 420 – 479 ) . 
 Shen 's largest atlas included twenty three maps of China and foreign regions that were drawn at a uniform scale of 1 : 900 @,@ 000 . Shen also created a raised @-@ relief map using sawdust , wood , beeswax , and wheat paste . Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) was inspired by the raised @-@ relief map of Huang Shang and so made his own portable map made of wood and clay which could be folded up from eight hinged pieces . 
 = = = Pharmacology = = = 
 For pharmacology , Shen wrote of the difficulties of adequate diagnosis and therapy , as well as the proper selection , preparation , and administration of drugs . He held great concern for detail and philological accuracy in identification , use and cultivation of different types of medicinal herbs , such as in which months medicinal plants should be gathered , their exact ripening times , which parts should be used for therapy ; for domesticated herbs he wrote about planting times , fertilization , and other matters of horticulture . In the realms of botany , zoology , and mineralogy , Shen Kuo documented and systematically described hundreds of different plants , agricultural crops , rare vegetation , animals , and minerals found in China . For example , Shen noted that the mineral orpiment was used to quickly erase writing errors on paper . 
 = = = Civil engineering = = = 
 The writing of Shen Kuo is the only source for the date when the drydock was first used in China . Shen Kuo wrote that during the Xi @-@ Ning reign ( 1068 – 1077 ) , the court official Huang Huaixin devised a plan for repairing 60 m ( 200 ft ) long palatial boats that were a century old ; essentially , Huang Huaixin devised the first Chinese drydock for suspending boats out of water . These boats were then placed in a roof @-@ covered dock warehouse to protect them from weathering . Shen also wrote about the effectiveness of the new invention ( i.e. by the 10th century engineer Qiao <unk> ) of the pound lock to replace the old flash lock design used in canals . He wrote that it saved the work of five hundred annual labors , annual costs of up to 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 strings of cash , and increased the size limit of boats accommodated from 21 tons / <unk> kg to 113 tons / <unk> kg . 
 If it were not for Shen Kuo 's analysis and quoting in his Dream Pool Essays of the writings of the architect Yu Hao ( fl . 970 ) , the latter 's work would have been lost to history . Yu designed a famous wooden pagoda that burned down in 1044 and was replaced in 1049 by a brick pagoda ( the ' Iron Pagoda ' ) of similar height , but not of his design . From Shen 's quotation — or perhaps Shen 's own paraphrasing of Yu Hao 's Timberwork Manual ( <unk> ; <unk> ) — shows that already in the 10th century there was a graded system of building unit proportions , a system which Shen states had become more precise in his time but stating no one could possibly reproduce such a sound work . However , he did not anticipate the more complex and matured system of unit proportions embodied in the extensive written work by scholar @-@ official Li Jie ( 1065 – 1110 ) , the Treatise on Architectural Methods ( <unk> ; Yingzao Fashi ) of 1103 . Klaas <unk> states that the version of the Timberwork Manual quoted by Shen is most likely Shen 's <unk> of Yu 's work or a corrupted passage of the original by Yu Hao , as Shen writes : " According to some , the work was written by Yu Hao . " 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 The Chinese had long taken an interest in examining the human body . For example , in 16 AD the Xin Dynasty usurper Wang Mang called for the dissection of an executed man , to examine his arteries and viscera in order to discover cures for illnesses . Shen also took interest in human anatomy , dispelling the long @-@ held Chinese theory that the throat contained three valves , writing , " When liquid and solid are imbibed together , how can it be that in one 's mouth they sort themselves into two throat channels ? " Shen maintained that the larynx was the beginning of a system that distributed vital qi from the air throughout the body , and that the esophagus was a simple tube that dropped food into the stomach . Following Shen 's reasoning and correcting the findings of the dissection of executed bandits in 1045 , an early 12th @-@ century Chinese account of a bodily dissection finally supported Shen 's belief in two throat valves , not three . Also , the later Song Dynasty judge and early forensic expert Song Ci ( 1186 – 1249 ) would promote the use of autopsy in order to solve homicide cases , as written in his Collected Cases of Injustice <unk> . 
 = = = Mathematics and optics = = = 
 In the broad field of mathematics , Shen Kuo mastered many practical mathematical problems , including many complex formulas for geometry , circle packing , and chords and arcs problems employing trigonometry . Shen addressed problems of writing out very large numbers , as large as 1043 . Shen 's " technique of small increments " laid the foundation in Chinese mathematics for packing problems involving equal difference series . Sal <unk> writes that Shen used summation of higher series to ascertain the number of kegs which could be piled in layers in a space shaped like the frustum of a rectangular pyramid . In his formula " technique of intersecting circles " , he created an approximation of the arc of a circle s given the diameter d , <unk> v , and length of the chord c <unk> the arc , the length of which he approximated as s = c + <unk> / d . <unk> writes that Shen 's work in the lengths of arcs of circles provided the basis for spherical trigonometry developed in the 13th century by Guo Shoujing ( 1231 – 1316 ) . He also simplified the counting rods technique by outlining short cuts in algorithm procedures used on the counting board , an idea expanded on by the mathematician Yang Hui ( 1238 – 1298 ) . Victor J. Katz asserts that Shen 's method of " dividing by 9 , increase by 1 ; dividing by 8 , increase by 2 , " was a direct forerunner to the rhyme scheme method of repeated addition " 9 , 1 , bottom add 1 ; 9 , 2 , bottom add 2 " . 
 Shen wrote extensively about what he had learned while working for the state treasury , including mathematical problems posed by computing land tax , estimating requirements , currency issues , metrology , and so forth . Shen once computed the amount of terrain space required for battle formations in military strategy , and also computed the longest possible military campaign given the limits of human carriers who would bring their own food and food for other soldiers . Shen wrote about the earlier Yi Xing ( 672 – 717 ) , a Buddhist monk who applied an early escapement mechanism to a water @-@ powered celestial globe . By using mathematical permutations , Shen described Yi Xing 's calculation of possible positions on a go board game . Shen calculated the total number for this using up to five rows and twenty five game pieces , which yielded the number 847 @,@ 288 @,@ 609 @,@ 443 . 
 Shen Kuo experimented with the pinhole camera and burning mirror as the ancient Chinese <unk> had done in the 4th century BC . Although the Iraqi Muslim scientist Ibn al @-@ Haytham ( 965 – 1039 ) was the first to experiment with camera obscura , Shen Kuo was the first to attribute geometrical and quantitative properties to the camera obscura , just several decades after Ibn al @-@ Haytham 's death . Using a fitting metaphor , Shen compared optical image inversion to an <unk> and waisted drum . He also discussed focal points and noted that the image in a concave mirror is inverted . Shen , who never asserted that he was the first to experiment with camera obscura , hints in his writing that camera obscura was dealt with in the Miscellaneous <unk> from <unk> written by Duan Chengshi ( d . 863 ) during the Tang Dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) , in regard to the inverted image of a Chinese pagoda by a seashore . 
 = = = Magnetic needle compass = = = 
 Since the time of the engineer and inventor Ma Jun ( c . 200 – 265 ) , the Chinese had used the south @-@ pointing chariot , which did not employ magnetism , as a compass . In 1044 the Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques ( <unk> ; Wujing Zongyao ) recorded that fish @-@ shaped objects cut from sheet iron , magnetized by thermoremanence ( essentially , heating that produced weak magnetic force ) , and placed in a water @-@ filled bowl enclosed by a box were used for directional pathfinding alongside the south @-@ pointing chariot . 
 However , it was not until the time of Shen Kuo that the earliest magnetic compasses would be used for navigation . In his written work , Shen Kuo made the first known explicit reference to the magnetic compass @-@ needle and the concept of true north . He wrote that steel needles were magnetized once they were rubbed with lodestone , and that they were put in floating position or in mountings ; he described the suspended compass as the best form to be used , and noted that the magnetic needle of compasses pointed either south or north . Shen Kuo asserted that the needle will point south but with a deviation , stating " [ the magnetic needles ] are always displaced slightly east rather than pointing due south . " 
 Shen Kuo wrote that it was preferable to use the twenty @-@ four @-@ point rose instead of the old eight compass cardinal points — and the former was recorded in use for navigation shortly after Shen 's death . The preference of use for the twenty @-@ four @-@ point @-@ rose compass may have arisen from Shen 's finding of a more accurate astronomical meridian , determined by his measurement between the pole star and true north ; however , it could also have been inspired by geomantic beliefs and practices . The book of the author Zhu Yu , the Pingzhou Table Talks published in 1119 ( written from 1111 to 1117 ) , was the first record of use of a compass for seafaring navigation . However , Zhu Yu 's book recounts events back to 1086 , when Shen Kuo was writing the Dream Pool Essays ; this meant that in Shen 's time the compass might have already been in navigational use . In any case , Shen Kuo 's writing on magnetic compasses has proved invaluable for understanding China 's earliest use of the compass for seafaring navigation . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 Many of Shen Kuo 's contemporaries were interested in antiquarian pursuits of collecting old artworks . They were also interested in archaeological pursuits , although for rather different reasons than why Shen Kuo held an interest in archaeology . While Shen 's educated Confucian contemporaries were interested in obtaining ancient relics and antiques in order to revive their use in rituals , Shen was more concerned with how items from archeological finds were originally manufactured and what their functionality would have been , based on empirical evidence . Shen Kuo criticized those in his day who reconstructed ancient ritual objects using only their imagination and not the tangible evidence from archeological digs or finds . Shen also disdained the notion of others that these objects were products of the " sages " or the aristocratic class of antiquity , rightfully crediting the items ' manufacture and production to the common working people and artisans of previous eras . Fraser and Haber write that Shen Kuo " advocated the use of an interdisciplinary approach to archaeology and practiced such an approach himself through his work in metallurgy , optics , and geometry in the study of ancient measures . " 
 While working in the Bureau of Astronomy , Shen Kuo 's interest in archaeology and old relics led him to reconstruct an armillary sphere from existing models as well as from ancient texts that could provide additional information . Shen used ancient mirrors while conducting his optics experiments . He observed ancient weaponry , describing the scaled sight devices on ancient crossbows and the ancients ' production of swords with composite blades that had a midrib of wrought iron and low @-@ carbon steel while having two sharp edges of high @-@ carbon steel . Being a knowledgeable musician , Shen also suggested suspending an ancient bell by using a hollow handle . In his assessment of the carved reliefs of the ancient <unk> Tomb , Shen stated that the reliefs demonstrate genuine Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) era clothing . 
 After unearthing an ancient crossbow device from a house 's garden in <unk> , Jiangsu , Shen discovered that the cross @-@ wire grid sighting device , marked in graduated measurements on the stock , could be used to calculate the height of a distant mountain in the same way that mathematicians could apply right @-@ angle triangles to measure height . Needham asserts Shen had discovered the survey device known as Jacob 's staff , which was not described elsewhere until the Provençal Jewish mathematician Levi ben Gerson ( 1288 – 1344 ) wrote of it in 1321 . Shen wrote that while viewing the whole of a mountain , the distance on the instrument was long , but while viewing a small part of the mountainside the distance was short due to the device 's cross piece that had to be pushed further away from the observer 's eye , with the graduation starting on the further end . He wrote that if one placed an arrow on the device and looked past its end , the degree of the mountain could be measured and thus its height could be calculated . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The ancient Greek Aristotle ( 384 BC – 322 BC ) wrote in his Meteorology of how the earth had the potential for physical change , including the belief that all rivers and seas at one time did not exist where they were , and were dry . The Greek writer Xenophanes ( 570 BC – 480 BC ) wrote of how inland marine fossils were evidence that massive periodic flooding had wiped out mankind several times in the past , but never wrote of land formation or shifting seashores . Du Yu ( 222 – 285 ) a Chinese Jin Dynasty officer , believed that the land of hills would eventually be leveled into valleys and valleys would gradually rise to form hills . The Daoist alchemist Ge Hong ( 284 – 364 ) wrote of the legendary immortal <unk> ; in a written dialogue by Ge , Ma Gu described how what was once the Eastern Sea ( i.e. East China Sea ) had transformed into solid land where mulberry trees grew , and would one day be filled with mountains and dry , dusty lands . The later Persian Muslim scholar Abū Rayhān al @-@ Bīrūnī ( 973 – 1048 ) hypothesized that India was once covered by the Indian Ocean while observing rock formations at the mouths of rivers . 
 It was Shen Kuo who formulated a hypothesis about the process of land formation ( geomorphology ) based upon several observations as evidence . This included his observation of fossil shells in a geological stratum of a mountain hundreds of miles from the ocean . He inferred that the land was reshaped and formed by erosion of the mountains , uplift , and the deposition of silt , after observing strange natural <unk> of the Taihang Mountains and the <unk> Mountain near Wenzhou . He hypothesized that , with the inundation of silt , the land of the continent must have been formed over an enormous span of time . While visiting the Taihang Mountains in 1074 , Shen Kuo noticed strata of bivalve shells and ovoid rocks in a horizontal @-@ running span through a cliff like a large belt . Shen proposed that the cliff was once the location of an ancient seashore that by his time had shifted hundreds of miles east . Shen wrote that in the Zhiping reign period ( 1064 – 1067 ) a man of <unk> unearthed an object in his garden that looked like a serpent or dragon , and after examining it , concluded the dead animal had apparently turned to " stone " . The magistrate of <unk> , Zheng <unk> , examined the creature as well , and noted the same scale @-@ like markings that were seen on other marine animals . Shen Kuo likened this to the " stone crabs " found in China . 
 Shen also wrote that since petrified bamboos were found underground in a climatic area where they had never been known to be grown , the climate there must have shifted geographically over time . Around the year 1080 , Shen Kuo noted that a landslide on the bank of a large river near Yanzhou ( modern Yan 'an ) had revealed an open space several dozens of feet under the ground once the bank collapsed . This underground space contained hundreds of petrified bamboos still intact with roots and trunks , " all turned to stone " as Shen Kuo wrote . Shen Kuo noted that bamboos do not grow in Yanzhou , located in northern China , and he was puzzled during which previous dynasty the bamboos could have grown . Considering that damp and gloomy low places provide suitable conditions for the growth of bamboo , Shen deduced that the climate of Yanzhou must have fit that description in very ancient times . Although this would have intrigued many of his readers , the study of <unk> in medieval China never developed into an established discipline . 
 The philosopher Zhu Xi ( 1130 – 1200 ) wrote of this curious natural phenomenon of fossils as well . He was known to have read the works of Shen Kuo . Shen 's description of soil erosion and weathering predated that of Georgius Agricola in his book of 1546 , De <unk> et <unk> <unk> . Furthermore , Shen 's theory of sedimentary deposition predated that of James Hutton , who published his groundbreaking work in 1802 ( considered the foundation of modern geology ) . Historian Joseph Needham likened Shen 's account to that of the Scottish scientist Roderick Murchison ( 1792 – 1871 ) , who was inspired to become a geologist after observing a providential landslide . 
 = = = Meteorology = = = 
 Early speculation and hypothesis pertaining to what is now known as meteorology had a long tradition in China before Shen Kuo . 
 Shen wrote vivid descriptions of tornadoes — the first known description of them in East Asia . 
 He also gave reasoning ( earlier proposed by Sun <unk> , 1015 – 1076 ) that rainbows were formed by the shadow of the sun in rain , occurring when the sun would shine upon it . Paul Dong writes that Shen 's explanation of the rainbow as a phenomenon of atmospheric refraction " is basically in accord with modern scientific principles . " In Europe , Roger Bacon ( 1214 – 1294 ) was the first to suggest that the colors of the rainbow were caused by the reflection and refraction of sunlight through rain drops . 
 Shen hypothesized that rays of sunlight refract before reaching the surface of the earth , hence people on earth observing the sun are not viewing it in its exact position , in other words , the altitude of the apparent sun is higher than the actual altitude of the sun . Dong writes that " at the time , this discovery was remarkably original . " Ibn al @-@ Haytham , in his Book of Optics ( 1021 ) , also discussed atmospheric refraction ( in regard to twilight ) . 
 = = = Astronomy and instruments = = = 
 Being the head official for the Bureau of Astronomy , Shen Kuo was an avid scholar of medieval astronomy , and improved the designs of several astronomical instruments . Shen is credited with making improved designs of the gnomon , armillary sphere , and clepsydra clock . For the clepsydra he designed a new overflow @-@ tank type , and argued for a more efficient higher @-@ order interpolation instead of linear interpolation in calibrating the measure of time . Improving the 5th century model of the astronomical sighting tube , Shen Kuo widened its diameter so that the new calibration could observe the pole star indefinitely . This came about due to the position of the pole star shifting in position since the time of Zu Geng in the 5th century , hence Shen Kuo diligently observed the course of the pole star for three months , plotting the data of its course and coming to the conclusion that it had shifted slightly over three degrees . Apparently this astronomical finding had an impact upon the intellectual community in China at the time . Even Shen 's political rival and contemporary astronomer Su Song featured Shen 's corrected position of the pole star ( halfway between Tian shu , at − 350 degrees , and the current Polaris ) in the fourth star map of his celestial atlas . 
 The astronomical phenomena of the solar eclipse and lunar eclipse had been observed in the 4th century BC by astronomers Gan De and Shi Shen ; the latter gave instructions on predicting the eclipses based on the relative position of the Moon to the Sun . The philosopher Wang Chong argued against the ' radiating influence ' theory of Jing Fang 's writing in the 1st century BC and that of Zhang Heng ( 78 – 139 ) ; the latter two correctly hypothesized that the brightness of the Moon was merely light reflected from the Sun . Jing Fang had written in the 1st century BC of how it was long accepted in China that the Sun and Moon were spherical in shape ( ' like a crossbow bullet ' ) , not flat . Shen Kuo also wrote of solar and lunar eclipses in this manner , yet expanded upon this to explain why the celestial bodies were spherical , going against the ' flat earth ' theory for celestial bodies . However , there is no evidence to suggest that Shen Kuo supported a round earth theory , which was introduced into Chinese science by Matteo Ricci and Xu Guangqi in the 17th century . When the Director of the Astronomical Observatory asked Shen Kuo if the shapes of the Sun and Moon were round like balls or flat like fans , Shen Kuo explained that celestial bodies were spherical because of knowledge of waxing and waning of the Moon . Much like what Zhang Heng had said , Shen Kuo likened the Moon to a ball of silver , which does not produce light , but simply reflects light if provided from another source ( the Sun ) . He explained that when the Sun 's light is slanting , the Moon appears full . He then explained if one were to cover any sort of sphere with white powder , and then viewed from the side it would appear to be a crescent , hence he reasoned that celestial bodies were spherical . He also wrote that , although the Sun and Moon were in conjunction and opposition with each other once a month , this did not mean the Sun would be eclipsed every time their paths met , because of the small obliquity of their orbital paths . 
 Shen is also known for his cosmological hypotheses in explaining the variations of planetary motions , including retrogradation . His colleague Wei Pu realized that the old calculation technique for the mean Sun was inaccurate compared to the apparent Sun , since the latter was ahead of it in the accelerated phase of motion , and behind it in the retarded phase . Shen 's hypotheses were similar to the concept of the epicycle in the Greco @-@ Roman tradition , only Shen compared the side @-@ section of orbital paths of planets and variations of planetary speeds to points in the tips of a willow leaf . In a similar rudimentary physical analogy of celestial motions , as John B. Henderson describes it , Shen likened the relationship of the Moon 's path to the ecliptic , the path of the Sun , " to the figure of a rope coiled about a tree . " 
 Along with his colleague Wei Pu in the Bureau of Astronomy , Shen Kuo planned to plot out the exact coordinates of planetary and lunar movements by recording their astronomical observations three times a night for a continuum of five years . The Song astronomers of Shen 's day still retained the lunar theory and coordinates of the earlier Yi Xing , which after 350 years had devolved into a state of considerable error . Shen criticized earlier Chinese astronomers for failing to describe celestial movement in spatial terms , yet he did not attempt to provide any reasoning for the motive power of the planets or other celestial movements . Shen and Wei began astronomical observations for the Moon and planets by plotting their locations three times a night for what should have been five successive years . The officials and astronomers at court were deeply opposed Wei and Shen 's work , offended by their insistence that the coordinates of the renowned Yi Xing were inaccurate . They also slandered Wei Pu , out of resentment that a commoner had expertise exceeding theirs . When Wei and Shen made a public demonstration using the gnomon to prove the doubtful wrong , the other ministers reluctantly agreed to correct the lunar and solar errors . Despite this success , they eventually dismissed Wei and Shen 's tables of planetary motions . Therefore , only the worst and most obvious planetary errors were corrected , and many inaccuracies remained . 
 = = = Movable type printing = = = 
 Shen Kuo wrote that during the Qingli reign period ( 1041 – 1048 ) , under Emperor Renzong of Song ( 1022 – 1063 ) , an obscure commoner and artisan known as Bi Sheng ( 990 – 1051 ) invented ceramic movable type printing . Although the use of assembling individual characters to compose a piece of text had its origins in antiquity , Bi Sheng 's methodical innovation was something completely revolutionary for his time . Shen Kuo noted that the process was tedious if one only wanted to print a few copies of a book , but if one desired to make hundreds or thousands of copies , the process was incredibly fast and efficient . Beyond Shen Kuo 's writing , however , nothing is known of Bi Sheng 's life or the influence of movable type in his lifetime . Although the details of Bi Sheng 's life were scarcely known , Shen Kuo wrote : 
 When Bi Sheng died , his fount of type passed into the possession of my followers ( i.e. one of Shen 's nephews ) , among whom it has been kept as a precious possession until now . 
 There are a few surviving examples of books printed in the late Song Dynasty using movable type printing . This includes Zhou Bida 's Notes of The Jade Hall ( <unk> ) printed in 1193 using the method of baked @-@ clay movable type characters outlined in the Dream Pool Essays . Yao Shu ( 1201 – 1278 ) , an advisor to Kublai Khan , once persuaded a disciple Yang Gu to print philological primers and Neo @-@ Confucian texts by using what he termed the " movable type of Shen Kuo " . Wang Zhen ( fl . 1290 – 1333 ) , who wrote the valuable agricultural , scientific , and technological treatise of the Nong Shu , mentioned an alternative method of baking earthenware type with earthenware frames in order to make whole blocks . Wang Zhen also improved its use by inventing wooden movable type in the years 1297 or 1298 , while he was a magistrate of <unk> , Anhui province . The earlier Bi Sheng had experimented with wooden movable type , but Wang 's main contribution was improving the speed of typesetting with simple mechanical devices , along with the complex , systematic arrangement of wooden movable type involving the use of revolving tables . Although later metal movable type would be used in China , Wang Zhen experimented with tin metal movable type , but found its use to be inefficient . 
 By the 15th century , metal movable type printing was developed in Ming Dynasty China ( and earlier in Joseon Korea , by the mid 13th century ) , and was widely applied in China by at least the 16th century . In Jiangsu and Fujian , wealthy Ming era families sponsored the use of metal type printing ( mostly using bronze ) . This included the printing works of Hua Sui ( 1439 – 1513 ) , who pioneered the first Chinese bronze @-@ type movable printing in the year 1490 . In 1718 , during the mid Qing Dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) , the scholar of Tai 'an known as Xu <unk> developed movable type with enamelware instead of earthenware . There was also Zhai <unk> ( b . 1784 ) , a teacher of <unk> , Anhui , who spent thirty years making a font of earthenware movable type , and by 1844 he had over 100 @,@ 000 Chinese writing characters in five sizes . 
 Despite these advances , movable type printing never gained the amount of widespread use in East Asia that woodblock printing had achieved since the Chinese Tang Dynasty in the 9th century . With written Chinese , the vast amount of written morpheme characters impeded movable type 's acceptance and practical use , and was therefore seen as largely unsatisfactory . Furthermore , the European printing press , first invented by Johannes Gutenberg ( 1398 – 1468 ) , was eventually wholly adopted as the standard in China , yet the tradition of woodblock printing remains popular in East Asian countries still . 
 = = = Other achievements in science and technology = = = 
 Shen Kuo described the phenomena of natural predator insects controlling the population of pests , the latter of which had the potential to wreak havoc upon the agricultural base of China . 
 While visiting the iron producing district at <unk> in 1075 , Shen described the " partial decarburization " method of reforging cast iron under a cold blast , which Hartwell , Needham , and <unk> state is the predecessor of the Bessemer process . Shen was worried about deforestation due to the needs of the iron industry and ink makers using pine soot in the production process , so he suggested for the latter an alternative of petroleum , which he believed was " produced <unk> within the earth " . Shen used the soot from the smoke of burned petroleum fuel ( <unk> <unk> , " rock oil " as Shen called it ) to invent a new , more durable type of writing ink ; the Ming Dynasty pharmacologist Li Shizhen ( 1518 – 1593 ) wrote that Shen 's ink was " lustrous like lacquer , and superior to that made from pinewood lamp @-@ black , " or the soot from pinewood . 
 = = = Beliefs and philosophy = = = 
 Shen Kuo was much in favor of philosophical Daoist notions which challenged the authority of empirical science in his day . Although much could be discerned through empirical observation and recorded study , Daoism asserted that the secrets of the universe were boundless , something that scientific investigation could merely express in fragments and partial understandings . Shen Kuo referred to the ancient Daoist I Ching in explaining the spiritual processes and attainment of foreknowledge that cannot be attained through " crude traces " , which he likens to mathematical astronomy . Nathan Sivin proposes that Shen was the first in history to " make a clear distinction between our unconnected experiences and the unitary causal world we postulate to explain them , " which <unk> and <unk> state is arguably inherent in the works of Heraclitus , Plato , and Democritus as well . Shen was a firm believer in destiny and prognostication , and made rational explanations for the relations between them . Shen held a special interest in fate , mystical divination , bizarre phenomena , yet warned against the tendency to believe that all matters in life were preordained . When describing an event where lightning had struck a house and all the wooden walls did not burn ( but simply turned black ) and lacquerwares inside were fine , yet metal objects had melted into liquid , Shen Kuo wrote : 
 Most people can only judge of things by the experiences of ordinary life , but phenomena outside the scope of this are really quite numerous . How insecure it is to investigate natural principles using only the light of common knowledge , and subjective ideas . 
 In his commentary on the ancient Confucian philosopher Mencius ( 372 – 289 BC ) , Shen wrote of the importance of choosing to follow what one knew to be a true path , yet the heart and mind could not attain full knowledge of truth through mere sensory experience . In his own unique way but using terms influenced by the ideas of Mencius , Shen wrote of an autonomous inner authority that formed the basis for one 's inclination towards moral choices , a concept linked to Shen 's life experiences of surviving and obtaining success through self @-@ reliance . Along with his commentary on the Chinese classic texts , Shen Kuo also wrote extensively on the topics of supernatural divination and Buddhist meditation . 
 = = = Art criticism = = = 
 As an art critic , Shen criticized the paintings of Li Cheng ( 919 – 967 ) for failing to observe the principle of " seeing the small from the viewpoint of the large " in portraying buildings and the like . He praised the works of Dong Yuan ( c . 934 – c . 962 ) ; he noted that although a close @-@ up view of Dong 's work would create the impression that his brush techniques were cursory , seen from afar his landscape paintings would give the impression of grand , resplendent , and realistic scenery . In addition , Shen 's writing on Dong 's artworks represents the earliest known reference to the Jiangnan style of painting . In his " Song on Painting " and in his Dream Pool Essays , Shen praised the creative artworks of the Tang painter Wang Wei ( 701 – 761 ) ; Shen noted that Wang was unique in that he " penetrated into the mysterious reason and depth of creative activity , " but was criticized by others for not conforming his paintings to reality , such as his painting with a banana tree growing in a snowy , wintry landscape . 
 = = Written works = = 
 Much of Shen Kuo 's written work was probably purged under the leadership of minister Cai Jing ( 1046 – 1126 ) , who revived the New Policies of Wang Anshi , although he set out on a campaign of attrition to destroy or radically alter the written work of his predecessors and especially Conservative enemies . For example , only six of Shen 's books remain , and four of these have been significantly altered since the time they were penned by the author . 
 In modern times , the best attempt at a complete list and summary of Shen 's writing was an appendix written by Hu <unk> in his standard edition of Brush Talks , written in 1956 . 
 = = = Dream Pool Essays = = = 
 Shen Kuo 's Dream Pool Essays consists of some 507 separate essays exploring a wide range of subjects . It was Shen 's ultimate attempt to comprehend and describe a multitude of various aspects of nature , science , and reality , and all the practical and profound curiosities found in the world . The literal translation of the title , Dream Brook Brush Talks , refers to his Dream Brook estate , where he spent the last years of his life . About the title , he is quoted as saying : " Because I had only my writing brush and ink slab to converse with , I call it Brush Talks . " 
 The book was originally 30 chapters long , yet an unknown Chinese author 's edition of 1166 edited and reorganized the work into 26 chapters . 
 A passage called " Strange Happenings " contains a peculiar account of an unidentified flying object . 
 = = = Other written works = = = 
 Although the Dream Pool Essays is certainly his most extensive and important work , Shen Kuo wrote other books as well . In 1075 , Shen Kuo wrote the Xining <unk> Li ( <unk> ; The <unk> Epoch astronomical system of the Splendid Peace reign period ) , which was lost , but listed in a 7th chapter of a Song Dynasty bibliography . This was the official report of Shen Kuo on his reforms of the Chinese calendar , which were only partially adopted by the Song court 's official calendar system . During his years of retirement from governmental service , Shen Kuo compiled a <unk> known as the Liang Fang ( <unk> ; Good medicinal formulas ) . Around the year 1126 it was combined with a similar collection by the famous Su Shi ( 1037 – 1101 ) , who was ironically a political opponent to Shen Kuo 's faction of Reformers and New Policies supporters at court , yet it was known that Shen Kuo and Su Shi were nonetheless friends and associates . Shen wrote the <unk> <unk> Lu ( <unk> ; Record of longings forgotten at Dream Brook ) , which was also compiled during Shen 's retirement . This book was a treatise in the working since his youth on rural life and ethnographic accounts of living conditions in the isolated mountain regions of China . Only quotations of it survive in the <unk> Fu ( <unk> ) collection , which mostly describe the agricultural implements and tools used by rural people in high mountain regions . Shen Kuo also wrote the Changxing Ji ( <unk> ; Collected Literary Works of [ the Viscount of ] Changxing ) . However , this book was without much doubt a posthumous collection , including various poems , prose , and administrative documents written by Shen . By the 15th century ( during the Ming Dynasty ) , this book was reprinted , yet only the 19th chapter remained . This chapter was reprinted in 1718 , yet poorly edited . Finally , in the 1950s the author Hu <unk> supplemented this small yet valuable work with additions of other scattered poems written by Shen , in the former 's Collection of Shen <unk> 's Extant Poetry ( Shanghai : Shang @-@ hai Shu @-@ <unk> , 1958 ) . In the tradition of the popular Song era literary category of ' travel record literature ' ( ' <unk> <unk> ' ) , Shen Kuo also wrote the Register of What Not to Forget , a traveler 's guide to what type of carriage is suitable for a journey , the proper foods one should bring , the special clothing one should bring , and many other items . 
 In his Sequel to Numerous Things Revealed , the Song author Cheng <unk> ( 1123 – 1195 ) noted that stanzas prepared by Shen Kuo for military victory celebrations were later written down and published by Shen . This includes a short poem " Song of Triumph " by Shen Kuo , who uses the musical instrument <unk> <unk> ( ' horse @-@ tail barbarian stringed instrument ' or ' horse @-@ tail fiddle ' ) of the northwestern Inner Asian nomads as a metaphor for prisoners @-@ of @-@ war led by Song troops : 
 Historian Jonathan Stock notes that the bent bow described in the poem above represents the arched bow used to play the <unk> , while the sound of the instrument itself represented the discontent expressed by the prisoners @-@ of @-@ war with their defeated khan . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Praise , critique , and criticism = = = 
 In the Routledge Curzon Encyclopedia of Confucianism , <unk> Yao states that Shen Kuo 's legacy was tainted by his eager involvement in Wang Anshi 's New Policies reforms , his actions criticized in the later traditional histories . However , Shen 's reputation as a polymath has been well regarded . The British sinologist , historian , and biochemist Joseph Needham ( 1900 – 1995 ) stated that Shen Kuo was " one of the greatest scientific minds in Chinese history . " The French sinologist Jacques Gernet is of the opinion that Shen possessed an " amazingly modern mind . " Yao states of Shen 's thorough recording of natural sciences in his Dream Pool Essays : 
 We must regard Shen Kuo 's collection as an indispensable primary source attesting to the unmatched level of attainment achieved by Chinese science prior to the twelfth century . 
 However , Toby E. Huff writes that Shen Kuo 's " scattered set " of writings lacks clear @-@ cut organization and " theoretical acuteness , " that is , scientific theory . Nathan Sivin wrote that Shen 's originality stands " cheek by jowl with trivial didacticism , court anecdotes , and ephemeral curiosities " that provide little insight . Donald Holzman writes that Shen " has nowhere organized his observations into anything like a general theory . " Huff writes that this was a systemic problem of early Chinese science , which lacked systematic treatment that could be found in European works such as the Concordance and Discordant Canons by the lawyer Gratian of Bologna ( fl . 12th century ) . In regard to an overarching concept of science which could branch together all the various sciences studied by the Chinese , Sivin asserts that the writings of Shen Kuo " do not indicate that he achieved , or even sought , an integrated framework for his diverse knowledge ; the one common thread is the varied responsibilities of his career as a high civil servant . " 
 = = = Burial and posthumous honors = = = 
 Upon his death , Shen Kuo was interred in a tomb in <unk> District of Hangzhou , at the foot of the Taiping Hill . His tomb was eventually destroyed , yet Ming Dynasty records indicated its location , which was found in 1983 and protected by the government in 1986 . The remnants of the tomb 's brick structure remained , along with Song Dynasty glasswares and coins . The Hangzhou Municipal Committee completed a restoration of Shen 's tomb in September 2001 . 
 In addition to his tomb , Shen Kuo 's Mengxi garden estate , his former two acre ( 8 @,@ 000 m ² ) property in Zhenjiang , was restored by the government in 1985 . However , the renovated Mengxi Garden is only part of the original of Shen Kuo 's time . A Qing Dynasty era hall built on the site is now used as the main admissions gate . In the Memorial Hall of the gardens , there is a large painting depicting the original garden of Shen Kuo 's time , including wells , green bamboo groves , stone @-@ paved paths , and decorated walls of the original halls . In this exhibition hall there stands a 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) tall statue of Shen Kuo sitting on a platform , along with centuries @-@ old published copies of his Dream Pool Essays in glass cabinets , one of which is from Japan . At the garden estate there are also displayed marble banners , statues of Shen Kuo , and a model of an armillary sphere ; a small museum gallery depicts Shen 's various achievements . 
 The Chinese Mount Zijinshan Observatory discovered a new planetoid in 1964 ; in 1979 , the Chinese Academy of Sciences decided to honor Shen by listing " Shen Kuo " as one of its names . 
 = Conscience = 
 Conscience is an aptitude , faculty , intuition or judgment that assists in distinguishing right from wrong . Moral judgment may derive from values or norms ( principles and rules ) . In psychological terms conscience is often described as leading to feelings of remorse when a human commits actions that go against his / her moral values and to feelings of rectitude or integrity when actions conform to such norms . The extent to which conscience informs moral judgment before an action and whether such moral judgments are or should be based in reason has occasioned debate through much of the history of Western philosophy . 
 Religious views of conscience usually see it as linked to a morality inherent in all humans , to a beneficent universe and / or to divinity . The diverse ritualistic , mythical , doctrinal , legal , institutional and material features of religion may not necessarily cohere with experiential , emotive , spiritual or contemplative considerations about the origin and operation of conscience . Common secular or scientific views regard the capacity for conscience as probably genetically determined , with its subject probably learned or imprinted ( like language ) as part of a culture . 
 Commonly used metaphors for conscience include the " voice within " and the " inner light " . Conscience , as is detailed in sections below , is a concept in national and international law , is increasingly conceived of as applying to the world as a whole , has motivated numerous notable acts for the public good and been the subject of many prominent examples of literature , music and film . 
 = = Religious , secular and philosophical views about conscience = = 
 Although humanity has no generally accepted definition of conscience or universal agreement about its role in ethical decision @-@ making , three approaches have addressed it : 
 Religious views 
 Secular views 
 Philosophical views 
 = = Religious views = = 
 In the literary traditions of the Upanishads , Brahma Sutras and the Bhagavad Gita , conscience is the label given to attributes composing knowledge about good and evil , that a soul acquires from the completion of acts and consequent accretion of karma over many lifetimes . According to Adi Shankara in his <unk> morally right action ( characterised as humbly and compassionately performing the primary duty of good to others without expectation of material or spiritual reward ) , helps " purify the heart " and provide mental tranquility but it alone does not give us " direct perception of the Reality " . This knowledge requires discrimination between the eternal and non @-@ eternal and eventually a realization in contemplation that the true self merges in a universe of pure consciousness . 
 In the Zoroastrian faith , after death a soul must face judgment at the Bridge of the Separator ; there , evil people are tormented by prior denial of their own higher nature , or conscience , and " to all time will they be guests for the House of the Lie . " The Chinese concept of Ren , indicates that conscience , along with social etiquette and correct relationships , assist humans to follow The Way ( Tao ) a mode of life reflecting the implicit human capacity for goodness and harmony . 
 Conscience also features prominently in Buddhism . In the Pali scriptures , for example , Buddha links the positive aspect of conscience to a pure heart and a calm , well @-@ directed mind . It is regarded as a spiritual power , and one of the “ Guardians of the World ” . The Buddha also associated conscience with compassion for those who must endure cravings and suffering in the world until right conduct culminates in right mindfulness and right contemplation . <unk> ( 685 – 763 CE ) wrote in the <unk> ( which he composed and delivered in the great northern Indian Buddhist university of Nalanda ) of the spiritual importance of perfecting virtues such as generosity , forbearance and training the awareness to be like a " block of wood " when attracted by vices such as pride or lust ; so one can continue advancing towards right understanding in meditative absorption . Conscience thus manifests in Buddhism as unselfish love for all living beings which gradually intensifies and awakens to a purer awareness where the mind withdraws from sensory interests and becomes aware of itself as a single whole . 
 The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote in his Meditations that conscience was the human capacity to live by rational principles that were congruent with the true , tranquil and harmonious nature of our mind and thereby that of the Universe : " To move from one unselfish action to another with God in mind . Only there , delight and stillness ... the only rewards of our existence here are an unstained character and unselfish acts . " 
 The Islamic concept of Taqwa is closely related to conscience . In the Qur ’ ān verses 2 : 197 & 22 : 37 Taqwa refers to " right conduct " or " piety " , " guarding of oneself " or " guarding against evil " . Qur ’ ān verse 47 : 17 says that God is the ultimate source of the believer 's taqwā which is not simply the product of individual will but requires inspiration from God . In Qur ’ ān verses 91 : 7 – 8 , God the Almighty talks about how He has perfected the soul , the conscience and has taught it the wrong ( <unk> ) and right ( taqwā ) . Hence , the awareness of vice and virtue is inherent in the soul , allowing it to be tested fairly in the life of this world and tried , held accountable on the day of judgment for responsibilities to God and all humans . 
 Qur ’ ān verse 49 : 13 states : " O humankind ! We have created you out of male and female and constituted you into different groups and societies , so that you may come to know each other @-@ the noblest of you , in the sight of God , are the ones possessing taqwā . " In Islam , according to eminent theologians such as Al @-@ Ghazali , although events are ordained ( and written by God in al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> , the Preserved Tablet ) , humans possess free will to choose between wrong and right , and are thus responsible for their actions ; the conscience being a dynamic personal connection to God enhanced by knowledge and practise of the Five Pillars of Islam , deeds of piety , repentance , self @-@ discipline and prayer ; and disintegrated and metaphorically covered in blackness through sinful acts . Marshall Hodgson wrote the three @-@ volume work : The Venture of Islam : Conscience and History in a World Civilization . 
 In the Protestant Christian tradition , Martin Luther insisted in the Diet of Worms that his conscience was captive to the Word of God , and it was neither safe nor right to go against conscience . To Luther , conscience falls within the ethical , rather than the religious , sphere . John Calvin saw conscience as a battleground : " [ ... ] the enemies who rise up in our conscience against his Kingdom and hinder his decrees prove that God 's throne is not firmly established therein " . Many Christians regard following one 's conscience as important as , or even more important than , obeying human authority . A fundamentalist Christian view of conscience might be : ' God gave us our conscience so we would know when we break His Law ; the guilt we feel when we do something wrong tells us that we need to repent . ' This can sometimes ( as with the conflict between William Tyndale and Thomas More over the translation of the Bible into English ) lead to moral quandaries : " Do I unreservedly obey my Church / priest / military / political leader or do I follow my own inner feeling of right and wrong as instructed by prayer and a personal reading of scripture ? " Some contemporary Christian churches and religious groups hold the moral teachings of the Ten Commandments or of Jesus as the highest authority in any situation , regardless of the extent to which it involves responsibilities in law . In the Gospel of John ( 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 ) ( King James Version ) Jesus challenges those accusing a woman of adultery stating : " ' He that is without sin among you , let him first cast a stone at her . ' And again he stooped down , and wrote on the ground . And they which heard it , being convicted by their own conscience , went out one by one " ( see Jesus and the woman taken in adultery ) . In the Gospel of Luke ( 10 : 25 – 37 ) Jesus tells the story of how a despised and heretical Samaritan ( see Parable of the Good Samaritan ) who ( out of compassion and conscience ) helps an injured stranger beside a road , qualifies better for eternal life by loving his neighbor , than a priest who passes by on the other side . 
 This dilemma of obedience in conscience to divine or state law , was demonstrated dramatically in Antigone 's defiance of King Creon 's order against burying her brother an alleged traitor , appealing to the " unwritten law " and to a " longer allegiance to the dead than to the living " . 
 Catholic theology sees conscience as the last practical " judgment of reason which at the appropriate moment enjoins [ a person ] to do good and to avoid evil " . Thus , conscience is not like the will , nor a habit like prudence , but " the interior space in which we can listen to and hear the truth , the good , the voice of God . It is the inner place of our relationship with Him , who speaks to our heart and helps us to discern , to understand the path we ought to take , and once the decision is made , to move forward , to remain faithful " In terms of logic , conscience can be viewed as the practical conclusion of a moral syllogism whose major premise is an objective norm and whose minor premise is a particular case or situation to which the norm is applied . Thus , Catholics are taught to carefully educate themselves as to revealed norms and norms derived therefrom , so as to form a correct conscience . Catholics are also to examine their conscience daily and with special care before confession . Catholic teaching holds that , " Man has the right to act according to his conscience and in freedom so as personally to make moral decisions . He must not be forced to act contrary to his conscience . Nor must he be prevented from acting according to his conscience , especially in religious matters " . This right of conscience does not allow one to arbitrarily disagree with Church teaching and claim that one is acting in accordance with conscience . A sincere conscience presumes one is diligently seeking moral truth from authentic sources , that is , seeking to conform oneself to that moral truth by listening to the authority established by Christ to teach it . Nevertheless , despite one 's best effort , " [ i ] t can happen that moral conscience remains in ignorance and makes erroneous judgments about acts to be performed or already committed ... This ignorance can often be imputed to personal responsibility ... In such cases , the person is culpable for the wrong he commits . " Some Catholics appeal to conscience in order to justify dissent , not on the level of conscience properly understood , but on the level of the principles and norms which are supposed to inform conscience . For example , some priests make on the use of the so @-@ called internal forum solution ( which is not sanctioned by the Magisterium ) to justify actions or lifestyles incompatible with Church teaching , such as Christ 's prohibition of remarriage after divorce or sexual activity outside marriage . The Catholic Church has warned that " rejection of the Church 's authority and her teaching ... can be at the source of errors in judgment in moral conduct " . 
 Judaism arguably does not require uncompromising obedience to religious authority ; the case has been made that throughout Jewish history rabbis have circumvented laws they found unconscionable , such as capital punishment . Similarly , although an occupation with national destiny has been central to the Jewish faith ( see Zionism ) many scholars ( including Moses Mendelssohn ) stated that conscience as a personal revelation of scriptural truth was an important adjunct to the Talmudic tradition . The concept of inner light in the Religious Society of Friends or Quakers is associated with conscience . Freemasonry describes itself as providing an adjunct to religion and key symbols found in a Freemason Lodge are the square and compasses explained as providing lessons that Masons should " square their actions by the square of conscience " , learn to " circumscribe their desires and keep their passions within due bounds toward all mankind . " The historian Manning Clark viewed conscience as one of the <unk> that religion placed between man and death but also a crucial part of the quest for grace encouraged by the Book of Job and the Book of Ecclesiastes , leading us to be paradoxically closest to the truth when we suspect that what matters most in life ( " being there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for " ) . Leo Tolstoy , after a decade studying the issue ( 1877 – 1887 ) , held that the only power capable of resisting the evil associated with materialism and the drive for social power of religious institutions , was the capacity of humans to reach an individual spiritual truth through reason and conscience . Many prominent religious works about conscience also have a significant philosophical component : examples are the works of Al @-@ Ghazali , Avicenna , Aquinas , Joseph Butler and Dietrich Bonhoeffer ( all discussed in the philosophical views section ) . 
 = = Secular views = = 
 The secular approach to conscience includes psychological , physiological , sociological , humanitarian and authoritarian views . Lawrence Kohlberg considered critical conscience to be an important psychological stage in the proper moral development of humans , associated with the capacity to rationally weigh principles of responsibility , being best encouraged in the very young by linkage with humorous personifications ( such as Jiminy Cricket ) and later in adolescents by debates about individually pertinent moral dilemmas . Erik Erikson placed the development of conscience in the ' pre @-@ schooler ' phase of his eight stages of normal human personality development . The psychologist Martha Stout terms conscience " an intervening sense of obligation based in our emotional attachments . " Thus a good conscience is associated with feelings of integrity , psychological wholeness and peacefulness and is often described using adjectives such as " quiet " , " clear " and " easy " . 
 Sigmund Freud regarded conscience as originating psychologically from the growth of civilisation , which periodically frustrated the external expression of aggression : this destructive impulse being forced to seek an alternative , healthy outlet , directed its energy as a superego against the person 's own " ego " or selfishness ( often taking its cue in this regard from parents during childhood ) . According to Freud , the consequence of not obeying our conscience is guilt , which can be a factor in the development of neurosis ; Freud claimed that both the cultural and individual super @-@ ego set up strict ideal demands with regard to the moral aspects of certain decisions , disobedience to which provokes a ' fear of conscience ' . 
 Antonio Damasio considers conscience an aspect of extended consciousness beyond survival @-@ related dispositions and incorporating the search for truth and desire to build norms and ideals for behavior . 
 = = = Conscience as society @-@ forming instincts = = = 
 Michel <unk> argues that conscience is one of the instincts and drives which enable people to form societies : groups of humans without these drives or in whom they are insufficient cannot form societies and do not reproduce their kind as successfully as those that do . 
 Charles Darwin considered that conscience evolved in humans to resolve conflicts between competing natural impulses @-@ some about self @-@ preservation but others about safety of a family or community ; the claim of conscience to moral authority emerged from the " greater duration of impression of social instincts " in the struggle for survival . In such a view , behavior destructive to a person 's society ( either to its structures or to the persons it comprises ) is bad or " evil " . Thus , conscience can be viewed as an outcome of those biological drives that prompt humans to avoid provoking fear or contempt in others ; being experienced as guilt and shame in differing ways from society to society and person to person . A requirement of conscience in this view is the capacity to see ourselves from the point of view of another person . Persons unable to do this ( psychopaths , sociopaths , narcissists ) therefore often act in ways which are " evil " . 
 Fundamental in this view of conscience is that humans consider some " other " as being in a social relationship . Thus , nationalism is invoked in conscience to quell tribal conflict and the notion of a Brotherhood of Man is invoked to quell national conflicts . Yet such crowd drives may not only overwhelm but redefine individual conscience . Friedrich Nietzsche stated : " communal solidarity is annihilated by the highest and strongest drives that , when they break out passionately , whip the individual far past the average low level of the ' herd @-@ conscience . ' Jeremy Bentham noted that : " fanaticism never sleeps ... it is never stopped by conscience ; for it has pressed conscience into its service . " Hannah Arendt in her study of the trial of Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem , notes that the accused , as with almost all his fellow Germans , had lost track of his conscience to the point where they hardly remembered it ; this wasn 't caused by familiarity with atrocities or by psychologically redirecting any resultant natural pity to themselves for having to bear such an unpleasant duty , so much as by the fact that anyone whose conscience did develop doubts could see no one who shared them : " Eichmann did not need to close his ears to the voice of conscience ... not because he had none , but because his conscience spoke with a " respectable voice " , with the voice of the respectable society around him " . 
 An interesting area of research in this context concerns the similarities between our relationships and those of animals , whether animals in human society ( pets , working animals , even animals grown for food ) or in the wild . One idea is that as people or animals perceive a social relationship as important to preserve , their conscience begins to respect that former " other " , and urge actions that protect it . Similarly , in complex territorial and cooperative breeding bird communities ( such as the Australian magpie ) that have a high degree of <unk> , rules , hierarchies , play , songs and negotiations , rule @-@ breaking seems tolerated on occasions not obviously related to survival of the individual or group ; behaviour often appearing to exhibit a touching gentleness and tenderness . 
 = = = Evolutionary biology and physics = = = 
 Contemporary scientists in ethology and evolutionary psychology seek to explain conscience as a function of the brain that evolved to facilitate altruism within societies . 
 In his book The God Delusion , Richard Dawkins states that he agrees with Robert Hinde 's Why Good is Good , Michael Shermer 's The Science of Good and Evil , Robert Buckman 's Can We Be Good Without God ? and Marc Hauser 's Moral Minds , that our sense of right and wrong can be derived from our Darwinian past . Christopher Hitchens in God is Not Great has argued that " Modern vernacular describes conscience – not too badly – as whatever it is that makes us behave well when nobody is looking ... Those who believe that the existence of conscience is a proof of a godly design are advancing an argument that simply cannot be disproved because there is no evidence for or against it . " Charles Lineweaver has argued that our " ideas of " good " and " evil " , and our consciences that we rely on to help us make moral decisions ( like <unk> ’ s Jiminy Cricket ) , are features of consciousness that have evolved under selection pressure , just like skin color , intestinal pH and fingernail growth rates . " 
 = = = Neuroscience and artificial conscience = = = 
 Numerous case studies of brain damage have shown that damage to areas of the brain ( such as the anterior prefrontal cortex ) results in the reduction or elimination of inhibitions , with a corresponding radical change in behaviour . When the damage occurs to adults , they may still be able to perform moral reasoning ; but when it occurs to children , they may never develop that ability . 
 Attempts have been made by neuroscientists to locate the free will necessary for what is termed the ' veto ' of conscience over unconscious mental processes ( see Neuroscience of free will and Benjamin <unk> ) in a scientifically measurable awareness of an intention to carry out an act occurring 350 – 400 microseconds after the electrical discharge known as the ' readiness <unk> 
 Jacques <unk> claims that some kind of artificial conscience is beneficial in artificial intelligence systems to improve their long @-@ term performance and direct their introspective processing . 
 = = Philosophical views = = 
 The word " conscience " derives etymologically from the Latin conscientia , meaning " privity of knowledge " or " with @-@ knowledge " . The English word implies internal awareness of a moral standard in the mind concerning the quality of one 's motives , as well as a consciousness of our own actions . Thus conscience considered philosophically may be first , and perhaps most commonly , a largely unexamined " gut feeling " or " vague sense of guilt " about what ought to be or should have been done . Conscience in this sense is not necessarily the product of a process of rational consideration of the moral features of a situation ( or the applicable normative principles , rules or laws ) and can arise from parental , peer group , religious , state or corporate indoctrination , which may or may not be presently consciously acceptable to the person ( " traditional conscience " ) . Conscience may be defined as the practical reason employed when applying moral convictions to a situation ( " critical conscience " ) . In purportedly morally mature mystical people who have developed this capacity through daily contemplation or meditation combined with selfless service to others , critical conscience can be aided by a " spark " of intuitive insight or revelation ( called <unk> in Islamic Sufi philosophy and synderesis in medieval Christian scholastic moral philosophy ) . Conscience is accompanied in each case by an internal awareness of ' inner light ' and approbation or ' inner darkness ' and condemnation as well as a resulting conviction of right or duty either followed or declined . 
 = = = Medieval philosophical views = = = 
 The medieval Islamic scholar and mystic Al @-@ Ghazali divided the concept of Nafs ( soul or self ( spirituality ) ) into three categories based on the Qur ’ an : 
 Nafs <unk> ( 12 : 53 ) which " exhorts one to freely indulge in gratifying passions and instigates to do evil " 
 Nafs <unk> ( 75 : 2 ) which is " the conscience that directs man towards right or wrong " 
 Nafs <unk> ( 89 : 27 ) which is " a self that reaches the ultimate peace " 
 The medieval Persian philosopher and physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al @-@ Razi believed in a close relationship between conscience or spiritual integrity and physical health ; rather than being self @-@ indulgent , man should pursue knowledge , use his intellect and apply justice in his life . The medieval Islamic philosopher Avicenna , whilst imprisoned in the castle of <unk> near <unk> , wrote his famous isolated @-@ but @-@ awake " Floating Man " sensory deprivation thought experiment to explore the ideas of human self @-@ awareness and the substantiality of the soul ; his hypothesis being that it is through intelligence , particularly the active intellect , that God communicates truth to the human mind or conscience . According to the Islamic Sufis conscience allows Allah to guide people to the <unk> , the peace or " light upon light " experienced where a Muslim 's prayers lead to a melting away of the self in the inner knowledge of God ; this foreshadowing the eternal Paradise depicted in the Qur ’ ān . 
 Some medieval Christian scholastics such as Bonaventure made a distinction between conscience as a rational faculty of the mind ( practical reason ) and inner awareness , an intuitive " spark " to do good , called synderesis arising from a remnant appreciation of absolute good and when consciously denied ( for example to perform an evil act ) , becoming a source of inner torment . Early modern theologians such as William Perkins and William Ames developed a syllogistic understanding of the conscience , where God 's law made the first term , the act to be judged the second and the action of the conscience ( as a rational faculty ) produced the judgement . By debating test cases applying such understanding conscience was trained and refined ( i.e. <unk> ) . 
 In the 13th century , St. Thomas Aquinas regarded conscience as the application of moral knowledge to a particular case ( S.T. I , q . 79 , a . 13 ) . Thus , conscience was considered an act or judgment of practical reason that began with synderesis , the structured development of our innate remnant awareness of absolute good ( which he categorised as involving the five primary precepts proposed in his theory of Natural Law ) into an acquired habit of applying moral principles . According to Singer , Aquinas held that conscience , or conscientia was an imperfect process of judgment applied to activity because knowledge of the natural law ( and all acts of natural virtue implicit therein ) was obscured in most people by education and custom that promoted selfishness rather than fellow @-@ feeling ( Summa <unk> , I – II , I ) . Aquinas also discussed conscience in relation to the virtue of prudence to explain why some people appear to be less " morally enlightened " than others , their weak will being incapable of adequately balancing their own needs with those of others . 
 Aquinas reasoned that acting contrary to conscience is an evil action but an errant conscience is only blameworthy if it is the result of culpable or <unk> ignorance of factors that one has a duty to have knowledge of . Aquinas also argued that conscience should be educated to act towards real goods ( from God ) which encouraged human flourishing , rather than the apparent goods of sensory pleasures . In his Commentary on Aristotle 's Nicomachean Ethics Aquinas claimed it was weak will that allowed a non @-@ virtuous man to choose a principle allowing pleasure ahead of one requiring moral constraint . 
 Thomas A Kempis in the medieval contemplative classic The Imitation of Christ ( ca 1418 ) stated that the glory of a good man is the witness of a good conscience . " Preserve a quiet conscience and you will always have joy . A quiet conscience can endure much , and remains joyful in all trouble , but an evil conscience is always fearful and uneasy . " The anonymous medieval author of the Christian mystical work The Cloud of <unk> similarly expressed the view that in profound and prolonged contemplation a soul dries up the " root and ground " of the sin that is always there , even after one 's confession and however busy one is in holy things : " therefore , whoever would work at becoming a contemplative must first cleanse his [ or her ] conscience . " The medieval Flemish mystic John of <unk> likewise held that true conscience has four aspects that are necessary to render a man just in the active and contemplative life : " a free spirit , attracting itself through love " ; " an intellect enlightened by grace " , " a delight yielding <unk> or inclination " and " an <unk> losing of oneself in the abyss of ... that eternal object which is the highest and chief blessedness ... those lofty amongst men , are absorbed in it , and immersed in a certain boundless thing . " 
 = = = Modern philosophical ideas = = = 
 Benedict de Spinoza in his Ethics , published after his death in 1677 , argued that most people , even those that consider themselves to exercise free will , make moral decisions on the basis of imperfect sensory information , inadequate understanding of their mind and will , as well as emotions which are both outcomes of their contingent physical existence and forms of thought defective from being chiefly impelled by self @-@ preservation . The solution , according to Spinoza , was to gradually increase the capacity of our reason to change the forms of thought produced by emotions and to fall in love with viewing problems requiring moral decision from the perspective of eternity . Thus , living a life of peaceful conscience means to Spinoza that reason is used to generate adequate ideas where the mind increasingly sees the world and its conflicts , our desires and passions sub specie <unk> , that is without reference to time . Hegel 's obscure and mystical Philosophy of Mind held that the absolute right of freedom of conscience facilitates human understanding of an all @-@ embracing unity , an absolute which was rational , real and true . Nevertheless , Hegel thought that a functioning State would always be tempted not to recognize conscience in its form of subjective knowledge , just as similar non @-@ objective opinions are generally rejected in science . A similar idealist notion was expressed in the writings of Joseph Butler who argued that conscience is God @-@ given , should always be obeyed , is intuitive , and should be considered the " constitutional monarch " and the " universal moral faculty " : " conscience does not only offer itself to show us the way we should walk in , but it likewise carries its own authority with it . " Butler advanced ethical speculation by referring to a duality of regulative principles in human nature : first , " self @-@ love " ( seeking individual happiness ) and second , " benevolence " ( compassion and seeking good for another ) in conscience ( also linked to the agape of situational ethics ) . Conscience tended to be more authoritative in questions of moral judgment , thought Butler , because it was more likely to be clear and certain ( whereas calculations of self @-@ interest tended to probable and changing conclusions ) . John Selden in his Table Talk expressed the view that an awake but excessively scrupulous or ill @-@ trained conscience could hinder resolve and practical action ; it being " like a horse that is not well <unk> , he starts at every bird that flies out of the hedge " . 
 As the sacred texts of ancient Hindu and Buddhist philosophy became available in German translations in the 18th and 19th centuries , they influenced philosophers such as Schopenhauer to hold that in a healthy mind only deeds oppress our conscience , not wishes and thoughts ; " for it is only our deeds that hold us up to the mirror of our will " ; the good conscience , thought Schopenhauer , we experience after every disinterested deed arises from direct recognition of our own inner being in the phenomenon of another , it affords us the verification " that our true self exists not only in our own person , this particular manifestation , but in everything that lives . By this the heart feels itself enlarged , as by egotism it is contracted . " 
 Immanuel Kant , a central figure of the Age of Enlightenment , likewise claimed that two things filled his mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe , the oftener and more steadily they were reflected on : " the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me ... the latter begins from my invisible self , my personality , and exhibits me in a world which has true infinity but which I recognise myself as existing in a universal and necessary ( and not only , as in the first case , contingent ) connection . " The ' universal connection ' referred to here is Kant 's categorical imperative : " act only according to that maxim by which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law . " Kant considered critical conscience to be an internal court in which our thoughts accuse or excuse one another ; he acknowledged that morally mature people do often describe contentment or peace in the soul after following conscience to perform a duty , but argued that for such acts to produce virtue their primary motivation should simply be duty , not expectation of any such bliss . Rousseau expressed a similar view that conscience somehow connected man to a greater metaphysical unity . John <unk> in his critical examination of Rousseau 's work considered that conscience was there defined as the feeling that urges us , in spite of contrary passions , towards two harmonies : the one within our minds and between our passions , and the other within society and between its members ; " the weakest can appeal to it in the strongest , and the appeal , though often unsuccessful , is always disturbing . However , corrupted by power or wealth we may be , either as possessors of them or as victims , there is something in us serving to remind us that this corruption is against nature . " 
 Other philosophers expressed a more sceptical and pragmatic view of the operation of " conscience " in society . John Locke in his Essays on the Law of Nature argued that the widespread fact of human conscience allowed a philosopher to infer the necessary existence of objective moral laws that occasionally might contradict those of the state . Locke highlighted the metaethics problem of whether accepting a statement like " follow your conscience " supports subjectivist or objectivist conceptions of conscience as a guide in concrete morality , or as a spontaneous revelation of eternal and immutable principles to the individual : " if conscience be a proof of innate principles , <unk> may be innate principles ; since some men with the same bent of conscience prosecute what others avoid . " Thomas Hobbes likewise pragmatically noted that opinions formed on the basis of conscience with full and honest conviction , nevertheless should always be accepted with humility as potentially erroneous and not necessarily indicating absolute knowledge or truth . William Godwin expressed the view that conscience was a memorable consequence of the " perception by men of every creed when the descend into the scene of busy life " that they possess free will . Adam Smith considered that it was only by developing a critical conscience that we can ever see what relates to ourselves in its proper shape and dimensions ; or that we can ever make any proper comparison between our own interests and those of other people . John Stuart Mill believed that idealism about the role of conscience in government should be tempered with a practical realisation that few men in society are capable of directing their minds or purposes towards distant or <unk> interests , of disinterested regard for others , and especially for what comes after them , for the idea of posterity , of their country , or of humanity , whether grounded on sympathy or on a conscientious feeling . Mill held that certain amount of conscience , and of disinterested public spirit , may fairly be calculated on in the citizens of any community ripe for representative government , but that " it would be ridiculous to expect such a degree of it , combined with such intellectual discernment , as would be proof against any plausible fallacy tending to make that which was for their class interest appear the dictate of justice and of the general good . " 
 Josiah Royce ( 1855 – 1916 ) built on the transcendental idealism view of conscience , viewing it as the ideal of life which constitutes our moral personality , our plan of being ourself , of making common sense ethical decisions . But , he thought , this was only true insofar as our conscience also required loyalty to " a mysterious higher or deeper self . " In the modern Christian tradition this approach achieved expression with Dietrich Bonhoeffer who stated during his imprisonment by the Nazis in World War II that conscience for him was more than practical reason , indeed it came from a " depth which lies beyond a man 's own will and his own reason and it makes itself heard as the call of human existence to unity with itself . " For Bonhoeffer a guilty conscience arose as an indictment of the loss of this unity and as a warning against the loss of one 's self ; primarily , he thought , it is directed not towards a particular kind of doing but towards a particular mode of being . It protests against a doing which <unk> the unity of this being with itself . Conscience for Bonhoeffer did not , like shame , embrace or pass judgment on the morality of the whole of its owner 's life ; it reacted only to certain definite actions : " it recalls what is long past and represents this disunion as something which is already accomplished and irreparable " . The man with a conscience , he believed , fights a lonely battle against the " overwhelming forces of inescapable situations " which demand moral decisions despite the likelihood of adverse <unk> <unk> has similarly claimed that the truth distributed in the world , as the statement about human dignity , as the affirmation of the line between good and evil , lives in people as conscience . 
 As Hannah Arendt pointed out , however , ( following the utilitarian John Stuart Mill on this point ) : a bad conscience does not necessarily signify a bad character ; in fact only those who affirm a commitment to applying moral standards will be troubled with remorse , guilt or shame by a bad conscience and their need to regain integrity and wholeness of the self . Representing our soul or true self by analogy as our house , Arendt wrote that " conscience is the anticipation of the fellow who awaits you if and when you come home . " Arendt believed that people who are unfamiliar with the process of silent critical reflection about what they say and do will not mind contradicting themselves by an immoral act or crime , since they can " count on its being forgotten the next moment ; " bad people are not full of regrets . Arendt also wrote eloquently on the problem of languages distinguishing the word consciousness from conscience . One reason , she held , was that conscience , as we understand it in moral or legal matters , is supposedly always present within us , just like consciousness : " and this conscience is also supposed to tell us what to do and what to repent ; before it became the lumen naturale or Kant 's practical reason , it was the voice of God . " 
 Albert Einstein , as a self @-@ professed adherent of humanism and rationalism , likewise viewed an enlightened religious person as one whose conscience reflects that he " has , to the best of his ability , liberated himself from the fetters of his selfish desires and is preoccupied with thoughts , feelings and aspirations to which he clings because of their super @-@ personal value . " Einstein often referred to the " inner voice " as a source of both moral and physical knowledge : " Quantum mechanics is very impressive . But an inner voice tells me that it is not the real thing . The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings one closer to the secrets of the Old One . I am at all events convinced that He does not play dice . " 
 Simone Weil who fought for the French resistance ( the Maquis ) argued in her final book The Need for Roots : Prelude to a Declaration of Duties Towards Mankind that for society to become more just and protective of liberty , obligations should take precedence over rights in moral and political philosophy and a spiritual awakening should occur in the conscience of most citizens , so that social obligations are viewed as fundamentally having a transcendent origin and a beneficent impact on human character when fulfilled . Simone Weil also in that work provided a psychological explanation for the mental peace associated with a good conscience : " the liberty of men of goodwill , though limited in the sphere of action , is complete in that of conscience . For , having incorporated the rules into their own being , the prohibited possibilities no longer present themselves to the mind , and have not to be rejected . " 
 Alternatives to such metaphysical and idealist opinions about conscience arose from realist and materialist perspectives such as those of Charles Darwin . Darwin suggested that " any animal whatever , endowed with well @-@ marked social instincts , the parental and filial affections being here included , would inevitably acquire a moral sense or conscience , as soon as its intellectual powers had become as well , or as nearly as well developed , as in man . " Émile Durkheim held that the soul and conscience were particular forms of an impersonal principle diffused in the relevant group and communicated by totemic ceremonies . AJ Ayer was a more recent realist who held that the existence of conscience was an empirical question to be answered by sociological research into the moral habits of a given person or group of people , and what causes them to have precisely those habits and feelings . Such an inquiry , he believed , fell wholly within the scope of the existing social sciences . George Edward Moore bridged the idealistic and sociological views of ' critical ' and ' traditional ' conscience in stating that the idea of abstract ' rightness ' and the various degrees of the specific emotion excited by it are what constitute , for many persons , the specifically ' moral sentiment ' or conscience . For others , however , an action seems to be properly termed ' internally right ' , merely because they have previously regarded it as right , the idea of ' rightness ' being present in some way to his or her mind , but not necessarily among his or her deliberately constructed motives . 
 The French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir in A Very Easy Death ( Une mort très <unk> , 1964 ) reflects within her own conscience about her mother 's attempts to develop such a moral sympathy and understanding of others . 
 Michael Walzer claimed that the growth of religious toleration in Western nations arose amongst other things , from the general recognition that private conscience signified some inner divine presence regardless of the religious faith professed and from the general respectability , piety , self @-@ limitation , and sectarian discipline which marked most of the men who claimed the rights of conscience . Walzer also argued that attempts by courts to define conscience as a merely personal moral code or as sincere belief , risked encouraging an anarchy of moral <unk> , unless such a code and motive was necessarily tempered with shared moral knowledge : derived either from the connection of the individual to a universal spiritual order , or from the common principles and mutual engagements of unselfish people . Ronald Dworkin maintains that constitutional protection of freedom of conscience is central to democracy but creates personal duties to live up to it : " Freedom of conscience presupposes a personal responsibility of reflection , and it loses much of its meaning when that responsibility is ignored . A good life need not be an especially reflective one ; most of the best lives are just lived rather than studied . But there are moments that cry out for self @-@ assertion , when a passive bowing to fate or a mechanical decision out of deference or convenience is treachery , because it forfeits dignity for ease . " Edward Conze stated it is important for individual and collective moral growth that we recognise the illusion of our conscience being wholly located in our body ; indeed both our conscience and wisdom expand when we act in an unselfish way and conversely " repressed compassion results in an unconscious sense of guilt . " 
 The philosopher Peter Singer considers that usually when we describe an action as conscientious in the critical sense we do so in order to deny either that the relevant agent was motivated by selfish desires , like greed or ambition , or that he acted on whim or impulse . 
 Moral anti @-@ realists debate whether the moral facts necessary to activate conscience supervene on natural facts with a posteriori necessity ; or arise a priori because moral facts have a primary intension and naturally identical worlds may be presumed morally identical . It has also been argued that there is a measure of moral luck in how circumstances create the obstacles which conscience must overcome to apply moral principles or human rights and that with the benefit of enforceable property rights and the rule of law , access to universal health care plus the absence of high adult and infant mortality from conditions such as malaria , tuberculosis , HIV / AIDS and famine , people in relatively prosperous developed countries have been spared pangs of conscience associated with the physical necessity to steal scraps of food , bribe tax inspectors or police officers , and commit murder in guerrilla wars against corrupt government forces or rebel armies . Scrutton has claimed that true understanding of conscience and its relationship with morality has been hampered by an " impetuous " belief that philosophical questions are solved through the analysis of language in an area where clarity threatens vested interests . Susan Sontag similarly argued that it was a symptom of psychological immaturity not to recognise that many morally immature people willingly experience a form of delight , in some an erotic breaking of taboo , when witnessing violence , suffering and pain being inflicted on others . Jonathan Glover wrote that most of us " do not spend our lives on endless landscape gardening of our self " and our conscience is likely shaped not so much by heroic struggles , as by choice of partner , friends and job , as well as where we choose to live . Garrett Hardin in a famous article called tragedy of the commons argued that any instance in which society appeals to an individual exploiting a commons to restrain himself or herself for the general good @-@ by means of his or her <unk> merely sets up a system which , by selectively diverting societal power and physical resources to those lacking in conscience , while fostering guilt ( including anxiety about his or her individual contribution to over @-@ population ) in people acting upon it , actually works toward the elimination of conscience from the race . 
 John Ralston Saul expressed the view in The Unconscious Civilization that in contemporary developed nations many people have acquiesced in turning over their sense of right and wrong , their critical conscience , to technical experts ; willingly restricting their moral freedom of choice to limited consumer actions ruled by the ideology of the free market , while citizen participation in public affairs is limited to the isolated act of voting and private @-@ interest lobbying turns even elected representatives against the public interest . 
 Some argue on religious or philosophical grounds that it is blameworthy to act against conscience , even if the judgement of conscience is likely to be erroneous ( say because it is inadequately informed about the facts , or prevailing moral ( humanist or religious ) , professional ethical , legal and human rights norms ) . Failure to acknowledge and accept that conscientious judgements can be seriously mistaken , may only promote situations where one 's conscience is manipulated by others to provide unwarranted justifications for non @-@ virtuous and selfish acts ; indeed , insofar as it is appealed to as glorifying ideological content , and an associated extreme level of devotion , without adequate constraint of external , altruistic , normative justification , conscience may be considered morally blind and dangerous both to the individual concerned and humanity as a whole . Langston argues that philosophers of virtue ethics have unnecessarily neglected conscience for , once conscience is trained so that the principles and rules it applies are those one would want all others to live by , its practise cultivates and sustains the virtues ; indeed , amongst people in what each society considers to be the highest state of moral development there is little disagreement about how to <unk> Levinas viewed conscience as a revelatory encountering of resistance to our selfish powers , developing morality by calling into question our naive sense of freedom of will to use such powers arbitrarily , or with violence , this process being more severe the more rigorously the goal of our self was to obtain control . In other words , the welcoming of the Other , to Levinas , was the very essence of conscience properly conceived ; it encouraged our ego to accept the fallibility of assuming things about other people , that selfish freedom of will " does not have the last word " and that realising this has a transcendent purpose : " I am not alone ... in conscience I have an experience that is not commensurate with any a priori [ see a priori and a posteriori ] framework @-@ a <unk> experience . " 
 = = Conscientious acts and the law = = 
 English humanist lawyers in the 16th and 17th centuries interpreted conscience as a collection of universal principles given to man by god at creation to be applied by reason ; this gradually reforming the medieval Roman law @-@ based system with forms of action , written pleadings , use of juries and patterns of litigation such as <unk> and <unk> that displayed an increased concern for elements of right and wrong on the actual facts . A conscience vote in a parliament allows legislators to vote without restrictions from any political party to which they may belong . In his trial in Jerusalem Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann claimed he was simply following legal orders under paragraph 48 of the German Military Code which provided : " <unk> of an action or omission is not excused on the ground that the person considered his behaviour required by his conscience or the <unk> of his religion " . The United Nations Universal Declaration on Human Rights ( UDHR ) which is part of international customary law specifically refers to conscience in Articles 1 and 18 . Likewise , the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ( ICCPR ) mentions conscience in Article 18 @.@ 1 . 
 All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights . They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood 
 Everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion ; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief , and freedom , either alone or in community with others and in public or private , to manifest his religion or belief in teaching , practice , worship and observance 
 Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion . This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice , and freedom , either individually or in community with others and in public or private , to manifest his religion or belief in worship , observance , practice and teaching 
 It has been argued that these articles provide international legal obligations protecting conscientious objectors from service in the military . 
 John Rawls in his A Theory of Justice defines a conscientious objector as an individual prepared to undertake , in public ( and often despite widespread condemnation ) , an action of civil disobedience to a legal rule justifying it ( also in public ) by reference to contrary foundational social virtues ( such as justice as liberty or fairness ) and the principles of morality and law derived from them . Rawls considered civil disobedience should be viewed as an appeal , warning or admonishment ( showing general respect and fidelity to the rule of law by the non @-@ violence and transparency of methods adopted ) that a law breaches a community 's fundamental virtue of justice . Objections to Rawls ' theory include first , its inability to accommodate conscientious objections to the society 's basic appreciation of justice or to emerging moral or ethical principles ( such as respect for the rights of the natural environment ) which are not yet part of it and second , the difficulty of predictably and consistently determining that a majority decision is just or unjust . Conscientious objection ( also called conscientious refusal or evasion ) to obeying a law , should not arise from unreasoning , naive " traditional conscience " , for to do so merely encourages infantile abdication of responsibility to calibrate the law against moral or human rights norms and disrespect for democratic institutions . Instead it should be based on " critical conscience ' – seriously thought out , conceptually mature , personal moral or religious beliefs held to be fundamentally incompatible ( that is , not merely inconsistent on the basis of selfish desires , whim or impulse ) , for example , either with all laws requiring conscription for military service , or legal compulsion to fight for or financially support the State in a particular war . A famous example arose when Henry David Thoreau the author of Walden was willingly jailed for refusing to pay a tax because he profoundly disagreed with a government policy and was frustrated by the corruption and injustice of the democratic machinery of the state . A more recent case concerned Kimberly Rivera , a private in the US Army and mother of four children who , having served 3 months in Iraq War decided the conflict was immoral and sought refugee status in Canada in 2012 ( see List of Iraq War resisters ) , but was deported and arrested in the US . 
 In the Second World War , Great Britain granted conscientious @-@ objection status not just to complete pacifists , but to those who objected to fighting in that particular war ; this was done partly out of genuine respect , but also to avoid the disgraceful and futile persecutions of conscientious objectors that occurred during the First World War . 
 Amnesty International organises campaigns to protect those arrested and or incarcerated as a prisoner of conscience because of their conscientious beliefs , particularly concerning intellectual , political and artistic freedom of expression and association . Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma , was the winner of the 2009 Amnesty International Ambassador of Conscience Award . In legislation , a conscience clause is a provision in a statute that excuses a health professional from complying with the law ( for example legalising surgical or pharmaceutical abortion ) if it is incompatible with religious or conscientious beliefs . Expressed justifications for refusing to obey laws because of conscience vary . Many conscientious objectors are so for religious reasons — notably , members of the historic peace churches are pacifist by doctrine . Other objections can stem from a deep sense of responsibility toward humanity as a whole , or from the conviction that even acceptance of work under military orders acknowledges the principle of conscription that should be everywhere condemned before the world can ever become safe for real democracy . A conscientious objector , however , does not have a primary aim of changing the law . John Dewey considered that conscientious objectors were often the victims of " moral <unk> " and <unk> in moral training : " the moving force of events is always too much for conscience " . The remedy was not to deplore the wickedness of those who manipulate world power , but to connect conscience with forces moving in another <unk> to build institutions and social environments predicated on the rule of law , for example , " then will conscience itself have compulsive power instead of being forever the martyred and the coerced . " As an example , Albert Einstein who had advocated conscientious objection during the First World War and had been a longterm supporter of War Resisters ' International reasoned that " radical pacifism " could not be justified in the face of Nazi rearmament and advocated a world federalist organization with its own professional army . Samuel Johnson pointed out that an appeal to conscience should not allow the law to bring unjust suffering upon another . Conscience , according to Johnson , was nothing more than a conviction felt by ourselves of something to be done or something to be avoided ; in questions of simple <unk> morality , conscience is very often a guide that may be trusted . But before conscience can conclusively determine what morally should be done , he thought that the state of the question should be thoroughly known . " No man 's conscience " , said Johnson " can tell him the right of another man ... it is a conscience very ill informed that violates the rights of one man , for the convenience of another . " 
 Civil disobedience as non @-@ violent protest or civil resistance are also acts of conscience , but are designed by those who undertake them chiefly to change , by appealing to the majority and democratic processes , laws or government policies perceived to be incoherent with fundamental social virtues and principles ( such as justice , equality or respect for intrinsic human dignity ) . Civil disobedience , in a properly functioning democracy , allows a minority who feel strongly that a law infringes their sense of justice ( but have no capacity to obtain legislative amendments or a referendum on the issue ) to make a potentially apathetic or uninformed majority take account of the intensity of opposing views . A notable example of civil resistance or satyagraha ( " satya " in <unk> means " truth and compassion " , " agraha " means " firmness of will " ) involved Mahatma Gandhi making salt in India when that act was prohibited by a British statute , in order to create moral pressure for law reform . Rosa Parks similarly acted on conscience in 1955 in Montgomery , Alabama refusing a legal order to give up her seat to make room for a white passenger ; her action ( and the similar earlier act of 15 @-@ year @-@ old Claudette Colvin ) leading to the Montgomery Bus Boycott . Rachel Corrie was a US citizen allegedly killed by a bulldozer operated by the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) while involved in direct action ( based on the non @-@ violent principles of Martin Luther King and Mahatma Gandhi ) to prevent demolition of the home of local Palestinian pharmacist Samir Nasrallah . Al Gore has argued " If you 're a young person looking at the future of this planet and looking at what is being done right now , and not done , I believe we have reached the stage where it is time for civil disobedience to prevent the construction of new coal plants that do not have carbon capture and sequestration . " In 2011 , NASA climate scientist James E. Hansen , environmental leader Phil Radford and Professor Bill McKibben were arrested for opposing a tar sands oil pipeline and Canadian renewable energy professor Mark <unk> was arrested for opposing mountain @-@ top coal mining ; in his book Storms of my Grandchildren Hansen calls for similar civil resistance on a global scale to help replace the ' business @-@ as @-@ usual ' Kyoto Protocol cap and trade system , with a progressive carbon tax at emission source on the oil , gas and coal industries – revenue being paid as dividends to low carbon footprint families . 
 Notable historical examples of conscientious noncompliance in a different professional context included the manipulation of the visa process in 1939 by Japanese Consul @-@ General <unk> <unk> in Kaunas ( the temporary capital of Lithuania between Germany and the Soviet Union ) and by Raoul Wallenberg in Hungary 1n 1944 to allow Jews to escape almost certain death . Ho Feng @-@ Shan the Chinese Consul @-@ General in Vienna in 1939 , defied orders from the Chinese ambassador in Berlin to issue Jews with visas for Shanghai . John Rabe a German member of the Nazi Party likewise saved thousands of Chinese from massacre by the Japanese military at Nanking . The White Rose German student movement against the Nazis declared in their 4th leaflet : " We will not be silent . We are your bad conscience . The White Rose will not leave you in peace ! " Conscientious noncompliance may be the only practical option for citizens wishing to affirm the existence of an international moral order or ' core ' historical rights ( such as the right to life , right to a fair trial and freedom of opinion ) in states where non @-@ violent protest or civil disobedience are met with prolonged arbitrary detention , torture , forced disappearance , murder or persecution . The controversial Milgram experiment into obedience by Stanley Milgram showed that many people lack the psychological resources to openly resist authority , even when they are directed to act callously and inhumanely against an innocent victim . 
 = = World conscience = = 
 World conscience is the universalist idea that with ready global communication , all people on earth will no longer be morally estranged from one another , whether it be culturally , ethnically , or geographically ; instead they will conceive ethics from the utopian point of view of the universe , eternity or infinity , rather than have their duties and obligations defined by forces arising solely within the restrictive boundaries of ' blood and <unk> 
 Often this derives from a spiritual or natural law perspective , that for world peace to be achieved , conscience , properly understood , should be generally considered as not necessarily linked ( often destructively ) to fundamentalist religious ideologies , but as an aspect of universal consciousness , access to which is the common heritage of humanity . Thinking predicated on the development of world conscience is common to members of the Global Ecovillage Network such as the Findhorn Foundation , international conservation organisations like Fauna and Flora International , as well as performers of world music such as Alan Stivell . Non @-@ government organizations , particularly through their work in agenda @-@ setting , policy @-@ making and implementation of human rights @-@ related policy , have been referred to as the conscience of the world 
 Edward O Wilson has developed the idea of <unk> to encourage coherence of global moral and scientific knowledge supporting the premise that " only unified learning , universally shared , makes accurate foresight and wise choice possible " . Thus , world conscience is a concept that overlaps with the Gaia hypothesis in advocating a balance of moral , legal , scientific and economic solutions to modern transnational problems such as global poverty and climate change , through strategies such as environmental ethics , climate ethics , natural conservation , ecology , cosmopolitanism , sustainability and sustainable development , <unk> and legal protection of the biosphere and biodiversity . The NGO 350.org , for example , seeks to attract world conscience to the problems associated with elevation in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations . 
 The microcredit initiatives of Nobel Peace Prize winner Muhammad Yunus have been described as inspiring a " war on poverty that blends social conscience and business savvy " . 
 The Green party politician Bob Brown ( who was arrested by the Tasmanian state police for a conscientious act of civil disobedience during the Franklin Dam protest ) expresses world conscience in these terms : " the universe , through us , is evolving towards experiencing , understanding and making choices about its future ' ; one example of policy outcomes from such thinking being a global tax ( see Tobin tax ) to alleviate global poverty and protect the biosphere , amounting to 1 / 10 of 1 % placed on the worldwide speculative currency market . Such an approach sees world conscience best expressing itself through political reforms promoting democratically based globalisation or planetary democracy ( for example internet voting for global governance organisations ( see world government ) based on the model of " one person , one vote , one value " ) which gradually will replace contemporary market @-@ based globalisation . 
 The American cardiologist Bernard Lown and the Russian cardiologist Yevgeniy <unk> were motivated in conscience through studying the catastrophic public health consequences of nuclear war in establishing International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War ( <unk> ) which was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985 and continues to work to " heal an ailing planet " . 
 Worldwide expressions of conscience contributed to the decision of the French government to halt atmospheric nuclear tests at Mururoa in the Pacific in 1974 after 41 such explosions ( although below @-@ ground nuclear tests continued there into the 1990s ) . 
 A challenge to world conscience was provided by an influential 1968 article by Garrett Hardin that critically analyzed the dilemma in which multiple individuals , acting independently after rationally consulting self @-@ interest ( and , he claimed , the apparently low ' survival @-@ of @-@ the @-@ fittest ' value of conscience @-@ led actions ) ultimately destroy a shared limited resource , even though each acknowledges such an outcome is not in anyone 's long @-@ term interest . Hardin 's conclusion that commons areas are <unk> achievable only in conditions of low population density ( and so their continuance requires state restriction on the freedom to breed ) , created controversy additionally through his direct deprecation of the role of conscience in achieving individual decisions , policies and laws that facilitate global justice and peace , as well as sustainability and sustainable development of world commons areas , for example including those officially designated such under United Nations treaties ( see common heritage of humanity ) . Areas designated common heritage of humanity under international law include the Moon , Outer Space , deep sea bed , Antarctica , the world cultural and natural heritage ( see World Heritage Convention ) and the human genome . It will be a significant challenge for world conscience that as world oil , coal , mineral , timber , agricultural and water reserves are depleted , there will be increasing pressure to commercially exploit common heritage of mankind areas . 
 The philosopher Peter Singer has argued that the United Nations Millennium Development Goals represent the emergence of an ethics based not on national boundaries but on the idea of one world . Ninian Smart has similarly predicted that the increase in global travel and communication will gradually draw the world 's religions towards a pluralistic and transcendental humanism characterized by an " open spirit " of empathy and compassion . 
 Noam Chomsky has argued that forces opposing the development of such a world conscience include free market ideologies that <unk> corporate greed in nominal electoral democracies where advertising , shopping malls and indebtedness , shape citizens into apathetic consumers in relation to information and access necessary for democratic participation . John Passmore has argued that mystical considerations about the global expansion of all human consciousness , should take into account that if as a species we do become something much superior to what we are now , it will be as a consequence of conscience not only implanting a goal of moral perfectibility , but assisting us to remain periodically anxious , passionate and discontented , for these are necessary components of care and compassion . The Committee on Conscience of the US Holocaust Memorial Museum has targeted genocides such as those in Rwanda , Bosnia , Darfur , the Congo and Chechnya as challenges to the world 's conscience . Oscar Arias Sanchez has criticised global arms industry spending as a failure of conscience by nation states : " When a country decides to invest in arms , rather than in education , housing , the environment , and health services for its people , it is depriving a whole generation of its right to prosperity and happiness . We have produced one firearm for every ten inhabitants of this planet , and yet we have not bothered to end hunger when such a feat is well within our reach . This is not a necessary or inevitable state of affairs . It is a deliberate choice " ( see Campaign Against Arms Trade ) . US House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi , after meeting with the 14th Dalai Lama during the 2008 violent protests in Tibet and aftermath said : " The situation in Tibet is a challenge to the conscience of the world . " Nelson Mandela , through his example and words , has been described as having shaped the conscience of the world . 
 The Right Livelihood Award is awarded yearly in Sweden to those people , mostly strongly motivated by conscience , who have made exemplary practical contributions to resolving the great challenges facing our planet and its people . In 2009 , for example , along with Catherine Hamlin ( obstetric fistula and see fistula foundation ) ) , David Suzuki ( promoting awareness of climate change ) and Alyn Ware ( nuclear disarmament ) , René <unk> shared the Right Livelihood Award " for his courage in confronting the forces that are destroying the Congo Basin 's rainforests and building political support for their conservation and sustainable use " . <unk> is one of the largest global on @-@ line organizations launched in January 2007 to promote conscience @-@ driven activism on issues such as climate change , human rights , animal rights , corruption , poverty , and conflict , thus " closing the gap between the world we have and the world most people everywhere want " . 
 = = Notable examples of modern acts based on conscience = = 
 In a notable contemporary act of conscience , Christian <unk> Brenda Hean protested against the flooding of Lake Pedder despite threats and that ultimately lead to her death . Another was the campaign by Ken Saro @-@ <unk> against oil extraction by multinational corporations in Nigeria that led to his execution . So too was the act by the Tank Man , or the Unknown Rebel photographed holding his shopping bag in the path of tanks during the protests at Beijing 's Tiananmen Square on 5 June 1989 . The actions of United Nations Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld to try and achieve peace in the Congo despite the ( eventuating ) threat to his life , were strongly motivated by conscience as is reflected in his diary , <unk> ( Markings ) . Another example involved the actions of Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson , Jr to try and prevent the My Lai Massacre in the Vietnam War . Evan <unk> voluntarily confessed and was convicted of the Sydney Hilton bombing stating that his conscience could not tolerate the guilt and that " I guess I was quite unique in the prison system in that I had to keep proving my guilt , whereas everyone else said they were innocent . " Vasili <unk> was a Russian naval officer on out @-@ of @-@ radio @-@ contact Soviet submarine B @-@ 59 being depth @-@ charged by US warships during the Cuban Missile Crisis whose dissent when two other officers decided to launch a nuclear torpedo ( unanimous agreement to launch was required ) may have averted a nuclear war . In 1963 Buddhist monk Thich Quang Duc performed a famous act of self @-@ immolation to protest against alleged persecution of his faith by the Vietnamese Ngo Dinh Diem regime . 
 Conscience played a major role in the actions by anaesthetist Stephen <unk> to <unk> ( see list of whistleblowers ) on incompetent paediatric cardiac surgeons at the Bristol Royal Infirmary . Jeffrey Wigand was motivated by conscience to expose the Big Tobacco scandal , revealing that executives of the companies knew that cigarettes were addictive and approved the addition of carcinogenic ingredients to the cigarettes . David Graham , a Food and Drug Administration employee , was motivated by conscience to <unk> that the arthritis pain @-@ reliever Vioxx increased the risk of cardiovascular deaths although the manufacturer suppressed this information . Rick Piltz from the U.S. Climate Change Science Program , blew the whistle on a White House official who ignored majority scientific opinion to edit a climate change report ( " Our Changing Planet " ) to reflect the Bush administration 's view that the problem was unlikely to exist . " <unk> al @-@ Zaidi , an Iraqi journalist , was imprisoned and allegedly tortured for his act of conscience in throwing his shoes at George W. Bush . Mordechai <unk> an Israeli former nuclear technician , acted on conscience to reveal details of Israel 's nuclear weapons program to the British press in 1986 ; was kidnapped by Israeli agents , transported to Israel , convicted of treason and spent 18 years in prison , including more than 11 years in solitary confinement . 
 At the awards ceremony for the 200 metres at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City John Carlos , Tommie Smith and Peter Norman ignored death threats and official warnings to take part in an anti @-@ racism protest that destroyed their respective careers . W. Mark Felt an agent of the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation who retired in 1973 as the Bureau 's Associate Director , acted on conscience to provide reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein with information that resulted in the Watergate scandal . Conscience was a major factor in US Public Health Service officer Peter <unk> revealing the Tuskegee syphilis experiment to the public . The 2008 attack by the Israeli military on civilian areas of Palestinian Gaza was described as a " stain on the world 's conscience " . Conscience was a major factor in the refusal of Aung San Suu Kyi to leave Burma despite house arrest and persecution by the military dictatorship in that country . Conscience was a factor in Peter Galbraith 's criticism of fraud in the 2009 Afghanistan election despite it costing him his United Nations job . Conscience motivated <unk> Greenhouse to expose irregularities in the contracting of the Halliburton company for work in Iraq . Naji al @-@ Ali a popular cartoon artist in the Arab world , loved for his defense of the ordinary people , and for his criticism of repression and despotism by both the Israeli military and Yasser Arafat 's PLO , was murdered for refusing to compromise with his conscience . The journalist Anna Politkovskaya provided ( prior to her murder ) an example of conscience in her opposition to the Second Chechen War and then @-@ Russian President Vladimir Putin . Conscience motivated the Russian human @-@ rights activist Natalia <unk> , who was abducted and murdered in Grozny , Chechnya in 2009 . The Death of Neda Agha @-@ Soltan arose from conscience @-@ driven protests against the 2009 Iranian presidential election . Female Muslim lawyer Shirin <unk> ( winner of the 2003 Nobel Peace Prize ) has been described as the ' conscience of the Islamic Republic ' for her work in protecting the human rights of women and children in Iran . The human rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng , often referred to as the ' conscience of China ' and who had previously been arrested and allegedly tortured by the Chinese regime for defending members of the Falun Gong , was abducted by Chinese security agents on 4 February 2009 and has not been seen since . 2010 Nobel Peace Prize winner Liu Xiaobo in his final statement before being sentenced by a closed Chinese court to over a decade in jail as a political prisoner of conscience stated : " For hatred is corrosive of a person ’ s wisdom and conscience ; the mentality of enmity can poison a nation ’ s spirit . " Sergei <unk> , a lawyer in Russia , was arrested , held without trial for almost a year and died in custody , as a result of exposing corruption . On 6 October 2001 Laura Whittle was a naval gunner on HMAS Adelaide ( FFG 01 ) under orders to implement a new border protection policy when they encountered the <unk> @-@ 4 ( Suspected Illegal Entry Vessel @-@ 4 ) refugee boat in choppy seas . After being ordered to fire warning shots from her 50 calibre machinegun to make the boat turn back she saw it beginning to break up and sink with a father on board holding out his young daughter that she might be saved ( see Children Overboard Affair ) . Whittle jumped without a life vest 12 metres into the sea to help save the refugees from drowning thinking " this isn 't right ; this isn 't how things should be . " In February 2012 journalist Marie Colvin was deliberately targeted and killed by the Syrian Army in Homs during the 2011 – 2012 Syrian uprising and Siege of Homs , after she decided to stay at the " epicentre of the storm " in order to " expose what is happening . " In October 2012 the Taliban organised the attempted murder of Malala Yousafzai a teenage girl who had been campaigning , despite their threats , for female education in Pakistan . In December 2012 the 2012 Delhi gang rape case was said to have stirred the collective conscience of India to civil disobedience and public protest at the lack of legal action against rapists in that country ( see Rape in India ) In June 2013 Edward Snowden revealed details of a US National Security Agency internet and electronic communication PRISM ( surveillance program ) because of a conscience @-@ felt obligation to the freedom of humanity greater than obedience to the laws that bound his employment . 
 = = Conscience in literature , art , film , and music = = 
 The ancient epic of the Indian subcontinent , the Mahabharata of Vyasa , contains two pivotal moments of conscience . The first occurs when the warrior Arjuna being overcome with compassion against killing his opposing relatives in war , receives counsel ( see Bhagavad @-@ Gita ) from Krishna about his spiritual duty ( " work as though you are performing a sacrifice for the general good " ) . The second , at the end of the saga , is when king Yudhishthira having alone survived the moral tests of life , is offered eternal bliss , only to refuse it because a faithful dog is prevented from coming with him by purported divine rules and laws . The French author Montaigne ( 1533 – 1592 ) in one of the most celebrated of his essays ( " On experience " ) expressed the benefits of living with a clear conscience : " Our duty is to compose our character , not to compose books , to win not battles and provinces , but order and tranquillity in our conduct . Our great and glorious masterpiece is to live properly " . In his famous Japanese travel journal Oku no Hosomichi ( Narrow Road to the Deep North ) composed of mixed haiku poetry and prose , Matsuo Basho ( 1644 – 94 ) in attempting to describe the eternal in this perishable world is often moved in conscience ; for example by a thicket of summer grass being all that remains of the dreams and ambitions of ancient warriors . Chaucer 's " Franklin 's Tale " in The Canterbury Tales recounts how a young suitor releases a wife from a rash promise because of the respect in his conscience for the freedom to be truthful , gentle and generous . 
 The critic A. C. Bradley discusses the central problem of Shakespeare 's tragic character Hamlet as one where conscience in the form of moral scruples deters the young Prince with his " great anxiety to do right " from obeying his father 's hell @-@ bound ghost and murdering the usurping King ( " is 't not perfect conscience to quit him with this arm ? " ( <unk> ) ) . 
 Bradley develops a theory about Hamlet 's moral agony relating to a conflict between " traditional " and " critical " conscience : " The conventional moral ideas of his time , which he shared with the Ghost , told him plainly that he ought to avenge his father ; but a deeper conscience in him , which was in advance of his time , contended with these explicit conventional ideas . It is because this deeper conscience remains below the surface that he fails to recognise it , and fancies he is hindered by cowardice or sloth or passion or what not ; but it emerges into light in that speech to Horatio . And it is just because he has this nobler moral nature in him that we admire and love him " . The opening words of Shakespeare 's Sonnet 94 ( " They that have pow 'r to hurt , and will do none " ) have been admired as a description of conscience . So has John Donne 's commencement of his poem s : <unk> , 1613 . Riding Westward : " Let man 's soul be a sphere , and then , in this , Th ' intelligence that moves , devotion is ; " 
 Anton Chekhov in his plays The Seagull , Uncle Vanya and Three Sisters describes the tortured emotional states of doctors who at some point in their careers have turned their back on conscience . In his short stories , Chekhov also explored how people misunderstood the voice of a tortured conscience . A promiscuous student , for example , in The Fit describes it as a " dull pain , indefinite , vague ; it was like anguish and the most acute fear and despair ... in his breast , under the heart " and the young doctor examining the misunderstood agony of compassion experienced by the factory owner 's daughter in From a Case Book calls it an " unknown , mysterious power ... in fact close at hand and watching him . " Characteristically , Chekhov 's own conscience drove him on the long journey to Sakhalin to record and alleviate the harsh conditions of the prisoners at that remote outpost . As Irina <unk> writes in the introduction to that work : " Abandoning everything , he travelled to the distant island of Sakhalin , the most feared place of exile and forced labour in Russia at that time . One cannot help but wonder why ? Simply , because the lot of the people there was a bitter one , because nobody really knew about the lives and deaths of the exiles , because he felt that they stood in greater need of help that anyone else . A strange reason , maybe , but not for a writer who was the epitome of all the best traditions of a Russian man of letters . Russian literature has always focused on questions of conscience and was , therefore , a powerful force in the moulding of public opinion . " 
 E. H. Carr writes of Dostoevsky 's character the young student Raskolnikov in the novel Crime and Punishment who decides to murder a ' vile and loathsome ' old woman money lender on the principle of transcending conventional morals : " the sequel reveals to us not the pangs of a stricken conscience ( which a less subtle writer would have given us ) but the tragic and fruitless struggle of a powerful intellect to maintain a conviction which is incompatible with the essential nature of man . " 
 Hermann Hesse wrote his Siddhartha to describe how a young man in the time of the Buddha follows his conscience on a journey to discover a transcendent inner space where all things could be unified and simply understood , ending up discovering that personal truth through selfless service as a ferryman . J. R. R. Tolkien in his epic The Lord of the Rings describes how only the hobbit Frodo is pure enough in conscience to carry the ring of power through war @-@ torn Middle @-@ earth to destruction in the Cracks of Doom , Frodo determining at the end to journey without weapons , and being saved from failure by his earlier decision to spare the life of the creature Gollum . Conor Cruise O 'Brien wrote that Albert Camus was the writer most representative of the Western consciousness and conscience in its relation to the non @-@ Western world . Harper Lee 's To Kill a Mockingbird portrays Atticus Finch ( played by Gregory Peck in the classic film from the book ( see To Kill a Mockingbird ( film ) ) ) as a lawyer true to his conscience who sets an example to his children and community . 
 The Robert Bolt play A Man For All Seasons focuses on the conscience of Catholic lawyer Thomas More in his struggle with King Henry VIII ( " the loyal subject is more bounden to be loyal to his conscience than to any other thing " ) . George Orwell wrote his novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four on the isolated island of Jura , Scotland to describe how a man ( Winston Smith ) attempts to develop critical conscience in a totalitarian state which watches every action of the people and manipulates their thinking with a mixture of propaganda , endless war and thought control through language control ( double think and <unk> ) to the point where prisoners look up to and even love their torturers . In the Ministry of Love , Winston 's torturer ( O 'Brien ) states : " You are imagining that there is something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and will turn against us . But we create human nature . Men are infinitely malleable " . 
 A tapestry copy of Picasso 's Guernica depicting a massacre of innocent women and children during the Spanish civil war is displayed on the wall of the United Nations building in New York City , at the entrance to the Security Council room , demonstrably as a spur to the conscience of representatives from the nation states . Albert Tucker painted Man 's Head to capture the moral disintegration , and lack of conscience , of a man convicted of kicking a dog to death . 
 The impressionist painter Vincent van Gogh wrote in a letter to his brother Theo in 1878 that " one must never let the fire in one 's soul die , for the time will inevitably come when it will be needed . And he who chooses poverty for himself and loves it possesses a great treasure and will hear the voice of his conscience address him every more clearly . He who hears that voice , which is God 's greatest gift , in his innermost being and follows it , finds in it a friend at last , and he is never alone ! ... That is what all great men have acknowledged in their works , all those who have thought a little more deeply and searched and worked and loved a little more than the rest , who have plumbed the depths of the sea of life . " 
 The 1957 Ingmar Bergman film Seventh Seal portrays the journey of a medieval knight ( Max von Sydow ) returning disillusioned from the crusades ( " what is going to happen to those of us who want to believe , but aren 't able to ? " ) across a plague @-@ ridden landscape , undertaking a game of chess with the personification of Death until he can perform one meaningful altruistic act of conscience ( overturning the chess board to distract Death long enough for a family of jugglers to escape in their wagon ) . 
 The 1942 Casablanca centers on the development of conscience in the cynical American Rick Blaine ( Humphrey Bogart ) in the face of oppression by the Nazis and the example of the resistance leader Victor Laszlo . 
 The David Lean and Robert Bolt screenplay for Doctor Zhivago ( an adaptation of Boris Pasternak 's novel ) focuses strongly on the conscience of a doctor @-@ poet in the midst of the Russian Revolution ( in the end " the walls of his heart were like paper " ) . 
 The 1982 Ridley Scott film Blade Runner focuses on the struggles of conscience between and within a bounty hunter ( Rick Deckard ( Harrison Ford ) ) and a renegade replicant android ( Roy Batty ( Rutger Hauer ) ) in a future society which refuses to accept that forms of artificial intelligence can have aspects of being such as conscience . 
 Johann Sebastian Bach wrote his last great choral composition the Mass in B minor ( BWV 232 ) to express the alternating emotions of loneliness , despair , joy and rapture that arise as conscience reflects on a departed human life . Here JS Bach 's use of counterpoint and contrapuntal settings , his dynamic discourse of melodically and rhythmically distinct voices seeking forgiveness of sins ( " Qui tollis peccata mundi , <unk> nobis " ) evokes a spiraling moral conversation of all humanity expressing his belief that " with devotional music , God is always present in his grace " . 
 Ludwig van Beethoven 's meditations on illness , conscience and mortality in the Late String Quartets led to his dedicating the third movement of String Quartet in A Minor ( 1825 ) Op. 132 ( see String Quartet No. 15 ) as a " Hymn of Thanksgiving to God of a convalescent " . John Lennon 's work " Imagine " owes much of its popular appeal to its evocation of conscience against the atrocities created by war , religious fundamentalism and politics . The Beatles George Harrison @-@ written track " The Inner Light " sets to Indian raga music a verse from the Tao Te Ching that " without going out of your door you can know the ways of heaven ' . In the 1986 movie The Mission the guilty conscience and penance of the slave trader Mendoza is made more poignant by the haunting oboe music of Ennio Morricone ( " On Earth as it is in Heaven " ) The song Sweet Lullaby by Deep Forest is based on a traditional <unk> lullaby from the Solomon Islands called " <unk> " in which a young orphan is comforted as an act of conscience by his older brother . The Dream Academy song ' Forest Fire ' provided an early warning of the moral dangers of our ' black cloud ' ' bringing down a different kind of weather ... letting the sunshine in , that 's how the end begins . " 
 The American Society of Journalists and Authors ( ASJA ) presents the Conscience @-@ in @-@ Media Award to journalists whom the society deems worthy of recognition for demonstrating " singular commitment to the highest principles of journalism at notable personal cost or sacrifice " . 
 The Ambassador of Conscience Award , Amnesty International 's most prestigious human rights award , takes its inspiration from a poem written by Irish Nobel prize @-@ winning poet Seamus Heaney called " The Republic of Conscience . " Winners of the award have included : Malala Yousafzai , singer and social justice activist Harry Belafonte , musician Peter Gabriel ( 2008 ) , Nelson Mandela ( 2006 ) , the Irish rock band U2 ( 2005 ) , Mary Robinson and Hilda Morales Trujillo ( a Guatemalan women 's rights activist ) ( 2004 ) and the author and public intellectual Václav Havel ( 2003 ) . 
 = The Royal Opera = 
 The Royal Opera is a company based in central London , resident at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden . Along with the English National Opera , it is one of the two principal opera companies in London . Founded in 1946 as the Covent Garden Opera Company , it was known by that title until 1968 . It brought a long annual season and consistent management to a house that had previously hosted short seasons under a series of impresarios . Since its inception , it has shared the Royal Opera House with the dance company now known as The Royal Ballet . 
 When the company was formed , its policy was to perform all works in English , but since the late 1950s most operas have been performed in their original language . From the outset , performers have comprised a mixture of British and Commonwealth singers and international guest stars , but fostering the careers of singers from within the company was a consistent policy of the early years . Among the many guest performers have been Maria Callas , Plácido Domingo , Kirsten Flagstad , Hans Hotter , Birgit Nilsson , Luciano Pavarotti and Elisabeth Schwarzkopf . Among those who have risen to international prominence from the ranks of the company are Geraint Evans , Joan Sutherland , Kiri Te Kanawa and Jon Vickers . 
 The company 's growth under the management of David Webster from modest beginnings to parity with the world 's greatest opera houses was recognised by the grant of the title " The Royal Opera " in 1968 . Under Webster 's successor , John Tooley , appointed in 1970 , The Royal Opera prospered , but after his retirement in 1988 , there followed a period of instability and the closure of the Royal Opera House for rebuilding and restoration between 1997 and 1999 . The 21st century has seen a stable managerial regime once more in place . The company has had six music directors since its inception : Karl Rankl , Rafael Kubelík , Georg Solti , Colin Davis , Bernard Haitink and Antonio Pappano . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 19th century , opera had been presented on the site of Covent Garden 's Royal Opera House , at first by Michael Costa 's Royal Italian Opera company . After a fire , the new building opened in 1858 with The Royal English Opera company , which moved there from the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . From the 1860s until the Second World War , various syndicates or individual impresarios presented short seasons of opera at the Royal Opera House ( so named in 1892 ) , sung in the original language , with star singers and conductors . Pre @-@ war opera was described by the historian Montague Haltrecht as " international , dressy and exclusive " . During the war , the Royal Opera House was leased by its owners , Covent Garden Properties Ltd , to Mecca <unk> who used it profitably as a dance hall . Towards the end of the war , the owners approached the music publishers Boosey and Hawkes to see if they were interested in taking a lease of the building and staging opera ( and ballet ) once more . Boosey and Hawkes took a lease , and granted a sub @-@ lease at generous terms to a not @-@ for @-@ profit charitable trust established to run the operation . The chairman of the trust was Lord Keynes . 
 There was some pressure for a return to the pre @-@ war regime of starry international seasons . Sir Thomas Beecham , who had presented many Covent Garden seasons between 1910 and 1939 confidently expected to do so again after the war . However , Boosey and Hawkes , and David Webster , whom they appointed as chief executive of the Covent Garden company , were committed to presenting opera all year round , in English with a resident company . It was widely assumed that this aim would be met by inviting the existing Sadler 's Wells Opera Company to become resident at the Royal Opera House . Webster successfully extended just such an invitation to the Sadler 's Wells Ballet Company , but he regarded the sister opera company as " parochial " . He was determined to set up a new opera company of his own . The British government had recently begun to give funds to subsidise the arts , and Webster negotiated an ad hoc grant of £ 60 @,@ 000 and an annual subsidy of £ 25 @,@ 000 , enabling him to proceed . 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Webster 's first priority was to appoint a musical director to build the company from scratch . He negotiated with Bruno Walter and Eugene Goossens , but neither of those conductors was willing to consider an opera company with no leading international stars . Webster appointed a little @-@ known Austrian , Karl Rankl , to the post . Before the war , Rankl had acquired considerable experience in charge of opera companies in Germany , Austria and Czechoslovakia . He accepted Webster 's invitation to assemble and train the principals and chorus of a new opera company , alongside a permanent orchestra that would play in both operas and ballets . 
 The new company made its debut in a joint presentation , together with the Sadler 's Wells Ballet Company , of Purcell 's The Fairy @-@ Queen on 12 December 1946 . The first production by the opera company alone was Carmen , on 14 January 1947 . Reviews were favourable . The Times said : 
 It revealed in Mr. Karl Rankl a musical director who knew how to conduct opera . It conceded the claims of theatrical production without sacrificing the music . It proved that contrary to expectation English can even now be sung so that the words are intelligible . It confirmed what we knew already about the quality of the chorus . 
 All the members of the cast for the production were from Britain or the Commonwealth . Later in the season , one of England 's few pre @-@ war international opera stars , Eva Turner , appeared as Turandot . For the company 's second season , eminent singers from continental Europe were recruited , including Ljuba <unk> , Elisabeth Schwarzkopf , Paolo Silveri , Rudolf Schock and Set <unk> . Other international stars who were willing to re @-@ learn their roles in English for the company in its early years included Kirsten Flagstad and Hans Hotter for The Valkyrie . Nevertheless , even as early as 1948 , the opera in English policy was weakening ; the company was obliged to present some Wagner performances in German to recruit leading exponents of the main roles . At first Rankl conducted all the productions ; he was dismayed when eminent guest conductors including Beecham , Clemens Krauss and Erich Kleiber were later invited for prestige productions . By 1951 Rankl felt that he was no longer valued , and announced his resignation . In Haltrecht 's view , the company that Rankl built up from nothing had outgrown him . 
 In the early years , the company sought to be innovative and widely accessible . Ticket prices were kept down : in the 1949 season 530 seats were available for each performance at two shillings and sixpence . In addition to the standard operatic repertory , the company presented operas by living composers such as Britten , Vaughan Williams , Bliss , and , later , Walton . The young stage director Peter Brook was put in charge of productions , bringing a fresh and sometimes controversial approach to stagings . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 After Rankl 's departure the company engaged a series of guest conductors while Webster sought a new musical director . His preferred candidates , Erich Kleiber , John Barbirolli , Josef Krips , Britten and Rudolf Kempe , were among the guests but none would take the permanent post . It was not until 1954 that Webster found a replacement for Rankl in Rafael Kubelík . Kubelík announced immediately that he was in favour of continuing the policy of singing in the vernacular : " Everything that the composer has written should be understood by the audience ; and that is not possible if the opera is sung in a language with which they are not familiar " . This provoked a public onslaught by Beecham , who continued to maintain that it was impossible to produce more than a handful of English @-@ speaking opera stars , and that importing singers from continental Europe was the only way to achieve first @-@ rate results . 
 Despite Beecham 's views , by the mid @-@ 1950s the Covent Garden company included many British and Commonwealth singers who were already or were soon to be much sought after by overseas opera houses . Among them were Joan Carlyle , Marie Collier , Geraint Evans , Michael Langdon , Elsie Morison , Amy <unk> , Joan Sutherland , Josephine Veasey and Jon Vickers . Nevertheless , as Lords Goodman and Harewood put it in a 1969 report for the Arts Council , " [ A ] s time went on the operatic centre of British life began to take on an international character . This meant that , while continuing to develop the British artists , it was felt impossible to reach the highest international level by using only British artists or singing only in English " . Guest singers from mainland Europe in the 1950s included Maria Callas , Boris Christoff , Victoria de los Ángeles , Tito Gobbi and Birgit Nilsson . Kubelík introduced Janáček 's Jenůfa to British audiences , sung in English by a mostly British cast . 
 The verdict of the public on whether operas should be given in translation or the original was clear . In 1959 , the opera house stated in its annual report , " [ T ] he percentage attendance at all opera in English was 72 per cent ; attendance at the special productions marked by higher prices was 91 per cent … it is ' international ' productions with highly priced seats that reduce our losses " . The opera in English policy was never formally renounced . On this subject , Peter Heyworth wrote in The Observer in 1960 that Covent Garden had " quickly learned the secret that underlies the genius of British institutions for undisturbed change : it continued to pay lip service to a policy that it increasingly ignored " . 
 By the end of the 1950s , Covent Garden was generally regarded as approaching the excellence of the world 's greatest opera companies . Its sister ballet company had achieved international recognition and was granted a royal charter in 1956 , changing its title to " The Royal Ballet " ; the opera company was close to reaching similar eminence . Two landmark productions greatly enhanced its reputation . In 1957 , Covent Garden presented the first substantially complete professional staging at any opera house of Berlioz 's vast opera The Trojans , directed by John Gielgud and conducted by Kubelík . The Times commented , " It has never been a success ; but it is now " . In 1958 the present theatre 's centenary was marked by Luchino Visconti 's production of Verdi 's Don Carlos , with Vickers , Gobbi , Christoff , <unk> <unk> and Fedora Barbieri , conducted by Carlo Maria Giulini . The work was then a rarity , and had hitherto been widely regarded as impossible to stage satisfactorily , but Visconti 's production was a triumph . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Kubelík did not renew his contract when it expired , and from 1958 there was an interregnum until 1961 , covered by guest conductors including Giulini , Kempe , Tullio Serafin , Georg Solti and Kubelík himself . In June 1960 Solti was appointed musical director from the 1961 season onwards . With his previous experience in charge of the Munich and Frankfurt opera houses , he was at first uncertain that Covent Garden , not yet consistently reaching the top international level , was a post he wanted . Bruno Walter persuaded him otherwise , and he took up the musical directorship in August 1961 . The press gave him a cautious welcome , but there was some concern about a drift away from the company 's original policies : 
 [ A ] recent shift in policy towards engaging eminent singers and conductors from abroad , which is a reversion to what has been at once traditional and fatal to the establishment of a permanent organization , a kind of diffused grand season , has endangered the good work of the past fifteen years . ... The purpose of a subsidy from the Exchequer was to lay foundations for an English opera , such as is a feature of the culture of every other country in Europe . 
 Solti , however , was an advocate of opera in the vernacular , and promoted the development of British and Commonwealth singers in the company , frequently casting them in his recordings and important productions in preference to overseas artists . Among those who came to prominence during the decade were Gwyneth Jones and Peter Glossop . Solti demonstrated his belief in vernacular opera with a triple bill in English of L 'heure espagnole , <unk> and Gianni Schicchi . Nevertheless , Solti and Webster had to take into account the complete opposition on the part of such stars as Callas to opera in translation . Moreover , as Webster recognised , the English @-@ speaking singers wanted to learn their roles in the original so that they could sing them in other countries and on record . Increasingly , productions were in the original language . In the interests of musical and dramatic excellence , Solti was a strong proponent of the <unk> system of scheduling performances , rather than the traditional repertory system . By 1967 , The Times said , " Patrons of Covent Garden today automatically expect any new production , and indeed any revival , to be as strongly cast as anything at the Met in New York , and as carefully presented as anything in Milan or Vienna " . 
 The company 's repertory in the 1960s combined the standard operatic works and less familiar pieces . The five composers whose works were given most frequently were Verdi , Puccini , Wagner , Mozart and Richard Strauss ; the next most performed composer was Britten . Rarities performed in the 1960s included operas by Handel and Janáček ( neither composer 's works being as common in the opera house then as now ) , and works by Gluck ( Iphigénie en Tauride ) , Poulenc ( The Carmelites ) , Ravel ( L 'heure espagnole ) and Tippett ( King Priam ) . There was also a celebrated production of Schoenberg 's Moses and Aaron in the 1965 – 66 and 1966 – 67 seasons . In the mainstream repertoire , a highlight of the decade was Franco Zeffirelli 's production of Tosca in 1964 with Callas , Renato <unk> and Gobbi . Among the guest conductors who appeared at Covent Garden during the 1960s were Otto Klemperer , Pierre Boulez , Claudio Abbado and Colin Davis . Guest singers included Jussi Björling , Mirella <unk> , Sena <unk> , Irmgard Seefried and Astrid <unk> . 
 The company made occasional appearances away from the Royal Opera House . Touring within Britain was limited to centres with large enough theatres to accommodate the company 's productions , but in 1964 the company gave a concert performance of Otello at the Proms in London . Thereafter an annual appearance at the Proms was a regular feature of the company 's schedule throughout the 1960s . In 1970 , Solti led the company to Germany , where they gave Don Carlos , Falstaff and a new work by Richard Rodney Bennett . All but two of the principals were British . The public in Munich and Berlin were , according to the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , " beside themselves with enthusiasm " . 
 In 1968 , on the recommendation of the Home Secretary , James Callaghan , the Queen conferred the title " The Royal Opera " on the company . It was the third stage company in the UK to be so honoured , following the Royal Ballet and the Royal Shakespeare Company . 
 = = = 1970 to 1986 = = = 
 Webster retired in June 1970 . The music critic Charles Osborne wrote , " When he retired , he handed over to his successor an organization of which any opera house in the world might be proud . No memorial could be more appropriate " . The successor was Webster 's former assistant , John Tooley . One of Webster 's last important decisions had been to recommend to the board that Colin Davis should be invited to take over as musical director when Solti left in 1971 . It was announced in advance that Davis would work in tandem with Peter Hall , appointed director of productions . Peter Brook had briefly held that title in the company 's early days , but in general the managerial structure of the opera company differed markedly from that of the ballet . The latter had always had its own director , subordinate to the chief executive of the opera house but with , in practice , a great degree of autonomy . The chief executive of the opera house and the musical director exercised considerably more day @-@ to @-@ day control over the opera company <unk> a substantial theatrical figure such as Hall was an important departure . Hall , however , changed his mind , and did not take up the appointment , going instead to run the National Theatre . His defection , and the departure to Australian Opera of the staff conductor Edward Downes , a noted Verdi expert , left the company weakened on both production and musical sides . 
 Like his predecessors , Davis experienced hostility from sections of the audience in his early days in charge . His first production after taking over was a well @-@ received Le nozze di Figaro , in which Kiri Te Kanawa achieved immediate stardom , but booing was heard at a " disastrous " Nabucco in 1971 , and his conducting of Wagner 's Ring was at first compared unfavourably with that of his predecessor . The Covent Garden board briefly considered replacing him , but was dissuaded by its chairman , Lord Drogheda . Davis 's Mozart was generally admired ; he received much praise for reviving the little @-@ known La clemenza di Tito in 1974 . Among his other successes were The Trojans and Benvenuto Cellini . 
 Under Davis , the opera house introduced promenade performances , giving , as Bernard Levin wrote , " an opportunity for those ( particularly the young , of course ) who could not normally afford the price of stalls tickets to sample the view from the <unk> quarters at the trifling cost of £ 3 and a willingness to sit on the floor " . Davis conducted more than 30 operas during his 15 @-@ year tenure , but , he said , " people like [ Lorin ] Maazel , Abbado and [ Riccardo ] Muti would only come for new productions " . Unlike Rankl , and like Solti , Davis wanted the world 's best conductors to come to Covent Garden . He ceded the baton to guests for new productions including Der Rosenkavalier , Rigoletto and Aida . In The Times , John Higgins wrote , " One of the hallmarks of the Davis regime was the flood of international conductors who suddenly arrived at Covent Garden . While Davis has been in control perhaps only three big names have been missing from the roster : Karajan , Bernstein and Barenboim " . Among the high @-@ profile guests conducting Davis 's company were Carlos Kleiber for performances of Der Rosenkavalier ( 1974 ) , Elektra ( 1977 ) , La bohème ( 1979 ) and Otello ( 1980 ) , and Abbado conducting Un ballo in maschera ( 1975 ) , starring Plácido Domingo and Katia <unk> . 
 In addition to the standard repertoire , Davis conducted such operas as Berg 's Lulu and Wozzeck , Tippett 's The Knot Garden and The Ice Break , and Alexander Zemlinsky 's Der <unk> and Eine <unk> <unk> . 
 Among the star guest singers during the Davis years were the sopranos Montserrat Caballé and Leontyne Price , the tenors Carlo Bergonzi , Nicolai Gedda and Luciano Pavarotti and the bass Gottlob Frick . British singers appearing with the company included Janet Baker , Heather Harper , John Tomlinson and Richard Van Allan . Davis 's tenure , at that time the longest in The Royal Opera 's history , closed in July 1986 not with a gala , but , at his insistence , with a promenade performance of Fidelio with cheap admission prices . 
 = = = 1987 to 2002 = = = 
 To succeed Davis , the Covent Garden board chose Bernard Haitink , who was then the musical director of the Glyndebourne Festival . He was highly regarded for the excellence of his performances , though his repertory was not large . In particular , he was not known as an interpreter of the Italian opera repertoire ( he conducted no Puccini and only five Verdi works during his music directorship at Covent Garden ) . His tenure began well ; a cycle of the Mozart Da Ponte operas directed by Johannes Schaaf was a success , and although a Ring cycle with the Russian director Yuri Lyubimov could not be completed , a substitute staging of the cycle directed by Götz Friedrich was well received . Musically and dramatically the company prospered into the 1990s . A 1993 production of Die Meistersinger , conducted by Haitink and starring John Tomlinson , Thomas Allen , Gösta <unk> and Nancy Gustafson , was widely admired , as was Richard Eyre 's 1994 staging of La traviata , conducted by Solti and propelling Angela Gheorghiu to stardom . 
 For some time , purely musical considerations were overshadowed by practical and managerial crises at the Royal Opera House . Sir John Tooley retired as general director in 1988 , and his post was given to the television executive Jeremy Isaacs . Tooley later forsook his customary reticence and pronounced the Isaacs period a disaster , citing poor management that failed to control inflated manning levels with a consequent steep rise in costs and ticket prices . The uneasy relations between Isaacs and his colleagues , notably Haitink , were also damaging . Tooley concluded that under Isaacs " Covent Garden had become a place of corporate entertainment , no longer a theatre primarily for opera and ballet lovers " . Isaacs was widely blamed for the poor public relations arising from the 1996 BBC television series The House , in which cameras were permitted to film the day @-@ to @-@ day backstage life of the opera and ballet companies and the running of the theatre . The Daily Telegraph commented , " For years , the Opera House was a byword for mismanagement and chaos . Its innermost workings were exposed to public ridicule by the BBC fly @-@ on @-@ the @-@ wall series The House " . 
 In 1995 , The Royal Opera announced a " Verdi Festival " , of which the driving force was the company 's leading Verdian , Sir Edward Downes , by now returned from Australia . The aim was to present all Verdi 's operas , either on stage or in concert performance , between 1995 and the centenary of Verdi 's death , 2001 . Those operas substantially rewritten by the composer in his long career , such as Simon Boccanegra , were given in both their original and revised versions . The festival did not manage to stage a complete Verdi cycle ; the closure of the opera house disrupted many plans , but as The Guardian put it , " Downes still managed to introduce , either under his own baton or that of others , most of the major works and many of the minor ones by the Italian master . " 
 The most disruptive event of the decade for both the opera and the ballet companies was the closure of the Royal Opera House between 1997 and 1999 for major rebuilding . The Independent on Sunday asserted that Isaacs " hopelessly mismanaged the closure of the Opera House during its redevelopment " . Isaacs , the paper states , turned down the chance of a temporary move to the Lyceum Theatre almost next door to the opera house , pinning his hopes on a proposed new temporary building on London 's South Bank . That scheme was refused planning permission , leaving the opera and ballet companies homeless . Isaacs resigned in December 1996 , nine months before the expiry of his contract . Haitink , dismayed by events , threatened to leave , but was persuaded to stay and keep the opera company going in a series of temporary homes in London theatres and concert halls . A semi @-@ staged Ring cycle at the Royal Albert Hall gained superlative reviews and won many new admirers for Haitink and the company , whose members included Tomlinson , Anne Evans and Hildegard Behrens . 
 After Isaacs left , there was a period of managerial instability , with three chief executives in three years . Isaacs 's successor , Genista McIntosh , resigned in May 1997 after five months , citing ill @-@ health . Her post was filled by Mary Allen , who moved into the job from the Arts Council . Allen 's selection did not comply with the Council 's rules for such appointments , and following a critical House of Commons Select Committee report on the management of the opera house she resigned in March 1998 , as did the entire board of the opera house , including the chairman , Lord <unk> . A new board appointed Michael Kaiser as general director in September 1998 . He oversaw the restoration of the two companies ' finances and the re @-@ opening of the opera house . He was widely regarded as a success , and there was some surprise when he left in June 2000 after less than two years to run the Kennedy Center in Washington , D.C. 
 The last operatic music to be heard in the old house had been the finale of Falstaff , conducted by Solti with the singers led by Bryn Terfel , in a joint opera and ballet farewell gala in July 1997 . When the house reopened in December 1999 , magnificently restored , Falstaff was the opera given on the opening night , conducted by Haitink , once more with Terfel in the title role . 
 = = = 2002 to date = = = 
 Following years of disruption and conflict , stability was restored to the opera house and its two companies after the appointment in May 2001 of a new chief executive , Tony Hall , formerly a senior executive at the BBC . The following year Antonio Pappano succeeded Haitink as music director of The Royal Opera . Following the redevelopment , a second , smaller auditorium , the <unk> Studio Theatre has been made available for small @-@ scale productions by The Royal Opera and The Royal Ballet , for visiting companies , and for work produced in the <unk> programme , which supports new work and developing artists . The Royal Opera encourages young singers at the start of their careers with the Jette Parker Young Artists Programme ; participants are salaried members of the company and receive daily coaching in all aspects of opera . 
 In addition to the standard works of the operatic repertoire , The Royal Opera has presented many less well known pieces since 2002 , including Cilea 's Adriana <unk> , Massenet 's Cendrillon , Prokofiev 's The Gambler , Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's The Tsar 's Bride , Rossini 's Il <unk> in Italia , Steffani 's Niobe , and Tchaikovsky 's The Tsarina 's Slippers . Among the composers whose works were premiered were Thomas Adès , Harrison Birtwistle , Lorin Maazel , and Nicholas Maw . 
 Productions in the first five years of Pappano 's tenure ranged from Shostakovich 's Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk ( 2004 ) to Stephen Sondheim 's Sweeney Todd ( 2003 ) starring Thomas Allen and Felicity Palmer . Pappano 's Ring cycle , begun in 2004 and staged as a complete tetralogy in 2007 , was praised like Haitink 's before it for its musical excellence ; it was staged in a production described by Richard Morrison in The Times as " much derided for mixing the homely … the wacky and the cosmic " . During Pappano 's tenure , his predecessors Davis and Haitink have both returned as guests . Haitink conducted Parsifal , with Tomlinson , Christopher Ventris and Petra Lang in 2007 , and Davis conducted four Mozart operas between 2002 and 2011 , Richard Strauss 's Ariadne auf Naxos in 2007 and Humperdinck 's Hansel and Gretel in 2008 . In 2007 , Sir Simon Rattle conducted a new production of Debussy 's Pelléas et Mélisande starring Simon Keenlyside , Angelika <unk> and Gerald Finley . 
 The company visited Japan in 2010 , presenting a new production of Manon and the Eyre production of La traviata . While the main company was abroad , a smaller company remained in London , presenting Niobe , Così fan tutte and Don Pasquale at Covent Garden . 
 In 2010 , the Royal Opera House received a government subsidy of just over £ 27m , compared with a subsidy of £ 15m in 1998 . This sum was divided between the opera and ballet companies and the cost of running the building . Compared with opera houses in mainland Europe , Covent Garden 's public subsidy has remained low as a percentage of its income – typically 43 % , compared with 60 % for its counterpart in Munich . 
 In the latter part of the 2000s The Royal Opera gave an average of 150 performances each season , lasting from September to July , of about 20 operas , nearly half of which were new productions . Productions in the 2011 – 12 season included a new opera ( Miss Fortune ) by Judith Weir , and the first performances of The Trojans at Covent Garden since 1990 , conducted by Pappano , and starring Bryan <unk> , Eva @-@ Maria <unk> and Anna Caterina Antonacci . From the start of the 2011 – 12 season Kasper Holten became Director of The Royal Opera , joined by John Fulljames as Associate Director of Opera . At the end of the 2011 @-@ 12 season <unk> , the contemporary arm of The Royal Opera House , was closed . Responsibility for contemporary programming was split between the Studio programmes of The Royal Opera and The Royal Ballet . 
 Since the start of the 2012 – 13 season The Royal Opera has continued to mount around 20 productions and around seven new productions each season . The 2012 – 13 season opened with a revival of Der Ring des Nibelungen , directed by Keith Warner ; new productions that season included Robert le diable , directed by Laurent Pelly , Eugene Onegin , directed by Holten , La donna del <unk> , directed by Fulljames , and the UK premiere of Written on Skin , composed by George Benjamin and directed by Katie Mitchell . Productions by the Studio Programme included the world premiere of David Bruce 's The Firework @-@ Maker 's Daughter ( inspired by Philip Pullman 's novel of the same name ) , directed by Fulljames , and the UK stage premiere of Gerald Barry 's The Importance of Being Earnest , directed by Ramin Gray . 
 New productions in the 2013 – 14 season included Les vêpres siciliennes , directed by Stefan <unk> , Parsifal , directed by Stephen Langridge , Don Giovanni , directed by Holten , Die Frau ohne Schatten , directed by Claus Guth , and Manon Lescaut , directed by Jonathan Kent , and in the Studio Programme the world premiere of Luke Bedford 's Through His Teeth , and the London premiere of Luca <unk> 's <unk> ( directed by Fulljames ) . This season also saw the first production of a three @-@ year collaboration between The Royal Opera and Welsh National Opera , staging Moses und Aron in 2014 , Richard Ayre 's Peter Pan in 2015 and a new commission in 2016 to celebrate WNO 's 70th anniversary . Other events this season included The Royal Opera 's first collaboration with Shakespeare 's Globe , Holten directing L <unk> in the newly opened Sam Wanamaker Playhouse . In The Guardian , Tim Ashley wrote , " A more exquisite evening would be hard to imagine " ; Dominic Dromgoole , director of the playhouse expressed the hope that the partnership with the Royal Opera would become an annual fixture . The production was revived in February 2015 . 
 = = Managerial and musical heads , 1946 to date = = 
 = E ( mathematical constant ) = 
 The number e is an important mathematical constant that is the base of the natural logarithm . It is approximately equal to 2 @.@ 71828 , and is the limit of ( 1 + 1 / n ) n as n approaches infinity , an expression that arises in the study of compound interest . It can also be calculated as the sum of the infinite series 
 <formula> 
 The constant can be defined in many ways . For example , e can be defined as the unique positive number a such that the graph of the function y 
 = ax has unit slope at x = 
 0 . The function f ( x ) 
 = ex is called the exponential function , and its inverse is the natural logarithm , or logarithm to base e . The natural logarithm of a positive number k can also be defined directly as the area under the curve y = 
 1 / x between x 
 = 1 and x = 
 k , in which case e is the number whose natural logarithm is 1 . There are alternative characterizations . 
 Sometimes called Euler 's number after the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler , e is not to be confused with γ , the Euler – Mascheroni constant , sometimes called simply Euler 's constant . The number e is also known as Napier 's constant , but Euler 's choice of the symbol e is said to have been retained in his honor . The constant was discovered by the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli while studying compound interest . 
 The number e is of eminent importance in mathematics , alongside 0 , 1 , π and i . All five of these numbers play important and recurring roles across mathematics , and are the five constants appearing in one formulation of Euler 's identity . Like the constant π , e is irrational : it is not a ratio of integers . Also like π , e is transcendental : it is not a root of any non @-@ zero polynomial with rational coefficients . The numerical value of e truncated to 50 decimal places is 
 2 @.@ <unk> ... ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The first references to the constant were published in 1618 in the table of an appendix of a work on logarithms by John Napier . However , this did not contain the constant itself , but simply a list of logarithms calculated from the constant . It is assumed that the table was written by William Oughtred . The discovery of the constant itself is credited to Jacob Bernoulli , who attempted to find the value of the following expression ( which is in fact e ) : 
 <formula> 
 The first known use of the constant , represented by the letter b , was in correspondence from Gottfried Leibniz to Christiaan Huygens in 1690 and 1691 . Leonhard Euler introduced the letter e as the base for natural logarithms , writing in a letter to Christian Goldbach of 25 November 1731 . Euler started to use the letter e for the constant in 1727 or 1728 , in an unpublished paper on explosive forces in cannons , and the first appearance of e in a publication was Euler 's Mechanica ( 1736 ) . While in the subsequent years some researchers used the letter c , e was more common and eventually became the standard . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Compound interest = = = 
 Jacob Bernoulli discovered this constant in 1683 by studying a question about compound interest : 
 An account starts with $ 1 @.@ 00 and pays 100 percent interest per year . If the interest is credited once , at the end of the year , the value of the account at year @-@ end will be $ 2 @.@ 00 . What happens if the interest is computed and credited more frequently during the year ? 
 If the interest is credited twice in the year , the interest rate for each 6 months will be 50 % , so the initial $ 1 is multiplied by 1 @.@ 5 twice , yielding $ 1 @.@ 00 × 1 @.@ 52 
 = $ 2 @.@ 25 at the end of the year . Compounding quarterly yields $ 1 @.@ 00 × 1 @.@ 254 = 
 $ 2 @.@ <unk> ... , and compounding monthly yields $ 1 @.@ 00 × ( 1 + 1 / 12 ) 12 
 = $ 2 @.@ <unk> ... If there are n compounding intervals , the interest for each interval will be 100 % / n and the value at the end of the year will be $ 1 @.@ 00 × ( 1 + 1 / n ) n . 
 Bernoulli noticed that this sequence approaches a limit ( the force of interest ) with larger n and , thus , smaller compounding intervals . Compounding weekly ( n = 
 52 ) yields $ 2 @.@ <unk> ... , while compounding daily ( n 
 = 365 ) yields $ 2 @.@ <unk> ... , just two cents more . The limit as n grows large is the number that came to be known as e ; with continuous compounding , the account value will reach $ 2 @.@ <unk> .... More generally , an account that starts at $ 1 and offers an annual interest rate of R will , after t years , yield <unk> dollars with continuous compounding . ( Here R is the decimal equivalent of the rate of interest expressed as a percentage , so for 5 % interest , R = 
 5 / 100 = 0 @.@ 05 ) 
 = = = Bernoulli trials = = = 
 The number e itself also has applications to probability theory , where it arises in a way not obviously related to exponential growth . Suppose that a gambler plays a slot machine that pays out with a probability of one in n and plays it n times . Then , for large n ( such as a million ) the probability that the gambler will lose every bet is ( approximately ) 1 / e . For n 
 = 20 it is already approximately 1 / 2 @.@ 79 . 
 This is an example of a Bernoulli trials process . Each time the gambler plays the slots , there is a one in one million chance of winning . Playing one million times is modelled by the binomial distribution , which is closely related to the binomial theorem . The probability of winning k times out of a million trials is ; 
 <formula> 
 In particular , the probability of winning zero times ( k = 
 0 ) is 
 <formula> 
 This is very close to the following limit for 1 / e : 
 <formula> 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Another application of e , also discovered in part by Jacob Bernoulli along with Pierre Raymond de Montmort , is in the problem of <unk> , also known as the hat check problem : n guests are invited to a party , and at the door each guest checks his hat with the butler who then places them into n boxes , each labelled with the name of one guest . But the butler does not know the identities of the guests , and so he puts the hats into boxes selected at random . The problem of de Montmort is to find the probability that none of the hats gets put into the right box . The answer is : 
 <formula> 
 As the number n of guests tends to infinity , pn approaches 1 / e . Furthermore , the number of ways the hats can be placed into the boxes so that none of the hats are in the right box is n ! / e rounded to the nearest integer , for every positive n . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The number e occurs naturally in connection with many problems involving asymptotics . A prominent example is Stirling 's formula for the asymptotics of the factorial function , in which both the numbers e and π enter : 
 <formula> 
 A particular consequence of this is 
 <formula> . 
 = = = Standard normal distribution = = = 
 The simplest case of a normal distribution is known as the standard normal distribution , described by this probability density function : 
 <formula> 
 The factor <formula> in this expression ensures that the total area under the curve ϕ ( x ) is equal to one [ proof ] . The 1 / 2 in the exponent ensures that the distribution has unit variance ( and therefore also unit standard deviation ) . This function is symmetric around x = 0 , where it attains its maximum value <formula> ; and has inflection points at + 1 and − 1 . 
 = = e in calculus = = 
 The principal motivation for introducing the number e , particularly in calculus , is to perform differential and integral calculus with exponential functions and logarithms . A general exponential function y 
 = ax has derivative given as the limit : 
 <formula> 
 The limit on the far right is independent of the variable x : it depends only on the base a . When the base is e , this limit is equal to 1 , and so e is symbolically defined by the equation : 
 <formula> 
 Consequently , the exponential function with base e is particularly suited to doing calculus . Choosing e , as opposed to some other number , as the base of the exponential function makes calculations involving the derivative much simpler . 
 Another motivation comes from considering the base @-@ a logarithm . Considering the definition of the derivative of <unk> x as the limit : 
 <formula> 
 where the substitution u = 
 h / x was made in the last step . The last limit appearing in this calculation is again an undetermined limit that depends only on the base a , and if that base is e , the limit is equal to 1 . So symbolically , 
 <formula> 
 The logarithm in this special base is called the natural logarithm and is represented as ln ; it behaves well under differentiation since there is no undetermined limit to carry through the calculations . 
 There are thus two ways in which to select a special number a = e . One way is to set the derivative of the exponential function ax to ax , and solve for a . The other way is to set the derivative of the base a logarithm to 1 / x and solve for a . In each case , one arrives at a convenient choice of base for doing calculus . In fact , these two solutions for a are actually the same , the number e . 
 = = = Alternative characterizations = = = 
 Other characterizations of e are also possible : one is as the limit of a sequence , another is as the sum of an infinite series , and still others rely on integral calculus . So far , the following two ( equivalent ) properties have been introduced : 
 The number e is the unique positive real number such that 
 <formula> 
 The number e is the unique positive real number such that 
 <formula> 
 The following three characterizations can be proven equivalent : 
 The number e is the limit 
 <formula> 
 Similarly : 
 <formula> 
 The number e is the sum of the infinite series 
 <formula> 
 where n ! is the factorial of n . 
 The number e is the unique positive real number such that 
 <formula> 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Calculus = = = 
 As in the motivation , the exponential function ex is important in part because it is the unique nontrivial function ( up to multiplication by a constant ) which is its own derivative 
 <formula> 
 and therefore its own antiderivative as well : 
 <formula> 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The number e is the unique real number such that 
 <formula> 
 for all positive x . 
 Also , we have the inequality 
 <formula> 
 for all real x , with equality if and only if x = 0 . Furthermore , e is the unique base of the exponential for which the inequality ax ≥ x + 1 holds for all x . 
 = = = Exponential @-@ like functions = = = 
 Steiner 's problem asks to find the global maximum for the function 
 <formula> 
 This maximum occurs precisely at x 
 = e . For proof , the inequality <formula> , from above , evaluated at <formula> and simplifying gives <formula> . So <formula> for all positive x . 
 Similarly , x = 
 1 / e is where the global minimum occurs for the function 
 <formula> 
 defined for positive x . More generally , for the function 
 <formula> 
 the global maximum for positive x occurs at x 
 = 1 / e for any n < 0 ; and the global minimum occurs at x = 
 e − 1 / n for any n > 0 . 
 The infinite tetration 
 <formula> or <formula> 
 converges if and only if e − e ≤ x ≤ e1 / e ( or approximately between 0 @.@ <unk> and 1 @.@ 4447 ) , due to a theorem of Leonhard Euler . 
 = = = Number theory = = = 
 The real number e is irrational . Euler proved this by showing that its simple continued fraction expansion is infinite . ( See also Fourier 's proof that e is irrational . ) 
 Furthermore , by the Lindemann – Weierstrass theorem , e is transcendental , meaning that it is not a solution of any non @-@ constant polynomial equation with rational coefficients . It was the first number to be proved transcendental without having been specifically constructed for this purpose ( compare with Liouville number ) ; the proof was given by Charles <unk> in 1873 . 
 It is conjectured that e is normal , meaning that when e is expressed in any base the possible digits in that base are uniformly distributed ( occur with equal probability in any sequence of given length ) . 
 = = = Complex numbers = = = 
 The exponential function ex may be written as a Taylor series 
 <formula> 
 Because this series keeps many important properties for ex even when x is complex , it is commonly used to extend the definition of ex to the complex numbers . This , with the Taylor series for sin and cos x , allows one to derive Euler 's formula : 
 <formula> 
 which holds for all x . The special case with x = π is Euler 's identity : 
 <formula> 
 from which it follows that , in the principal branch of the logarithm , 
 <formula> 
 Furthermore , using the laws for exponentiation , 
 <formula> 
 which is de Moivre 's formula . 
 The expression 
 <formula> 
 is sometimes referred to as cis ( x ) . 
 = = = Differential equations = = = 
 The general function 
 <formula> 
 is the solution to the differential equation : 
 <formula> 
 = = Representations = = 
 The number e can be represented as a real number in a variety of ways : as an infinite series , an infinite product , a continued fraction , or a limit of a sequence . The chief among these representations , particularly in introductory calculus courses is the limit 
 <formula> 
 given above , as well as the series 
 <formula> 
 given by evaluating the above power series for ex at x = 1 . 
 Less common is the continued fraction ( sequence <unk> in the OEIS ) . 
 <formula> 
 which written out looks like 
 <formula> 
 This continued fraction for e converges three times as quickly : 
 <formula> 
 which written out looks like 
 <formula> 
 Many other series , sequence , continued fraction , and infinite product representations of e have been developed . 
 = = = Stochastic representations = = = 
 In addition to exact analytical expressions for representation of e , there are stochastic techniques for estimating e . One such approach begins with an infinite sequence of independent random variables X1 , X2 ... , drawn from the uniform distribution on [ 0 , 1 ] . Let V be the least number n such that the sum of the first n observations exceeds 1 : 
 <formula> 
 Then the expected value of V is e : E ( V ) = e . 
 = = = Known digits = = = 
 The number of known digits of e has increased substantially during the last decades . This is due both to the increased performance of computers and to algorithmic improvements . 
 Since that time , the proliferation of modern high @-@ speed desktop computers has made it possible for amateurs to compute billions of digits of e . 
 = = In computer culture = = 
 In contemporary internet culture , individuals and organizations frequently pay homage to the number e . 
 For instance , in the IPO filing for Google in 2004 , rather than a typical round @-@ number amount of money , the company announced its intention to raise $ 2 @,@ 718 @,@ 281 @,@ 828 , which is e billion dollars rounded to the nearest dollar . Google was also responsible for a billboard that appeared in the heart of Silicon Valley , and later in Cambridge , Massachusetts ; Seattle , Washington ; and Austin , Texas . It read " { first 10 @-@ digit prime found in consecutive digits of e } .com " . Solving this problem and visiting the advertised ( now defunct ) web site led to an even more difficult problem to solve , which in turn led to Google Labs where the visitor was invited to submit a resume . The first 10 @-@ digit prime in e is <unk> , which starts at the 99th digit . 
 In another instance , the computer scientist Donald Knuth let the version numbers of his program <unk> approach e . The versions are 2 , 2 @.@ 7 , 2 @.@ 71 , 2 @.@ 718 , and so forth . 
 = HMS Royal Oak ( 1862 ) = 
 HMS Royal Oak was a Prince Consort @-@ class armoured frigate built for the Royal Navy in the 1860s . The lead ship of her class , she is sometimes described as a half @-@ sister to the other three ships because of her different engine and boiler arrangements . Like her sisters , she was converted into an ironclad from a wooden ship of the line that was still under construction . 
 The ship spent most of her career with the Mediterranean Fleet , only briefly serving with the Channel Fleet . Royal Oak returned home in 1871 for a refit , but was instead placed in reserve to save money . Fourteen years later , still in reserve , she was sold for scrap in 1885 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Royal Oak was 273 feet ( 83 @.@ 2 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 58 feet 6 inches ( 17 @.@ 8 m ) . The ship had a draught of 23 feet 11 inches ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) forward and 25 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 7 m ) aft . She displaced 6 @,@ 366 long tons ( 6 @,@ 468 t ) and had a tonnage of 4 @,@ 056 tons burthen . 
 Royal Oak had a low centre of gravity which meant that she rolled a lot and was an unsteady gun platform . She was , however , very handy and sailed well in all weathers under sail or steam . Her crew consisted of 585 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Royal Oak had a simple horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine , built by Maudslay , that drove a single propeller shaft using steam that was provided by six rectangular boilers . The engine produced 3 @,@ 704 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 762 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials on 15 June 1863 which gave the ship a maximum speed of 12 @.@ 5 knots ( 23 @.@ 2 km / h ; 14 @.@ 4 mph ) under steam . She carried a maximum of 550 long tons ( 560 t ) of coal , enough to steam 2 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 100 km ; 2 @,@ 500 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 The ship was initially barque @-@ rigged with three masts and had a sail area of 25 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) . Yards were added to the ship 's mizzenmast in June 1866 and Royal Oak was given a full ship rig which she retained for the rest of her career . Her propeller was designed to be disconnected and hoisted up into the stern of the ship to reduce drag while under sail , but this was rarely done because there was no bulkhead surrounding the hoisting holes which could have flooded the ship if their covers had been removed in even a moderate sea . To further reduce drag , the funnel was telescopic and could be lowered . Her best speed with the propeller disconnected and under sail alone was 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) , the fastest of any British ironclad , and she was the only ship to exceed her best speed using steam while under sail . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Royal Oak was initially armed with 24 smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 68 @-@ pounder guns on the main deck and 11 rifled breech @-@ loading ( RBL ) Armstrong seven @-@ inch , 110 @-@ pounder guns . Eight of these were also on the main deck and the other three served as chase guns on the upper deck , two at the bow and one aft . 
 The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) and had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110 @-@ pounder Armstrong breech @-@ loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of 11 @.@ 25 ° , a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 The ship 's original armament was replaced during her 1867 refit with 20 seven @-@ inch and 8 eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , four of the seven @-@ inch guns were chase guns . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre eight @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed nine long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre seven @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell that was able penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) of armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The entire side of the Prince Consort @-@ class ships , from the upper @-@ deck level downwards , was protected by wrought iron armour that tapered from 3 inches ( 76 mm ) at the ends to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) amidships . The armour extended 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) below the waterline and was backed by the sides of the hull which were 29 @.@ 5 inches ( 749 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Royal Oak , named for the English oak tree within which King Charles II hid to escape after his defeat at Battle of Worcester in 1651 , was laid down on 1 May 1860 at Chatham Dockyard as a 90 @-@ gun Bulwark @-@ class ship of the line . She was ordered to be converted to an ironclad on 14 May 1861 and was launched on 10 September 1862 . The ship was commissioned in April 1863 to run her trials and completed on 28 May , for the price of £ 245 @,@ 537 . 
 Royal Oak briefly served with the Channel Fleet before she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet . She was paid off for a refit and re @-@ arming in 1867 , and then rejoined the Channel Fleet for six months . She was accidentally rammed by HMS Warrior in heavy weather at night on 14 August 1868 ; the impact sheared off the main and mizzen <unk> as well as all the boats on the starboard side . Three months later the ship returned to the Mediterranean , and was present at the opening of the Suez Canal in November 1869 where she grounded on an uncharted sandbank outside Port Said , Egypt , without sustaining any damage . She paid off for an extensive refit at Portsmouth at the end of 1871 , but was instead laid up as an economy measure . Royal Oak remained in fourth @-@ class reserve for 14 years until she was no longer worth repairing and was sold for breaking up on 30 September 1885 . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 A block of housing within the new development at " Rochester Riverside " has been named after this ship . 
 = Stanisław Lem = 
 Stanisław Herman Lem ( Polish pronunciation : [ staˈɲiswaf <unk> ] ; 12 September 1921 – 27 March 2006 ) was a Polish writer of science fiction , philosophy , and satire , and a trained physician . Lem 's books have been translated into forty @-@ one languages and have sold over forty @-@ five million copies . From the 1950s to 2000s , he published many books , both science fiction and philosophical / futurological . He is best known as the author of the 1961 novel Solaris , which has been made into a feature film three times . In 1976 , Theodore Sturgeon wrote that Lem was the most widely read science @-@ fiction writer in the world . 
 Lem 's works explore philosophical themes through speculation on technology , the nature of intelligence , the impossibility of mutual communication and understanding , despair about human limitations , and humanity 's place in the universe . They are sometimes presented as fiction , but others are in the form of essays or philosophical books . 
 Translations of his works are difficult due to passages with elaborate word formation , alien or robotic poetry , and puns . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Lem was born in 1921 in Lwów , Poland ( since 1945 Lviv , Soviet Union ) . He was the son of Sabina née <unk> ( 1892 – 1979 ) and Samuel Lem ( 1879 – 1954 ) , a wealthy laryngologist and former physician in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army , and first cousin to Polish poet Marian <unk> ( Lem 's father and <unk> 's mother were brother and sister ) . Though in later years he sometimes claimed to have been raised a Roman Catholic , he went to Jewish religious lessons during his school years , and later became an atheist " for moral reasons . . . the world appears to me to be put together in such a painful way that I prefer to believe that it was not created . . . intentionally " . Lem called himself both an " agnostic " . and an atheist later in life . After the Soviet invasion and occupation of Eastern Poland , he was not allowed to study at the Polytechnic as he wished because of his " bourgeois origin , " and only due to his father 's connections was accepted to study medicine at Lwów University in 1940 . During the subsequent Nazi occupation ( 1941 – 1944 ) , Lem 's family , which had Jewish roots , avoided imprisonment in a ghetto , surviving with false papers . During that time , Lem earned a living as a car mechanic and welder . Lem declared : 
 During that period , I learned in a very personal , practical way that I was no “ Aryan ” . I knew that my ancestors were Jews , but I knew nothing of the Mosaic faith and , regrettably , nothing at all of Jewish culture . So it was , strictly speaking , only the Nazi legislation that brought home to me the realization that I had Jewish blood in my veins . 
 In 1945 , Polish eastern Kresy was annexed into Soviet Ukraine and the family , like many other Poles , was resettled to Kraków , where Lem , at his father 's insistence , took up medical studies at the Jagiellonian University . He did not take his final examinations on purpose , so as not to be obliged to become a military doctor . Earlier , he had started working as an assistant in a hospital and writing stories in his spare time . 
 = = = Rise to fame = = = 
 Lem made his literary debut in 1946 with a number of works of different genres , including poetry as well as a science fiction novel The Man from Mars ( <unk> z Marsa ) serialized in Nowy Świat <unk> ( New World of Adventures ) . Between 1948 and 1950 Lem was working as a scientific research assistant at the Jagiellonian University , and published a number of short stories , poems , reviews and similar works , particularly at Tygodnik Powszechny . In 1951 , he published his first book , The Astronauts ( <unk> ) . In 1954 , he published a short story anthology , Sesame and other stories ( Sezam i <unk> <unk> ) . That year he also married Barbara Leśniak . The following year , 1955 , saw the publication of another science fiction novel , The Magellanic Cloud ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 During the era of Stalinism , which had begun in Poland in the late ' 40s , all published works had to be directly approved by the communist regime . Thus <unk> was not , in fact , the first novel Lem finished , just the first that made it past the censors . Going by the date of finished manuscript , Lem 's first book was a partly autobiographical novella Hospital of the Transfiguration ( <unk> <unk> ) , finished in 1948 . It would be published seven years later , in 1955 , as a trilogy under a title Czas <unk> ( Time Not Lost ) . The experience of trying to push Czas .. through the censors was one of the major reasons Lem decided to focus on the less @-@ censored genre of science fiction . Nonetheless , most of Lem 's works published in the 1950s also contain — forced upon him by the censors and editors — various references to socialist realism as well as the " glorious future of communism " . Lem later criticized several of his early pieces as compromised by the ideological pressure . 
 Lem became truly productive after 1956 , when the de @-@ Stalinization period in the Soviet Union led to the " Polish October " , when Poland experienced an increase in freedom of speech . Between 1956 and 1968 , Lem authored seventeen books . His writing over the next three decades or so was split between science fiction ( primarily prose ) and essays about science and culture . 
 In 1957 , he published his first non @-@ fiction , philosophical book , Dialogues ( <unk> ) , as well as a science @-@ fiction anthology , The Star Diaries ( <unk> <unk> ) , collecting short stories about one of his most popular characters , <unk> Tichy . 1959 saw the publication of three books : Eden , <unk> and the short story anthology , <unk> z <unk> . 1961 saw two more books , the first regarded as being among his top works : Pamiętnik <unk> w <unk> , Solaris , as well as <unk> z <unk> . This was followed by a collections of his essays and non @-@ fiction prose , <unk> na <unk> ( 1962 ) , and a short @-@ story anthology Noc <unk> ( 1963 ) . In 1964 , Lem published a large work on the border of philosophy and sociology of science and <unk> , Summa Technologiae , as well as a novel , The Invincible ( <unk> ) . 
 1965 saw the publication of The Cyberiad ( <unk> ) . That year also saw the publication of a short @-@ story anthology , The Hunt ( <unk> ) . 1966 is the year of " <unk> Zamek " , and 1968 , " Głos Pana " and " <unk> o <unk> <unk> " . " <unk> Zamek " was another of Lem 's autobiographical works , and touched upon a theme that usually was not favored by the censors : Lem 's youth in the pre @-@ war , then @-@ Polish , Lviv . 1967 and 1970 saw two more non @-@ fiction treatises , " <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> i <unk> " . <unk> Tichy returns in 1971 's The <unk> Congress Kongres <unk> , the year of a genre @-@ mixing experiment , " <unk> <unk> " ( a collection of reviews of non @-@ existent books ) . 1973 sees a similar work , " <unk> <unk> " . In 1976 , Lem published two novels : " <unk> " and " Katar " . In 1980 , he published another set of reviews of non @-@ existent works , " <unk> " . The following year sees another Tichy novel , " <unk> <unk> " , and Golem XIV . Later in that decade , he published " <unk> na <unk> " ( 1984 ) and " <unk> " ( 1986 ) , Lem 's final science @-@ fiction novel . 
 In the late ' 70s and early ' 80s , Lem cautiously supported the Polish dissident movement , and started publishing essays in Paris @-@ based Kultura . In 1982 , with martial law in Poland declared , Lem moved to West Berlin , where he became a fellow of the Institute for Advanced Study , Berlin ( <unk> zu Berlin ) . After that , he settled in Vienna . He returned to Poland in 1988 . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 From the late 1980s onwards , he tended to concentrate on philosophical texts and essays , published in a number of Polish magazines ( Tygodnik Powszechny , Odra , Przegląd , and others ) . They were later collected in a number of anthologies . 
 In the early 1990s , Lem met with the literary scholar and critic Peter Swirski for a series of extensive interviews , published together with other critical materials and translations as A Stanislaw Lem Reader ( 1997 ) ; in the book , Lem speaks about a range of issues rarely touched on before in any interview . Moreover , the book includes Swirski 's translation of Lem 's retrospective essay " Thirty Years Later " , devoted to Lem 's legendary nonfictional treatise Summa Technologiae . During later interviews in 2005 , Lem expressed his disappointment with the genre of science fiction , and his general pessimism regarding technical progress . He viewed the human body as unsuitable for space travel , held that information technology drowns people in a glut of low @-@ quality information , and considered truly intelligent robots as both undesirable and impossible to construct . Subsequently , Peter Swirski has published a series of in @-@ depth studies of Lem as a writer , philosopher , and <unk> ; notable among them are the recent From Literature to <unk> : Lem , Turing , Darwin ( 2013 ) , Stanislaw Lem : Selected Letters to Michael Kandel ( 2014 ) , <unk> ( 2014 ) , and Stanislaw Lem : Philosopher of the Future ( 2015 ) . 
 In 1996 , Lem received the prestigious Polish award , the Order of the White Eagle . 
 Lem died from heart disease in Kraków on 27 March 2006 at the age of 84 . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = SFWA = = = 
 Lem was awarded an honorary membership in the Science Fiction Writers of America ( SFWA ) in 1973 . SFWA Honorary membership is given to people who do not meet the publishing criteria for joining the regular membership , but who would be welcomed as members had their work appeared in the qualifying English @-@ language publications . Lem , however , never had a high opinion of American science fiction , describing it as ill @-@ thought @-@ out , poorly written , and interested more in making money than in ideas or new literary forms . After his eventual American publication , when he became eligible for regular membership , his honorary membership was rescinded , an action that some of the SFWA members apparently intended as a rebuke , and it seems that Lem interpreted it as such . Lem was invited to stay on with the organization with a regular membership , but declined . After many members ( including Ursula K. Le Guin ) protested Lem 's treatment by the SFWA , a member offered to pay his dues . Lem never accepted the offer . 
 = = = Philip K. Dick = = = 
 Lem singled out only one American SF writer for praise , Philip K. Dick — see the 1986 English @-@ language anthology of his critical essays , <unk> . Dick thought that Stanisław Lem was probably a false name used by a composite committee operating on orders of the Communist party to gain control over public opinion , and wrote a letter to the FBI to that effect . Stanisław Lem was also responsible for Polish translation of Dick 's work , and when Dick felt monetarily short @-@ changed by the publisher , he held Lem personally responsible ( see <unk> ) . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Lem has become one of the most highly acclaimed science @-@ fiction writers , hailed by critics as equal to such classic authors as H. G. Wells and Olaf Stapledon . In 1976 , Theodore Sturgeon wrote that Lem was the most widely read science @-@ fiction writer in the world . 
 In Poland , in the ' 60s and ' 70s , Lem remained under the radar of mainstream critics , who dismissed him as a " mass market " , low @-@ brow , youth @-@ oriented writer ; such dismissal might have given him a form of invisibility from censorship . 
 The total volume of his published works is over twenty @-@ eight million volumes . His works were widely translated abroad , appearing in over forty languages , though the bulk of them were in Eastern Bloc countries ( Poland , Germany , and the Soviet Union ) . Franz <unk> , Lem 's former agent abroad , had this to say about Lem 's reception on international markets : 
 With [ number of translations and copies sold ] , Lem is the most successful author in modern Polish fiction ; nevertheless his commercial success in the world is limited , and the bulk of his large editions was due to the special publishing conditions in the Communist countries : Poland , the Soviet Union , and the German Democratic Republic ) . Only in West Germany was Lem really a critical and a commercial success [ . . . and everywhere . . . ] in recent years interest in him has waned . 
 But he is the only writer of European [ science fiction , most of whose ] books have been translated into English , and [ . . . ] kept in print in the USA . Lem 's critical success in English is due mostly to the excellent translations of Michael Kandel . 
 His best @-@ known novels include Solaris ( 1961 ) , His Master 's Voice ( Głos <unk> , 1968 ) , and the late Fiasco ( <unk> , 1987 ) . Solaris was made into a film in 1968 by Russian director Boris <unk> , a film in 1972 by Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky — which won a Special Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival in 1972 — and an American re @-@ adaptation in 2002 by American director Steven Soderbergh , starring George Clooney . 
 Solaris is not the only work of Lem 's to be made into a movie . Over ten movie , film , and television adaptations of his work exist , such as adaptations of The Astronauts ( First Spaceship on Venus , 1960 ) and The Magellan Nebula ( <unk> XB @-@ 1 , 1963 ) . Lem himself was , however , critical of most of the screen adaptations , with the sole exception of <unk> in 1968 by Andrzej Wajda . More recently , in 2013 , the Israeli – Polish co @-@ production The Congress was released , inspired by Lem 's novel The <unk> Congress . 
 Lem 's works have been used in education , for example as teaching texts for philosophy students . 
 Lem 's works have influenced not only the realm of literature , but that of science as well . For example , Return from the Stars includes the " <unk> " , which is often cited as the first published appearance of the idea of electronic paper . 
 In 1981 , the philosophers Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett included three extracts from Lem 's fiction in their annotated anthology The Mind 's I , accompanied by Hofstadter 's comment , which says in part that Lem 's " literary and intuitive approach . . . does a better job of convincing readers of his views than any hard @-@ nosed scientific article . . . might do " . 
 Other influences exerted by Lem 's works include Will Wright 's popular city planning game SimCity , which was partly inspired by Lem 's short story The Seventh Sally . 
 = = Writings = = 
 = = = Science fiction = = = 
 Stanisław Lem works were influenced by such masters of Polish literature as Cyprian Norwid and Stanisław <unk> . His prose show a mastery of numerous genres and themes . 
 One of Lem 's major recurring themes , beginning from his very first novel , The Man from Mars , was the impossibility of communication between profoundly alien beings , which may have no common ground with human intelligence , and humans . The best known example is the living planetary ocean in Lem 's novel Solaris . Other examples include swarms of mechanical insects ( in The Invincible ) , and strangely ordered societies of more human @-@ like beings in Fiasco and Eden , describing the failure of the first contact . In His Master 's Voice , Lem describes the failure of humanity 's intelligence to decipher and truly comprehend an apparent message from space . 
 Two overlapping arcs of short stories , Fables for Robots ( <unk> <unk> ) , translated in the collection Mortal Engines ) , and The Cyberiad ( <unk> ) provide a commentary on humanity in the form of a series of grotesque , humorous , fairytale @-@ like short stories about a mechanical universe inhabited by robots ( who have occasional contact with biological " <unk> " and human " <unk> " ) . 
 " <unk> " and " Katar " are crime novels ( the latter without a murderer ) ; " Pamiętnik . . . " is a psychological drama inspired by Kafka . " <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> <unk> " are collections of reviews of non @-@ existent books and introductions to them . Similarly , " <unk> " purports to review a Holocaust @-@ themed work . 
 = = = Essays = = = 
 Lem 's criticism of most science fiction surfaced in literary and philosophical essays Science Fiction and <unk> and interviews . In the 1990s , Lem <unk> science fiction and returned to futurological prognostications , most notably those expressed in Blink of an Eye ( <unk> ) . He became increasingly critical of modern technology in his later life , criticizing inventions such as the Internet . 
 <unk> and Summa Technologiae ( 1964 ) are Lem 's two most famous philosophical texts . The Summa is notable for being a unique analysis of prospective social , cybernetic , and biological advances ; in this work , Lem discusses philosophical implications of technologies that were completely in the realm of science fiction at the time , but are gaining importance today — for instance , virtual reality and nanotechnology . 
 = = Honors = = 
 1957 – City of Kraków 's Prize in Literature ( Nagroda <unk> <unk> <unk> ) 
 1965 – Prize of the Minister of Culture and Art , 2nd Level ( Nagroda Ministra Kultury i Sztuki II <unk> ) 
 1972 – member of commission " Poland 2000 " of the Polish Academy of Sciences 
 1973 
 Prize of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for popularization of Polish culture abroad ( <unk> Ministra <unk> <unk> za <unk> <unk> kultury za <unk> ) 
 Literary Prize of the Minister of Culture and Art ( <unk> <unk> Ministra Kultury i Sztuki ) and honorary member of Science Fiction Writers of America 
 1976 – State Prize 1st Level in the area of literature ( Nagroda <unk> I <unk> w <unk> <unk> ) 
 1979 
 Grand Prix de Littérature <unk> for his novel Katar . 
 A minor planet , 3836 Lem , discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh in 1979 , is named after him . 
 1981 – Doctor honoris causa honorary degree from the Wrocław University of Technology 
 1986 – Austrian State Prize for European Literature 
 1991 – Austrian literary Franz Kafka Prize 
 1994 – member of the Polish Academy of Learning 
 1996 – recipient of the Order of the White Eagle 
 1997 – honorary citizen of Kraków 
 1998 – Doctor honoris causa : University of Opole , Lviv University , Jagiellonian University 
 2003 – Doctor honoris causa of the University of Bielefeld 
 2007 – A street in Kraków is to be named in his honour . 
 2009 – A street in Wieliczka was named in his honour 
 2011 – An interactive Google logo inspired by The Cyberiad was created and published in his honor for the 60th anniversary of his first published book : The Astronauts . 
 = Volume 6 , Part 2 = 
 July 1979 
 Stanislaw Lem , Jeet Heer , Boston Globe Ideas , 15 December 2004 
 The writing of Stanislaw Lem – Reviews by Matt <unk> 
 Stanislaw Lem Bibliography 
 " Less Predictable Realities , " translated by Joanna Zylinska , in the journal Scapegoat , issue 05 ( 2013 ) 
 <unk> St. Creator of worlds 
 Lem , Stanisław . Encyclopædia Britannica . 2006 . Retrieved 30 June 2006 . 
 Obituaries 
 Life after Lem , Warsaw Voice 5 April 2006 ( cover story ) 
 To Solaris and beyond , Philosopher 's Zone Australian Broadcasting Corporation discussion about Lem 's works ; MP3 
 Times Online obituary 
 = Brigitte Boisselier = 
 Brigitte Boisselier ( born 1956 ) , also known as Brigitte Roehr , is a French chemist and Raëlian religious leader best known for her claim to have overseen the creation of the first human clone . A native of Champagne @-@ Ardenne , she studied chemistry in France and the United States , earning two PhDs . From 1984 to 1997 , she lived near Paris and worked as a research chemist and a sales manager for Air Liquide . She embraced Raëlism in 1992 ; the group was unpopular in France and her conversion led to tensions with those around her . Five years later , she joined Clonaid , a Raëlian organization that sought to clone a human . After her service as their scientific director was publicized , she lost her position with Air Liquide and focused on cloning full @-@ time . 
 In late 2000 , Clonaid announced that they had received a large donation to fund the cloning of a child , and that Boisselier supervised a team of scientists at a secret laboratory in the United States who would soon produce a human clone . For the next year , the project received media coverage — and regulatory suspicion — as Boisselier promised the imminent birth of a human clone . In late 2001 , she announced that one had been born and that public evidence would soon be offered . This declaration received significant press coverage in the United States , and Boisselier appeared on many television programs . After a court in Florida launched a child welfare investigation , she stated that the cloned child 's parents had withdrawn their offer to provide evidence of the cloning and would have no further public comment . No evidence of the cloning , or subsequent procedures reported by Clonaid , was ever offered , and the announcements were widely perceived to have been a hoax . 
 In 2003 , impressed with her management of Clonaid and public relations skill , Raël , the founder of Raëlism , announced that Boisselier would succeed him as the group 's leader upon his death . In subsequent years , she has devoted herself to lecturing about the group 's doctrines and serving as their spokesperson . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Brigitte Boisselier was born to a Catholic family in France in 1956 . She was reared on a farm in Champagne @-@ Ardenne and became interested in science while young . She attended the University of Dijon , earning a master 's degree in biochemistry and a PhD in chemistry . In the 1980s , she moved to Texas , where she received another PhD in chemistry from the University of Houston . 
 Boisselier returned to France in 1984 to work for Air Liquide , an industrial gas company , where she remained for 13 years . At that time , she lived in Les Loges @-@ en @-@ <unk> and worked as a research chemist and a sales manager in Lyon . She married and had three children between the late 1970s and early 1990s . 
 = = Conversion and new career = = 
 In 1992 , Boisselier converted to Raëlism , a UFO religion founded by the French journalist Claude Vorilhon , usually known as Raël , in 1973 . After attending a meeting at which Raël spoke , she felt strongly that he was completely honest and joined his movement . She had left her husband , alleging violent behavior , shortly before her conversion ; afterwards , owing to her involvement with Raëlism , he gained sole custody of their youngest child . Boisselier believed that religious intolerance motivated a court to transfer the child 's custody . Although her faith led to tension with her parents , her eldest child converted . In the 1990s , Raëlism was seen as dangerous and viewed with disdain in France , resulting in loss of employment for prominent members . The hostility was fueled in part by public concerns about new religious movements after deaths caused by the Order of the Solar Temple in Europe during the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 Boisselier became the scientific director of Clonaid , an organization founded by Raël that sought to clone humans , in 1997 . That year , Boisselier was interviewed by Le Monde about her role in Clonaid , and she lost her position with Air Liquide after the company learned of this . Air Liquide stated that her termination was due to her holding dual employment , and that she was strained by her Clonaid service . She filed a lawsuit against Air Liquide , arguing that she was the victim of religious discrimination . Her suit was successful : in 1999 , she won a judgment of about US $ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 After losing her job , Boisselier moved with her middle child , a son , to Quebec , where her eldest daughter was a student . Boisselier began to travel to discuss Clonaid , eventually becoming a high @-@ profile speaker . Around that time , she reached the rank of Bishop within Raëlism . She was one of the 25 members closest to Raël and joined the group 's Order of Angels , which promoted free love and femininity . She moved to the United States and began teaching at State University of New York at Plattsburgh for a short time before moving to Hamilton College in 2000 to teach chemistry . Her association with Clonaid was publicized in the U.S. in February 2001 , and she resigned her academic position that May , although she had a three @-@ year contract . She was initially popular at Hamilton College , but she felt that she was disrespected after her association with Clonaid was publicized . 
 = = Cloning = = 
 = = = Clonaid origins = = = 
 Raël founded Clonaid in March 1997 , shortly after the Dolly the Sheep cloning , believing that the process was important because the human species had been created by an extraterrestrial cloning project . On a practical level , Raël promoted the practice as a way to develop more desirable genetics and eventually prolong memories in new bodies . Shortly after Clonaid 's launch , Boisselier began publicizing and managing its operations . In 1999 , she announced that she had set up cloning laboratories and had hired a team of six scientists . She said she had limited knowledge of cloning but was skilled in selecting experts . 
 In August 2000 , Mark Hunt , a politician from West Virginia , asked Boisselier to clone his late son , who had died as a child . Hunt paid Clonaid $ 500 @,@ 000 and helped them rent a science laboratory from a school . Boisselier said that the laboratory would initially be used to clone cattle , before moving on to humans . She planned to use a number of Raëlian surrogates , who were willing to abort abnormal pregnancies , to bear clones ; the high number of women would compensate for the low odds of a healthy child for each implantation . In September 2000 , Raël and Boisselier held a press conference with several aspiring surrogate mothers of clones . At the event , Boisselier announced the construction of a cloning laboratory and vaguely described Hunt , who wished to remain anonymous . Boisselier received significant media attention as an advocate of cloning . Some commentators initially accepted her work as a legitimate attempt at cloning ; Margaret Talbot of the New York Times described her as a more credible spokesperson than Raël , projecting what she described as " an air of cool , academic professionalism " . Boisselier 's striking physical appearance drew particular attention , and she developed an avant @-@ garde , stylish reputation , contrary to popular images of scientists . 
 = = = Announcements and media coverage = = = 
 In early 2001 , Boisselier promised the cloning of a human child within a year , drawing further attention to her work . A prosecutor in New York began investigating her compliance with local medical laws . Boisselier said that the Food and Drug Administration also surreptitiously investigated her , and Raël claimed that U.S. President George W. Bush was concerned about Clonaid 's work . The caretaker of the laboratory that Hunt had rented grew suspicious about their work and contacted law enforcement . They spoke with the FDA , who searched the site and persuaded Boisselier to suspend her cloning work pending legal clarification . After Hunt was asked by the laboratory 's caretaker to shut down the cloning operation , he broke with Boisselier and criticized her for seeking media attention . The caretaker also spoke publicly , saying that Boisselier was seldom at the laboratory . Boisselier then announced that she was moving her cloning operations overseas . Boisselier never faced any legal charges in connection with the laboratory . 
 In March 2001 , Boisselier was invited to speak at a U.S. Congress hearing on human cloning , and at her insistence Raël was permitted to speak as well . The event garnered public attention , in large part because of Raël 's unconventional appearance . On August 7 , 2001 , Boisselier attended a widely publicized human cloning symposium at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington , D.C. , Significant media attention was given to Boisselier , who , along with Severino <unk> and Panayiotis <unk> , was one of three participants actively engaged in efforts to produce a human clone . The rest of the attendees were renowned scientists and ethicists , one of whom , Arthur Caplan , dismissed Boisselier as part of the " loony cloning element " . By May 2002 , Boisselier said that she had facilitated 10 to 20 pregnancies but had been thwarted by miscarriages . 
 = = = = Claims of success = = = = 
 Boisselier confidently announced at a press conference in Florida in December 2002 that Clonaid had successfully produced a live @-@ born clone , named Eve , for an infertile couple . Canadian sociologist Susan J. Palmer notes that naming the cloned child " Eve " recalls Raël 's teachings that aliens created the first humans through cloning . After the announcement , Boisselier received abundant press , but the media , particularly late @-@ night comedy programs , criticized her glamorous appearance and mocked Raëlism . Around that time , Boisselier appeared on many U.S. network news broadcasts and on CNN . She did not provide details about the child or its family , although she was often asked to . She hired a science editor from ABC to supervise verification of the cloning . Many scientists doubted that the Raëlians could overcome the difficulties that human cloning posed , or that they would be able to produce a healthy child . Boisselier said a DNA test was forthcoming and announced that five more clones would be born later that winter . As Raël and Boisselier continued to seek media exposure , journalistic animosity towards them grew . 
 Bernard Siegel , an attorney from Florida , learned of the case and felt that a hearing should be held about Eve 's welfare . In January 2003 , he initiated legal proceedings , seeking to bring the clone 's parents to court so its health could be verified . Raël and Boisselier attacked the filing as an attempt to take a child from loving parents and announced that , in protest , they would not provide DNA for testing . An arraignment occurred on January 24 and was televised live on CNN ; Boisselier and Clonaid 's vice president , Thomas <unk> , were subpoenaed in lieu of the child 's parents . In courtroom testimony , the vice president of Clonaid said he knew very little about the clone , and that Boisselier controlled all the information . She did not attend the hearing , and <unk> provided little information , angering the judge , who threatened contempt of court charges . Boisselier attended a second hearing on January 29 , telling the court that the child was in Israel . The judge then ruled that the court had no jurisdiction . In late January , the science editor announced that he suspected the cloning announcements were a hoax . Around that time , Boisselier held a press conference at which she announced that the cloned baby 's parents had cut off contact with her and would never speak to the press . 
 In the following years , Boisselier claimed to have facilitated the cloning of several children in a variety of countries . As of June 2004 , she reported that Clonaid has successfully cloned 13 children . She did not provide evidence to verify the claims . She stated that the a machine called the RMX 2010 was used in the cloning attempts , and exhibited it publicly . 
 After Boisselier announced that no evidence of the cloning would be provided , journalists became very skeptical of her story . While discussing Boisselier 's management of Clonaid , Palmer notes that it is impossible to know why she stated that a clone was produced but then refused to provide evidence . She argues that her refusal to provide evidence may have been because she organized a hoax , did not wish to publicize the birth of an unhealthy child , or was taken advantage of by a scientist she had hired . American science journalist Steven S. Hall criticized the media for their coverage of Clonaid , believe that they were <unk> represented as a credible group . He speculates that the coverage of Boisselier and other cloning adherents galvanized sentiment against cloning , leading to its banning in the U.S. 
 = = Later activism = = 
 In January 2003 , Raël held a ceremony at which he thanked Boisselier for her service and anointed her as his successor . He praised her for spreading the message of Raëlism internationally while publicizing the cloning . In the Raëlian hierarchy , she is one level below Raël and serves as a spokesperson for the movement . As a leader , she has attempted to rehabilitate the swastika , one of the group 's symbols . She maintains that it is valuable as an ancient symbol of peace , and that it has been unfairly associated with Nazi Germany . 
 In the mid @-@ 2000s , Boisselier often taught about the Raëlian perspective of the body and sexuality . She discussed these topics from a biological perspective , arguing that humans are essentially robots because they can be reprogrammed . Specifically , she maintained that hormones program the brain , and they provide humans the freedom to choose from many possibilities . Raëlians emphasize sexual stimulation as a way to positively change their members , and Boisselier has stated that she sees the pursuit of femininity as a method of spiritual growth . The group highly values feminine beauty , and Raël has applauded Boisselier for maintaining her appearance , casting her as a role model . 
 By 2007 , Boisselier had taken the name " Brigitte Roehr " and was living in Los Angeles . That year , she began leading a Raëlian project to fight female genital mutilation . She heads a Raëlian @-@ affiliated group known as Clitoraid , which raises funds to provide restorative surgery to women with damaged clitorises . The project , which has attracted criticism of its effectiveness , aims to build a hospital in Burkina Faso where women can received clitoral surgery . 
 = Cyclone Manou = 
 Tropical Cyclone Manou was a relatively rare May tropical cyclone that affected southeastern Madagascar . The final named storm of the 2002 – 03 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season , Manou formed on May 2 to the southwest of Diego Garcia . It moved generally to the southwest for much of its duration , steered by a ridge to the southeast . Manou affected Saint Brandon and Mauritius with gusty winds . After an initial strengthening phase , the storm weakened but later re @-@ intensified as it approached Madagascar . Manou developed a well @-@ defined eye and reached peak winds only 19 km ( 12 mi ) from the eastern Madagascar coastline . For about 12 hours , the cyclone stalled before turning to the south and weakening . Manou became extratropical on May 10 and dissipated three days later . 
 Damage in Madagascar was heaviest near Vatomandry , where 85 % of buildings were destroyed and 23 people were killed . Manou destroyed about 24 @,@ 500 houses nationwide , leaving 114 @,@ 480 people homeless . The storm destroyed large areas of crops and disrupted transportation , including damaging the road between Vatomandry and Brickaville . Manou injured 85 and killed 89 people throughout Madagascar . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late April , an area of convection persisted southwest of Diego Garcia in the southern Indian Ocean . The system had a low @-@ level circulation and pulsating thunderstorm activity . Located in an area of weak to moderate wind shear , the convection gradually organized while developing outflow . On May 2 , a secondary area of convection , also with an accompanying circulation , formed to the northwest , and also showed signs of development . That day , the original disturbance organized enough for Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) to designate it Tropical Disturbance 16 at 1200 UTC . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued tropical cyclone formation alerts for both systems within a 14 ‑ hour period , and upgraded the original system to Tropical Cyclone 18S on May 3 about 980 km ( 610 mi ) northeast of Mauritius . Due to the disturbance to the northwest , as well as a building ridge to the northeast , the system continued to the southwest . On May 4 , MFR upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression and later Tropical Storm Manou . 
 According to the JTWC , the storm quickly reached 1 @-@ minute sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . The secondary disturbance to the west weakened while approaching the storm . Manou also weakened due to ongoing shear , and the windspeeds dropped as the circulation became exposed from the convection . On May 6 , the storm re @-@ intensified and the thunderstorms redeveloped while passing north of Mauritius and Réunion . On May 8 while approaching Madagascar , Manou developed an eye , and as a result , MFR upgraded it to tropical cyclone status , with 10 @-@ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The JTWC also upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . After becoming a tropical cyclone , Manou intensified further , although its forward motion slowed significantly . MFR estimated peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 155 km / h ( 95 mph ) on May 8 , and JTWC estimated peak 1 @-@ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , with gusts to 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . This made Manou a rare May tropical cyclone in the basin ; only four other storms that formed in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean in May reached winds of over 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) since satellite coverage began , most recently Cyclone Kesiny in the previous year . 
 While maintaining its peak intensity and an eye 44 km ( 28 mi ) in diameter , Manou reached a position only 19 km ( 12 mi ) from the eastern Madagascar coastline . At that time , gale force winds extended over 150 km ( 90 mi ) from the center , and MFR estimated a minimum barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . For about 12 hours , Manou drifted off the eastern coast of Madagascar before turning to the south , moving around a ridge to its east . Land interaction and drier air weakened the eye , and on May 9 the cyclone weakened to tropical storm status . The next day Manou weakened to a tropical depression , and the JTWC issued its last advisory . MFR continued tracking the storm until it dissipated on May 13 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Early in its duration , Manou passed just north of Saint Brandon . There , sustained winds reached 74 mph ( 46 mph ) , with gusts to 109 km / h ( 68 mph ) . On Mauritius , the storm produced gusty winds across much of the island , peaking at 107 km / h ( 67 mph ) . 
 Before affecting Madagascar , officials in the country advised residents to evacuate to shelters , although the storm was not expected to be as severe as it was . When Manou stalled just offshore eastern Madagascar , it produced gusts as strong as 211 km / h ( 131 mph ) in Vatomandry . The same city reported 227 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall in a 15 ‑ hour period . Damage was heaviest in Vatomandry , where 85 % of buildings were destroyed , although the broader region also experienced severe damage and was largely isolated from the rest of the country . In Vatomandry , Manou severely damaged the main hospital , several schools , and the prison . The storm disrupted power and water networks . Strong winds blowing salt spray destroyed the coffee and cloves crops , and rice crops were also damaged , after 80 % of rice fields were flooded in Brickaville and <unk> . In those two towns , an official estimated that 95 % of houses were wrecked . The road between Vatomandry and Brickaville was washed out or otherwise blocked by landslides , and the village of <unk> was isolated after the storm wrecked a bridge . Throughout Madagascar , Manou injured 85 and killed 89 people , including 23 people in Vatomandry and 2 in Brickaville . About 24 @,@ 500 houses were destroyed , leaving 114 @,@ 480 people homeless . 
 On May 12 , Malagasy Prime Minister Jacques Sylla issued an appeal to the international community for assistance . Due to the damage from Manou , the French Red Cross activated its office in Réunion , providing one ton of medicine . The Malagasy Red Cross had pre @-@ positioned emergency supplies earlier in the cyclone season , and after Manou struck , the agency distributed a water purification unit , medicine , and tents to the affected areas . Due to road damage , supplies had to be delivered by boat , which arrived in Vatomandry on May 13 . The delivery included 4 @,@ 500 kg ( 9 @,@ 900 lb ) of supplies . Workers quickly made repairs to power systems . The Malagasy government provided $ 147 @,@ 000 to restore health centers in Vatomandry and <unk> . Japan provided $ 80 @,@ 000 worth of supplies , including tents and <unk> . Japan , the United States , Norway , and Germany donated about $ 1 @.@ 27 million to Madagascar for relief . The World Food Programme initially provided 90 tons of rice , although ongoing drought conditions and storms caused the agency to continue providing food to residents in southern Madagascar for several months . 
 = Trial of Thomas Paine = 
 The trial of Thomas Paine for seditious libel was held on 18 December 1792 , in response to his publication of the second part of the Rights of Man . The government of William Pitt , worried by the possibility that the French Revolution might spread to England , had begun suppressing works that espoused radical philosophies . Paine 's work , which advocated the right of the people to overthrow their government , was duly targeted , with a writ for his arrest issued on 21 May . Paine fled to France in September , having been elected a member of the National Convention in France . He was instead represented in absentia by Thomas Erskine , a noted lawyer and orator who was severely criticised by government supporters in the months leading up to the trial . 
 At the trial , Archibald Macdonald , representing the prosecution , argued that Paine 's work served only to inflame the populace and distribute radical ideas to those without the experience to understand them in context . Erskine 's reply opened with a defence of the freedom of lawyers to represent whichever clients came to them , and followed with an exposition of his views on the nature of the freedom of the press — arguing that the publication of radical tracts served only to improve the government by highlighting its weaknesses , and could not be seditious if published in good faith . Despite Erskine 's speech later receiving a rapturous response , Paine was found guilty before Macdonald replied . The verdict was seen by the government as legitimising their repression of radicalism , and paved the way for the 1794 Treason Trials , in which Erskine played a prominent role . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = French Revolution = = = 
 After involving itself in the Seven Years ' War and the American Revolutionary War , France found itself financially ruined . Attempts to pass an economic plan to alleviate this in the Estates @-@ General of 1789 led instead to the third estate — the commoners — forking to form the National Assembly . Succeeded in turn by the National Constituent Assembly and the Legislative Assembly , the various legislative bodies succeeded in rendering the monarchy constitutional , limited by democratic institutions . Attempts to remove the monarch entirely , although thwarted on 20 June 1792 , led to the effective overthrow of Louis XVI on 10 August . On 21 October , France was formally declared a republic . 
 Britain was initially sympathetic to the revolutionaries of France ; this sympathy dissolved with the execution of Louis XVI , and was replaced by hostility and a growing schism within the Whigs . While the <unk> branch argued for the Revolution as a source of general liberty , the administration of William Pitt became increasingly repressive , fearing the spread of Jacobinism to the United Kingdom and the overthrow of the government . This split was reflected in the behaviour of the people : while some joined societies dedicated to Parliamentary reform , others formed mobs under the banner of " Church and King " , attacking the homes of liberals and those who sympathised with the French revolution , including that of Joseph Priestley . The Association for Preserving Liberty and Property against Republicans and Levellers was formed , serving as " an organised body of private agents engaged in ferreting out sedition wherever it raised its inky head " . 
 = = = Paine and the Rights of Man = = = 
 Thomas Paine was a noted writer and political theorist whose work had influenced and helped drive the American Revolution . Having returned to England , he decided to write a book addressing the arguments of Edmund Burke , a prominent conservative strongly fearful of the French Revolution . This was simply titled Rights of Man . The first part was published in 1791 , and attracted no attention from Pitt 's administration . The second , published on 16 February 1792 , advocated , amongst other things , the right of the people to replace their government if they thought it appropriate . The work was an immediate success , selling a million and a half copies , and generated public support for various reform movements . It also brought Paine to the attention of the government and made him a subject to its crackdown . While Paine was visiting an aunt in Kent , Pitt had a writ issued against J.S. Jordan , Paine 's publisher , prosecuting him for seditious libel — a crime based on the concept that the executive was beyond reproach , that made it illegal to criticise the government . Paine returned to London and began to campaign for Jordan , finding him a lawyer and agreeing to pay his legal fees . Jordan , however , most likely frightened for his life , pleaded guilty and turned his files over to the court . With this additional evidence , a writ was issued for Paine on 21 May , charging him with the same crime . His trial date was set for 8 June , and later rescheduled for 18 December . 
 Paine left England before he could be tried , as he had been elected a member of the National Convention in France , tasked with writing a new constitution . He departed England on 13 September , never to return , although he further infuriated the government remotely by republishing the Rights of Man and writing Letter Addressed to the <unk> of the Late Proclamation , in which he defended his actions and beliefs against those who had chosen to side with the government . Paine was instead represented in absentia by Thomas Erskine , a famous lawyer and orator who served as Attorney General to the Prince of Wales . As the trial date approached , both Erskine and Paine were targeted by vicious personal attacks . Paine 's writ was followed by hundreds of loyal addresses , many of which targeted him , the burning of an effigy in Exeter , and the banning of the sale of any of his books in Chester . Pamphlets slandering him were widely published , and both Paine and Erskine had their personal lives dug into . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial was finally held on 18 December 1792 , in front of the Court of King 's Bench . Lord Kenyon presided , with Erskine representing the defence , and the government represented by Archibald Macdonald , John Scott and Spencer Perceval . Macdonald opened for the prosecution , expressing outrage at the publication of the Rights of Man , and his concern that it would be made available to so many members of the public who were unfamiliar with political philosophy . He also read excerpts from a letter Paine had written to him after his arrival in Paris , which contained " everything with which to inflame a jury " . He then presented various witnesses , starting with Thomas Haynes , to testify that the works had indeed been published , and following with Thomas Chapman , who had printed the first part of the Rights of Man . Chapman testified that he had intended to print the second part , until he came upon a passage that " appeared of a dangerous tendency " , and , after an argument with a drunken Paine , returned the book . 
 Erskine offered no evidence , admitting that Paine had written both the Rights of Man and the letter to Macdonald , and instead chose to begin speaking . He opened with a statement against those who had pressured him to refuse Paine 's case , stating , in a " brilliant exposition of the principles involved " , that : 
 I will for ever , at all hazards , assert the dignity , independence and integrity of the English Bar , without which impartial justice , the most valuable part of the English Constitution , can have no existence . From the moment that any advocate can be permitted to say that he will , or will not , stand between the Crown and the subject arraigned in the court where he daily sits to practise , from that moment the liberties of England are at an end . If the advocate refuses to defend , from what he may think of the charge or of the defence , he assumes the character of the Judge ; nay , he assumes it before the hour of judgment ; and in proportion to his rank and reputation , puts the heavy influence of , perhaps , a mistaken opinion into the scales against the accused , in whose favour the benevolent principle of English law makes all presumptions . 
 He then moved on to addressing the freedom of the press , and the limits on it , arguing that freedom of speech was necessary to identify the flaws in the structure of the government and the constitution — even if the author was mistaken about those flaws . As long as a writer intended only to enlighten others , prohibiting their speech would serve only to undermine the government by harming the opportunities to improve it . While Macdonald had argued that the book was problematic because it was circulated amongst all classes of society , Erskine argued that this was not the test of whether the Rights of Man was seditious . Instead , the test was whether Paine had exclusively dealt with what he believed to be in the best interests of England , its government , and its people . While Paine 's opinions ran counter to the existing system of government , Erskine argued that " opinion is free and ... conduct alone is amenable to the law " . For a libel claim to succeed , the Libel Act 1792 required that the prosecution show the publication was motivated by malice ; as Paine had intended only to help mankind , and this was a pure motive , he could not be guilty . 
 Despite this speech , the jury found Paine guilty before Macdonald replied to Erskine 's argument . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although it failed to sway the jury , Erskine 's speech was given a rapturous response ; after he left the court , he was confronted by a mob who cheered him and shouted " Damn Tom Paine , but Erskine for ever , and the Liberty of the Press ; the King , the Constitution , and Erskine for ever " . The crowd proceeded to <unk> the horses from his carriage , and carry the carriage ( with him inside ) to his lodgings at Serjeant 's Inn . Over 30 transcripts or reports of the trial were printed , all of which contained Erskine 's speech , and many editions emphasised Erskine 's name and the theme of his speech on the title pages , using it to sell copies . Other reactions were less positive ; William Godwin wrote a letter to Erskine shortly after the trial arguing that his statement that individuals were free to publish works attacking or criticising the Constitution " had a considerable share in prosecuting the verdict of guilty " . Paine himself found Erskine 's speech and conduct during the trial disappointing , expecting him to do more to defend the principles in the Rights of Man than he had . 
 Pitt 's administration took the guilty verdict in Paine 's trial as a sign that further prosecutions for sedition were possible , and began many . In the 17 months following the trial , 11 publishers of the Rights of Man were prosecuted , receiving prison sentences of up to 4 years . These acted as a prelude to the 1794 Treason Trials , in which a dozen reformers were indicted for allegedly conspiring to bring about a revolution . Erskine played a prominent role in defending many of them , including Thomas Hardy , John Horne Tooke and John Thelwall , all three of whom were acquitted . 
 = Ruma Maida = 
 Ruma Maida ( released internationally as Maida 's House ) is a 2009 Indonesian film written by Ayu Utami , directed by Teddy Soeriaatmadja and starring Atiqah Hasiholan , Yama Carlos , Nino Fernandez , and Frans Tumbuan . It details a woman 's struggle to save a historic house from a developer ; it also shows the life of the house 's original owner . 
 Work on what was to become Ruma Maida began in 2008 , when Utami was approached by Lamp Pictures and asked to write a nationalism @-@ themed script ; she completed the task in six months , with input from Soeriaatmadja . After three months of pre @-@ production , shooting began in Semarang , Central Java , and Kota , Jakarta . Editing took three months , after which the film – with a soundtrack by the band Naif and a song written by Utami – premiered on 28 October 2009 , the anniversary of the 1928 Youth Pledge ; it was later shown in film festivals in Singapore , Australia , and Italy . 
 Ruma Maida , which uses different filming styles for scenes in the past and present , deals with the importance of education , history , and pluralism . Critical reception to the film was mixed ; reviewers praised the visuals but disapproved of the plot and dialogue . It was nominated for twelve Citra Awards at the 2009 Indonesian Film Festival , of which it won one . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young history student , Maida ( Atiqah Hasiholan ) , a Christian , runs a free school for street children in Jakarta . The school is in a house that once belonged to Ishak Pahing ( Nino Fernandez ) , a Christian Indo composer and pilot , and his Muslim wife Nani Kuddus ( Imelda Soraya ) ; Pahing wrote the song " Pulau Tenggara " ( " The South @-@ Eastern Island " ) , which inspired President Sukarno to help form the Non @-@ Aligned Movement , while living in the house . As Maida learns about Pahing , she decides to write her undergraduate thesis about his life . 
 One day her class is interrupted by the young Muslim architect Sakera ( Yama Carlos ) , who has been told to evict Maida 's school by his employer , the developer <unk> Muchlisin ( Frans Tumbuan ) . As Maida and Sakera argue in the streets , rioting breaks out around them . Sakera protects the half @-@ Chinese Maida , then tells her that he will help her keep the house , although it is scheduled to be demolished within a week . 
 After attempts to persuade Muchlisin to keep the original design fail , Sakera overhears that the house is on disputed land . Maida uses the information , as well as feedback from a traditional musical group distantly related to Pahing , to discover that the house has a secret underground bunker , in which she and Sakera – with whom she has begun to fall in love – find documents showing the history of the house . With the help of her mother 's former lover Kuan ( <unk> <unk> ) , she discovers the true ownership of the house . 
 Pahing , who had grown up within the nascent independence movement and associated with several historical figures , was arrested for being half @-@ Dutch by the Japanese spy Maruyama ( Verdi <unk> ) – a man who coveted Pahing 's wife . After being tortured , Pahing was released to discover that his wife had been raped and killed ; their newborn son Fajar had been kidnapped . Pahing later died on a flight carrying medical supplies over Yogyakarta when the flight was shot down . Meanwhile , his son was raised by Maruyama – the kidnapper – and had his name changed to <unk> Muchlisin . 
 With this information , Maida , Sakera , and Kuan approach Muchlisin and tell him how the house features in his history . After a short silence , Muchlisin tells them to leave . Several months later , on Maida and Sakera 's wedding day – when they are married at both a mosque and a church – Muchlisin comes to the church and says that he has abandoned his plans to demolish the house . Instead , he renovates the building and dedicates it as a school for street children . 
 = = Production = = 
 The screenplay for Ruma Maida was written by Ayu Utami , her first such work ; mainly known for her novels , she had avoided screenplays as she thought they were generally too commercially oriented . She wrote the screenplay over a period of six months beginning in 2008 , when Lamp Pictures – which produced the film with Karuna Pictures – requested that she write a story about nationalism ; according to the director Teddy Soeriaatmadja , who was brought in while the screenplay was still on its first draft , he and Utami read seven drafts of the screenplay before they agreed on the story . Considering the screenplay a way to encourage the younger generation to study Indonesian history , which she said could be fun , Utami decided to focus on education , diversity , and history . 
 Pre @-@ production for Ruma Maida took three months . The characters were written without any particular actors in mind . Atiqah Hasiholan , who had previously starred in the Academy Award @-@ submitted Jamila dan Sang Presiden ( Jamila and the President , 2009 ) , was cast as Maida . Yama Carlos , who played Sakera , was initially cast for another role but received the leading male role after a last @-@ minute switch . The actor cast as Muchlisin , Frans Tumbuan , was the only one auditioned as Soeriaatmadja thought the role was perfect for him . Soeriaatmadja later recalled that , including extras , Ruma Maida had the largest cast of any film he had made to that point . 
 Shooting for the film was conducted in Kota , Jakarta , and Semarang , Central Java , over a period of one month . Soeriaatmadja later recalled that the most difficult scenes to shoot were those which happened in modern times , especially the riots ; for set design , however , Indra <unk> <unk> found those that occurred in the past to be the most difficult , owing to the research necessary . The scenes at the house were shot separately ; those occurring in 1998 were shot first and those occurring in the past were shot after the crew had spent a week renovating the house . Hasiholan later recalled that Soeriaatmadja was a controlling director who told the actors exactly what he wanted in a clear manner . However , cinematographer <unk> Tanjung said that Soeriaatmadja was still open to feedback from the cast and crew . Editing , which was done by <unk> <unk> , took another three months . 
 The Indonesian band Naif covered several songs for Ruma Maida 's soundtrack , including songs from the 1940s such as " <unk> Malam " ( " Beauty of the Night " , by Ismail Marzuki ) , " Di Bawah Sinar Bulan <unk> " ( " Under the Light of the Full Moon " , by R. <unk> ) , and " Ibu Pertiwi " ( " Motherland " ) . The covers were recorded over a period of five days . Utami wrote " Pulau Tenggara " , which was sung by Imelda Soraya . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Benny Benke , writing in Suara Merdeka , noted that the film was a " free interpretation of the formal Indonesian history , [ a history ] which is too arrogant , dominant , and dogmatic " . He wrote that at times the line between fact and fiction was thin . Utami stated that people from the revolutionary period " believed in dreams " and had a " strong sense of heroism and patriotism " , things which she believed Indonesia needed . Soeriaatmadja also noted that the film was meant to address issues of contemporary Indonesia , through the house 's history . Assistant director Azhar Lubis described the house as a microcosm of Indonesia , implying that , if the country was not maintained , it would fall apart . 
 In Media Indonesia , Yulia <unk> Sari wrote that Soeriaatmadja seemed to be promoting the need to remember and respect history through the plot and characterisations . The film showed " Indonesia Raya " composer W.R. <unk> , Japanese admiral Maeda , Vice President Mohammad Hatta , President Sukarno , and Prime Minister Sutan Sjahrir . Hasiholan considered the film a warning against repeating past mistakes . 
 Triwik Kurniasari , writing in The Jakarta Post , described the inclusion of the May 1998 riots and subsequent fall of Suharto as touching on pluralism issues . Utami , in an interview with the Jakarta Globe , stated that she had meant to show diversity by giving the characters different ethnic , religious , and socio @-@ economic backgrounds , and later explained that the film was meant to show Indonesia 's motto Bhinneka Tunggal Ika ( Unity in Diversity ) as it is applied in the country . Another reviewer , Dewi <unk> , wrote that Ruma Maida " paints a more realistic picture of Indonesia ’ s society , where people do not necessarily fit into neat social , racial or economic categories " , with its characters not fitting into any traditional stereotypes . 
 = = Style = = 
