 Ruma Maida uses colours and shooting styles to indicate different time periods . Past events have a soft sepia overlay and are shot with a static camera , while those in 1998 have more natural tones and are shot with a handheld . The use of the handheld was meant to show the present in as " rough and non @-@ sterile " a manner possible , while the past was meant to have a sweet , beautiful , and clean feeling ; this played on the theme of romanticising the past . Events in Pahing 's life are shown in flashbacks interspersed throughout Maida 's struggle to retake the house . The film is paced slowly , and shots are taken from " unique " angles . 
 In Tempo magazine , <unk> <unk> wrote that Ruma Maida intertwined several sub @-@ plots , including the depiction of the 1928 Youth Conference , the education of street children , and a scene where Sakera discusses architecture with Muchlisin ; the review stated that these detracted from the film 's comprehensibility . Jakarta Globe reviewer Armando Siahaan noted that several plot lines run parallel , including riots following the Japanese surrender in 1945 and those in May 1998 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ruma Maida premiered on 28 October 2009 , coinciding with events that celebrated the 1928 Youth Pledge – this release date was planned from early in production , because of the date 's historical significance . It received a wide release on the following day . The film was screened at the Singapore International Film Festival in April 2010 . That August Ruma Maida had three screenings in the " Education " category of the Indonesian Film Festival in Melbourne , Australia . In November it was screened at the Asiatica Film <unk> in Rome , Italy , under the title La Casa Di Maida . 
 Ruma Maida received mixed reception . Kurniasari described the film as " an enjoyable way to learn more about [ Indonesia 's ] long history . " Benke wrote that the film had good visuals , but the dialogue at times " went over viewers ' heads " . Sari called the cinematography well done , but found that the plot could confuse viewers . <unk> thought that the film was well visualised but lost much of its impact owing to its extraneous subplots . 
 <unk> , covering the Indonesian Film Festival in Australia , described Ruma Maida as cleverly weaving the plot into Indonesia 's independence struggle , although she felt that several plot twists " rather stretch [ ed ] the audience 's imagination " . Siahaan wrote that the film " may have limitations in its execution and presentation , but is highly commendable for its ability to raise social questions and delve into the nation ’ s history . " The review in Republika suggested that the film may be too boring for the general public owing to its slow @-@ moving plot . 
 The film was released on VCD and DVD in Indonesia on 14 July 2010 by <unk> Home Entertainment , after passing through the censorship board in February . The DVD featured English @-@ language subtitles and a behind the scenes documentary . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Ruma Maida was nominated for twelve Citra Awards at the 2009 Indonesian Film Festival , winning one . 
 = New York State Route 9A = 
 New York State Route 9A ( NY 9A ) is a state highway in the vicinity of New York City in the United States . Its southern terminus is at the northern end of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel in New York City , where it intersects with both the unsigned Interstate 478 ( I @-@ 478 ) and FDR Drive . The northern terminus of NY 9A is at U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in Peekskill . It is predominantly an alternate route of US 9 between New York City and Peekskill ; however , in New York City , it is a major route of its own as it runs along the West Side Highway and Henry Hudson Parkway . In Westchester County , NY 9A follows the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway . 
 The origins of NY 9A date back to the 1920s when an alternate route of then @-@ NY 6 from Yonkers to Tarrytown was designated as New York State Route 6A . NY 6 was redesignated as US 9 in 1927 ; however , NY 6A was not renumbered to NY 9A until the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 9A was extended south into New York City in 1934 and north to Ossining in the late 1930s . In 1933 , the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway opened as New York State Route 404 . All of NY 404 was incorporated into an extended NY 9A on January 1 , 1949 . NY 9A was extended northward to Peekskill in 1967 following the completion of the Croton Expressway and southward to the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 9A begins in Lower Manhattan at the north end of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel ( <unk> @-@ 478 ) and heads north on the surface West Side Highway and Henry Hudson Parkway , crossing US 9 for the first time at the east end of the George Washington Bridge . After crossing into the Bronx via the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority @-@ owned Henry Hudson Bridge , NY 9A proceeds to leave the parkway at exit 23 , joining US 9 on Broadway . The portions of NY 9A between 34th and 72nd streets in Manhattan and from the Henry Hudson Parkway to the New York City line in the Bronx is maintained by the New York City Department of Transportation . The concurrency between US 9 and NY 9A runs for 2 @.@ 87 miles ( 4 @.@ 62 km ) within the city of Yonkers . All of NY 9A within Yonkers is maintained by the city . 
 NY 9A separates from US 9 along Ashburton Avenue and heads north as Saw Mill River Road . It parallels the Saw Mill River Parkway through Ardsley and Elmsford , to the west side of Hawthorne . The route meets the southbound New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) at a partial interchange and later meets I @-@ 287 ( the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway ) at a full interchange that provides a route to the northbound Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) . NY 100 merges with NY 9A to form a 3 @.@ 11 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 01 km ) concurrency carrying the names Saw Mill River Road and Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway , parallel to the Taconic State Parkway . NY 9A exits off this highway along the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway , while NY 100 continues straight as Saw Mill River Road . NY 9A merges to form a brief concurrency with US 9 as the Croton Expressway in Ossining just south of the Croton River . 
 The second concurrency between US 9 and NY 9A runs for 0 @.@ 65 miles ( 1 km ) , with NY 9A leaving the Croton Expressway at Croton Point Avenue in Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson . The highway heads north along Riverside Avenue and eventually joins old Albany Post Road . After crossing US 9 once more in Cortlandt , NY 9A ends at the <unk> Avenue interchange in southern Peekskill . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Prior to the establishment of the U.S. Highway System , US 9 was designated as NY 6 . An alternate route from Yonkers to Tarrytown was assigned the NY 6A designation by 1926 . This ran along the present alignment of NY 9A from Yonkers to north of Elmsford , where it turned west on Old Saw Mill River Road , <unk> Road , County House Road and Bedford Road to end at NY 6 in Tarrytown . NY 6 was redesignated as US 9 when U.S. Highways were first posted in New York in 1927 ; however , NY 6A was not renumbered at this time . It was finally renumbered to NY 9A as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 New York City initially did not mark numbered routes within its limits . In 1932 , the New York Automobile Club drafted a plan establishing alignments for several routes through the city . In this plan , NY 9A went south through the Bronx and into Manhattan on Broadway while US 9 used Riverdale Avenue north of 230th Street . As a result , the two routes would have had a short concurrency across Spuyten Duyvil Creek . NY 9A would have split to the south on Tenth Avenue at 218th Street in order to join the Harlem River Drive via Nagle Avenue and Dyckman Street . From there it would head west on 155th Street to Amsterdam Avenue , where it would head south to 79th Street , heading west there to rejoin US 9 at Riverside Drive . US 9 would have continued south through lower Manhattan to Staten Island via the Staten Island Ferry ; however , it is unclear whether NY 9A would have continued south with US 9 to lower Manhattan . 
 The New York Automobile Club released another plan in 1933 . This plan made no changes to NY 9A ; however , US 9 was changed to use Broadway all the way through the Bronx and to travel to New Jersey by way of the Holland Tunnel . In the final plan implemented in mid @-@ December 1934 , no route was assigned to the Harlem River Drive – Amsterdam Avenue corridor . Instead , NY 9A used what had been planned as US 9 , splitting at Broadway and Dyckman Street . NY 9A ran south along the west side of Manhattan on Riverside Drive and the West Side Elevated Highway ( detouring around an unfinished section via 57th Street , Eleventh Avenue and 48th Street ) to end at the entrance and exit plazas of the Holland Tunnel . US 9 was shifted northward to enter New Jersey via the George Washington Bridge . 
 = = = Westchester County = = = 
 In Westchester County , Saw Mill River Road originally followed the Saw Mill River Parkway corridor from Eastview to Hawthorne . This section of Saw Mill River Road gained a number c . 1931 , becoming part of NY 142 , a route that began at NY 100 on the Greenburgh – Mount Pleasant town line and followed Grasslands Road , NY 9A , and Saw Mill River Road north to Hawthorne , where it rejoined NY 100 . The route went unchanged until it was removed c . 1938 . Its former routing was split into two routes — an extended NY 141 north of NY 9A and the new NY 100C along Grasslands Road — by 1940 . NY 9A was extended northward c . 1939 from Tarrytown to <unk> , a small hamlet midway between Tarrytown and Ossining , by way of Sleepy Hollow Road . 
 Farther north , a new highway was built around Ossining from Saw Mill River Road ( NY 100 ) in Briarcliff Manor to US 9 north of Ossining . The highway , known as the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway , was completed c . 1933 and initially designated as NY 404 . On January 1 , 1949 , NY 9A was altered to continue north along a slightly realigned Saw Mill River Road from NY 100C near Elmsford to the south end of the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway in Briarcliff Manor . At this point , NY 9A left Saw Mill River Road and followed the parkway to its end at US 9 , supplanting NY 404 . The realignment created a 3 @-@ mile ( 5 km ) overlap between NY 9A and NY 100 from Hawthorne to Briarcliff Manor and resulted in the truncation of NY 141 back to its previous terminus in Hawthorne . 
 Construction on the Croton Expressway , the only piece of the failed Hudson River Expressway project that was ever built , began in the mid @-@ 1960s . It became part of a realigned US 9 when it was completed by 1967 . The former surface routing of US 9 along Albany Post Road between Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson and Buchanan became a northward extension of NY 9A , which reached the old alignment by way of an overlap with US 9 from the north end of the Briarcliff – Peekskill Parkway to Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson . 
 = = = New York City = = = 
 As the Henry Hudson Parkway replaced Riverside Drive in the mid @-@ 1930s , NY 9A was moved onto it , eventually using the new parkway to where it crossed US 9 ( Broadway ) in the Bronx . Here , NY 9A exited the parkway and ran concurrent with US 9 to the split in Yonkers . The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel connecting Manhattan 's Battery Park to Brooklyn was completed in 1950 . By 1960 , an extension of the West Side Elevated Highway south to the Manhattan tunnel portal became part of NY 27A , which had ended in Brooklyn prior to the construction of the tunnel . On January 1 , 1970 , NY 27A was truncated on its western end to eastern Nassau County while NY 27 was extended northward over NY 27A 's former routing through the Battery Tunnel and the West Side Elevated Highway . 
 However , by 1973 , NY 27 had been cut back to its interchange with the Gowanus Expressway in Brooklyn while unsigned I @-@ 478 was assigned to both the Battery Tunnel and all of the West Side Elevated Highway south of the Lincoln Tunnel . NY 9A was cut back to the Lincoln Tunnel as a result . The extension of I @-@ 478 into Manhattan was eliminated following the collapse of part of the Elevated Highway in 1973 , an event which led to the demolition of the highway south of 59th Street . Demolition was completed in 1989 . NY 9A was shifted onto 12th Avenue , one of the surface streets that the Elevated Highway had run atop of , but was otherwise unaffected as the route 's south end was initially kept at the Lincoln Tunnel . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , NY 9A was extended south to the Battery Tunnel by way of 12th Avenue and two other streets the Elevated Highway had previously run atop of , West Street and 11th Avenue . Construction began in early 1996 on a project to convert the section of NY 9A south of 59th Street into the West Side Highway , a six @-@ lane urban boulevard with a parkway @-@ style median and decorative lightposts . The first of the project 's seven segments — between Clarkson and Horatio streets in the Greenwich Village neighborhood — was completed in 1998 . Completion of the project was originally set for October 2001 ; however , it was delayed for years due to damage caused by the September 11 attacks . It is expected to be finished by the end of 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits on the Briarcliff – <unk> Parkway and Croton Expressway are unnumbered . 
 = Leslie Nielsen = 
 Leslie William Nielsen , OC ( 11 February 1926 – 28 November 2010 ) was a Canadian actor , comedian , and producer . He appeared in more than 100 films and 150 television programs , portraying more than 220 characters . 
 Nielsen was born in Regina , Saskatchewan . He enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and later worked as a disc jockey before receiving a scholarship to study theatre at the Neighborhood Playhouse . Making his acting debut in 1948 , he made more than 50 television appearances two years later . Nielsen made his film debut in 1956 , with supporting roles in several drama , western , and romance films produced between the 1950s and the 1970s , with Nielsen crossing genres in both television and films . 
 Although his notable performances in the films Forbidden Planet and The Poseidon Adventure gave him standing as a serious actor , Nielsen later gained enduring recognition for his deadpan comedy roles during the 1980s and the early 1990s , after being cast against type for the Zucker , Abrahams and Zucker comedy film Airplane ! . Nielsen specialized in his portrayal of characters oblivious to and complicit in their absurd surroundings , which gave him a reputation as a comedian . Airplane ! marked Nielsen 's turning point , which made him " the Olivier of spoofs " according to film critic Roger Ebert ; his work on the film also led to further success in the genre with The Naked Gun film series , which are based on their earlier short @-@ lived television series Police Squad ! , in which he also starred . Nielsen received a variety of awards and was inducted into the Canada and Hollywood Walks of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nielsen was born on 11 February 1926 in Regina , Saskatchewan . His mother , Mabel Elizabeth ( née Davies ) , was a Welsh immigrant , and his father , <unk> <unk> Nielsen , was a Danish @-@ born constable in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . Nielsen had two brothers ; the elder , Erik Nielsen ( 1924 – 2008 ) , was Deputy Prime Minister of Canada from 1984 to 1986 . 
 His half @-@ uncle , Jean Hersholt , was an actor known for his portrayal of Dr. Christian in a radio series of that name and the subsequent television series and films . In a 1994 Boston Globe article , Nielsen explained , " I did learn very early that when I would mention my uncle , people would look at me as if I were the biggest liar in the world . Then I would take them home and show them 8 @-@ by @-@ 10 <unk> , and things changed quite drastically . So I began to think that maybe this acting business was not a bad idea , much as I was very shy about it and certainly without courage regarding it . My uncle died not too long after I was in a position to know him . I regret that I had not a chance to know him better . " 
 Nielsen lived for several years in Fort Norman ( now <unk> ) , Northwest Territories where his father was with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . His father was a troubled man who beat his wife and sons , and Leslie longed to escape . When he graduated from high school at 17 , he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force even though he was legally deaf ( he wore hearing aids most of his life ) . Following graduation from Victoria School of Performing and Visual Arts in Edmonton , Nielsen enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force and trained as an aerial gunner during World War II . He was too young to be fully trained or sent overseas . He worked briefly as a disc jockey at a Calgary , Alberta , radio station , before enrolling at the Lorne Greene Academy of Radio Arts , Toronto . While studying in Toronto , Nielsen received a scholarship to the Neighborhood Playhouse . He noted , " I couldn 't refuse , but I must say when you come from the land of the snow goose , the moose and wool to New York , you 're bringing every ton of <unk> and country bumpkin that you packed . As long as I didn 't open my mouth , I felt a certain security . But I always thought I was going to be unmasked : ' OK , pack your stuff . ' ' Well , what 's the matter ? ' ' We 've discovered you have no talent ; we 're shipping you back to Canada . ' " He moved to New York City for his scholarship , studying theatre and music at the Neighborhood Playhouse , while performing in summer stock theatre . Afterward , he attended the Actors Studio , until making his first television appearance in 1948 on an episode of Studio One , alongside Charlton Heston , for which he was paid $ 75 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Nielsen 's career began in dramatic roles on television during " Television 's Golden Age " , appearing in almost 50 live programs in 1950 alone . He said there " was very little gold , we only got $ 75 or $ 100 per show . " He narrated documentaries and commercials and most of his early work as a dramatic actor was uneventful . Hal Erickson of Allmovie noted that " much of Nielsen 's early work was undistinguished ; he was merely a handsome leading man in an industry overstocked with handsome leading men . " In 1956 he made his feature film debut in the Michael Curtiz @-@ directed musical film The Vagabond King . In the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , Nielsen remembered Curtiz as " a sadist , a charming sadist , but a sadist " . Nielsen called this film " The Vagabond Turkey " . Though the film was not a success , producer Nicholas <unk> offered him an audition for the science fiction film Forbidden Planet , resulting in Nielsen 's taking a long contract with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) . 
 Forbidden Planet became an instant success , and roles in other MGM films such as Ransom ! ( 1956 ) , The Opposite Sex ( 1956 ) and Hot Summer Night ( 1957 ) followed . In 1957 he won the lead role opposite Debbie Reynolds in the romantic comedy Tammy and the Bachelor , which , as a Chicago Tribune critic wrote in 1998 , made people consider Nielsen a dramatic actor and handsome romantic lead . However , dissatisfied with the films he was offered , calling the studios " a Tiffany , which had forgotten how to make silver " , Nielsen left MGM after auditioning for Messala in the 1959 Ben @-@ Hur . Stephen Boyd got the role . After leaving the studios , Nielsen landed the lead role in the Disney miniseries The Swamp Fox , as American Revolutionary War hero Francis Marion . In a 1988 interview he reflected on the series , saying , " That was a great experience , because the Disney people didn 't do their shows like everyone else , knocking out an episode a week . ... We only had to do an episode a month , and the budgets were extremely high for TV at that time . We had location shooting rather than cheap studio backdrops , and very authentic costumes . " Eight episodes were produced and aired between 1959 and 1961 . 
 His television appearances include Justice , Alfred Hitchcock Presents , Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea , The Virginian , and The Wild Wild West . In 1961 , he was the lead in a Los Angeles police drama called The New Breed . He guest @-@ starred in a 1964 episode of Daniel Boone with Fess Parker in a minor but credited role . In 1968 , he had a major role in the pilot for the police series Hawaii Five @-@ O , and appeared in one of the seventh @-@ season episodes . In 1969 , he had the leading role as a police officer in The Bold Ones : The Protectors . 
 In 1972 , Nielsen appeared as the ship 's captain in the The Poseidon Adventure . He also starred in the William Girdler 's 1977 action film , Project : Kill . His last dramatic role before mainly comedy roles was the 1979 Canadian disaster film City on Fire , in which he played a corrupt mayor . In 1980 , he guest @-@ starred as Sinclair on the CBS miniseries The <unk> . 
 = = = Airplane ! and The Naked Gun = = = 
 Nielsen 's supporting role of Dr. <unk> in Zucker , Abrahams and Zucker 's 1980 's Airplane ! was a watershed in his career . The film , a parody of disaster films such as Zero Hour ! and Airport , was based on building a comedy around the actors known for dramatic roles . Other stars included Robert Stack , Peter Graves , and Lloyd Bridges . Nielsen 's deadpan delivery contrasted with the absurdity surrounding him . When asked , " Surely you can 't be serious ? " , he responded with a curt , " I am serious . And don 't call me Shirley . " In several interviews he reflected on the line : " I thought it was amusing , but it never occurred to me that it was going to become a trademark . It 's such a surprise ... the thing comes out , people say , ' What did he say ? ! ' " Nielsen said he was " ... pleased and honored that [ he ] had a chance to deliver that line . " The comedic exchange was at # 79 on the American Film Institute 's AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes . The American Film Institute included the film in its list of the top ten comedy films of all time in 2008 , and a 2007 survey in the United Kingdom judged it the second greatest comedy film of all time , while in 2012 Empire magazine voted it No. 1 in The 50 Funniest Comedies Ever poll . Critics praised the film , which also proved a long @-@ term success with audiences . In 2010 Airplane ! was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress . 
 The directors cast Nielsen for his ability to play like " a fish in water " , saying " You could have cast funny people and done it with everybody winking , goofing off , and silly ... we wanted people to be oblivious to the comedy . " For Nielsen , Airplane ! marked a shift from dramatic roles to deadpan comedy . When it was suggested his role in Airplane ! was against type , Nielsen protested that he had " always been cast against type before " , and that comedy was what he always wanted to do . The same directors cast Nielsen in a similar style , in their TV series Police Squad ! . The series introduced Nielsen as Frank Drebin , the stereotypical police officer modelled after serious characters in earlier police series . 
 Police Squad 's opening sequence was based on the 1950s show M Squad , which starred Lee Marvin , which opened with footage of a police car roving through a dark urban setting with a big band playing a jazz song in the background . The voice @-@ over and the show 's organization into acts with an epilogue was homage to Quinn Martin police dramas including The Fugitive , The Streets of San Francisco , Barnaby Jones , The F.B.I. , and Cannon . Nielsen portrayed a serious character whose one @-@ liners appeared accidental next to the pratfalls and sight gags that were happening around him . Although the show lasted only six episodes Nielsen received an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 Six years after cancellation of Police Squad ! , the film The Naked Gun : From the Files of Police Squad ! returned Nielsen to his role as Frank Drebin . It involved a ruthless drug king trying hypnosis to assassinate Queen Elizabeth II . Drebin , like the doctor in Airplane ! , seemed unaware of the absurdity of the scenes he was in , even while contributing to it . Nielsen did many of his own stunts : " You have an idea of how you 're going to do something , and it 's your vision ... unless you do it , it really doesn 't stand a chance . " This movie grossed over $ 78 million and was well received by critics . Ebert 's 3 ½ – star review ( out of four ) noted , " You laugh , and then you laugh at yourself for laughing . " 
 The Naked Gun spawned two sequels : The Naked Gun 2 ½ : The Smell of Fear ( 1991 ) and Naked Gun 33 ⅓ : The Final Insult ( 1994 ) . Naked Gun 2 ½ grossed more than the original , with $ 86 @.@ 9 million , while Naked Gun 33 ⅓ grossed $ 51 @.@ 1 million . Nielsen remained open to a fourth Naked Gun film , although he doubted that it would be produced — " I don 't think so " , he said in 2005 . " If there hasn 't been one by now , I doubt it . I think it would be wonderful . " 
 Nielsen briefly appeared on the World Wrestling Federation program in the summer of 1994 on WWF Monday Night Raw ; capitalizing on Frank Drebin . Nielsen ( and George Kennedy ) were hired as sleuths to unravel the mystery of The Undertaker who had disappeared at January 's Royal Rumble event . At SummerSlam 1994 , in a Naked Gun parody , they were hot on the case ( in fact , they were standing on a case ) . Although they did not find The Undertaker , the case had been closed ( the literal case had been shut ) and thus , they solved the mystery . In 1990 , Nielsen appeared as a Frank Drebin character in advertisements in the United Kingdom for Red Rock Cider . 
 Non @-@ comedic roles after Airplane ! included Prom Night ( 1980 ) and Creepshow ( 1982 ) , both horror films , and as a dramatic and unsympathetic character in the 1986 comedy Soul Man . His last dramatic role was as Allen Green , a violent client of a prostitute killed in self @-@ defence by Barbra Streisand 's character , Claudia Draper , in Martin Ritt 's courtroom drama Nuts ( 1987 ) . 
 = = = Later comedies = = = 
 Subsequent to Airplane ! and The Naked Gun , Nielsen portrayed similar styled roles in a number of other films . These mostly emulated the style of The Naked Gun with varying success and often targeted specific films : many were panned by critics and most performed poorly . <unk> ( 1990 ) and 2001 : A Space Travesty ( 2001 ) were parodies of The Exorcist and 2001 : A Space Odyssey , respectively . Both attempted absurd comedy but were poorly received . Even a leading role in a Mel Brooks comic horror , Dracula : Dead and Loving It , failed to generate much box office excitement , although it did gain a following later release to video . Both 1996 's Spy Hard and 1998 's Wrongfully Accused , a parody of James Bond films and The Fugitive , were popular on video but not well received by critics . 
 His attempt at children 's comedies met additional criticism . Surf Ninjas ( 1993 ) and Mr. Magoo ( 1997 ) had scathing reviews . Several critics were disappointed that Nielsen 's role in Surf Ninjas was only " an extended cameo " and Chris Hicks recommended that viewers " avoid any comedy that features Leslie Nielsen outside of the Naked Gun series . " Jeff Miller of the Houston Chronicle panned Mr. Magoo , a live action remake of the 1950s cartoon , by saying , " I 'm supposed to suggest how the film might be better but I can 't think of anything to say other than to make the film again . " 
 Nielsen 's first major success since The Naked Gun came in a supporting role in Scary Movie 3 ( 2003 ) . His appearance as President Harris led to a second appearance in its sequel , Scary Movie 4 ( 2006 ) . This was the first time Nielsen had reprised a character since Frank Drebin . In one scene , Nielsen appeared almost nude , and one critic referred to the scene as putting " the ' scary ' in Scary Movie 4 . " 
 = = = Video , stage , and celebrity productions = = = 
 Nielsen also produced instructional golf videos , which were not presented in a serious style , beginning with 1993 's Bad Golf Made Easier . The videos combined comedy with golf techniques . The series spawned two additional sequels , Bad Golf My Way ( 1994 ) and Stupid Little Golf Video ( 1997 ) . Nielsen also co @-@ wrote a fictional autobiography titled The Naked Truth . The book portrayed Nielsen as a popular actor with a long history of prestigious films . 
 In his eighties , Nielsen performed serious roles on screen and stage ( such as his one @-@ man theatre show Darrow , in which he played Clarence Darrow ) , as well as providing voice @-@ overs and appearances for commercials ; cartoons like <unk> where he had the leading role / voice ; children 's shows , such as Pumper Pups , which he narrated , in addition to comedic film roles . The sibling relationship with his elder brother , the Honourable Erik Nielsen , a former Deputy Prime Minister of Canada , served as the premise of an HBO mockumentary entitled The Canadian Conspiracy in which Leslie Nielsen appeared , along with other prominent Canadian @-@ born media personalities . He was a celebrity contestant on CBS 's Gameshow Marathon , where he played The Price Is Right , Let 's Make a Deal , Beat the Clock , and Press Your Luck for charity . 
 = = = Final acting years = = = 
 Beginning in February 2007 , Nielsen began playing a small role as a doctor in the humorous yet educational television show Doctor * Ology . The show chronicles real @-@ life medical techniques and technology , on the Discovery Channel . Nielsen said : " There are any number of things that you think about when you ponder if you hadn 't been an actor , what would you be , and I 've always said I 'd like to be an astronaut or a doctor . I have such admiration for doctors . I just don 't know how you go around to thank them enough for coming up with the world 's most remarkable new discoveries . " 
 In 2007 , Nielsen starred in the drama Music Within . In 2008 , he portrayed a version of Uncle Ben for Superhero Movie , a spoof of superhero films . He then appeared in the 2008 parody An American Carol , which David Zucker directed , produced and co @-@ wrote . He appeared in the 2009 parody Stan Helsing . Nielsen portrayed the Doctor in the Spanish horror comedy Spanish Movie , a spoof comedy like Scary Movie , but making fun of popular Spanish films . 
 Nielsen appeared in more than 100 films and 1 @,@ 500 television episodes , portraying more than 220 characters . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nielsen married four times : nightclub singer Monica Boyar ( 1950 – 1956 ) , <unk> Ullman ( 1958 – 1973 ) , Brooks Oliver ( 1981 – 1983 ) and <unk> Earl ( 2001 – 2010 ) . Nielsen had two daughters from his second marriage , Maura and Thea Nielsen . 
 Nielsen often played golf . He joked , " I have no goals or ambition . I do , however , wish to work enough to maintain whatever celebrity status I have so that they will continue to invite me to golf tournaments . " His interest in the sport led him to comedic instructional films . 
 Nielsen was a practical joker , and known for pranking people with a portable hand @-@ controlled fart machine : " he always had that fart machine with him . " His epitaph read : " Let ' er rip " , a final reference to his favourite practical joke . 
 Nielsen was legally deaf and wore hearing aids for most of his life . Because of this impairment , he supported the Better Hearing Institute . Later in life , Nielsen had knee osteoarthritis . He participated in an educational video from The Arthritis Research Centre of Canada ( ARC ) , demonstrating the physical examination of a patient with knee osteoarthritis . 
 = = Death = = 
 In November 2010 , Nielsen was admitted to a Fort Lauderdale , Florida , hospital with pneumonia . On 28 November , Doug Nielsen , Nielsen 's nephew , told the <unk> radio station that 84 @-@ year @-@ old Nielsen had died in his sleep from pneumonia around 5 : 30 pm EST surrounded by family and friends . He was interred in Fort Lauderdale 's Evergreen Cemetery . As a final bit of humor , Nielsen chose " Let ' er rip " as his epitaph . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 Among his awards , in 1995 Nielsen received UCLA 's Jack Benny Award . In 1988 , he became the <unk> personality to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6541 Hollywood Blvd . In 2001 he was inducted into Canada 's Walk of Fame . The following year he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada , although he was also a naturalized US citizen . With his American status , he maintained his Canadian heritage : " There 's no way you can be a Canadian and think you can lose it ... Canadians are a goodly group . They are very aware of caring and helping . " On 19 May 2005 , during the centennial gala of his birth province , Saskatchewan , Leslie Nielsen was introduced to HM Queen Elizabeth II . 
 In 1997 , a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs , California , Walk of Stars was dedicated to him . 
 On 20 February 2002 , Nielsen was named an honorary citizen of West Virginia and an Ambassador of Mountain State Goodwill . Nielsen visited the state many times to speak and visit friends . In 2003 , in honour of Nielsen , Grant MacEwan College named its school of communications after him . Also in 2003 , the Alliance of Canadian Cinema , Television and Radio Artists awarded him the <unk> Award of Excellence . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video = = = 
 1993 : Bad Golf Made Easier 
 1994 : Bad Golf My Way 
 1997 : Stupid Little Golf Video 
 1997 : National Geographic Video : The Savage Garden 
 Nielsen also appeared in a promotional video for Layman Allen 's mathematics game called " Equations " and in the Seaworld San Antonio Summer Nights 4 @-@ D show " Pirates 4 @-@ D " . 
 = = Writings = = 
 1993 : The Naked Truth 
 1995 : Leslie Nielsen 's Stupid Little Golf Book with Henry Beard 
 1996 : Bad Golf My Way with Henry Beard 
 = Kids Can Say No ! = 
 Kids Can Say No ! is a 1985 British short educational film produced and directed by Jessica Skippon and written by Anita Bennett . It is intended to teach children between ages five and eight how to avoid situations where they might be sexually abused , how to escape such situations , and how to get help if they are abused . In the film , Australian celebrity Rolf Harris is in a park with a group of four children and tells them about proper and improper physical intimacy , which he calls " yes " and " no " feelings . The film has four role @-@ playing scenes in which children encounter paedophiles , with Harris and the children discussing each scene . 
 Harris said that he came up with the idea for the film on a 1982 Canadian tour when he saw Vancouver 's Green Thumb Theatre production of Feeling Yes , Feeling No , a play about child sexual abuse . Kids Can Say No ! , released in October 1985 on VHS in the United Kingdom , was the first British children 's film about sexual abuse and was purchased by police forces , educational institutions , and libraries across Europe . Upon the film 's release , The Times obtained opinions from four sexual @-@ abuse experts , who unanimously opposed using Kids Can Say No ! or any other film to teach children about the subject . The Australian Broadcasting Corporation received a positive response to its 1988 broadcast of Kids Can Say No ! and therefore broadcast it a second time that year . Harris and Skippon collaborated on the 1986 sequel Beyond the Scare , which advises teachers about what to do if a child discloses abuse . <unk> of Kids Can Say No ! eventually decreased as VHS became less popular . 
 Kids Can Say No ! resurfaced in 2014 , when Harris was prosecuted for twelve counts of indecently assaulting young girls . The prosecutors found Kids Can Say No ! on YouTube and wanted to show it at trial to illustrate its unintentional irony , but the film was not admitted as evidence . Harris was found guilty of all counts . During the trial , it was learned that , while Harris was filming Kids Can Say No ! , he was in the midst of a casual sexual relationship with his daughter Bindi 's best friend and , by its release , he had committed nine of the twelve assaults . According to Richard Guilliatt and <unk> <unk> in an article in The Australian , Harris ' campaign against paedophilia in Kids Can Say No ! can " be seen in retrospect as either monumental self @-@ delusion or a sign of deep , self @-@ lacerating guilt " . 
 = = Contents = = 
 In Kids Can Say No ! , Australian celebrity Rolf Harris appears with four children between the ages of seven and eight and warns them about paedophiles . The film begins with its theme song , " My Body " , which has the chorus " My body 's nobody 's body but mine . You run your own body . Let me run mine . " During the song , children ride a seesaw , skip rope and cycle . Harris sits under a tree in a park with the children — two girls and two boys — and tells them about proper and improper physical intimacy , which he calls " yes " and " no " feelings ; a parent 's hug is given as an example of a " yes " feeling . In vox populi segments , children give other examples of " yes " and " no " feelings ; one child says that being tickled by his father is a " yes " feeling , and another says that being squeezed hard is a " no " feeling . Harris leads the children in a chant of " Go away ! " as an exercise in how to respond to " no " feelings . He teaches the children about stranger danger , and that adults they know can also be a threat . 
 The film includes four role @-@ playing scenes . In the first , a man tells a girl that he will buy her a toy if she goes home with him . In the second , eight @-@ year @-@ old Natasha goes to her friend 's house and finds that only her friend 's father is home ; after he intentionally spills water on her clothes , he tells her to take them off . The film cuts to Harris , who says , " She should look him straight in the eye and tell him to stop , go away " . In the third scene , a group of older boys try to lure young children into their " special club " ; they lead one young boy to a secluded , wooded area and try to convince him to remove his clothes . In the last role @-@ playing scene , Sophie 's father offers her a secret bubble bath ; afterwards , he tells her not to tell anyone because he would go to jail and it would be her fault . 
 During and after each of the role @-@ playing scenes , Harris and the children discuss the situation and what the child should do . Harris tells the children not to be afraid to tell someone if they have been improperly touched , saying , " Some people don 't act right with kids , and they need help . You can 't protect them from trouble that they themselves have caused , and it 's better to say something so that you and the family can get the help you need . You know nothing gets better by keeping quiet about it . " Harris says that , if it is difficult to explain where they have been touched , they can draw a picture or point to the place on a doll . The film ends with " My Body " sung by a group of people including Harris , two police officers , and some children . 
 = = Production = = 
 Kids Can Say No ! is a twenty @-@ minute British short educational film intended to teach children about sexual abuse . Harris said he was naive about the subject and was motivated to make the film by a female teacher who told him that , when she spoke to her students about abuse , a traumatised girl ran out of the room ; the girl later disclosed that she was being abused by a family member . According to Harris , he came up with the idea for the film on a 1982 Canadian tour when he saw Vancouver 's Green Thumb Theatre production of Feeling Yes , Feeling No , a play about child sexual abuse . He was also inspired by a similar Australian production and a Swedish film about two children befriended by a large man on a farm . In an interview , Harris said that , when he saw the Swedish film , he thought the man was going to abuse the children , but that his expectations were incorrect and that " the film was completely innocent ; I was not " . 
 Harris , then host of Rolf 's Cartoon Time , approached the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children ( NSPCC ) and the Tavistock Clinic with his idea about making a film on child sexual abuse . Both organisations were receptive . Harris had previous connections with the NSPCC , having appeared in films in 1963 and 1973 promoting the NSPCC League of Pity , and a NSPCC official suggested that he use child actors in Kids Can Say No ! Harris approached director Jessica Skippon , with whom he had made a film about water safety , and said that he wanted to make Kids Can Say No ! to protect children . Harris later said that production was hampered by colleagues opposing the idea that children should be told about sexual abuse . 
 Kids Can Say No ! was made in London with input from Carolyn <unk> Jones , an expert on child abuse , and was filmed on Hampstead Heath in 1985 . The child actors were students at the Barbara Speake Stage School . Skippon directed and produced the film . Funding was difficult because neither the Department of Health and Social Security nor the Home Office considered the film under their jurisdiction , and each office referred Skippon to the other . <unk> , a charitable organisation , donated £ 15 @,@ 000 and technical facilities were provided by Barclays Bank Video . Harris covered the rest of the film 's production costs and American children 's songwriter Peter Alsop wrote the theme song . American Anita Bennett wrote the script , which was reviewed and approved by a NSPCC committee . Kids Can Say No ! was the second film from Rolf Harris Video , an educational video production company Harris founded in 1980 . In an interview , he said that his role of talking with children about sexual abuse in the film was a natural one because " my track record has made me a believable person . I have never betrayed the kids ' trust " . 
 Kids Can Say No ! was the first British children 's film about sexual abuse . The film is intended to teach children between ages five and eight how to avoid situations where they might be abused , how to get out of such situations , and how to get help if they are abused . Skippon later said that , although the people working on the film tried to keep it from being frightening to children , the task was difficult . She said that the film was not intended for home viewing and that only well @-@ informed adults trained in the subject should present it to children . 
 In April 1986 , Harris met with Western Australia Police officials and members of several state @-@ government departments in Mount Hawthorn to propose another film for children about how to handle sexual predators . Despite Harris ' offer to work for free , the officials declined and instead developed a broader campaign on the subject without Harris . 
 = = Release = = 
 Kids Can Say No ! was released in the United Kingdom in October 1985 on VHS with notes for teachers and two relevant books , and was distributed by Skippon Video , Skippon 's UK @-@ based company . Although several other short children 's educational films about sexual abuse were on the market in the UK including several also released that year , Kids Can Say No ! was the only British film ; the others were made in Australia , Canada and the United States . 
 In August 1986 , Jones presented the film at the Sydney Opera House in Australia as part of the sixth International Congress on Child Abuse and Neglect , the largest conference in the world on child abuse . The 56 @-@ year @-@ old Harris , who was chosen to be master of ceremonies for the three @-@ day conference 's opening event because of his celebrity and involvement with the film , told the audience that paedophilia was finally " coming out from under its veil of secrecy " . 
 Copies of Kids Can Say No ! were purchased by police forces , educational institutions , and libraries across Europe . The VHS tapes circulated widely in schools and rape crisis centers in Australia ; although showings began to decrease as VHS became less popular , the film was a significant teaching tool . The Australian Broadcasting Corporation received a positive response to its 1988 broadcast of Kids Can Say No ! and therefore broadcast it a second time that year . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 After the release of Kids Can Say No ! , many teachers who showed the film to their students reported receiving disclosures of abuse . Because many of the teachers said they were unsure of how to deal with the disclosures , Harris and Skippon collaborated on the 1986 sequel Beyond the Scare . Kids Can Say No ! encourages children to report abuse they experience and Beyond the Scare advises teachers about what to do if a child makes such a disclosure . 
 Beyond the Scare , filmed in a North London school , consists of role @-@ playing scenes with actual teachers . The film instructs teachers to listen to the child , to discuss the incident with the child 's parents and to contact the appropriate authorities . The Tavistock Clinic helped with the film 's production , and an expert from the organisation appears on @-@ camera to promote child protection projects in schools . Although Harris appears in Beyond the Scare , his role is less prominent than in Kids Can Say No ! and his activism against child abuse ended soon afterwards . 
 = = Harris ' trial = = 
 Kids Can Say No ! resurfaced in 2014 when Harris , then 83 years old , was prosecuted for twelve counts of indecent assault between 1968 and 1986 against four young girls ; the youngest was seven years old . The prosecutors found Kids Can Say No ! on YouTube and wanted to show it at trial for its unintentional irony , but the film was ruled irrelevant to the case and not admitted as evidence . 
 After the trial began , Skippon warned media outlets that it was illegal to use the film without written permission . The director wrote to The Independent that no complaints were made against Harris during the making of the film . In an article about the allegations against Harris , The Sunday Telegraph noted that Kids Can Say No ! was commissioned by the NSPCC ; a NSPCC spokesperson responded , " The film was made independently by Rolf Harris and a film company nearly 30 years ago ... We did not commission it , fund it , make it or distribute it " . 
 Southwark Crown Court found Harris guilty of all twelve counts of indecent assault . During the trial , it was learned that , while making Kids Can Say No ! , Harris was involved in a casual sexual relationship with his daughter Bindi 's best friend ; the relationship began when the victim was 13 years old and lasted for 15 years . Harris had committed nine of the twelve counts by the film 's release , including the assault of fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Tonya Lee in London three months before the release . The first victim was about the age of the children in Kids Can Say No ! The last assault of which Harris was convicted occurred several weeks after his meeting with officials in Western Australia to propose another film about child sexual abuse . A former child actor from the Barbara Speake Stage School who appeared in Kids Can Say No ! said that Harris ' behavior with older girls at the school made Harris ' eventual arrest unsurprising . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of Kids Can Say No ! have generally been negative , with initial reviews doubting the benefit of showing the film to children and later reviews focusing on Harris ' hypocrisy . In a 1985 Times review , Caroline Moorehead writes that the film 's avoidance of an explicit discussion of sexual abuse was both a requirement and the film 's greatest weakness . According to Moorehead , an explicit discussion might have terrified children and prevented parents from consenting to their children 's viewing of the film ; however , its oblique approach prevents children from understanding the issue . She calls the film 's theme song " catchy , one of those irritating snatches of music that is hard to forget " . 
 The Times obtained opinions from four sexual @-@ abuse experts , who unanimously opposed using Kids Can Say No ! or any other film to teach children about the subject . Northampton social worker Helen <unk> said that she would not show the film to children . Psychiatrist Brendan McCarthy called it simplistic . According to teacher Clare Rankin , children under five would not understand the film . Physician Paula Drummond was concerned that it might inspire children to falsely accuse adults they disliked , although McCarthy said that children were unlikely to make false abuse accusations . McCarthy was especially critical of the film , calling it " no clearer to a child than the Gorbachev @-@ Reagan talks " . Moorehead summarised the experts ' comments as suggesting that Kids Can Say No ! is " muddling , evasive and pussy @-@ footed , best not for children at all , but as ... aids for parents and professional workers to alert them to paedophilia and incest " . 
 In a 1988 Sydney Morning Herald review , Judith Whelan writes that Harris is more serious in the film than he was when performing " Jake the Peg " . According to Whelan , the film " would best be seen by children in a group , with an adult ( teacher or parent ) nearby who could encourage discussion after the show or answer children 's questions during it " . 
 When Kids Can Say No ! resurfaced in 2014 , Peter Walker wrote in The Guardian that the film " illustrates with grim eloquence , in retrospect , the prosecution notion that [ Harris ] was a man of two distinct sides : the avuncular and trustworthy public figure , and lurking behind , the groper and abuser " . Walker notes that the scene in which a man assaults his child 's friend mirrors what Harris did to his daughter 's best friend , and that the closing sequence has " an accidental resonance that would only emerge more than 25 years later " because of the two police officers behind Harris . 
 According to Richard Guilliatt and <unk> <unk> in an article in The Australian , Harris ' campaign against paedophilia in Kids Can Say No ! can " be seen in retrospect as either monumental self @-@ delusion or a sign of deep , self @-@ lacerating guilt " . NSPCC chief executive officer Peter Wanless appeared on Good Morning Britain saying that Harris ' appearance in the film was hypocritical . In an Irish Daily Mail article , Paul <unk> writes that Harris ' work on Kids Can Say No ! at the same time that he was abusing girls was " one of the most sickening examples [ of ] hiding in plain sight " . In 2014 , theme composer Peter Alsop said that Harris may have used the film to groom children because it encouraged trust by parents . 
 = Deborah Kerr = 
 Deborah Kerr CBE ( / <unk> / ; born Deborah Jane Kerr @-@ Trimmer ; 30 September 1921 – 16 October 2007 ) was a Scottish @-@ born film , theatre and television actress . During her career , she won a Golden Globe for her performance as Anna Leonowens in the motion picture The King and I ( 1956 ) and the Sarah Siddons Award for her performance as " Laura Reynolds " in the play Tea and Sympathy ( a role she originated on Broadway ) . She was also a three @-@ time winner of the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . 
 Kerr was nominated six times for the Academy Award for Best Actress , more than any other actress without ever winning . In 1994 , however , having already received honorary awards from the Cannes Film Festival and BAFTA , she received an Academy Honorary Award with a citation recognising her as " an artist of impeccable grace and beauty , a dedicated actress whose motion picture career has always stood for perfection , discipline and elegance " . As well as The King and I , her films include An Affair to Remember ; From Here to Eternity ; Quo Vadis ; The Innocents ; Black Narcissus ; Heaven Knows , Mr. Allison ; King Solomon 's Mines ; The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp ; The Sundowners and Separate Tables . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Deborah Jane Kerr @-@ Trimmer was born in a private nursing home ( hospital ) in Glasgow , the only daughter of Kathleen Rose ( née Smale ) and Capt. Arthur Charles Kerr @-@ Trimmer , a World War I veteran who lost a leg at the Battle of the Somme and later became a naval architect and civil engineer . She spent the first three years of her life in the nearby town of Helensburgh , where her parents lived with Deborah 's grandparents in a house on West King Street . Kerr had a younger brother , Edmund ( " Teddy " ) , who became a journalist . He was killed in a road rage incident in 2004 . 
 Kerr was educated at the independent Northumberland House School , <unk> , and at <unk> School , Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Kerr originally trained as a ballet dancer , first appearing on stage at Sadler 's Wells in 1938 . After changing careers , she soon found success as an actress . Her first acting teacher was her aunt , Phyllis Smale , who ran the Hicks @-@ Smale Drama School in Bristol . She adopted the name Deborah Kerr on becoming a film actress ( " Kerr " was a family name going back to the maternal grandmother of her grandfather Arthur Kerr @-@ Trimmer ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Kerr 's first stage appearance was at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare in 1937 , as " Harlequin " in the mime play Harlequin and Columbine . She then went to the Sadler 's Wells ballet school and in 1938 made her début in the corps de ballet in Prometheus . After various walk @-@ on parts in Shakespeare productions at the Open @-@ Air Theatre in Regent 's Park , London , she joined the Oxford Playhouse repertory company in 1940 , playing , inter alia , " Margaret " in Dear Brutus and " Patty Moss " in The Two <unk> . 
 In 1943 , aged 21 , Kerr made her West End début as " Ellie Dunn " in a revival of Heartbreak House at the Cambridge Theatre , stealing attention from stalwarts such as Edith Evans and Isabel Jeans . " She has the rare gift " , wrote critic Beverley Baxter , " of thinking her lines , not merely remembering them . The process of development from a romantic , silly girl to a hard , disillusioned woman in three hours was moving and convincing " . 
 Deborah Kerr returned to the London stage 29 years later , in many productions including the old @-@ fashioned , The Day After the Fair ( Lyric , 1972 ) , a Peter Ustinov comedy , <unk> ( Haymarket , 1981 ) and a revival of Emlyn Williams 's The Corn is Green . After her first London success in 1943 , she toured England and Scotland in Heartbreak House . Near the end of the Second World War , she also toured Holland , France , and Belgium for ENSA as " Mrs Manningham " in Angel Street , and Britain ( with Stewart Granger ) in Gaslight . 
 Having established herself as a film actress in the meantime , she made her Broadway debut in 1953 , appearing in Robert Anderson 's Tea and Sympathy , for which she received a Tony Award nomination . Kerr repeated her role along with her stage partner John Kerr ( no relation ) in Vincente Minnelli 's film adaptation of the drama . In 1955 , Kerr won the Sarah Siddons Award for her performance in Chicago during a national tour of the play . After her Broadway début in 1953 , she toured the United States with Tea and Sympathy . In 1975 , she returned to Broadway , creating the role of Nancy in Edward Albee 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning play <unk> . 
 In 1977 , she came back to the West End , playing the title role in a production of George Bernard Shaw 's Candida . 
 The theatre , despite her success in films , was always to remain Kerr 's first love , even though going on stage filled her with trepidation : 
 I do it because it 's exactly like dressing up for the grown ups . I don 't mean to belittle acting but I 'm like a child when I 'm out there performing — shocking the grownups , enchanting them , making them laugh or cry . It 's an unbelievable terror , a kind of masochistic madness . The older you get , the easier it should be but it isn 't . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Kerr 's first film role was in the British production Contraband in 1940 , but her scenes were left on the cutting room floor . With her next two British films — Major Barbara and Love on the Dole ( both 1941 ) — her screen future seemed assured and her performance , said James Agate of Love on the Dole , " is not within a mile of Wendy Hiller 's in the theatre , but it is a charming piece of work by a very pretty and promising beginner , so pretty and so promising that there is the usual <unk> about a new star " . She went on to make Hatter 's Castle ( 1942 ) , in which she starred opposite Robert Newton and James Mason , and then played a Norwegian resistance fighter in The Day Will Dawn ( 1942 ) . She was an immediate hit with the public : British exhibitors voted her the most popular local female star at the box office . 
 In 1943 , she played three women in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger 's The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp . During the filming , according to Powell 's autobiography , Powell and she became lovers : " I realised that Deborah was both the ideal and the flesh @-@ and @-@ blood woman whom I had been searching for " . Kerr made clear that her surname should be pronounced the same as " car " . To avoid confusion over pronunciation , Louis B. Mayer of MGM billed her as " Kerr rhymes with Star ! " 
 Although the British Army refused to co @-@ operate with the producers — and Winston Churchill thought the film would ruin wartime morale — Colonel Blimp confounded critics when it proved to be an artistic and commercial success . Powell hoped to reunite Kerr and lead actor Roger Livesey in his next film , A Canterbury Tale ( 1944 ) , but her agent had sold her contract to MGM . According to Powell , his affair with Kerr ended when she made it clear to him that she would accept an offer to go to Hollywood if one were made . 
 Her role as a troubled nun in the Powell and Pressburger production of Black Narcissus in 1947 did indeed bring her to the attention of Hollywood producers . The film was a hit in the US , as well as the UK , and Kerr won the New York Film Critics ' Award as Actress of the Year . British exhibitors voted her the eighth @-@ most popular local star at the box office . Soon she received the first of her Academy Award nominations for Edward , My Son , a 1949 drama set in England that co @-@ starred Spencer Tracy . 
 In Hollywood , Kerr 's British accent and manner led to a succession of roles portraying refined , reserved , and " proper " English ladies . Kerr , nevertheless , used any opportunity to discard her cool exterior . She starred in the 1950 adventure film King Solomon 's Mines , shot on location in Africa with Stewart Granger and Richard Carlson . This was immediately followed by her appearance in the religious epic Quo Vadis ? ( 1951 ) , shot at Cinecittà in Rome , in which she played the indomitable <unk> , a first @-@ century Christian . She then played Princess Flavia in a remake of The Prisoner of Zenda ( 1952 ) . In 1953 , Kerr " showed her theatrical mettle " as Portia in Joseph Mankiewicz 's Julius Caesar ( 1953 ) . She then departed from typecasting with a performance that brought out her sensuality , as " Karen Holmes " , the embittered military wife in Fred Zinnemann 's From Here to Eternity ( 1953 ) , for which she received an Oscar nomination for Best Actress . The American Film Institute acknowledged the iconic status of the scene from that film in which Burt Lancaster and she <unk> illicitly and passionately amidst crashing waves on a Hawaiian beach . The organisation ranked it 20th in its list of the 100 most romantic films of all time . 
 Thereafter , Kerr 's career choices would make her known in Hollywood for her versatility as an actress . She played the repressed wife in The End of the Affair ( 1955 ) , with Van Johnson ; a nun in Heaven Knows , Mr. Allison ( 1957 ) opposite her long @-@ time friend Robert Mitchum ; a mama 's girl in Separate Tables ( 1958 ) opposite David Niven ; and a governess in both The Chalk Garden and The Innocents ( 1961 ) . She also portrayed an earthy Australian sheep @-@ herder 's wife in The Sundowners and appeared as lustful and beautiful screen <unk> in both Beloved Infidel and Bonjour <unk> . 
 Among her most famous roles were Anna Leonowens in the film version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical The King and I ( 1956 ) ; and opposite Cary Grant as his shipboard romantic interest Terri McKay in the bittersweet love story An Affair to Remember ( 1957 ) . She reunited with Grant and Mitchum for a sophisticated comedy , The Grass Is Greener , and then joined Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra in a love triangle for a romantic comedy , Marriage on the Rocks . In 1966 , the producers of Carry On Screaming ! offered her a fee comparable to that paid to the rest of the cast combined , but she turned it down in favor of appearing in an aborted stage version of Flowers for Algernon . 
 In 1967 , Kerr starred in the comedy Casino Royale , achieving the distinction of being , at 46 , the oldest " Bond Girl " in any James Bond film , until Monica Bellucci , at the age of 50 , became a " Bond Girl " in Spectre ( 2015 ) . In 1969 , pressure of competition from younger , upcoming actresses made her agree to appear nude in John Frankenheimer 's The Gypsy Moths , the only nude scene in her career . Concern about the parts being offered to her , as well as the increasing amount of nudity included in films , led her to abandon the medium at the end of the 1960s in favour of television and theatre work . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Kerr experienced a career resurgence on television in the early 1980s when she played the role of the nurse — played by Elsa Lanchester in the 1957 movie — in Witness for the Prosecution . Later , Kerr rejoined screen partner Robert Mitchum in Reunion at <unk> . She also took on the role of the older Emma Harte , a tycoon , in the adaptation of Barbara Taylor Bradford 's A Woman of Substance . For this performance , Kerr was nominated for an Emmy Award . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kerr 's first marriage was to Squadron Leader Anthony Bartley RAF on 29 November 1945 . They had two daughters , Melanie Jane ( born 27 December 1947 ) and Francesca Ann ( born 20 December 1951 and subsequently married to the actor John Shrapnel ) . The marriage was troubled , owing to Bartley 's jealousy of his wife 's fame and financial success and because her career often took her away from home . They divorced in 1959 . 
 Her second marriage was to author Peter Viertel on 23 July 1960 . In marrying Viertel , she became stepmother to Viertel 's daughter , Christine Viertel . Although she long resided in <unk> , Switzerland and Marbella , Spain , she moved back to Britain to be closer to her own children as her health began to deteriorate . Her husband , however , continued to live in Marbella . 
 = = Death = = 
 Kerr died on 16 October 2007 in <unk> , a village in Suffolk , England , from the effects of Parkinson 's disease . She was 86 . Less than three weeks later , on 4 November , her husband Peter Viertel died of cancer . At the time of Viertel 's death , director Michael <unk> was filming the documentary Peter Viertel : Between the Lines which would include reminiscences concerning Kerr and the Academy Awards . She is buried at <unk> . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Deborah Kerr was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 1998 , but was unable to accept the honour in person because of ill health . She was also honoured in Hollywood , where , for her contributions to the motion picture industry , she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1709 Vine Street . 
 Kerr won a Golden Globe Award for " Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy " for The King and I in 1957 and a Henrietta Award for " World Film Favorite – Female " . She was the first performer to win the New York Film Critics Circle Award for " Best Actress " three times ( 1947 , 1957 and 1960 ) . 
 Although she never won a BAFTA , Oscar or Cannes Film Festival award in a competitive category , all three organisations gave Kerr honorary awards : a Cannes Film Festival Tribute in 1984 ; a BAFTA Special Award in 1991 ; and an Academy Honorary Award in 1994 . 
 In September and October 2010 , Josephine Botting of the British Film Institute curated the " Deborah Kerr Season " , which included around twenty of her feature films and an exhibition of posters , memorabilia and personal items loaned by her family . 
 Biographies of Kerr have been published by Eric Braun and , in 2010 , by the entertainment journalist Michelangelo Capua , but she has yet to receive an in @-@ depth study of her filmography , artistry or life . 
 = = Award nominations = = 
 Deborah Kerr was nominated six times for the Academy Award for Best Actress : Edward , My Son ( 1949 ) , From Here to Eternity ( 1953 ) , The King and I ( 1956 ) , Heaven Knows , Mr. Allison ( 1957 ) , Separate Tables ( 1958 ) and The Sundowners ( 1960 ) . She received one Academy Honorary Award for her career in 1994 . 
 She was also nominated four times for the BAFTA Award for Best British Actress : The End of the Affair ( 1955 ) , Tea and Sympathy ( 1956 ) , The Sundowners ( 1961 ) and The Chalk Garden ( 1964 ) . 
 She received one Emmy Award nomination in 1985 for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or a Special for A Woman of Substance . She was also nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama for Edward , My Son ( 1949 ) , Heaven Knows , Mr. Allison ( 1957 ) and Separate Tables ( 1958 ) . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Radio appearances = = 
 = HMS Caesar ( 1896 ) = 
 HMS Caesar was a Majestic @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy , named after the Roman military and political leader Julius Caesar . The ship was built at the Portsmouth Dockyard , starting with her keel laying in March 1895 . She was launched in September 1896 and was commissioned into the fleet in January 1898 . She was armed with a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and a secondary battery of twelve 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns . The ship had a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . 
 Caesar served with the Mediterranean Fleet after a brief stint in the Channel Fleet . In 1905 , she resumed service with a now re @-@ organised Channel Fleet and was also part of the Atlantic Fleet for a time . In the service of the Home Fleet from 1907 , she was placed in reserve in 1912 . Following the outbreak of World War I , Caesar returned to the Channel Fleet before being transferred to the North America and West Indies Station in 1915 after a brief spell as a guard ship at Gibraltar . From 1918 to 1919 she served as a depot ship , firstly in the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas and then the Black Sea , in support of naval operations against the Bolsheviks . In this latter role , she was the last of the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships to see service outside the United Kingdom . Returning to England in 1920 , she was decommissioned and sold for scrap in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Caesar was 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall and had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced up to 16 @,@ 060 tonnes ( 15 @,@ 810 long tons ; 17 @,@ 700 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . By 1907 – 1908 , she was re @-@ boilered with oil @-@ fired models . Her engines provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) . The Majestics were considered to have handled well , with an easy roll , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . She had a crew of 672 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with four BL 12 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed on circular barbettes , unlike six of her sisters , which retained earlier pear @-@ shaped barbettes . Caesar also carried twelve QF 6 @-@ inch / 40 guns . They were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships . She also carried sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder guns and twelve QF 2 @-@ pounder guns . She was also equipped with five 18 @-@ inch ( 450 @-@ mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull on the broadside , with the last in a deck @-@ mounted launcher on the stern . Caesar and the other ships of her class had 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey armour , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed Caesar and her sisters to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armour , and the conning tower had the same thickness of steel on the sides . The ship 's armoured deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 in ( 64 to 114 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 HMS Caesar was built at the Portsmouth Dockyard , with her keel laying taking place on 25 March 1895 . She was launched on 2 September 1896 , and completed in January 1898 . The ship was commissioned at Portsmouth on 13 January to serve in the Mediterranean Fleet . Before leaving for the Mediterranean , she was attached temporarily to the Channel Fleet to serve in home waters . In May 1898 , Caesar departed the United Kingdom for her Mediterranean service , undergoing a refit at Malta in 1900 – 01 . Captain George Callaghan was appointed to command her on 21 December 1901 , succeeding Captain John Ferris . She ended her Mediterranean service in October 1903 , paying off at Portsmouth on 6 October 1903 to begin a refit . Her refit completed , Caesar was commissioned at Portsmouth on 2 February 1904 to relieve her sister ship HMS Majestic as flagship of the Channel Fleet . When the Channel Fleet became the Atlantic Fleet as a result of a reorganisation on 1 January 1905 , Caesar became flagship of the Atlantic Fleet . She was relieved of this duty in March 1905 , becoming 2nd Flagship of the new Channel Fleet ( which had been the Home Fleet prior to the reorganisation ) . 
 On 3 June 1905 , Caesar collided with and sank the barque Afghanistan off Dungeness , suffering significant damage ; her bridge wings were carried away and the boats , davits , and net booms on her port side were badly damaged . Caesar was refitted at Devonport to repair the damage . Caesar became Flagship , Rear Admiral , Home Fleet , in December 1905 . She was relieved of this duty in February 1907 and transferred back to the Atlantic Fleet to become its temporary flagship . She served in this role until May 1907 . On 27 May 1907 , Caesar was recommissioned for service in the Devonport Division of the new Home Fleet , which had been formed in January 1907 . During this service she underwent a refit at Devonport in 1907 – 08 . In May 1909 , Caesar transferred to the Nore , temporarily serving as the flagship of Vice Admiral , 3rd and 4th Divisions , Home Fleet . In April 1911 she transferred to Devonport to serve in the 3rd Division , Home Fleet . On 16 January 1911 , Caesar was rammed by the barque Excelsior in fog at Sheerness , suffering no serious damage . In March 1912 , Caesar was placed in commissioned reserve with a nucleus crew as part of the 4th Division , Home Fleet . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Caesar was brought back into full commission and transferred to the 7th Battle Squadron of the Channel Fleet ; the squadron was charged with the defence of the English Channel . During this service she helped in transporting the Plymouth Marine Division from Plymouth to Ostend , Belgium , and covered the passage of the British Expeditionary Force from England to France in September 1914 . In December 1914 , Caesar was detached from the 7th Battle Squadron and transferred to Gibraltar to serve as guard ship and gunnery training ship there . In July 1915 , she transferred to the North America and West Indies Station , serving as guard ship and gunnery training ship at Bermuda and patrolling the Atlantic . 
 Her North America and West Indies Station service ended in September 1918 , when Caesar was transferred to relieve HMS Andromache ( the old second @-@ class cruiser and former minelayer HMS Latona ) as flagship of the Senior Naval Officer , British Adriatic Squadron , at Corfu , the last British pre @-@ dreadnought to serve as a flagship . In September 1918 , Caesar went to Malta for refit as a depot ship , during which she was equipped with repair shops and with leisure facilities such as recreation rooms and reading rooms . This conversion completed , she took up duties in October 1918 at Mudros as depot ship for the British Aegean Squadron . In January 1919 she was transferred to Port Said , Egypt , for service as a depot ship there . In June 1919 , Caesar transited the Dardanelles and transferred to the Black Sea , where she served as a depot ship for British naval forces operating against the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution . In this service she became the last British pre @-@ dreadnought to serve operationally overseas . Caesar returned to the United Kingdom in March 1920 , paid off at Devonport on 23 April 1920 , and was placed on the disposal list . She was sold to a British firm for scrapping on 8 November 1921 , then resold to a German firm in July 1922 and towed from Devonport to Germany to be scrapped . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Siege of Godesberg = 
 The Siege of Godesberg , 18 November – 17 December 1583 , was the first major siege of the Cologne War ( 1583 – 1589 ) . Seeking to wrest control of an important fortification , Bavarian and mercenary soldiers surrounded the Godesberg ( " Wotan 's Mountain " ) , and the village then of the same name , now Bad Godesberg ( " Wotan 's Mountain Spa " ) , located at its foot . On top of the mountain sat a formidable fortress , similarly named Godesburg ( " Wotan 's Castle " ) , built in the early 13th century during a contest over the election of two competing archbishops . 
 Towering over the Rhine valley , the Godesburg 's strategic position commanded the roads leading to and from Bonn , the Elector of Cologne 's capital city , and Cologne , the region 's economic powerhouse . Over time , the Electors strengthened its walls and heightened its towers . They added a small residence in the 14th century and the donjon ( also called a Bergfried or keep ) developed as a stronghold of the Electoral archives and valuables . By the mid @-@ 16th century , the Godesburg was considered nearly impregnable and had become a symbol of the dual power of the Prince @-@ electors and Archbishops of Cologne , one of the wealthiest ecclesiastical territories in the Holy Roman Empire . The Cologne War , a feud between the Protestant Elector , Gebhard , Truchsess of Waldburg , and the Catholic Elector , Ernst of Bavaria , was yet another schismatic episode in the Electoral and archdiocesan history . 
 The Godesburg came under attack from Bavarian forces in November 1583 . It resisted a lengthy cannonade by the attacking army ; finally , sappers tunneled into the basalt core of the mountain , placed 680 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) of powder into the tunnel and blew up a significant part of the fortifications . The explosion killed many of the defending troops , but the resulting rubble impeded the attackers ' progress , and the remaining defenders continued to offer staunch resistance . Only when some of the attackers entered the castle 's inner courtyard through the latrine system were the Bavarians able to overcome their opponents . The Godesburg 's commander and some surviving defenders took refuge in the keep ; using prisoners held in the dungeons as hostages , the commander negotiated safe passage for himself , his wife and his lieutenant . The others who were left in the keep — men , women and children — were killed . Nearby Bonn fell to the Bavarians the following month . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cologne War , 1583 – 1589 , was triggered by the 1582 conversion of the Archbishop @-@ Prince Elector of Cologne , Gebhard , Truchsess of Waldburg , to Calvinism , and his subsequent marriage to Agnes of Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben in 1583 . When he refused to relinquish the Electorate , a faction of clerics in the Cologne Cathedral chapter elected another archbishop , Ernst of Bavaria , of the House of Wittelsbach . 
 Initially , troops of the competing Archbishops of Cologne fought for control of the Electorate ; within a few months , the local feud between the two parties expanded to include supporters from the Electorate of the Palatinate on the Protestant side , and the Duchy of Bavaria on the Catholic side . Italian mercenaries hired with papal gold augmented the Catholic force . In 1586 , the conflict expanded further , with direct involvement of the Spanish Netherlands for the Catholic side , and tertiary involvement from Henry III of France and Elizabeth I of England on the Protestant side . 
 At its most fundamental , it was a local feud between two competing dynastic interests — the <unk> ( Truchsess ) of the House of Waldburg and the dukes of the House of Wittelsbach — that acquired religious overtones . The dispute had broad implications in the political , social , and dynastic balance of the Holy Roman Empire . It tested the principle of ecclesiastical reservation established in the religious Peace of Augsburg ( 1555 ) . The 1555 agreement settled religious problems in the Empire with the principle Cuius regio , eius religio : the subjects of a secular prince followed the religion of their sovereign . Ecclesiastical reservation excluded the territories of the imperial prelates ( bishops , archbishops , abbots or abbesses ) from cuius regio , eius religio . In an ecclesiastical territory , if the prelate changed his religion , his subjects did not have to do so . Instead , the prelate was expected to resign from his post . Problematically , the 1555 agreement did not specify this detail . 
 = = = Controversy of conversion = = = 
 Agnes of Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben was a Protestant canoness ( meaning that she was a woman living in a religious community , but not bound by a perpetual vow ) at a convent in Gerresheim , today a district of Düsseldorf . After 1579 , she maintained a lengthy liaison with the Archbishop of Cologne , Gebhard of Waldburg @-@ <unk> , Truchsess of Waldburg . In defense of her honor , two of her brothers convinced Gebhard to marry her , and Gebhard considered converting to Calvinism for her . Rumors spread throughout the Electorate of his possible conversion , and that he might refuse to relinquish his position . The Electorate had overcome similar problems . Hermann of Wied had converted to Protestantism and resigned in 1547 . Salentin of Isenburg @-@ Grenzau , Gebhard 's immediate predecessor , had resigned upon his marriage . In December 1582 , Gebhard announced his conversion and extended equal religious rights to Protestants in the Electorate . In February , he married Agnes . At the end of March 1583 , the Pope excommunicated him . The Cathedral chapter promptly elected a new archbishop , Ernst of Bavaria . 
 With two competing archbishops , both claiming the see and the Electorate , the contenders and their supporters gathered the troops . In numbers , Ernst had the advantage . The Pope hired 5 @,@ 000 mercenaries from the Farnese family to support the new Elector . Ernst 's brother , the Duke of Bavaria , provided an army and Ernst arranged for his brother Ferdinand 's army to take possession of the so @-@ called Oberstift , the southern territory of the Electorate ; his troops plundered many of its villages and towns . 
 With the support of Adolf von Neuenahr and the Count Solms , Gebhard secured some of the northern and eastern portions of the Electorate , where he held a geographical advantage in his proximity to the rebellious Dutch provinces . In the south , however , Ferdinand 's troops hunted the soldiers Gebhard had left in possession of such Oberstift villages as Ahrweiler and Linz ; Gebhard 's troops were forced out of their strongholds , hunted through the countryside , and eventually captured . By the fall of 1583 , most of the Oberstift had fallen to Ferdinand 's army and many of Gebhard 's erstwhile supporters — including his own brother — had returned home . In some cases , they honored parole agreements made after their capture . A strong supporter , Johann Casimir of <unk> , brother of the powerful Louis VI , Elector Palatine , returned to the Palatine when his brother died . Other supporters were frustrated by Gebhard 's chronic inability to pay his troops , or intimidated by threats of Rudolf II , Holy Roman Emperor . By late October 1583 , most of the Oberstift had fallen , although he still held the Godesburg , located near the villages of Godesberg and <unk> , the formidable fortress at Bonn , and the fortified village of Poppelsdorf . 
 = = Fortress = = 
 The Godesburg foundation stone was laid on 15 October 1210 upon the order of Dietrich of <unk> , the Archbishop of Cologne , who was himself in disputed possession of the Electorate and fighting to keep his position . Although his competitors deposed Dietrich in 1212 , his successors finished and enlarged the fortress ; it featured in chronicles of the subsequent centuries as both a symbolic and physical embodiment of the power of the archbishop of Cologne in his many struggles for regional authority in secular and ecclesiastical matters . Furthermore , by the late 14th century , the fortress had become the repository of the Elector 's valuables and archives . By the mid @-@ 16th century , with the inclusion of residential facilities , the castle was popularly considered the <unk> , or the favorite seat ( home ) , of the Electors . 
 The fortification originally had been constructed in the medieval style . In the reign of Siegfried II of <unk> ( 1275 – 1295 ) , it successfully resisted a five @-@ week siege by the Count of Cleves . Successive archbishops continued to improve the defenses with stronger walls , adding levels to the central Bergfried , which was cylindrical , not square like many medieval donjons . In addition to the construction of the small residence , these archbishops also expanded the inner works to include dungeons and a chapel ; they fortified the walls with towers and crenelations , added a curtain wall , and improved the roads that led to the entrance in a series of switchbacks . By the 1580s , the Godesburg was not only the favorite residence of the Elector , but also an elaborate stone fortress . Although it retained some of its medieval character , it had been enhanced partially in the style made popular by Italian military architects . The physical location on the mountain did not permit the star @-@ shaped trace italienne ; nevertheless , the Godesburg 's cordons of thick , rounded walls and massive iron @-@ studded gates made its defenders formidable adversaries . Its height , some 120 meters ( 400 ft ) above the Rhine on the peak of a steep hill , made artillery assault difficult . The approach road , with its hairpin turns , made battering rams impractical . The turns , overlooked by the castle wall , made foot assault dangerous and slow . Defenders could fire down on attackers from many angles . 
 Fortifications such as this , and the star @-@ shaped fortresses more commonly found in the flatter lands of the Dutch Provinces , increasingly made 16th @-@ century warfare both difficult and expensive ; victory was not simply a matter of winning a battle over the enemy 's army . Victory required traveling from one fortified and armed city to another and investing time and money in one of two outcomes . Ideally , a show of extraordinary force convinced city leaders to surrender . If the show of force did not intimidate a city , the alternative was an expensive siege that reduced the city to rubble and ended with storming the ruins . In the case of the former , when a city capitulated , it would have to quarter troops at its own expense , called execution , but the soldiers would not be permitted to plunder . In the case of the latter , no quarter would be given to the defenders and the victorious soldiers were released to pillage , plunder , and sack . 
 = = Investment of the Godesburg = = 
 On 13 – 14 November , Ferdinand of Bavaria ( Ernst 's brother ) and the Count of Arenberg took the Elector 's castle at Poppelsdorf ; on 18 November , they moved to attack the Godesburg . This fortress was considerably stronger than the one at Poppelsdorf and of supreme strategic importance for the projected attack on Bonn , the capital city of the Electorate . 
 The Godesburg was defended by Lieutenant Colonel Felix Buchner , Captain of the Guard Eduard Sudermann , a garrison of soldiers from the Netherlands , and a few cannons . Sudermann was a patrician from Cologne , and the son of Cologne 's Bürgermeister ( mayor ) Dr. Heinrich Sudermann ( 1520 – 1591 ) , a jurist and ambassador , and one of the most influential men in the imperial city and throughout the merchant capitals of the northern German states . According to contemporary sources , around 180 people lived in the facility , including peasants , the Dutch soldiers defending it , and an unknown number of women and children . The fortress was also home to several of Gebhard 's prisoners . The Abbot of Heisterbach , Johann von St. Vith , had been taken prisoner in July 1583 when Sudermann 's troops sacked several villages in the region and plundered the Heisterbach monastery . Other prisoners held in the Godesburg included Gebhard von Bothmer , the suffragan ( auxiliary bishop ) of Hildesheim , and Captain <unk> from Florence , the captured commander of Deutz , across the Rhine from Cologne . To besiege the fortress , Ferdinand brought more than 400 <unk> ( foot soldiers ) and five squadrons of mounted soldiers , plus a half dozen heavy caliber cannons , called culverins . His soldiers , among them Spanish and Italian mercenaries , took up quarters in neighboring villages , a process accompanied by pillage , arson , murder and rape . On 18 November , the first day of the siege , Ferdinand sent a trumpeter and formally asked the fortress to surrender ; the defending garrison replied that they had sworn their allegiance to Gebhard and would fight to the death for him . 
 = = = <unk> ( 18 – 28 November 1583 ) = = = 
 In response , Ferdinand took control of the village at the foot of the mountain and encircled the site . He surveyed the locale for two days to identify the most promising angle of attack . The customary equipage of siege warfare — the siege tower , the trebuchet , and the crossbow — would be ineffective . The distance between the curtain wall and the valley floor and the angle of the hill placed the Godesburg out of range . The besiegers had no choice but to use expensive artillery , although the angle would decrease its effectiveness . Ferdinand initially placed three cannons at the foot of the mountain , in Godesberg village . Daily , cannonballs and mortar shells smashed against the castle 's walls . Nightly , the defenders repaired the damage . At the following sunrise , the assault began anew . Ferdinand 's cannons were ineffective against the fortification , as were his mortars ; in the course of the cannonade , return fire even managed to destroy a few of his own pieces . From his place of safety in the north , Gebhard understood well the potential of the loss of the Godesburg , yet he was relatively helpless to help his garrison . In an effort to garner financial support from the Protestant states , in November 1583 he wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury , in London : " Verily , the Roman Antichrist moves every stone to oppress us and our churches ... " 
 Although financial help from the English was not forthcoming , Ferdinand could not break the defenses . On 28 November , ten days after the beginning of the siege , artillery fire had wasted several thousand pounds of powder in the ineffectual bombardment . Ferdinand moved his cannons to an elevated position in a hillside vineyard to the west of the Godesburg . The height offered a more advantageous trajectory with which to fire on the walls of the Godesburg 's outer ward . Within a few hours , his cannonade had breached them . Ferdinand sent three Italian experts to examine the breach and to advise him on the next step ; the Italians , having come under fire during their examination , concluded that storming the castle would incur many casualties . The defenders still had the advantage of height and would be able to shoot at attackers from multiple towers and defensive positions inside the walls . Ferdinand decided not to pursue this tactic . Unable to storm the castle , Ferdinand considered two options : abandon the siege , which he could not do , or blow up the fortress . This option of last resort usually made a fortress unusable . Furthermore while he considered his options , the defenders repaired the breaches caused by the cannonade and reinforced the walls , making them even stronger than they had been . The defenders also removed the roof of the St. Michael 's Chapel in the castle 's outer ward , filled the chapel with dirt to reinforce its walls , and placed some of their artillery pieces within the walls . 
 = = = <unk> ( completed 16 December 1583 ) = = = 
 Ferdinand reluctantly ordered saps to be dug into the side of the mountain . The sapping was difficult and dangerous and the sappers worked under continuous attack from the castle 's defenders , who fired on them with small arms and the castle 's artillery and dropped rocks and debris on their heads . The forced labor of local peasants minimized losses among Ferdinand 's own troops , but many of the peasants perished in the effort . 
 On 6 December , the sappers reached the south @-@ eastern side of the fortress 's outermost wall and then spent another ten days undermining the basalt on which the castle stood ; they completed their work on 16 December and placed 680 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) of powder into the mine . Ferdinand reported on the siege 's progress in a letter to his older brother , Duke Wilhelm , dated 15 December 1583 : " The fortress stands on solid rock . ... [ Y ] <unk> we had reached the outer wall of the castle , and in a day or two we hope to send the fortress into the sky . " 
 = = = Destruction of the fortress ( 17 December 1583 ) = = = 
 On 17 December , Ferdinand again asked the castle 's defenders to surrender . They replied that they did not know the meaning of the word and would hold the Godesburg to the last man . A report dated 23 December 1583 relates that , having given Ferdinand a rude reply , the defenders went back to lunch . 
 Ferdinand ordered 400 men to enter the saps ; these men would storm the castle once the mine had been detonated . The remainder of his cavalry and foot soldiers were to wait in the fields below . Some sources assert that the fuse was lit at around 1 : 00 pm , although the 19th @-@ century local historian Heinrich Joseph <unk> argued that these sources are mistaken , and that the explosion clearly occurred in the morning . All sources agree that the explosion , with a dreadful crack , propelled chunks of the towers and walls high into the air . Almost half the Godesburg collapsed instantly . According to a newspaper report dated 13 January 1584 , debris raining on the valley below damaged several houses , and destroyed some of them completely . 
 Amidst the flames and rubble , Arenberg 's and Ferdinand 's troops tried to storm the castle , but found their way blocked by masses of debris created by their own explosives . Furthermore , although close to half of the garrison had perished in the explosion and subsequent collapse of the fortifications , those who remained offered staunch resistance by throwing rocks on the approaching attackers , causing a large number of casualties . In frustration , 40 or 50 of the attackers tied together two ladders and crawled through the sluice @-@ ways of the garderobe ( latrines ) that emptied on the hillside , thus gaining access to the interior of the castle . There they killed around 20 of the defenders in fierce fighting ; the remaining defenders , approximately 70 men , among them Buchner and Sudermann , the garrison commander and his lieutenant , sought refuge in the castle 's keep . In this way , Ferdinand 's infantry at last gained unopposed access to the fortress . Storming the castle had taken about two hours . 
 Out of options , Buchner opened negotiations , using those interned in the castle as hostages . Presenting them at the keep 's door , he made clear that they would be killed unless Ferdinand promised to spare his , his wife 's and Sudermann 's lives . Ferdinand acceded to Buchner 's demand ; some sources maintain that the Abbot of Heisterbach , one of the prisoners , had been treated decently by Buchner throughout his imprisonment in the castle and himself asked for Buchner 's life to be spared . The prisoners were released . With much difficulty , given the state of mind of the besiegers , Ferdinand and Arenberg brought the <unk> and Sudermann out of the castle alive . Once the <unk> , Sudermann , and the hostages were clear of the fortress , Ferdinand released his troops , who were in an ugly mood and hungry for blood and plunder . All those who remained in the keep — soldiers , men , women and children — were killed , some inside the keep , some in the courtyard below ; the slaughter lasted well into the night . The castle 's 178 dead were buried in two mass graves whose locations remain unknown . Among those who perished in the destruction and storming of the castle was also one of the prisoners , a vicar from Hildesheim . The Hildesheim suffragan , too , was not among the rescued prisoners ; he had died during his incarceration , a short while before the castle was stormed . 
 Gebhard lost an important stronghold in the Oberstift and Ernst 's forces had acquired a ruin . The residence was unusable , and the fortifications were mere rubble . The keep had survived the blast and various armies used it as a watch tower in the Thirty Years ' War . Ernst 's troops , under his brother 's command , saturated the region , and the 7 @.@ 3 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 5 mi ) between Godesberg and Bonn bore a greater resemblance to a military camp than to a road . Walloon riders and squadrons of Italian cavalry , paid for by the pope , galloped back and forth . Forty companies of infantry trudged toward Bonn , including Walloons and Bavarians . They looked forward to besieging Bonn , the Elector 's capital city , to which they laid siege on 21 December 1583 , and which they took on 28 January 1584 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The siege of the Godesburg and its subsequent destruction were a mere taste of things to come . It was the first of many sieges in the Cologne War , and the castle 's fall eventually led to the fall not just of Bonn , but of several other principal towns and cities in the Electorate of Cologne : <unk> , Neuss and Werl . Several smaller fortified towns such as Gelsenkirchen , <unk> and Brühl were also either heavily damaged or destroyed before , during and after the siege . In addition to damage to the towns and cities , Ernst 's supporters managed to restrict imports and exports to and from the Electorate , not only crippling Gebhard 's financial resources but resulting in economic hardship for the inhabitants . 
 Advances in military architecture over the previous century had led to the construction or enhancement of fortresses that could withstand the pounding of cannonballs and mortar shells . For both Gebhard and Ernst , winning the war required mobilizing enough men to encircle a seemingly endless array of enemy artillery fortresses . These could be protected with relatively small garrisons , but taking them required both expensive artillery and enough men to storm the battlements . Furthermore , the victor had to maintain and defend all his possessions as they were acquired . Even the ruin of the Godesburg required a garrison and a defensive strategy ; as a strategic point on the north @-@ south road from Bonn to Koblenz , it came under siege in 1586 and again in 1588 . The Cologne War , similar to the Dutch Revolt , was not a war of assembled armies facing each other on a field , but a war of artillery sieges . It required men who could operate the machinery of war , which meant extensive economic resources for soldiers to build and operate the siege works , and a political and military will to keep the machinery of war operating . 
 The destruction of so prominent a fortress was also news . When Frans Hogenberg and Georg Braun compiled their <unk> Orbis Terrarum , a collection of important scenes and locales , they included Hogenberg 's engraving of its destruction as not only an important sight , but an important event ( see Info Box , top ) . Hogenberg lived in Bonn and Cologne in 1583 , and likely saw the site himself . After overwhelming the Godesburg , the Bavarians found a large marble slab in the ruins : the castle 's foundation stone , which had been displaced by the explosion . The stone is a block of black marble with a Latin inscription commemorating the construction of the fortress by Dietrich I von <unk> in 1210 : ANNO · D ( OMI ) NI · M · C · C · X · <unk> · <unk> · E ( ST ) · A · <unk> · EP ( <unk> ) O · I ( N ) · DIE · <unk> ( UM ) · M ( A ) R ( <unk> ) . A gold inscription was added to the back of the stone , noting that it had been found " on the very top of the blasted wall . " Ferdinand took the stone to Munich , where it was kept in a museum beside a fresco painting in an arcade commemorating the siege . Today , the foundation stone is in the <unk> Landesmuseum in Bonn . 
 = = = Long @-@ term consequences = = = 
 Gebhard 's eventual defeat changed the balance of power in the Electoral College of the Holy Roman Empire . In 1589 , Ernst of Bavaria became uncontested Prince @-@ elector of Cologne , the first Wittelsbach to hold the position . Wittelsbach authority in northwestern German territories endured until the mid @-@ 18th century , with the election of a succession of Bavarian princes to the archbishop 's throne and to the Prince @-@ Elector 's seat . This gave the family two voices in the choice of imperial candidates , which had ramifications in the 18th century . In 1740 , Charles Albert , Duke of Bavaria , laid claim to the imperial title ; his brother Klemens August of Bavaria , then the Archbishop and Prince @-@ elector , cast his vote for Charles and personally crowned him at Frankfurt am Main . The shift of the emperor 's orb from the House of Habsburg to the Wittelsbach family , albeit a brief event , was only resolved by the ascension of Maximilian III Joseph who , with the Treaty of Füssen , eschewed any imperial pretensions . 
 Gebhard 's defeat also changed the religious balance in the northwestern states . Although the Peace of Augsburg ( 1555 ) had addressed earlier the problem of religious pluralism , the solution potentially converted simple , and usually local , legal disputes into dynastic and religious warfare , as the Cologne War itself demonstrated . The result of the Cologne War gave the Counter Reformation a foothold in the lower Rhine . Ernst was a product of Jesuit education . Once his position was secured , he invited Jesuits into the territory to help re @-@ establish Catholicism , a task which the Order approached zealously . They ejected Protestant pastors from parishes , sometimes by force , and re @-@ established catechism education and pastoral visitations . Even when communities appeared to be reconverted , the Jesuits maintained strict supervision to identify recalcitrant Protestants or <unk> . The Jesuit reintroduction of Catholicism postponed the solution of Germany 's religious problems for another half century . 
 Finally , the German tradition of local and regional autonomy created structural and cultural differences in the Holy Roman Empire , compared to the increasingly centralized authority of such other European states as France , England , and Spain . The unabashed intervention of Spanish , French , Italian , Dutch , English and Scots mercenaries in the war , as well as the influence of papal gold , changed the dynamic of internal German confessional and dynastic disputes . The great " players " of the Early Modern European political stage realized that they could enhance their own positions vis @-@ a @-@ vis one another by assisting , promoting or undermining local and regional competition among the German princes , as they did in the feud between Gebhard and Ernst . Conversely , German princes , dukes , and counts realized that they could acquire an edge over their competitors by promoting the interests of powerful neighbors . 
 The scale of involvement of such external mercenary armies as Spain 's Army of Flanders set a precedent that internationalized contests of local autonomy and religious issues in the German states , a problem not settled until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 . Despite that settlement , German states remained vulnerable to both external intervention and religious division , as they were in the Cologne War . 
 = Daniel Craig = 
 Daniel Wroughton Craig ( born 2 March 1968 ) is an English actor . Craig trained at the National Youth Theatre and graduated from the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in 1991 , before beginning his career on stage . His film debut was in the drama The Power of One ( 1992 ) . Other early appearances were in the Disney family film A Kid in King Arthur 's Court ( 1995 ) and the biographical film Elizabeth ( 1998 ) , as well as in the historical war drama television series Sharpe 's Eagle ( 1993 ) and the action @-@ adventure drama series Zorro . Cast as the fictional British secret agent James Bond in October 2005 , his first film in the role , Casino Royale , was released internationally in November 2006 . 
 Craig 's appearances in the British television film Love Is the Devil : Study for a Portrait of Francis Bacon ( 1998 ) , the indie war film The Trench ( 1999 ) , and the drama Some Voices ( 2000 ) attracted the film industry 's attention . This led to roles in bigger productions such as the action film Lara Croft : Tomb Raider ( 2001 ) , the crime thriller Road to Perdition ( 2002 ) , the crime thriller Layer Cake ( 2004 ) , and the Steven Spielberg historical drama Munich ( 2005 ) . Craig achieved international fame when chosen as the sixth actor to play the role of Ian Fleming 's James Bond in the official film series , taking over from Pierce Brosnan in 2005 . Although his casting was initially greeted with scepticism , his debut was highly acclaimed and earned him a BAFTA award nomination , with Casino Royale becoming the highest @-@ grossing in the series at the time . Quantum of Solace followed two years later . 
 Craig 's third Bond film , Skyfall , premiered in 2012 and is currently the highest @-@ grossing film in the series , was the highest @-@ grossing film in the UK until 2015 and the twelfth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time . Craig 's fourth Bond film , Spectre , premiered in 2015 . In 2006 , he joined the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . Since taking the role of Bond , he has continued to star in other films , including the World War II film Defiance ( 2008 ) , science fiction Western Cowboys & Aliens ( 2010 ) , and the English @-@ language adaptation of Stieg Larsson 's mystery thriller The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo ( 2011 ) . Craig also made a guest appearance as Bond in the opening ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games , alongside Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Craig was born in Chester , Cheshire . His mother , Carol Olivia ( née Williams ) , was an art teacher , and his father , Timothy John Wroughton Craig , was the landlord of the pubs Ring o ' Bells in Frodsham , Cheshire and the Boot Inn in Tarporley , Cheshire , having served as a midshipman in the Merchant Navy . Both of Craig 's parents were of part Welsh descent . He also has distant French Huguenot ancestry . Huguenot minister Daniel <unk> is among his ancestors , as is Sir William Burnaby , 1st Baronet . Craig 's middle name , Wroughton , comes from his great @-@ great @-@ grandmother Grace Matilda Wroughton . 
 Raised on the Wirral Peninsula , Craig attended primary school in Frodsham and Hoylake , Merseyside . Later , he attended <unk> High School in West Kirby , Merseyside , along with his older sister Lea ( born 1965 ) , after failing his Eleven plus . When his parents divorced , Craig and his sister lived with their mother , moving to Liverpool . Upon finishing his compulsory secondary school education at the age of 16 , he briefly joined <unk> Grange Grammar School as a sixth form student . He played rugby union for Hoylake RFC . 
 Craig began acting in school plays at the age of six , and was introduced to serious acting by attending the Everyman Theatre in nearby Liverpool city centre with his mother . At the age of 16 , Craig was admitted to the National Youth Theatre , leaving school and moving to London , where he worked part @-@ time in restaurants to finance his training . Later on , after multiple attempts at auditioning for drama schools , he was accepted at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama at the Barbican , where he graduated in 1991 after three years of study under Colin McCormack . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 In Craig 's first screen role , he played an Afrikaner in The Power of One in 1992 . He then appeared as Joe in the Royal National Theatre 's production of Tony Kushner 's Angels in America in November 1993 . Also in 1993 , Craig was featured in an episode of Yorkshire Television 's Heartbeat , which aired 31 October 1993 . An early starring role was as ' Geordie ' in the BBC 's 1996 drama Our Friends in the North , with early film roles being as Angelina Jolie 's rival and love interest in Lara Croft : Tomb Raider ( 2001 ) , before appearing in Sam Mendes 's movie Road to Perdition ( 2002 ) , with Tom Hanks and Paul Newman . Other leading film roles include Sword of Honour ( 2001 ) , The Mother ( 2003 ) with Anne Reid , Sylvia ( 2003 ) with Gwyneth Paltrow , Layer Cake ( 2004 ) with Sienna Miller , Enduring Love ( 2004 ) with Rhys Ifans , Steven Spielberg 's Munich ( 2005 ) with Eric Bana , Infamous and Casino Royale ( 2006 ) , The Golden Compass ( 2007 ) , Quantum of Solace , Defiance ( 2008 ) , Cowboys & Aliens ( 2011 ) , The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo ( 2011 ) , Dream House ( 2011 ) , Skyfall ( 2012 ) and Spectre ( 2015 ) . The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences extended a membership invitation to Craig in 2006 . 
 = = = James Bond ( 2005 – present ) = = = 
 In 2005 , Craig was contacted by Eon Productions to portray James Bond . He stated he " was aware of the challenges " of the Bond franchise which he considered " a big machine that makes a lot of money " . He aimed at bringing more " emotional depth " to the character . Born in 1968 , Craig is the first actor to portray James Bond to have been born after the Bond series started , and after the death of Ian Fleming , the novels ' writer . Significant controversy followed the decision , as it was doubted if the producers had made the right choice . Throughout the entire production period internet campaigns expressed their dissatisfaction and threatened to boycott the film in protest . 
 The 5 @-@ foot @-@ 10 @-@ inch ( 178 cm ) blond Craig was not considered by some protesters to fit the tall , dark Bond portrayed by the previous Bond actors , and to which viewers had apparently become accustomed . Although the choice of Craig was controversial , numerous actors publicly voiced their support , most notably , four of the five actors who had previously portrayed Bond – Pierce Brosnan , Timothy Dalton , Sean Connery and Roger Moore – called his casting a good decision . George Lazenby has since voiced his approval of Craig also . Clive Owen , who had been linked to the role , also spoke in defence of Craig . 
 The first film , Casino Royale , premiered 14 November 2006 , and grossed a total of US $ 594 @,@ 239 @,@ 066 worldwide , which made it the highest @-@ grossing Bond film until the release of Skyfall . After the film was released , Craig 's performance was highly acclaimed . As production of Casino Royale reached its conclusion , producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli announced that pre @-@ production work had already begun on the 22nd Bond film . 
 After several months of speculation as to the release date , Wilson and Broccoli officially announced on 20 July 2006 , that the follow @-@ up film , Quantum of Solace , was to be released on 7 November 2008 , and that Craig would play Bond with an option for a third film . On 25 October 2007 , MGM CEO Harry Sloan revealed at the Forbes Meet II Conference that Craig had signed on to make four more Bond films , through to Bond 25 . 
 The planned 19 April 2010 release of Craig 's third Bond film ( the 23rd overall in the series ) was delayed , because of financial troubles with MGM , but the film ( Skyfall ) was released on 23 October 2012 , and was part of the year @-@ long celebration of the 50th anniversary of Dr. No . On 8 September 2012 , Bond producers announced Craig had signed on for two future Bond films , meaning he will star as 007 in at least five films , making him the third longest @-@ serving Bond after Roger Moore who starred in seven films , and Sean Connery who starred in six . Craig 's fourth Bond film , Spectre , began filming in December 2014 and was released on 26 October 2015 . 
 Craig has described his portrayal of Bond as an anti @-@ hero : " The question I keep asking myself while playing the role is , ' Am I the good guy or just a bad guy who works for the good side ? ' Bond 's role , after all , is that of an assassin when you come down to it . I have never played a role in which someone 's dark side shouldn 't be explored . I don 't think it should be confusing by the end of the film , but during the film you should be questioning who he is . " Craig has stated that his own favourite previous Bond actor is Sean Connery , but says , " I 'd never copy somebody else . I would never do an impression of anybody else or try and improve on what they did . That would be a pointless exercise for me . " His own favourite Bond film is From Russia with Love . On an episode of The South Bank Show , Connery divulged his thoughts on Craig 's casting as Bond , whom he described as " fantastic , marvelous in the part " . When told that Craig had taken particular note of his performances , Connery said that he was " flattered " and that Craig really gets the " danger element " to Bond 's character . Craig has remarked that Bond is " ... actually a misogynist ... A lot of women are drawn to him chiefly because he embodies a certain kind of danger and never sticks around for too long . " 
 = = = = Voice @-@ overs in James Bond video games = = = = 
 Craig lent his voice and likeness as James Bond for both the Wii game GoldenEye 007 , an enhanced remake of the 1997 game for the Nintendo 64 , and James Bond 007 : Blood Stone , an original game for Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , Nintendo DS , and Microsoft Windows . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 In 1999 , Craig starred as Richard in a TV drama called Shockers : The Visitor . He portrayed Lord Asriel in The Golden Compass , the 2007 film adaptation of Philip Pullman 's novel . Eva Green , who played Bond girl Vesper Lynd in Casino Royale , also starred in the film , although she did not appear in any scenes with Craig . In a stage version of the book , Asriel had previously been played by Timothy Dalton , one of Craig 's predecessors in the role of James Bond . 
 In early 2001 , Craig expressed an interest in being a part of the Star Trek franchise , professing his love of the series to the World Entertainment News Network and a desire to have a " stint in the TV show or a film . It 's been a secret ambition of mine for years . " On 16 March 2007 , Craig made a cameo appearance as himself in a sketch with Catherine Tate who appeared in the guise of her character Elaine Figgis from The Catherine Tate Show . The sketch was made for the BBC Red Nose Day 2007 fundraising programme . 
 In 2008 's Defiance , he played Tuvia Bielski , a Jewish resistance fighter in the forests of Belarus during World War II who saved 1 @,@ 200 people . In 2009 Del Monte Foods launched an ice pop moulded to resemble Craig emerging from the sea . He co @-@ starred with Hugh Jackman in a limited engagement of the drama A Steady Rain , on Broadway , which played from 10 September through 6 December 2009 at the Schoenfeld Theatre . His performance received praise from the New York Times , with the reviewer writing " Mr. Craig , a highly reputable stage actor in London ( “ Angels in America , ” “ A Number ” ) before he became the screen ’ s sixth James Bond , creates a more complete portrait as Joey . " 
 In August 2010 , Craig was cast as crusading journalist Mikael Blomkvist in David Fincher 's 2011 adaptation of Stieg Larsson 's novel The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo . In 2011 , he starred in Dream House , a psychological thriller directed by Jim Sheridan and co @-@ starring Rachel Weisz , Naomi Watts and Marton Csokas . It garnered mostly negative reviews and low box office results . Craig co @-@ starred with Harrison Ford and Olivia Wilde in Cowboys & Aliens , an American science fiction Western film , based on Scott Mitchell Rosenberg 's 2006 graphic novel of the same name . 
 Craig hosted the American late @-@ night live television sketch comedy Saturday Night Live on 6 October 2012 . He and his wife starred in the Broadway play titled Betrayal . It began performances in October 2013 , and continued until January 2014 . Despite mixed reviews , it grossed $ 17 @.@ 5 million , becoming the second highest broadway play of 2013 . 
 Craig was set to star in the courtroom drama The Whole Truth directed by Courtney Hunt . In April 2014 just a few days before filming was set to commence he dropped out of the project for unknown reasons replaced a month later by Keanu Reeves . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1992 , Craig married actress Fiona Loudon , with whom he had a daughter , Ella . The marriage ended in divorce in 1994 . 
 After his divorce , he was in a seven @-@ year relationship with German actress Heike <unk> , ending in 2001 . He subsequently dated film producer Satsuki Mitchell from 2005 until 2010 . 
 Craig and actress Rachel Weisz had been friends for many years , and worked together on the movie Dream House . They began dating in December 2010 and married on 22 June 2011 , in a private New York City ceremony , with four guests in attendance , including Craig 's 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter and Weisz 's 5 @-@ year @-@ old son , Henry . 
 In October 2008 , Craig paid £ 4 million for an apartment in a converted old house in Primrose Hill near Regent 's Park , London . He also has a house in Sunninghill outside Ascot . He is an avid fan of Premier League football club Liverpool F.C. , as well as a rugby fan and former player , having travelled to Australia in 2013 to watch the British & Irish Lions tour . 
 Daniel Craig made a unique place for himself in the history of Broadway Cares / Equity Fights AIDS fundraising 8 December 2009 , when it was announced that they had raised $ 1 @,@ 549 @,@ 953 in the 21st annual Gypsy of the Year competition , from six weeks of curtain appeals at their hit Broadway drama , A Steady Rain . 
 He is involved with multiple charities including <unk> Kenya , which uses street theatre to address social issues . He is also involved with the Opportunity Network , which provides access to education for low @-@ income students in New York . In 2011 , he collaborated with Dame Judi Dench to highlight gender inequality for International Women 's Day . In August 2014 , he added his name to a letter to British broadcasters calling for better representation for ethnic minorities . 
 In April 2015 , the United Nations appointed Craig the first global advocate for the elimination of mines and explosive hazards . The role will involve raising awareness for the UN Mine Action Service ( <unk> ) , and political and financial support for the cause . UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon told Craig : " You have been given a licence to kill , I 'm now giving you a licence to save . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Theatre performances = = 
 = Nordberg ( station ) = 
 Nordberg was a station on the Sognsvann Line of the Oslo Metro in Oslo , Norway . It was opened on 10 October 1934 , and was located between Østhorn and Holstein stations , in a level crossing with the steep road <unk> . The station saw several accidents , and was closed on 5 May 1992 when the Sognsvann Line was upgraded to rapid transit standard . An underpass was constructed to allow pedestrians pass under the tracks . 
 = = History = = 
 Nordberg station opened on 10 October 1934 as a station on the Sognsvann Line . The line was built by the municipally owned company Akersbanerne . The line was double @-@ tracked from Majorstuen to Korsvoll , and single @-@ tracked from there to Sognsvann . In 1939 , the section Korsvoll – Sognsvann was upgraded to double track , and the station Korsvoll had its name changed to Østhorn . 
 Nordberg was part of Holmenkolbanen 's operating network until 1975 , when the municipality of Oslo bought all the company 's stock . In the early 1990s , the stations on the Sognsvann Line were upgraded to metro standard , which involves a heightening and lengthening of the platforms , installation of third rail power supply and a new signaling system . The third rail made it impossible to cross the line in @-@ grade , and under- or overpasses had to be built at all stations . The transport authorities decided to close Nordberg , arguing that the access roads to the station were steep and dangerous , and icy during the winter . The residents of Nordberg opposed the closure of the station , arguing that it had served the area well with its central position in the area . Nevertheless , the station was closed , along with the level crossing that formerly had allowed for car traffic to cross the tracks . An underpass for pedestrians was constructed . 
 = = Accidents = = 
 In 1951 , two young lads rode a sled over the station 's level crossing , and accidentally hit a truck that was parked on the other side of the station . In 1987 , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old man was attacked by a raging moose near the station . The man ran off to a shop 40 metres ( 130 ft ) away , and left the accident with broken ribs and a punctured lung . The reason for the moose 's rage is unknown , but it was seen a few days earlier with a calf , and it is assumed that the moose wanted to protect it from foreigners . The man was sent to Ullevål University Hospital shortly thereafter . 
 = = Location = = 
 Nordberg Station was located in the steep road named <unk> , that passed the station in a level crossing . The station served the local senior center named <unk> , and was the most used of all stations among residents living in Nordberg . After the 1992 closure , very little remains from the station , aside from a pedestrians ' underpass . 
 = Gubazes II of Lazica = 
 Gubazes II ( Georgian : <unk> II , Greek : <unk> ) was king of Lazica ( modern western Georgia ) from circa 541 until his assassination in 555 . He was one of the central personalities of the Lazic War ( 541 – 562 ) . He originally ascended the throne as a vassal of the Byzantine Empire , but the heavy @-@ handed actions of the Byzantine authorities led him to seek the assistance of Byzantium 's main rival , Sassanid Persia . The Byzantines were evicted from Lazica with the aid of a Persian army in 541 , but the Persian occupation of the country turned out to be worse , and by 548 , Gubazes was requesting assistance from Byzantium . Gubazes remained a Byzantine ally during the next few years , as the two empires fought for control of Lazica , with the fortress of Petra as the focal point of the struggle . Gubazes eventually quarrelled with the Byzantine generals over the fruitless continuation of the war , and was assassinated by them . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Gubazes was of Byzantine descent through his mother , <unk> . <unk> ' marriage to <unk> seems to be the earliest recorded marriage between the Lazic and Byzantine elites . The custom of marrying Byzantine women , usually from the senatorial aristocracy , was common among the Lazic royalty : his uncle , the " king " Opsites ( it is unknown when exactly he reigned ) , was married to a Byzantine noblewoman named Theodora . It is known that Gubazes had a younger brother , Tzath , who succeeded him on the throne , and an unnamed sister . Gubazes was married and had children , but neither the name of his wife nor of any of his offspring is known . The name of Gubazes 's father is not known from the ancient annals . Professor Cyril Toumanoff , a specialist in Caucasian history and genealogy , has hypothesized that Gubazes was a son and direct successor of the king Tzath I , and that Opsites , his uncle , never actually ruled as a king . 
 The exact date of Gubazes 's accession is unknown , but it must not have been much earlier than 541 , when he is first attested as king of the Lazi . It is very likely that before his accession he had lived for several years at the Byzantine capital , Constantinople , for he is recorded to have been a <unk> , an influential position at the imperial palace ; alternatively , but less probably , he may have been given the title as an honorary appointment after his accession . 
 = = = Defection to Persia = = = 
 Lazica had been a Byzantine client state since 522 , when its king , Tzath I , had rejected Persian hegemony . However , during the rule of Emperor Justinian I ( reigned 527 – 565 ) , a series of heavy @-@ handed Byzantine measures made them unpopular . In particular , the establishment of a trade monopoly by the magister militum ( general ) John Tzibus , which was regulated from the newly constructed fortress of Petra , drove Gubazes to seek once again the protection of the Persian shah , Khosrau I ( r . 531 – 579 ) . 
 In 540 , Khosrau broke the " Eternal Peace " of 532 and invaded the Byzantine province of Mesopotamia . In spring 541 , Khosrau and his troops , led by Lazi guides , marched over the mountain passes into Lazica , where Gubazes submitted to him . The Byzantines under John Tzibus resisted valiantly from Petra , but Tzibus was killed , and the fortress fell soon after . Khosrau left a Persian garrison at Petra and departed the country , but soon , the Lazi grew discontented : as Christians , they resented the Persians ' Zoroastrianism , and they were greatly affected by the cessation of the Black Sea trade with Byzantium . The contemporary Byzantine historian Procopius of Caesarea reports that Khosrau , who was aware of Lazica 's strategic importance , intended to resettle the entire Lazi people and replace them with Persians . As a first step , the Persian ruler planned to assassinate Gubazes . Forewarned of Khosrau 's intentions , Gubazes switched his allegiance back to Byzantium . 
 = = = Return to Byzantine allegiance = = = 
 In 548 , Emperor Justinian dispatched 8 @,@ 000 men under Dagisthaeus , who together with a Lazic force set siege to the Persian garrison at Petra . As the Persians were well provisioned , the siege dragged on . Dagisthaeus had neglected to keep watch over the mountain passes that led into Lazica , and a far larger Persian relief force under Mihr @-@ Mihroe arrived and raised the siege . Yet , the Persians lacked sufficient supplies , and so , after strengthening the garrison at Petra and leaving further 5 @,@ 000 men under <unk> to secure its supply routes , Mihr @-@ Mihroe left . In the spring of the next year , Gubazes and Dagisthaeus combined their forces , destroyed <unk> 's army in a surprise attack , and pursued the survivors into Caucasian Iberia . In the same summer , they won another victory against a new Persian army , led by <unk> . The allies failed , however , to prevent another Persian army from reinforcing Petra , and Dagisthaeus was recalled and replaced by Bessas . 
 In 550 , a pro @-@ Persian revolt broke out among the Abasgians , a people that neighboured Lazica to the north . This provided an opportunity for a high @-@ ranking Lazic noble , called <unk> , who had quarrelled with Gubazes , to betray to the Persians an important fort in the land of the <unk> , a tribe under Lazic suzerainty . The <unk> retook the fort , but refused to accept Lazic rule until persuaded to do so by the Byzantine general John <unk> . In 551 , the Byzantines finally took and razed Petra , but a new army under Mihr @-@ Mihroe was able to establish Persian control over the eastern part of Lazica . The Byzantine forces in Lazica withdrew west to the mouth of the Phasis , while the Lazi , including Gubazes and his family , sought refuge in the mountains . Despite enduring harsh conditions in the winter of 551 / 552 , Gubazes rejected the peace offers conveyed by envoys from Mihr @-@ Mihroe . In 552 , the Persians received substantial reinforcements , but their attacks on the fortresses held by the Byzantines and the Lazi were repulsed . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Over the next two years , the Byzantines increased their forces in Lazica , but failed to achieve decisive success ; Gubazes quarreled with their generals , and wrote to Emperor Justinian accusing them of incompetence following a defeat by the Persians . Bessas was recalled , but the other two , Martin and the <unk> Rusticus , resolved to get rid of Gubazes . They sent a message to Constantinople accusing Gubazes of dealings with the Persians . Emperor Justinian , intending to question Gubazes himself , authorized the two generals to arrest him , using force if necessary . The two Byzantine generals then ( September / October 555 ) invited Gubazes to observe the siege of a Persian @-@ held fort , but when they met , John , Rusticus 's brother , stabbed the king with his dagger . Gubazes fell from his horse , and one of Rusticus 's servants gave him the finishing blow . 
 After Gubazes 's murder , the Lazi stopped participating in operations against the Persians for a time , leading to the failure of a Byzantine attack against the fort of <unk> . An assembly of the Lazic people informed Emperor Justinian of the events , requested that an investigation be launched , and asked that Gubazes 's younger brother Tzath , at the time residing in Constantinople , be confirmed as their new ruler . The Byzantine emperor complied with their requests : a " leading senator " named Athanasius ( perhaps the former praetorian prefect of the same name ) was dispatched to investigate Gubazes 's murder , and Tzath was sent to assume the Lazic throne . Athanasius 's investigation cleared Gubazes of any suspicion of treachery ; Rusticus and his brother John were found guilty and executed in autumn 556 , but Martin was simply deposed from his post . 
 = Lagidium ahuacaense = 
 Lagidium ahuacaense is a rodent in the mountain viscacha genus ( Lagidium ) that occurs in southern Ecuador . First observed in 2005 and formally described in 2009 , it occurs more than 500 km ( 310 mi ) north of the nearest previously known population of mountain viscachas in central Peru . Only a single population is known , found on rocky habitats on Cerro El Ahuaca , an isolated granite mountain in southern Ecuador , and there may be as little as a few dozen individuals . The species is threatened by fires and grazing cattle , and the discoverers recommended its conservation status be assessed as " Critically Endangered " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Lagidium ahuacaense was first observed in July 2005 , when the only known population was encountered at Cerro El Ahuaca , Ecuador , over 500 km ( 310 mi ) north of the northernmost previously known population of mountain viscachas ( Lagidium ) in central Peru . The find was published in a 2006 note by Florian Werner , Karim Ledesma , and Rodrigo Hidalgo , who provisionally identified the population as representing the Peruvian species Lagidium peruanum , but did not discount the possibility that it might represent a distinct species . Three years later , Ledesma , Werner , Ángel <unk> , and Luis <unk> described the population as a new species , Lagidium ahuacaense , on the basis of morphological and DNA sequence differences . The specific name , ahuacaense , refers to Cerro de Ahuaca . They suggested the English common name of " Ecuadorean mountain viscacha " . 
 Lagidium ahuacaense was the fourth species of the genus Lagidium to be described , after L. peruanum , L. viscacia , and L. wolffsohni of the central and southern Andes , although more species may eventually be recognized within L. peruanum and L. viscacia and L. wolffsohni is poorly differentiated from L. viscacia . Together with the plains viscacha ( <unk> maximus ) and the chinchillas ( Chinchilla ) , Lagidium forms the rodent family <unk> . Within Lagidium , L. ahuacaense differs by at least 7 @.@ 9 % from all other species in DNA sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene . A cladistic analysis placed the Ecuadorian species as the sister group to all other Lagidium , but support for this placement was not strong . Morphometric analysis also confirmed the Ecuadorian population is different from other Lagidium species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lagidium ahuacaense is a medium @-@ sized Lagidium with woolly , gray @-@ brown fur and a very long tail . There is a black stripe on the middle of the back . The thick , long mystacial vibrissae ( whiskers above the mouth ) are mostly dark brown and the few superciliary vibrissae ( above the eyes ) are also thick and brown . The ears are covered with dark skin . The underparts are creamy white . The forefeet are brown @-@ furred and much shorter than the hind feet , which are in covered in part by a mixture of brown and cream hairs and in part by dark brown hairs . The fore and hind feet both have four digits , which end in small , curved claws , and three black pads . The palms and soles are naked . The tail is hairy with the hairs on the upper side longer than those below . The upper side is gray @-@ brown at the base , light to medium brown intermixed with cream in the middle , and reddish brown at the tip , and the lower side is dark brown . In the single measured specimen , head and body length is 403 mm ( 15 @.@ 9 in ) , tail length is 400 mm ( 16 in ) , hindfoot length is 85 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) , ear length is 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) , and body mass is 2 @.@ 03 kg ( 4 @.@ 5 lb ) . 
 The skull is long and compact . The premaxillary bones extend slightly in front of the upper incisors and the zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) are broad . The suture between the premaxillary and frontal bones is more strongly curved than in L. peruanum and the rostrum ( front part of the skull ) is wider and the interorbital region ( between the eyes ) is narrower than in L. viscacia and L. wolffsohni . The incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) are long and narrow . The palate extends back to a point close to the upper third molar . The sides of the mesopterygoid fossa ( the opening behind the back margin of the palate ) are more strongly divergent than in other Lagidium species . The mandible ( lower jaw ) is strong . The dental formula is 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 @.@ 31 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 × 2 = 20 ( one incisor , one premolar , and three molars on each side of the upper and lower jaws ) . The incisors are large , white , and distinctly grooved . The molars are low @-@ crowned and rootless ( continuously growing ) . 
 = = Ecology and conservation status = = 
 Lagidium ahuacaense is known only from Cerro El Ahuaca , a steep granite <unk> near <unk> in Loja Province , southern Ecuador , where it occurs at an altitude of 1 @,@ 950 to 2 @,@ 480 m ( 6 @,@ 400 to 8 @,@ 140 ft ) , but only near rocky surfaces . The vegetation is dominated by the molasses grass ( <unk> <unk> ) . They eat plants and traces of their feeding are visible on the mountain . Its habitat on Cerro El Ahuaca covers an area of about 120 hectares ( 300 acres ) , and the total population there may not contain more than a few dozen individuals . Except for some small outcrops close to the Cerro , no nearby habitat is suitable , but more populations may exist elsewhere in southern Ecuador or nearby northern Peru . 
 The species is threatened by fires , used to maintain crop fields in the vicinity , which frequently get out of control and destroy part of the viscacha 's habitat on the Cerro , and by competition for food with grazing cattle . However , the species is unknown to the local people and is not hunted . In view of its small range and population , Ledesma and colleagues recommended the species be assessed as " Critically Endangered " under the IUCN Red List criteria and recommended immediate conservation action to protect the Cerro El Ahuaca population and further research into its biology . 
 = <unk> path problem = 
 In graph algorithms , the widest path problem is the problem of finding a path between two designated vertices in a weighted graph , maximizing the weight of the minimum @-@ weight edge in the path . The widest path problem is also known as the bottleneck shortest path problem or the maximum capacity path problem . It is possible to adapt most shortest path algorithms to compute widest paths , by modifying them to use the bottleneck distance instead of path length . However , in many cases even faster algorithms are possible . 
 For instance , in a graph that represents connections between routers in the Internet , where the weight of an edge represents the bandwidth of a connection between two routers , the widest path problem is the problem of finding an end @-@ to @-@ end path between two Internet nodes that has the maximum possible bandwidth . The smallest edge weight on this path is known as the capacity or bandwidth of the path . As well as its applications in network routing , the widest path problem is also an important component of the Schulze method for deciding the winner of a <unk> election , and has been applied to digital compositing , metabolic pathway analysis , and the computation of maximum flows . 
 A closely related problem , the minimax path problem , asks for the path that minimizes the maximum weight of any of its edges . It has applications that include transportation planning . Any algorithm for the widest path problem can be transformed into an algorithm for the minimax path problem , or vice versa , by reversing the sense of all the weight comparisons performed by the algorithm , or equivalently by replacing every edge weight by its negation . 
 = = <unk> graphs = = 
 In an undirected graph , a widest path may be found as the path between the two vertices in the maximum spanning tree of the graph , and a minimax path may be found as the path between the two vertices in the minimum spanning tree . 
 In any graph , directed or undirected , there is a straightforward algorithm for finding a widest path once the weight of its minimum @-@ weight edge is known : simply delete all smaller edges and search for any path among the remaining edges using breadth first search or depth first search . Based on this test , there also exists a linear time algorithm for finding a widest s @-@ t path in an undirected graph , that does not use the maximum spanning tree . The main idea of the algorithm is to apply the linear @-@ time path @-@ finding algorithm to the median edge weight in the graph , and then either to delete all smaller edges or contract all larger edges according to whether a path does or does not exist , and <unk> in the resulting smaller graph . 
 Fernandez , Garfinkel & <unk> ( 1998 ) use undirected bottleneck shortest paths in order to form composite aerial photographs that combine multiple images of overlapping areas . In the <unk> to which the widest path problem applies , two images have already been transformed into a common coordinate system ; the remaining task is to select a seam , a curve that passes through the region of overlap and divides one of the two images from the other . Pixels on one side of the seam will be copied from one of the images , and pixels on the other side of the seam will be copied from the other image . Unlike other compositing methods that average pixels from both images , this produces a valid photographic image of every part of the region being photographed . They weight the edges of a grid graph by a numeric estimate of how visually apparent a seam across that edge would be , and find a bottleneck shortest path for these weights . Using this path as the seam , rather than a more conventional shortest path , causes their system to find a seam that is difficult to discern at all of its points , rather than allowing it to trade off greater visibility in one part of the image for lesser visibility elsewhere . 
 A solution to the minimax path problem between the two opposite corners of a grid graph can be used to find the weak Fréchet distance between two polygonal chains . Here , each grid graph vertex represents a pair of line segments , one from each chain , and the weight of an edge represents the Fréchet distance needed to pass from one pair of segments to another . 
 If all edge weights of an undirected graph are positive , then the minimax distances between pairs of points ( the maximum edge weights of minimax paths ) form an <unk> ; conversely every finite <unk> space comes from minimax distances in this way . A data structure constructed from the minimum spanning tree allows the minimax distance between any pair of vertices to be queried in constant time per query , using lowest common ancestor queries in a Cartesian tree . The root of the Cartesian tree represents the heaviest minimum spanning tree edge , and the children of the root are Cartesian trees recursively constructed from the <unk> of the minimum spanning tree formed by removing the heaviest edge . The leaves of the Cartesian tree represent the vertices of the input graph , and the minimax distance between two vertices equals the weight of the Cartesian tree node that is their lowest common ancestor . Once the minimum spanning tree edges have been sorted , this Cartesian tree can be constructed in linear time . 
 = = Directed graphs = = 
 In directed graphs , the maximum spanning tree solution cannot be used . Instead , several different algorithms are known ; the choice of which algorithm to use depends on whether a start or destination vertex for the path is fixed , or whether paths for many start or destination vertices must be found simultaneously . 
 = = = All pairs = = = 
 The all @-@ pairs widest path problem has applications in the Schulze method for choosing a winner in <unk> elections in which voters rank the candidates in preference order . The Schulze method constructs a complete directed graph in which the vertices represent the candidates and every two vertices are connected by an edge . Each edge is directed from the winner to the loser of a pairwise contest between the two candidates it connects , and is labeled with the margin of victory of that contest . Then the method computes widest paths between all pairs of vertices , and the winner is the candidate whose vertex has wider paths to each opponent than vice versa . The results of an election using this method are consistent with the Condorcet method – a candidate who wins all pairwise contests automatically wins the whole election – but it generally allows a winner to be selected , even in situations where the <unk> method itself fails . The Schulze method has been used by several organizations including the Wikimedia Foundation . 
 To compute the widest path widths for all pairs of nodes in a dense directed graph , such as the ones that arise in the voting application , the asymptotically fastest known approach takes time O ( n ( 3 + ω ) / 2 ) where ω is the exponent for fast matrix multiplication . Using the best known algorithms for matrix multiplication , this time bound becomes O ( <unk> ) . Instead , the reference implementation for the Schulze method uses a modified version of the simpler Floyd – <unk> algorithm , which takes O ( <unk> ) time . For sparse graphs , it may be more efficient to repeatedly apply a single @-@ source widest path algorithm . 
 = = = Single source = = = 
 If the edges are sorted by their weights , then a modified version of Dijkstra 's algorithm can compute the bottlenecks between a designated start vertex and every other vertex in the graph , in linear time . The key idea behind the speedup over a conventional version of Dijkstra 's algorithm is that the sequence of bottleneck distances to each vertex , in the order that the vertices are considered by this algorithm , is a monotonic subsequence of the sorted sequence of edge weights ; therefore , the priority queue of Dijkstra 's algorithm can be implemented as a bucket queue : an array indexed by the numbers from 1 to m ( the number of edges in the graph ) , where array cell i contains the vertices whose bottleneck distance is the weight of the edge with position i in the sorted order . This method allows the widest path problem to be solved as quickly as sorting ; for instance , if the edge weights are represented as integers , then the time bounds for integer sorting a list of m integers would apply also to this problem . 
 = = = Single source and single destination = = = 
 Berman & Handler ( 1987 ) suggest that service vehicles and emergency vehicles should use minimax paths when returning from a service call to their base . In this application , the time to return is less important than the response time if another service call occurs while the vehicle is in the process of returning . By using a minimax path , where the weight of an edge is the maximum travel time from a point on the edge to the farthest possible service call , one can plan a route that minimizes the maximum possible delay between receipt of a service call and arrival of a responding vehicle . Ullah , Lee & <unk> ( 2009 ) use <unk> paths to model the dominant reaction chains in metabolic networks ; in their model , the weight of an edge is the free energy of the metabolic reaction represented by the edge . 
 Another application of widest paths arises in the Ford – Fulkerson algorithm for the maximum flow problem . Repeatedly augmenting a flow along a maximum capacity path in the residual network of the flow leads to a small bound , O ( m log U ) , on the number of augmentations needed to find a maximum flow ; here , the edge capacities are assumed to be integers that are at most U. However , this analysis does not depend on finding a path that has the exact maximum of capacity ; any path whose capacity is within a constant factor of the maximum suffices . Combining this approximation idea with the shortest path augmentation method of the Edmonds – Karp algorithm leads to a maximum flow algorithm with running time O ( mn log U ) . 
 It is possible to find maximum @-@ capacity paths and minimax paths with a single source and single destination very efficiently even in models of computation that allow only comparisons of the input graph 's edge weights and not arithmetic on them . The algorithm maintains a set S of edges that are known to contain the bottleneck edge of the optimal path ; initially , S is just the set of all m edges of the graph . At each iteration of the algorithm , it splits S into an ordered sequence of subsets S1 , S2 , ... of approximately equal size ; the number of subsets in this partition is chosen in such a way that all of the split points between subsets can be found by repeated median @-@ finding in time O ( m ) . The algorithm then <unk> each edge of the graph by the index of the subset containing the edge , and uses the modified Dijkstra algorithm on the <unk> graph ; based on the results of this computation , it can determine in linear time which of the subsets contains the bottleneck edge weight . It then replaces S by the subset Si that it has determined to contain the bottleneck weight , and starts the next iteration with this new set S. The number of subsets into which S can be split increases exponentially with each step , so the number of iterations is proportional to the iterated logarithm function , O ( log * n ) , and the total time is O ( m log * n ) . In a model of computation where each edge weight is a machine integer , the use of repeated bisection in this algorithm can be replaced by a list @-@ splitting technique of Han & Thorup ( 2002 ) , allowing S to be split into O ( √ m ) smaller sets Si in a single step and leading to a linear overall time bound . 
 = = Euclidean point sets = = 
 A variant of the minimax path problem has also been considered for sets of points in the Euclidean plane . As in the undirected graph problem , this Euclidean minimax path problem can be solved efficiently by finding a Euclidean minimum spanning tree : every path in the tree is a minimax path . However , the problem becomes more complicated when a path is desired that not only minimizes the hop length but also , among paths with the same hop length , minimizes or approximately minimizes the total length of the path . The solution can be approximated using geometric <unk> . 
 In number theory , the unsolved Gaussian moat problem asks whether or not minimax paths in the Gaussian prime numbers have bounded or unbounded minimax length . That is , does there exist a constant B such that , for every pair of points p and q in the infinite Euclidean point set defined by the Gaussian primes , the minimax path in the Gaussian primes between p and q has minimax edge length at most B ? 
 = John S. Loisel = 
 Colonel John Simon Loisel ( May 21 , 1920 – January 20 , 2010 ) was an American air ace , credited with having shot down 11 Japanese aircraft during World War II . Loisel was born in Coeur d 'Alene , Idaho and joined the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) in 1941 . By age 25 , Loisel had spent more time in combat than any other American pilot in World War II , with over three years in the Pacific . Serving in the Pacific he quickly distinguished himself by first becoming an ace after achieving five kills in just a two @-@ month period , and then becoming a double ace . 
 He became a career Air Force officer . Loisel commanded Fighter Groups in both World War II and Korea , along with several peacetime commands . He retired from the Air Force as a colonel . Following his military career , Loisel taught high school physics for 15 years in the Plano Independent School District , Plano , Texas . He died of natural causes at age 89 in 2010 in Plano . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Loisel was born in Coeur d 'Alene , Idaho on May 21 , 1920 and moved with his family to Norfolk , Nebraska by 1922 . His parents , Simon M. and Lucille Loisel were first @-@ generation Americans of French @-@ Canadian parents . The elder Loisel worked as a commercial traveler in the lumber industry . Simon Loisel did well enough to keep a live @-@ in servant and to reside in an expensive house for the time . Prior to John being born , Lucille Loisel had been employed as a teacher at a Catholic school in Coeur d 'Alene . John Loisel was the eldest child , with six younger brothers and two sisters . 
 After graduating from high school , Loisel attended Wayne State Teacher 's College , Nebraska ( now Wayne State College ) and the University of Nebraska from 1938 to 1941 . He then entered the USAAF for flight training at Mather Field , California on March 10 , 1941 and received his pilot wings on October 31 , 1941 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Upon receiving his wings and a commission as a second lieutenant , Loisel was initially posted for duties as a flight instructor while waiting for assignment . He was then posted to a unit in the Philippine Islands . When he was en route by ship , he learned of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . In late @-@ 1941 he was assigned as a Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobra fighter pilot with the 36th Fighter Squadron , 8th Fighter Group , based in New Guinea . By June 1943 , he had flown 83 combat missions in both the P @-@ 39D and the P @-@ 400 versions . Loisel was then selected as cadre for the newly formed 432nd Fighter Squadron , 475th Fighter Group , the first Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning fighter group formed in the USAAF . 
 Once assigned to the 432nd Fighter Squadron , Loisel began to quickly show his abilities once he started flying an aircraft that could compete with the top @-@ line Japanese fighters . Flying a P @-@ <unk> , serial no . 42 @-@ <unk> , named the Screaming Kid , he shot down five Japanese fighters within his first two months of flying in the P @-@ 38s and earned a promotion to captain . On August 21 , 1943 , while escorting USAAF bombers near Wewak , New Guinea , he shot down two Kawasaki Ki @-@ 61 " Tony " fighters , his first two victories . Less than a month later , on September 22 , 1943 , he claimed a Mitsubishi A6M " Zero " fighter near <unk> , New Guinea . Slightly less than two months later Loisel obtained " ace " status by downing two more Zeroes near Oro Bay , New Guinea . 
 In December , 1943 , he picked up two more kills , a Zero on the 15th and another Zero on the 21st , during the build @-@ up for the landings at Cape Gloucester . Loisel picked up his eighth victory on January 23 , 1944 over a Zero . On April 3 , 1944 , while escorting Douglas A @-@ 20 Havoc bombers near Hollandia , New Guinea , he shot down a Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 " Oscar " fighter and a Mitsubishi A6M3 " Hamp " fighter over Lake <unk> , giving him his ninth and tenth kills and making him a double ace . On January 22 , 1944 , he assumed command of the 432nd Fighter Squadron . This unit was tasked with striking targets in New Guinea and the Indonesian Spice Islands to support General Douglas MacArthur 's return to the Philippines . In August 1944 , Loisel returned to the United States as a major . 
 In January 1945 , Loisel returned to the 475th Fighter Group as the Operations Officer . After his return to combat following his assignment in the United States , Loisel had his eleventh and final aerial victory on March 28 , 1945 , when he shot down a Nakajima Ki @-@ 84 " Frank " fighter near Tree Island , Indochina ( Vietnam ) . On May 15 , 1945 he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and on July 15 , 1945 he became the Commanding Officer of the 475th Fighter Group . He relinquished command on April 18 , 1946 and returned to the United States . 
 He had , by the age of 25 , become a lieutenant colonel , a fighter group commander , and earned the Silver Star . His assignment to the Pacific Theatre of Operations for over three years was longer than any other American fighter pilot served in combat , and he flew more than 875 hours in combat . Loisel was the fourth leading ace in the 475th Fighter Group , flying with notable aces Thomas McGuire ( 38 kills ) , Charles MacDonald ( 27 kills ) and Daniel T. Roberts , Jr . ( 15 kills ) . He was known for his aggressiveness , instructing his pilots to " Head for the main body of the enemy – disregard stragglers ... [ and ] plow into the largest bunch you see . " 
 = = = Korea = = = 
 On return to the United States in 1946 , he married Rachel ' Rae ' <unk> and re @-@ enrolled at the University of Nebraska to earn his bachelor 's degree in physics , graduating in 1949 . Beginning in May , 1947 , he served as the commanding officer of the 63rd Fighter Squadron ( an Air Defense – Interceptor unit ) , based at Selfridge Air Force Base , Michigan , where he led the transition of the unit to the Lockheed P @-@ 80 Shooting Star jet fighter . After a staff tour at Headquarters , Air Defense Command , Loisel returned to combat in Korea in May 1953 , having been promoted to full colonel on December 1 , 1951 . Once there , Loisel commanded the 474th Fighter Bomber Group , flying the Republic F @-@ 84 Thunderjet fighter . He flew an additional 22 combat missions . One of the subordinate squadrons under his command ( the 429th Fighter Bomber Squadron ) set an Air Force record for the number of combat sorties flown ( 80 in one day ) in June 1953 and the 474th Fighter Bomber Group set a Fifth Air Force record of 254 sorties on that same day . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 Following the Korean War , Loisel had assignments that included tours as the Commander , 83rd Fighter Group and Deputy Commander , 4th Tactical Fighter Wing . In 1970 , having achieved the rank of colonel , over 5 @,@ 500 flying hours , and 323 combat missions , he retired from the Air Force . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his retirement from the Air Force , Loisel attended North Texas State University ( now the University of North Texas ) , obtaining his master 's degree in physics in 1972 . Loisel then taught physics at Plano Senior High School in Plano , Texas from 1972 to 1985 . Loisel was an " avid golfer " and a member of the American Fighter Aces Association . Loisel was married to Rae Loisel for 63 years . They had a son , John S. Loisel , Jr . , and a daughter , Susan Bryan . He died of natural causes on January 20 , 2010 in Plano , Texas and is buried at the Dallas @-@ Fort Worth National Cemetery . He is survived by his wife , daughter , and two sisters , Mary Margaret Pappas and Anne <unk> . His son John , Jr. and his brothers predeceased him . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Silver Star 
 Legion of Merit 
 Distinguished Flying Crosses with three oak leaf clusters 
 Air Medal with two silver oak leaf clusters 
 Presidential Unit Citation with four oak leaf clusters 
 Republic of Korea <unk> Medal with silver star 
 = = = Other honors = = = 
 Grand Marshal , Dallas Veteran 's Day Parade , Dallas , Texas , 2007 
 Nebraska Aviation Hall of Fame , inducted 1994 
 U.S. Air Force Gathering of Eagles , inducted 1991 
 = Peter Molydeux = 
 Peter Molydeux is a Twitter account presented as a parody of the game designer Peter Molyneux . Created by game artist Adam Capone in 2009 , it posts audacious game design ideas in the style of Molyneux . The account presents Molyneux as a tragicomic character with unrelenting , creative ideas that are continually received by an apathetic audience . Over time , the account evolved from a Molyneux @-@ based persona into a list of potential game concepts . A common theme of the tweets is the untapped potential of emotional game experiences . Molyneux came to appreciate the parody , and has since met Capone in person . 
 The account went viral in 2011 and led to the reinvigoration of Molyneux 's legacy . To many , the two became entwined . Molyneux 's reputation as a dreamer was reclaimed as a positive trait in light of growing opposition to conservative game design , and the parody account became a mouthpiece for that population . The tweets contributed to Molyneux 's decision to leave Microsoft Game Studios and pursue riskier game ideas . They also inspired a game jam , in which about 1 @,@ 000 game developers worldwide created about 300 games based on the tweets over the course of a weekend . The game jam also brought Molyneux fame within a burgeoning indie game movement . Notable games based on the parody account 's ideas include Donut County . 
 = = History = = 
 In June 2009 , Adam Capone created a Twitter account , @ <unk> , as a parody of the game designer Peter Molyneux and the audacious game design ideas for which he was known . The account became a <unk> for people in the game industry interested in more adventurous game concepts . Capone was inspired by Molyneux 's games in his youth , particularly by the open choice structure of the 1994 simulation game Theme Park . Capone , a game artist who worked on titles including Gears of War , <unk> , and Saints Row , thought that Molyneux 's ambition outweighed his propensity for overstatement , and appreciated the game designer 's moxie in an industry known for safe ideas . Capone viewed Molyneux as a tragicomic character : full of creative ideas that are continually received by an unkind or indifferent audience . Capone did not expect the parody account to last long , but he became drawn to the persona . The parody 's content came to Capone " naturally " from games , game podcasts , and game news websites . He liked that he was able to give away his ideas — good and bad — while actual game designers must protect their ideas and implement them before others . 
 The account 's early tweets mocked Project Milo , a game Molyneux had introduced at the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo days before Capone began to tweet . The original persona 's content was modeled on previous Molyneux speeches . After exhausting Milo and Project Natal material , Capone tweeted clever game design concepts in Molyneux 's signature hyperbolic style . Capone found that the format had currency with his account 's followers . An underlying theme of these proposals is the untapped potential of emotional game experiences , as the tweets ask followers to imagine games that cross over into real life . He later added a " <unk> " series , which proposes bold updates for classic games , and video content . Other characters appear in the parody tweets , including mock family members and interns . Capone made Cliff Bleszinski into an adversarial foil for his parody character . The game designer is young , trendy , and supportive of the type of games Molyneux would hate . Capone views his persona as satirical caricature and is mindful of industry politics , especially when some mistake him for Molyneux . Once Capone reached 10 @,@ 000 followers , he set a goal of overtaking Molyneux 's own follower count . 
 The parody account is in contact with its namesake . Microsoft 's press department first introduced Peter Molyneux to his parody account in mid @-@ 2011 . The game designer was first annoyed at the caricature 's " pathetic " and impotent demeanor , but came to regard the parody as clever , creative , and admirable . The account reminded Molyneux of his energy earlier in his career , and helped convince him to leave Microsoft and pursue another audacious game design idea . Free of restrictions on press activity , Molyneux contacted Capone 's parody account upon leaving Microsoft . The two met later in person at Molyneux 's new studio . 
 As Capone 's account grew in popularity throughout 2011 , it became a mouthpiece for thousands of dissatisfied game developers who sought greater variety in mainstream games . The Twitter account 's growth was spurred by coverage in video game media . It had 23 @,@ 000 followers by the end of 2011 . The first Flash game based on one of his ideas was created in October 2011 . Capone said that Goodbye , My Love ironically " used the most dated gameplay out there " despite his tweet 's intention " to inspire an incredibly innovative game " . Twitter briefly closed the account near the end of 2011 as an impersonation rather than a parody account , but soon reversed its actions . 
 In March 2012 , multiple followers of the account began to plan a Molydeux game jam , an event in which game developers would create a game based on one of Molydeux 's tweets over the course of a weekend . Capone supported the effort but limited his participation to the creation of a promotional video . The event , known then as What Would Molydeux ? and later as Molyjam , soon grew from a San Francisco @-@ based affair into an international , <unk> event with satellite locations in the Netherlands , New York City , and Melbourne in 32 total locations . The event was held the weekend of March 30 , and around 1 @,@ 000 attendees made around 300 games , of which Capone found 15 games interesting . Professional cameos included David Hellman ( Braid ) in San Francisco and Peter Molyneux himself in London , where he gave an uncharacteristically fiery keynote speech that encouraged developers to " innovate ... come together and do crazy things " . While most games tended to consist of normal game mechanics underneath a bizarre concept , Wired said that their inability to deliver on their promise was the jam 's " most <unk> touch " . 
 Later that year , Capone created a trailer for one of Molyneux 's upcoming games . Molyneux found the parody " truly amazing " . In 2013 , the parody account proposed a game design school that would emphasize " enlightenment " over marketability and other attributes he attributed to existing game design schools . 
 = = Content = = 
 Some of the parody account 's proposals include : 
 A racing game in which the player controls the road instead of the vehicle 
 A Kinect game in which the player must cry to open a gate 
 An eight @-@ person online multiplayer game in which each player controls one leg of an octopus 
 The final segment of a war game , in which the player pauses in silence at the tombstone of each KIA recruit 
 A 3D adventure game in which the amnesiac player awakens in a museum with a room dedicated to each year of the character 's life 
 The player holds a radioactive baby , which acts as a torch in a dark environment ; rocking the baby increases its luminescence 
 The player pretends to be blind and must walk into objects to avoid suspicion 
 A bear must hug people in order to live , but crushes the people he hugs 
 A pigeon carries sentimental objects to businessmen to persuade them not to kill themselves 
 A divorced father sneaks into his family house to help with chores without alerting them 
 When the player kills henchmen in one game , the player sees recurring images of those henchmen 's crying children in an unrelated sports video game 
 A version of Street Fighter in which streets fight other streets 
 = = Reception = = 
 After two years , the account went viral in 2011 . While Capone remained anonymous , games journalists , such Kotaku and GameSetWatch , began to cover his tweets and journalists , such as Leigh Alexander ( Gamasutra ) and Alex Navarro ( Giant Bomb ) , reposted his content . Journalists did not view the parody as a mockery but instead as representative of a growing dissatisfaction over clichéd trends in the mainstream games industry . In this way , the account led to greater respect for Molyneux 's temerity . Kotaku wrote that Capone 's account displayed uncharacteristic creativity on his part , but Capone countered by saying that most game designers have endless game ideas and that real skill rests in applying them well . 
 The Twitter account also reinvigorated Molyneux 's legacy . The tweets established Molyneux as a " grand dreamer " and precipitated his Molyjam keynote address , which made Molyneux into a " patron saint of the indie game movement " . They also affected Molyneux 's own life course as he decided to leave his creative director position at Microsoft Games Studios . Wired suggested that Molyneux 's first game after leaving the company , Curiosity , could itself be based on a tweet from the parody account . Kotaku wrote that the statements of Molyneux and Molydeux are " often ... indistinguishable " . The Twitter account inspired the Molyjam game jam , which was also pivotal in Molyneux 's legacy . Wired wrote that his Molyjam keynote speech channeled the parody account while only a month earlier , Molyneux had been promoting the next Fable game . A second game jam based on quotes from Molyneux himself took place in July 2013 . 
 Cassandra <unk> of USgamer wrote that Molydeux has a track record of making avant @-@ garde and strange concepts come to life . One Molyjam title , Donut County , continued development and is expected for release in 2016 . Its core premise is a " reverse Katamari " in which the player moves a hole in the ground , which expands upon swallowing items . Eurogamer wrote that the Twitter account continued the tradition of previous Molyneux spoofs , such as a quest in Fable 2 that imitated an idiosyncratic tree @-@ growing mechanic from its predecessor . As of 2012 , Capone 's account had cornered the market . 
 = Curium = 
 Curium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol Cm and atomic number 96 . This element of the actinide series was named after Marie and Pierre Curie – both were known for their research on radioactivity . Curium was first intentionally produced and identified in July 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg at the University of California , Berkeley . The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1945 . Most curium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with neutrons in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 20 grams of curium . 
 Curium is a hard , dense , silvery metal with a relatively high melting point and boiling point for an actinide . Whereas it is paramagnetic at ambient conditions , it becomes antiferromagnetic upon cooling , and other magnetic transitions are also observed for many curium compounds . In compounds , curium usually exhibits valence + 3 and sometimes + 4 , and the + 3 valence is predominant in solutions . Curium readily oxidizes , and its oxides are a dominant form of this element . It forms strongly fluorescent complexes with various organic compounds , but there is no evidence of its incorporation into bacteria and archaea . When introduced into the human body , curium accumulates in the bones , lungs and liver , where it promotes cancer . 
 All known isotopes of curium are radioactive and have a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction . They predominantly emit α @-@ particles , and the heat released in this process can potentially produce electricity in radioisotope thermoelectric generators . This application is hindered by the scarcity , high cost and radioactivity of curium isotopes . Curium is used in production of heavier actinides and of the 238Pu radionuclide for power sources in artificial pacemakers . It served as the α @-@ source in the alpha particle X @-@ ray spectrometers installed on several space probes , including the Sojourner , Spirit , Opportunity and Curiosity Mars rovers and the Philae lander on comet 67P / Churyumov @-@ Gerasimenko , to analyze the composition and structure of the surface . 
 = = History = = 
 Although curium had likely been produced in previous nuclear experiments , it was first intentionally synthesized , isolated and identified in 1944 , at the University of California , Berkeley , by Glenn T. Seaborg , Ralph A. James , and Albert Ghiorso . In their experiments , they used a 60 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) cyclotron . 
 Curium was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory ( now Argonne National Laboratory ) at the University of Chicago . It was the third transuranium element to be discovered even though it is the fourth in the series – the lighter element americium was unknown at the time . 
 The sample was prepared as follows : first plutonium nitrate solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0 @.@ 5 cm2 area , the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium ( IV ) oxide ( PuO2 ) by annealing . Following cyclotron irradiation of the oxide , the coating was dissolved with nitric acid and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution . The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid , and further separation was carried out by ion exchange to yield a certain isotope of curium . The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that the Berkeley group initially called those elements pandemonium ( from Greek for all demons or hell ) and delirium ( from Latin for madness ) . 
 The curium @-@ 242 isotope was produced in July – August 1944 by bombarding 239Pu with α @-@ particles to produce curium with the release of a neutron : 
 <formula> 
 Curium @-@ 242 was unambiguously identified by the characteristic energy of the α @-@ particles emitted during the decay : 
 <formula> 
 The half @-@ life of this alpha decay was first measured as 150 days and then corrected to 162 @.@ 8 days . 
 Another isotope 240Cm was produced in a similar reaction in March 1945 : 
 <formula> 
 The half @-@ life of the 240Cm α @-@ decay was correctly determined as 26 @.@ 7 days . 
 The discovery of curium , as well as americium , in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project , the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945 . Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children , the Quiz Kids , five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on November 11 , 1945 , when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war . The discovery of curium ( 242Cm and 240Cm ) , their production and compounds were later patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor . 
 The new element was named after Marie Skłodowska @-@ Curie and her husband Pierre Curie who are noted for discovering radium and for their work in radioactivity . It followed the example of gadolinium , a lanthanide element above curium in the periodic table , which was named after the explorer of the rare earth elements Johan Gadolin : 
 " As the name for the element of atomic number 96 we should like to propose " curium " , with symbol Cm . The evidence indicates that element 96 contains seven 5f electrons and is thus analogous to the element gadolinium with its seven 4f electrons in the regular rare earth series . On this base element 96 is named after the Curies in a manner analogous to the naming of gadolinium , in which the chemist Gadolin was honored . " 
 The first curium samples were barely visible , and were identified by their radioactivity . Louis Werner and Isadore Perlman created the first substantial sample of 30 µg curium @-@ 242 hydroxide at the University of California in 1947 by bombarding americium @-@ 241 with neutrons . Macroscopic amounts of curium ( III ) fluoride were obtained in 1950 by W. W. T. Crane , J. C. <unk> and B. B. Cunningham . Its magnetic susceptibility was very close to that of <unk> providing the first experimental evidence for the + 3 valence of curium in its compounds . Curium metal was produced only in 1951 by reduction of <unk> with barium . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 A synthetic , radioactive element , curium is a hard dense metal with silvery @-@ white appearance and physical and chemical properties resembling those of gadolinium . Its melting point of 1340 ° C is significantly higher than that of the previous transuranic elements neptunium ( 637 ° C ) , plutonium ( 639 ° C ) and americium ( 1173 ° C ) . In comparison , gadolinium melts at 1312 ° C. The boiling point of curium is <unk> ° C. With a density of 13 @.@ 52 g / cm3 , curium is significantly lighter than neptunium ( 20 @.@ 45 g / cm3 ) and plutonium ( 19 @.@ 8 g / cm3 ) , but is heavier than most other metals . Between two crystalline forms of curium , the α @-@ Cm is more stable at ambient conditions . It has a hexagonal symmetry , space group P63 / mmc , lattice parameters a 
 = 365 pm and c = 
 1182 pm , and four formula units per unit cell . The crystal consists of a double @-@ hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with α @-@ lanthanum . At pressures above 23 GPa , at room temperature , α @-@ Cm transforms into β @-@ Cm , which has a face @-@ centered cubic symmetry , space group Fm3m and the lattice constant a = 493 pm . Upon further compression to 43 GPa , curium transforms to an orthorhombic γ @-@ Cm structure similar to that of α @-@ uranium , with no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa . These three curium phases are also referred to as Cm I , II and III . 
 Curium has peculiar magnetic properties . Whereas its neighbor element americium shows no deviation from Curie @-@ Weiss <unk> in the entire temperature range , α @-@ Cm transforms to an antiferromagnetic state upon cooling to 65 – 52 K , and β @-@ Cm exhibits a ferrimagnetic transition at about 205 K. Meanwhile , curium pnictides show ferromagnetic transitions upon cooling : <unk> and <unk> at 109 K , <unk> at 73 K and <unk> at 162 K. Similarly , the lanthanide analogue of curium , gadolinium , as well as its pnictides also show magnetic transitions upon cooling , but the transition character is somewhat different : Gd and <unk> become ferromagnetic , and <unk> , <unk> and <unk> show antiferromagnetic ordering . 
 In accordance with magnetic data , electrical resistivity of curium increases with temperature – about twice between 4 and 60 K – and then remains nearly constant up to room temperature . There is a significant increase in resistivity over time ( about 10 <unk> · cm / h ) due to self @-@ damage of the crystal lattice by alpha radiation . This makes uncertain the absolute resistivity value for curium ( about 125 <unk> · cm ) . The resistivity of curium is similar to that of gadolinium and of the actinides plutonium and neptunium , but is significantly higher than that of americium , uranium , polonium and thorium . 
 Under ultraviolet illumination , curium ( III ) ions exhibit strong and stable yellow @-@ orange fluorescence with a maximum in the range about 590 – 640 nm depending on their environment . The fluorescence originates from the transitions from the first excited state <unk> / 2 and the ground state <unk> / 2 . Analysis of this fluorescence allows monitoring interactions between Cm ( III ) ions in organic and inorganic complexes . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Curium ions in solution almost exclusively assume the oxidation state of + 3 , which is the most stable oxidation state for curium . The + 4 oxidation state is observed mainly in a few solid phases , such as CmO2 and <unk> . Aqueous curium ( IV ) is only known in the presence of strong oxidizers such as potassium persulfate , and is easily reduced to curium ( III ) by radiolysis and even by water . The chemical behavior of curium is different from the actinides thorium and uranium , and is similar to that of americium and many lanthanides . In aqueous solution , the Cm3 + ion is colorless to pale green , and <unk> + ion is pale yellow . The optical absorption of Cm3 + ions contains three sharp peaks at 375 @.@ 4 , 381 @.@ 2 and 396 @.@ 5 nanometers and their strength can be directly converted into the concentration of the ions . The + 6 oxidation state has only been reported once in solution in 1978 , as the <unk> ion ( CmO2 + 
 2 ) : this was prepared from the beta decay of americium @-@ 242 in the americium ( V ) ion <unk> + 
 2 . Failure to obtain Cm ( VI ) from oxidation of Cm ( III ) and Cm ( IV ) may be due to the high <unk> + / Cm3 + ionization potential and the instability of Cm ( V ) . 
 Curium ions are hard Lewis acids and thus form most stable complexes with hard bases . The bonding is mostly ionic , with a small covalent component . Curium in its complexes commonly exhibits a 9 @-@ fold coordination environment , within a tricapped trigonal prismatic geometry . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 About 20 radioisotopes and 7 nuclear isomers between <unk> and <unk> are known for curium , and no stable isotopes . The longest half @-@ lives have been reported for 247Cm ( 15 @.@ 6 million years ) and 248Cm ( 348 @,@ 000 years ) . Other long @-@ lived isotopes are 245Cm ( half @-@ life 8500 years ) , 250Cm ( 8 @,@ 300 years ) and 246Cm ( 4 @,@ 760 years ) . Curium @-@ 250 is unusual in that it predominantly ( about 86 % ) decays via spontaneous fission . The most commonly used curium isotopes are 242Cm and 244Cm with the half @-@ lives of 162 @.@ 8 days and 18 @.@ 1 years , respectively . 
 All isotopes between 242Cm and 248Cm , as well as 250Cm , undergo a self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction and thus in principle can act as a nuclear fuel in a reactor . As in most transuranic elements , the nuclear fission cross section is especially high for the odd @-@ mass curium <unk> , 245Cm and 247Cm . These can be used in thermal @-@ neutron reactors , whereas a mixture of curium isotopes is only suitable for fast breeder reactors since the even @-@ mass isotopes are not fissile in a thermal reactor and accumulate as burn @-@ up increases . The mixed @-@ oxide ( MOX ) fuel , which is to be used in power reactors , should contain little or no curium because the neutron activation of 248Cm will create californium . This is strong neutron emitter , and would pollute the back end of the fuel cycle and increase the dose to reactor personnel . Hence , if the minor actinides are to be used as fuel in a thermal neutron reactor , the curium should be excluded from the fuel or placed in special fuel rods where it is the only actinide present . 
 The table to the right lists the critical masses for curium isotopes for a sphere , without a moderator and reflector . With a metal reflector ( 30 cm of steel ) , the critical masses of the odd isotopes are about 3 – 4 kg . When using water ( thickness ~ 20 – 30 cm ) as the reflector , the critical mass can be as small as 59 gram for 245Cm , 155 gram for <unk> and 1550 gram for 247Cm . There is a significant uncertainty in these critical mass values . Whereas it is usually of the order 20 % , the values for 242Cm and 246Cm were listed as large as 371 kg and 70 @.@ 1 kg , respectively , by some research groups . 
 Currently , curium is not used as a nuclear fuel owing to its low availability and high price . 245Cm and 247Cm have a very small critical mass and therefore could be used in portable nuclear weapons , but none have been reported thus far . Curium @-@ 243 is not suitable for this purpose because of its short half @-@ life and strong α emission which would result in excessive heat . Curium @-@ 247 would be highly suitable , having a half @-@ life 647 times that of plutonium @-@ 239 . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 The longest @-@ lived isotope of curium , 247Cm , has a half @-@ life of 15 @.@ 6 million years . Therefore , any primordial curium , that is curium present on the Earth during its formation , should have decayed by now . Curium is produced artificially , in small quantities for research purposes . Furthermore , it occurs in spent nuclear fuel . Curium is present in nature in certain areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests , which were conducted between 1945 and 1980 . So the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb , Ivy Mike , ( 1 November 1952 , Enewetak Atoll ) , beside einsteinium , fermium , plutonium and americium also revealed isotopes of berkelium , californium and curium , in particular 245Cm , 246Cm and smaller quantities of 247Cm , 248Cm and 249Cm . For reasons of military secrecy , this result was published only in 1956 . 
 Atmospheric curium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles . Soil analysis revealed about 4 @,@ 000 times higher concentration of curium at the sandy soil particles than in water present in the soil pores . An even higher ratio of about 18 @,@ 000 was measured in loam soils . 
 The transuranic elements from americium to fermium , including curium , occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so . Exceedingly minute amounts of the isotope 244Cm may be produced naturally from the theoretically predicted extremely rare double beta decay of the trace primordial isotope 244Pu , but this has not yet been observed . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 = = = Isotope preparation = = = 
 Curium is produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors , and by now only kilograms of it have been accumulated for the 242Cm and 244Cm and grams or even milligrams for heavier isotopes . This explains the high price of curium , which has been quoted at 160 – 185 USD per milligram , with a more recent estimate at 2 @,@ 000 USD / g for 242Cm and 170 USD / g for 244Cm . In nuclear reactors , curium is formed from 238U in a series of nuclear reactions . In the first chain , 238U captures a neutron and converts into 239U , which via β − decay transforms into 239Np and 239Pu . 
 Further neutron capture followed by β − <unk> produces the 241Am isotope of americium which further converts into 242Cm : 
 For research purposes , curium is obtained by irradiating not uranium but plutonium , which is available in large amounts from spent nuclear fuel . Much higher neutron flux is used for the irradiation that results in a different reaction chain and formation of 244Cm : 
 Curium @-@ 244 decays into <unk> by emission of alpha particle , but it also absorbs neutrons resulting in a small amount of heavier curium isotopes . Among those , 247Cm and 248Cm are popular in scientific research because of their long half @-@ lives . However , the production rate of 247Cm in thermal neutron reactors is relatively low because of it is prone to undergo fission induced by thermal neutrons . Synthesis of 250Cm via neutron absorption is also rather unlikely because of the short half @-@ life of the intermediate product 249Cm ( 64 min ) , which converts by β − decay to the berkelium isotope 249Bk . 
 The above cascade of ( n , γ ) reactions produces a mixture of different curium isotopes . Their post @-@ synthesis separation is cumbersome , and therefore a selective synthesis is desired . Curium @-@ 248 is favored for research purposes because of its long half @-@ life . The most efficient preparation method of this isotope is via α @-@ decay of the californium isotope 252Cf , which is available in relatively large quantities due to its long half @-@ life ( 2 @.@ 65 years ) . About 35 – 50 mg of 248Cm is being produced by this method every year . The associated reaction produces 248Cm with isotopic purity of 97 % . 
 Another interesting for research isotope 245Cm can be obtained from the α @-@ decay of 249Cf , and the latter isotope is produced in minute quantities from the β − <unk> of the berkelium isotope 249Bk . 
 = = = Metal preparation = = = 
 Most synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes as oxides , from which a certain isotope of curium needs to be separated . An example procedure could be to dissolve spent reactor fuel ( e.g. MOX fuel ) in nitric acid , and remove the bulk of the uranium and plutonium using a PUREX ( Plutonium – URanium EXtraction ) type extraction with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon . The lanthanides and the remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue ( <unk> ) by a <unk> @-@ based extraction to give , after stripping , a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides . A curium compound is then selectively extracted using multi @-@ step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques with an appropriate reagent . Bis @-@ <unk> bipyridine complex has been recently proposed as such reagent which is highly selective to curium . Separation of curium from a very similar americium can also be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone at elevated temperature . Both americium and curium are present in solutions mostly in the + 3 valence state ; whereas americium oxidizes to soluble Am ( IV ) complexes , curium remains unchanged and can thus be isolated by repeated centrifugation . 
 Metallic curium is obtained by reduction of its compounds . Initially , curium ( III ) fluoride was used for this purpose . The reaction was conducted in the environment free from water and oxygen , in the apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten , using elemental barium or lithium as reducing agents . 
 <formula> 
 Another possibility is the reduction of curium ( IV ) oxide using a magnesium @-@ zinc alloy in a melt of magnesium chloride and magnesium fluoride . 
 = = Compounds and reactions = = 
 = = = Oxides = = = 
 Curium readily reacts with oxygen forming mostly Cm2O3 and CmO2 oxides , but the divalent oxide <unk> is also known . Black CmO2 can be obtained by burning curium oxalate ( <unk> ( C2O4 ) 3 ) , nitrate ( Cm ( NO3 ) 3 ) or hydroxide in pure oxygen . Upon heating to 600 – 650 ° C in vacuum ( about 0 @.@ 01 Pa ) , it transforms into the whitish Cm2O3 : 
 <formula> . 
 Alternatively , Cm2O3 can be obtained by reducing CmO2 with molecular hydrogen : 
 <formula> 
 Furthermore , a number of ternary oxides of the type M ( II ) <unk> are known , where M stands for a divalent metal , such as barium . 
 Thermal oxidation of trace quantities of curium hydride ( <unk> – 3 ) has been reported to produce a volatile form of CmO2 and the volatile trioxide <unk> , one of the two known examples of the very rare + 6 state for curium . Another observed species was reported to behave similarly to plutonium tetroxide and was tentatively characterized as <unk> , with curium in the extremely rare + 8 state ; however , new experiments seem to indicate that <unk> does not exist . 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 The colorless curium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> ) can be produced by introducing fluoride ions into curium ( III ) <unk> solutions . The brown tetravalent curium ( IV ) fluoride ( <unk> ) on the other hand is only obtained by reacting curium ( III ) fluoride with molecular fluorine : 
 <formula> 
 A series of ternary fluorides are known of the form <unk> , where A stands for alkali metal . 
 The colorless curium ( III ) chloride ( <unk> ) is produced in the reaction of curium ( III ) hydroxide ( Cm ( OH ) 3 ) with anhydrous hydrogen chloride gas . It can further be converted into other halides , such as curium ( III ) bromide ( colorless to light green ) and curium ( III ) iodide ( colorless ) , by reacting it with the ammonia salt of the corresponding halide at elevated temperature of about 400 – 450 ° C : 
 <formula> 
 An alternative procedure is heating curium oxide to about 600 ° C with the corresponding acid ( such as hydrobromic for curium bromide ) . Vapor phase hydrolysis of curium ( III ) chloride results in curium oxychloride : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Chalcogenides and pnictides = = = 
 <unk> , selenides and tellurides of curium have been obtained by treating curium with gaseous sulfur , selenium or tellurium in vacuum at elevated temperature . The pnictides of curium of the type <unk> are known for the elements nitrogen , phosphorus , arsenic and antimony . They can be prepared by reacting either curium ( III ) hydride ( <unk> ) or metallic curium with these elements at elevated temperatures . 
 = = = <unk> compounds and biological aspects = = = 
 Organometallic complexes analogous to uranocene are known also for other actinides , such as thorium , protactinium , neptunium , plutonium and americium . Molecular orbital theory predicts a stable " <unk> " complex ( η8 @-@ C8H8 ) <unk> , but it has not been reported experimentally yet . 
 Formation of the complexes of the type Cm ( n @-@ C3H7 @-@ BTP ) 3 , where BTP stands for 2 @,@ 6 @-@ di ( 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ yl ) pyridine , in solutions containing n @-@ C3H7 @-@ BTP and Cm3 + ions has been confirmed by EXAFS . Some of these BTP @-@ type complexes selectively interact with curium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides . Dissolved Cm3 + ions bind with many organic compounds , such as hydroxamic acid , urea , fluorescein and adenosine triphosphate . Many of these compounds are related to biological activity of various microorganisms . The resulting complexes exhibit strong yellow @-@ orange emission under UV light excitation , which is convenient not only for their detection , but also for studying the interactions between the Cm3 + ion and the ligands via changes in the half @-@ life ( of the order ~ 0 @.@ 1 ms ) and spectrum of the fluorescence . 
 Curium has no biological significance . There are a few reports on biosorption of Cm3 + by bacteria and archaea , however no evidence for incorporation of curium into them . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Curium is one of the most radioactive <unk> elements . Its two most common isotopes 242Cm and 244Cm are strong alpha emitters ( energy 6 MeV ) ; they have relatively short half @-@ lives of 162 @.@ 8 days and 18 @.@ 1 years , and produce as much as 120 W / g and 3 W / g of thermal energy , respectively . Therefore , curium can be used in its common oxide form in radioisotope thermoelectric generators like those in spacecraft . This application has been studied for the 244Cm isotope , while 242Cm was abandoned due to its prohibitive price of around 2000 USD / g . Curium @-@ 243 with a ~ 30 year half @-@ life and good energy yield of ~ 1 @.@ 6 W / g could make for a suitable fuel , but it produces significant amounts of harmful gamma and beta radiation from radioactive decay products . Though as an α @-@ emitter , 244Cm requires a much thinner radiation protection shielding , it has a high spontaneous fission rate , and thus the neutron and gamma radiation rate are relatively strong . As compared to a competing thermoelectric generator isotope such as 238Pu , 244Cm emits a 500 time greater fluence of neutrons , and its higher gamma emission requires a shield that is 20 times thicker — about 2 inches of lead for a 1 kW source , as compared to 0 @.@ 1 in for 238Pu . Therefore , this application of curium is currently considered impractical . 
 A more promising application of 242Cm is to produce 238Pu , a more suitable radioisotope for thermoelectric generators such as in cardiac pacemakers . The alternative routes to 238Pu use the ( n , γ ) reaction of 237Np , or the deuteron bombardment of uranium , which both always produce <unk> as an undesired by @-@ product — since the latter decays to 232U with strong gamma emission . Curium is also a common starting material for the production of higher transuranic elements and transactinides . Thus , bombardment of 248Cm with oxygen ( 18O ) or magnesium ( 26Mg ) yielded certain isotopes of seaborgium ( <unk> ) and hassium ( 269Hs and 270Hs ) . Californium was discovered when a microgram @-@ sized target of curium @-@ 242 was irradiated with 35 MeV alpha particles using the 60 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) cyclotron at Berkeley : 
 242 
 96Cm + 4 
 2He → 245 
 98Cf + 1 
 0n 
 Only about 5 @,@ 000 atoms of californium were produced in this experiment . 
 = = = X @-@ ray spectrometer = = = 
 The most practical application of 244Cm — though rather limited in total volume — is as α @-@ particle source in the alpha particle X @-@ ray spectrometers ( APXS ) . These instruments were installed on the Sojourner , Mars , Mars 96 , Mars Exploration Rovers and Philae comet lander , as well as the Mars Science Laboratory to analyze the composition and structure of the rocks on the surface of planet Mars . APXS was also used in the Surveyor 5 – 7 moon probes but with a 242Cm source . 
 An elaborated APXS setup is equipped with a sensor head containing six curium sources having the total radioactive decay rate of several tens of millicuries ( roughly a <unk> ) . The sources are collimated on the sample , and the energy spectra of the alpha particles and protons scattered from the sample are analyzed ( the proton analysis is implemented only in some spectrometers ) . These spectra contain quantitative information on all major elements in the samples except for hydrogen , helium and lithium . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Owing to its high radioactivity , curium and its compounds must be handled in appropriate laboratories under special arrangements . Whereas curium itself mostly emits α @-@ particles which are absorbed by thin layers of common materials , some of its decay products emit significant fractions of beta and gamma radiation , which require a more elaborate protection . If consumed , curium is excreted within a few days and only 0 @.@ 05 % is absorbed in the blood . From there , about 45 % goes to the liver , 45 % to the bones , and the remaining 10 % is excreted . In the bone , curium accumulates on the inside of the interfaces to the bone marrow and does not significantly redistribute with time ; its radiation destroys bone marrow and thus stops red blood cell creation . The biological half @-@ life of curium is about 20 years in the liver and 50 years in the bones . Curium is absorbed in the body much more strongly via inhalation , and the allowed total dose of 244Cm in soluble form is 0 @.@ 3 <unk> . Intravenous injection of 242Cm and 244Cm containing solutions to rats increased the incidence of bone tumor , and inhalation promoted pulmonary and liver cancer . 
 Curium isotopes are inevitably present in spent nuclear fuel with a concentration of about 20 g / tonne . Among them , the 245Cm – 248Cm isotopes have decay times of thousands of years and need to be removed to neutralize the fuel for disposal . The associated procedure involves several steps , where curium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short @-@ lived nuclides . This procedure , nuclear transmutation , while well documented for other elements , is still being developed for curium . 
 = I 'm with Cupid = 
 " I 'm with Cupid " is the fourteenth episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on Valentine 's Day , 1999 . The episode takes place on Valentine 's Day , and the wives of Springfield are jealous of the attention Apu gives to his wife Manjula . Angered by this , the Springfield husbands spy on Apu to sabotage his romantic plans . 
 " I 'm with Cupid " was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Bob Anderson . Because the episode was to air on Valentine 's Day , Fox wanted the episode to relate to the holiday , although the idea for the episode was pitched by Greaney . The title of the episode is based on the popular T @-@ shirt slogan " I 'm with stupid " . Elton John guest @-@ starred as himself , and recorded a new version of his song " Your Song " for the episode . The episode also features references to Breakfast at Tiffany 's , Tiffany & Co. and " Lisa the Vegetarian " , an earlier episode in the series . 
 In its original broadcast , " I 'm With Cupid " was seen by approximately 7 @.@ 7 million viewers and finished in 48th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following the home media release of The Simpsons : The Complete Tenth Season , the episode received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Apu and his new wife Manjula invite Homer and Marge to their house for dinner . However , Apu and Manjula get in a fight , after Marge mentions to Manjula that Apu does not need to work as much as he does . The week before Valentine 's Day , Apu tells Homer that he is disappointed that Manjula does not love him , until Homer assures him that Manjula will not leave him before Valentine 's Day , and Apu agrees . Apu decides to shower Manjula with many romantic surprises to regain her love . However , although many of Apu 's surprises succeed in fixing his marriage , they ruin other people 's relationships . The rest of Springfield 's women become jealous from all the attention Manjula is receiving , and find their men to be <unk> ( including Maude Flanders ) . At Moe 's Tavern , Homer encourages several of Springfield 's men that they have to prevent Apu and Manjula from reconciling to save their own relationships and marriages . 
 During Valentine 's Day , Homer , Chief Wiggum , Dr. Hibbert , Moe , and Ned Flanders investigate what Apu is doing so they can stop it . They go around town and Flanders is thrown out of the group for suggesting they should be using their time to be more romantic to their wives instead of trying to sabotage Apu . Following Apu to the airport , the remaining group see Elton John there , and they think that he supposedly came to Springfield to perform a concert for Apu and Manjula at his insistence ( in reality , he had to make an emergency landing because the chandelier on his plane was malfunctioning ) . However , Apu 's actual plan is that he arranged for a <unk> to write " I ♥ U <unk> " . During the trouble that ensues , Homer jumps on the plane during takeoff to try to stop the <unk> from spraying the message . When Homer destroys the plane 's canister in mid @-@ air it only sprayed part of the message - " I ♥ U * " , which the other women think is for them . While Homer and the pilot fight , Marge remains unconvinced until the plane flies by and Homer drops out of it covered with roses after the plane flew out of control through a thorny rose patch , possibly giving Homer a collapsed lung . Nonetheless , Elton John is able to perform a private concert for Apu and Manjula , and their marriage is saved . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I 'm With Cupid " was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Bob Anderson . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on Valentine 's Day , 1999 . Because they knew it would air on Valentine 's Day , Fox asked the Simpsons staff to produce an episode related to the holiday . The episode 's ending credits were also painted red in honor of the holiday . The idea for the episode was pitched by Greaney , who also wrote the episode 's first draft . The episode 's title was pitched by fellow Simpsons writer Ron Hauge , who based it on the popular T @-@ shirt slogan I 'm with stupid . However , Hauge later found out that the title had already been used before for an episode of another television series . However , he did not believe that copyright issues would arise : " It 's a very innocent mistake , " Hauge said in the DVD <unk> for the episode . " It is one of those things that , in the course of a career , you 're gonna be on both sides of that , so nobody ever sues on it . " 
 Jan Hooks reprised her role as Manjula in the episode . In a scene in the episode , Apu and Manjula are arguing in an Indian language . During the scene , both characters speak the language accurately , as both Hooks and Hank Azaria ( the voice of Apu ) were given a phonetic transcription of their lines . The singing parrot that Apu sends to Manjula was voiced by series main cast member Nancy Cartwright , who also portrays Bart in the series . The episode features singer sir Elton John as himself . John 's lines were recorded by current showrunner Al Jean , who found working with John being a " wonderful experience " . " Elton John was a very nice person , " Scully spoke for Jean in the DVD commentary for the episode , since Jean was busy during the commentary record . " He was a great sport and worked really hard for the show . " Scully also stated that the re @-@ recording of " Your Song " , which appears near the end of the episode , had to be recorded " several times , " but that John was " very accommodating " about it . 
 = = Themes and cultural references = = 
 In their book <unk> South Asian culture in English : textual and visual representations , <unk> Shakur and Karen D 'Souza analyzed " I 'm with Cupid " along with the season 9 episode " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " . The two argued that " I 'm with Cupid " represents Apu 's role in the series , and " reinforces the romanticised view of Apu 's marriage through the increasingly elaborate ways in which he expresses his love for his wife . " They wrote : " In a Valentine 's day episode , the message is clearly critically showing up the all @-@ American men of Springfield for their lack of romance . [ ... ] Throughout this episode , Apu 's identity is reinforced as exotic other , but not so much as ' South Asian ' other , as an ' American ' ideal other , that more wholesome , romantic male juxtaposed to the Duff drinking , couch potato male typified by the men of Moe 's bar and Homer Simpson . Again , Apu is not so much represented in his ethnicity , but presented in his critical otherness to both contemporary <unk> of American culture , specifically male identities and ironically ( re ) constructed idea of South <unk> . In these two episodes , the Asian cultural space which Apu , his mother and Manjula perform is a hybrid one , mixing ' Asian ' and ' American ' values and identities , but critically displacing Asian ' authenticity ' and revealing the displacement of contemporary American marriage from its ' authentic ' traditions . " 
 In a scene in the episode , John , having just chewed his way out of a dog carrier , meets Apu , who exclaims " Elton John ! " , to which John replies " That 's my name ! Well , not really . " The exchange references John 's name change , as his birth name was Reginald Dwight . At the end of the episode , John performs for Apu and Manjula on the roof of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . The scene is a callback to the season 7 episode " Lisa the Vegetarian " , in which Paul McCartney performed on the roof . The scene in which Homer is seen jamming Valentine 's Day cards into their holders were based on an observation by the writers . Simpsons writer George Meyer said of the scene : " You just see cards get really man @-@ handled , and the envelopes get switched with the wrong sizes . " In another scene , Marge and Manjula are seen playing badminton . While the scene was conceived in order to provide exposition , the sport was included because badminton is " very popular " in India , according to Simpsons writer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham . The episode also mentions the 1961 film Breakfast at Tiffany 's . In a scene , Apu , carrying a shopping bag , exits the jewellery and silverware store Tiffany & Co . Meanwhile , Homer , along with Chief Wiggum , Moe , Flanders and Dr Hibbert are watching Apu , assuming he bought jewellery for Manjula . It is soon revealed that Apu bought a croissant in the store , to which Wiggum says " Oh , that 's right , they have breakfast at Tiffany 's now . " The heart @-@ shaped fade out at the end of the episode is a reference to the series Love , American Style . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 14 , 1999 , " I 'm with Cupid " received a 7 @.@ 7 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 7 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode finished in 48th place in the ratings for the week of February 8 – 14 , 1999 . On August 7 , 2007 , the episode was released as part of The Simpsons - The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Mike Scully , George Meyer , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Ron Hauge and Matt Selman participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " I 'm with Cupid " received generally positive reviews from critics . In 2007 , Simon Crerar of The Times listed Elton John 's performance as one of the thirty @-@ three funniest cameos in the history of the show . James Plath of DVD Town wrote that the episode is " funny " because " it has a plot we recognize from our own lives , " and Jake McNeill of Digital Entertainment News considered it to be one of the season 's best episodes . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide gave the episode a positive review as well , calling it " Very , very clever and funny , " and wrote " it 's executed stylishly and Homer wins in the end ; entirely by default of course , but maybe that 's his reward for not falling off the skywriting plane until the last minute ! " However , they also criticized the episode for being " a little tacky , " writing " After all , how nice are these people who want to ruin Apu and Manjula 's day just because they 're scared of looking bad ? " 
 Writing for IGN , Robert Canning described " I 'm with Cupid " as " very smart and very funny " and " a great episode representing one piece of Apu 's journey . " However , he disliked John 's guest appearance in the episode , describing it as " completely unnecessary " and " very tacked on , " and described John 's performance as " very flat . " Nevertheless , Canning gave the episode an 8 @.@ 8 rating and concluded his review by describing it as a " tightly written Valentine 's episode . " Giving the episode a more mixed review , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide criticized it for being to similar to an earlier episode , writing " Didn ’ t we already see that Flanders makes everyone else look like a jerk on Valentine ’ s Day ? Doesn ’ t that theme mean that ' Cupid ' is somewhat redundant ? " He added " Not that the show lacks any spark , as it throws out a reasonable number of laughs , " and concluded his review by writing that " it seems a little stale and not one of the year ’ s better programs . " 
 = 41 cm / 45 3rd Year Type naval gun = 
 The 41 cm / 45 3rd Year Type naval gun was a 41 @-@ centimeter ( 16 @.@ 1 in ) breech @-@ loading naval gun designed during World War I for the Imperial Japanese Navy . It served as the primary armament in the Nagato @-@ class dreadnoughts completed after the end of the war and in coast defense mountings . Two turrets and their guns were salvaged during the 1970s from the wreck of the Japanese battleship Mutsu and are currently on display in Japan . 
 = = Description = = 
 The gun was of wire @-@ wound construction and had an overall length of 18 @.@ 84 meters ( 61 ft 10 in ) with a bore 18 @.@ 294 meters ( 60 ft 0 @.@ 2 in ) long . It weighed 102 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 224 @,@ 872 lb ) , including the <unk> @-@ type breech . This used the Elswick three @-@ motion short @-@ arm mechanism , much like the British BL 18 inch Mk I naval gun designed around the same time . Chamber volume was 467 @.@ 11 litres ( 28 @,@ 505 cu in ) . 
 Initially the gun was fitted in twin @-@ gun turrets that had an elevation range of – 2 ° / + 35 ° . It was initially equipped with the Type 88 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) armor @-@ piercing , capped ( APC ) shell , that had a muzzle velocity of 790 m / s ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . This was superseded in 1931 by the Type 91 shell that weighed 1 @,@ 020 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 250 lb ) . It was fired at a muzzle velocity of 790 m / s ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) to a range of 30 @,@ 200 meters ( 33 @,@ 000 yd ) . Also available was a 936 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 064 lb ) high @-@ explosive shell that had a muzzle velocity of 805 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 640 ft / s ) . A special Type 3 Sankaidan incendiary shrapnel shell was developed in the 1930s for anti @-@ aircraft use . The gun 's firing cycle was one round every 24 seconds . 
 The turrets aboard the Nagato @-@ class ships were replaced in the mid @-@ 1930s , using the turrets stored from the unfinished Tosa @-@ class battleships . While in storage the turrets were modified to increase their range of elevation to – 3 ° / + 43 ° , which gave them a maximum range of 37 @,@ 900 meters ( 41 @,@ 400 yd ) , and their firing cycle was reduced to 21 @.@ 5 seconds . 
 The gun was only initially known as the 41 cm / 45 3rd Year Type naval gun before it was redesignated as the 40 cm / 45 3rd Year Type naval gun on 29 March 1922 to comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty which forbade guns larger than 40 @.@ 6 cm ( 16 in ) . Third year type refers to the Welin breech block on which design began in 1914 , the third year of the Taishō period . This breech block design was also used on the 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 inch ) , 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 1 inch ) , 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 inch ) , 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 inch ) , and 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 inch ) naval guns . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Nagato @-@ class dreadnoughts were the only ships to use this gun , although it would have been used by the Tosa @-@ class and Kii @-@ class dreadnoughts as well as the Amagi @-@ class battlecruisers had they not been cancelled due to the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . The gun was also deployed in three coast @-@ defense turrets intended to close off the Strait of Tsushima . One turret each was deployed on Iki and Tsushima Islands while the third was mounted in Pusan , Korea . 
 The two aft turrets from Mutsu 's wreck were salvaged in the 1970s ; No. 4 in July or August 1970 and No. 3 in September of the following year . Turret No. 4 and its guns were restored and were installed on the grounds of the former Imperial Japanese Naval Academy at Etajima , Hiroshima . One gun from Turret No. 3 is at the Kure Maritime Museum , popularly known as the Yamato Museum , in Kure , Hiroshima while the other is at the Museum of Maritime Science in Odaiba , Tokyo . 
 = = Shells into bombs = = 
 Obsolete Type 88 shells were modified in 1939 – 40 to create the Type 99 No. 80 Mk 5 armor @-@ piercing bomb used during the attack on Pearl Harbor . The armor @-@ piercing cap and windscreen were removed , the body was machined down and tapered to reduce weight and a new , thinner , base plug installed with two fuzes . The filling was replaced by 23 kilograms ( 50 lb ) of <unk> and the bomb weighed 796 @.@ 8 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 757 lb ) . 
 Beginning in 1942 an improved version of the bomb was built . Its nose was much less thick and it contained 35 @.@ 7 kilograms ( 79 lb ) of <unk> . It weighed 811 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 788 lb ) . 
 = = = Weapons of comparable role , performance and era = = = 
 BL 16 inch Mk I naval gun : British equivalent 
 16 " / 45 caliber Mark 6 gun : American equivalent 
 40 @.@ 6 cm SK C / 34 gun : German equivalent 
 = M @-@ 109 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 109 is the designation of a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan that runs between Empire and Glen Arbor . The highway is a loop connected to M @-@ 22 at both ends that allows tourists access to Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore and the Pierce Stocking Scenic Drive located on a section of sandy forest land between Lake Michigan and Glen Lake . The trunkline traverses an area named the " Most Beautiful Place in America " by Good Morning America , the morning show on ABC . The highway was designated by 1929 and fully paved in 1939 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 109 starts at an intersection on M @-@ 22 north of Empire . The trunkline runs northward along Dune Highway past Maple Grove Cemetery and through woods in the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore . The area was named the " Most Beautiful Place in America " by Good Morning America in August 2011 ; the designation came after a social media campaign to capitalize on the show 's website poll . Further north , the highway passes the entrance to Pierce Stocking Scenic Drive before <unk> along the western shore of Glen Lake . Near the northwestern corner of the lake , M @-@ 109 passes the entrance to the Dune Climb in an area that 's predominantly fields . The trunkline makes a 90 @-@ degree turn at the intersection with Glen Haven Road , the former M @-@ 209 , south of Glen Haven , a former logging town on the shores of Lake Michigan . M @-@ 109 turns easterly at the intersection to follow Harbor Highway . It runs through another wooded area between Glen Lake and Sleeping Bear Bay . The highway passes the D.H. Day Campground and enters Glen Arbor , following Western Avenue . At the intersection with M @-@ 22 ( Ray Street ) , M @-@ 109 terminates in the middle of town . 
 Like other state highways in Michigan , M @-@ 109 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 783 vehicles used the highway daily along Dune Highway and 758 vehicles did so each day along Harbor Highway , the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . No section of M @-@ 109 is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of roadway to receive the M @-@ 109 designation was in place and signed on maps by May 1 , 1929 . The roadway was a spur from M @-@ 22 north of Empire that ended at Glen Haven , just west of the D.H. Day State Park . The highway was extended east along an existing road between Glen Haven and Glen Arbor . This extension was in place by May 1 , 1933 , completing the modern routing of M @-@ 109 . The highway was fully paved in 1939 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Leelanau County . 
 = St Beuno 's Church , Trefdraeth = 
 St Beuno 's Church , Trefdraeth is the medieval parish church of Trefdraeth , a hamlet in Anglesey , north Wales . Although one 19th @-@ century historian recorded that the first church on this location was reportedly established in about 616 , no part of any 7th @-@ century structure survives ; the oldest parts of the present building date are from the 13th century . Alterations were made in subsequent centuries , but few of them during the 19th century , a time when many other churches in Anglesey were rebuilt or were restored . 
 St Beuno 's is part of the Church in Wales , and its parish is one in a group of four . The church remains in use but as of 2013 there is no parish priest . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation for " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " an important example of a late Medieval rural church " with an unaltered simple design . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Beuno 's Church is in Trefdraeth , a hamlet in the south @-@ west of Anglesey by Malltraeth Marsh , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) south @-@ west of the county town of Llangefni . It stands in a roughly circular llan ( Welsh for an enclosed piece of land , particularly around a church ) north of the road between Trefdraeth and Bethel . Beuno , a 7th @-@ century Welsh saint , has several churches in north Wales dedicated to him . 
 According to Angharad Llwyd ( a 19th @-@ century historian of Anglesey ) , the first church on this site was reportedly established in about 616 . No part of any 7th century building survives , and restoration over the years has removed much historical evidence for the church 's development . 
 The earliest parts of the present structure are the nave and the chancel , which are 13th @-@ century . The church shows signs of alterations and additions in subsequent centuries . A transept or chapel was added to the south side of the chancel in the late 13th or early 14th century . The arch between them was once the archway between the chancel and the nave but was later moved . The bellcote at the west end of the roof was added in the 14th century . The porch on the south side of the nave was built in about 1500 , and was re @-@ roofed in 1725 . A doorway in the north wall of the nave was inserted in the late 15th or early 16th century , and now leads into a vestry added in the 19th century . The main roof is largely 17th @-@ century . Some repairs were carried out in the 1840s , with further repairs in 1854 under the supervision of the diocesan architect , Henry Kennedy . 
 = = Benefice = = 
 St Beuno 's is one of four churches in the benefice of Trefdraeth with Aberffraw with Llangadwaladr with Cerrigceinwen . Other churches in the benefice include St Beuno 's , Aberffraw and St Cadwaladr 's , Llangadwaladr . The church is in the Deanery of Malltraeth , the Archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 the parishes have no incumbent priest . 
 A number of notable clergy have held the living of St Beuno 's . Henry Rowlands , Bishop of Bangor 1598 – 1616 , was rector of Trefdraeth during his episcopacy , as the income from the parish was attached to the bishopric . The scholar and rhetorician Henry Perry was appointed priest in 1606 . Griffith Williams was appointed rector in 1626 and went on to be Dean of Bangor in 1634 . David Lloyd was rector in the late 1630s and early 1640s , and thereafter Dean of St Asaph . Robert Morgan was rector before and after the English Civil War and was made Bishop of Bangor in 1666 . John Pryce was rector 1880 – 1902 and Dean of Bangor 1902 – 1903 . 
 = = = Welsh language controversy = = = 
 In 1766 John Egerton , Bishop of Bangor , appointed an elderly English priest , Dr Thomas Bowles , to the parish of St Beuno , Trefdraeth and its chapelry of St Cwyfan , Llangwyfan . Between them the parish and chapelry had about 500 parishioners , of whom all but five spoke only Welsh , whereas Bowles spoke only English . The parishioners and churchwardens of Trefdraeth petitioned against Bowles 's appointment , arguing that the appointment of a priest who did not speak Welsh breached the Articles of Religion , the Act for the Translation of the Scriptures into Welsh 1563 and the Act of Uniformity 1662 . In 1773 the Court of Arches ruled that only clergy who could speak Welsh should be appointed to Welsh @-@ speaking parishes , and Bowles should not have been appointed , but he now held the ecclesiastical freehold of the benefice and the case to deprive him of it had not been proved . The court therefore let Bowles stay in post , which he did until he died in November of that year . Bowles was then replaced in the parish and chapelry with Richard Griffith , a priest who spoke Welsh . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Beuno 's is Decorated Gothic , built mainly with rubble masonry , with squared stones used to create courses in the nave 's south wall and the lower part of the west wall . There are external buttresses at the west and east ends , the south porch and the south transept . The roof is surfaced with hexagonal slates and has a stone bellcote on its west gable . Internally , there is no structural division between the nave and the chancel save for a step up to the chancel . The nave and chancel together are 59 feet ( 18 m ) long and the church is 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide . Near the eastern end of the church is a transept or chapel on the south side of the chancel , from which it is separated by a step down and an arch . The transept is 13 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 2 m ) by 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The windows range in age from the late 14th or early 15th century to the 19th century . The oldest is the chancel east window , which has an 18th @-@ century inscribed slate slab as its sill . The window is a pointed arch with three lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) , and it has a stained glass of the Crucifixion of Jesus that was installed as a memorial in 1907 . The nave north wall has a window from about 1500 , which was originally in the nave south wall . The nave west window is rectangular , again from about 1500 . In the nave south wall are two early 19th @-@ century windows set in square frames , one single @-@ light and one two @-@ light . The transept has a 19th @-@ century two @-@ light arched window in its south wall , which contains the oldest stained glass in the church : 15th @-@ century fragments of a crucifixion scene . It also has a pointed arched doorway in its west wall , from the late 13th or early 14th century . 
 The church is entered through the porch to the west end of the south wall of the nave , which leads to an arched doorway . There are two 18th @-@ century slate plaques on the walls by the south door commemorating those who made donations to the poor of the parish ; one has names from 1761 , the other from 1766 . On the opposite wall , a 17th @-@ century slate plaque commemorates Hugh ap Richard Lewis and his wife Jane ( died 1660 and 1661 respectively ) . The internal timbers of the roof , some of which are old , are exposed , but there is a decorated panelled barrel @-@ vaulted ceiling above the sanctuary at the east end of the church . The transept roof is largely 17th @-@ century . 
 The cylindrical font is 12th @-@ century , and is at the west end of the church . Four of its six panels are decorated with <unk> ; a fifth has a Celtic cross in knotwork with a ring ; the sixth is blank . One author has pointed out the similarities with the fonts of St Cristiolus 's , Llangristiolus , which is about 2 miles ( 3 km ) away , and of St Beuno 's , Pistyll , in the nearby county of Gwynedd . 
 A survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire in 1937 also noted the early 18th @-@ century communion rails , a plain oak communion table dated 1731 , and a wooden font cover dated 1714 . Other memorials , including parts of an early 14th @-@ century inscribed slab , were also recorded . Three items of church silver were included in the survey : a cup ( dated 1610 – 1611 ) , a paten ( 1719 ) and a flagon ( 1743 ) . Externally , an 18th @-@ century brass sundial on a slate pedestal was noted , as was a weathered decorated stone on the lychgate , thought to be from the 10th century . The Arts and Crafts Movement pulpit was made in 1920 . 
 = = Churchyard = = 
 The churchyard contains the Commonwealth war graves of a Royal Engineers soldier of World War I and a Pioneer Corps soldier of World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 , and has been listed because it is " an important example of a late Medieval rural church " . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes that the church 's " simple design [ remained ] unaltered during the extensive programme of church re @-@ building and restoration on Anglesey in the 19th century . " 
 In 1833 Angharad Llwyd described the church as " a small neat edifice " , with " an east window of modern date and of good design " . She noted that the parish registers , legible from 1550 onwards , were the second oldest in north Wales . Similarly , the 19th @-@ century publisher Samuel Lewis said the church was a " small plain edifice " that could hold nearly 300 people . 
 In 1846 the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones wrote that the church " has been lately repaired in a judicious manner , but without any restoration of importance being attempted , and is in good condition " . He added that with its " good condition this ranks as one of the better churches of the island . " The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in October 1849 . He said that the chapel on the south side resembled several others in Anglesey and Caernarfonshire . He also noted the new slate roof , the " mostly open and plain " seats , and the " very large cemetery ... commanding an extensive view " . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes St Beuno 's as being in " a pleasant and quiet rural location " . It adds that the church was " fairly small " and the roof had " unusual ornately @-@ shaped slates " . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region comments that " for once " Kennedy had repaired rather than replaced the church . It notes that " strangely " the chancel arch had been reset in the transept , and says that the nave roof was of " unusual construction " . 
 = Parallel computing = 
 Parallel computing is a type of computation in which many calculations are carried out simultaneously , or the execution of processes are carried out <unk> operating on the principle that large problems can often be divided into smaller ones , which are then solved at the same time . There are several different forms of parallel computing : bit @-@ level , instruction @-@ level , data , and task parallelism . Parallelism has been employed for many years , mainly in high @-@ performance computing , but interest in it has grown lately due to the physical constraints preventing frequency scaling . As power consumption ( and consequently heat generation ) by computers has become a concern in recent years , parallel computing has become the dominant paradigm in computer architecture , mainly in the form of multi @-@ core processors . 
 Parallel computing is closely related to concurrent computing — they are frequently used together , and often conflated , though the two are distinct : it is possible to have parallelism without concurrency ( such as bit @-@ level parallelism ) , and concurrency without parallelism ( such as multitasking by time @-@ sharing on a single @-@ core CPU ) . In parallel computing , a computational task is typically broken down in several , often many , very similar subtasks that can be processed independently and whose results are combined afterwards , upon completion . In contrast , in concurrent computing , the various processes often do not address related tasks ; when they do , as is typical in distributed computing , the separate tasks may have a varied nature and often require some inter @-@ process communication during execution . 
 Parallel computers can be roughly classified according to the level at which the hardware supports parallelism , with multi @-@ core and multi @-@ processor computers having multiple processing elements within a single machine , while clusters , MPPs , and grids use multiple computers to work on the same task . Specialized parallel computer architectures are sometimes used alongside traditional processors , for accelerating specific tasks . 
 In some cases parallelism is transparent to the programmer , such as in bit @-@ level or instruction @-@ level parallelism , but explicitly parallel algorithms , particularly those that use concurrency , are more difficult to write than sequential ones , because concurrency introduces several new classes of potential software bugs , of which race conditions are the most common . Communication and synchronization between the different subtasks are typically some of the greatest obstacles to getting good parallel program performance . 
 A theoretical upper bound on the speed @-@ up of a single program as a result of parallelization is given by Amdahl 's law . 
 = = Background = = 
 Traditionally , computer software has been written for serial computation . To solve a problem , an algorithm is constructed and implemented as a serial stream of instructions . These instructions are executed on a central processing unit on one computer . Only one instruction may execute at a time — after that instruction is finished , the next one is executed . 
 Parallel computing , on the other hand , uses multiple processing elements simultaneously to solve a problem . This is accomplished by breaking the problem into independent parts so that each processing element can execute its part of the algorithm simultaneously with the others . The processing elements can be diverse and include resources such as a single computer with multiple processors , several networked computers , specialized hardware , or any combination of the above . 
 Frequency scaling was the dominant reason for improvements in computer performance from the mid @-@ 1980s until 2004 . The runtime of a program is equal to the number of instructions multiplied by the average time per instruction . Maintaining everything else constant , increasing the clock frequency decreases the average time it takes to execute an instruction . An increase in frequency thus decreases runtime for all compute @-@ bound programs . 
 However , power consumption P by a chip is given by the equation P = C × V 2 × F , where C is the capacitance being switched per clock cycle ( proportional to the number of transistors whose inputs change ) , V is voltage , and F is the processor frequency ( cycles per second ) . Increases in frequency increase the amount of power used in a processor . Increasing processor power consumption led ultimately to Intel 's May 8 , 2004 cancellation of its Tejas and Jayhawk processors , which is generally cited as the end of frequency scaling as the dominant computer architecture paradigm . 
 Moore 's law is the empirical observation that the number of transistors in a microprocessor doubles every 18 to 24 months . Despite power consumption issues , and repeated predictions of its end , Moore 's law is still in effect . With the end of frequency scaling , these additional transistors ( which are no longer used for frequency scaling ) can be used to add extra hardware for parallel computing . 
 = = = Amdahl 's law and Gustafson 's law = = = 
 <unk> , the speedup from parallelization would be linear — doubling the number of processing elements should halve the runtime , and doubling it a second time should again halve the runtime . However , very few parallel algorithms achieve optimal speedup . Most of them have a near @-@ linear speedup for small numbers of processing elements , which flattens out into a constant value for large numbers of processing elements . 
 The potential speedup of an algorithm on a parallel computing platform is given by Amdahl 's law 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <unk> is the potential speedup in latency of the execution of the whole task ; 
 s is the speedup in latency of the execution of the parallelizable part of the task ; 
 p is the percentage of the execution time of the whole task concerning the parallelizable part of the task before parallelization . 
 Since <unk> < 1 / ( 1 - p ) , it shows that a small part of the program which cannot be <unk> will limit the overall speedup available from parallelization . A program solving a large mathematical or engineering problem will typically consist of several parallelizable parts and several non @-@ parallelizable ( serial ) parts . If the non @-@ parallelizable part of a program accounts for 10 % of the runtime ( p = 0 @.@ 9 ) , we can get no more than a 10 times speedup , regardless of how many processors are added . This puts an upper limit on the usefulness of adding more parallel execution units . " When a task cannot be partitioned because of sequential constraints , the application of more effort has no effect on the schedule . The bearing of a child takes nine months , no matter how many women are assigned . " 
 Amdahl 's law only applies to cases where the problem size is fixed . In practice , as more computing resources become available , they tend to get used on larger problems ( larger datasets ) , and the time spent in the parallelizable part often grows much faster than the inherently serial work . In this case , Gustafson 's law gives a less pessimistic and more realistic assessment of parallel performance : 
 <formula> 
 Both Amdahl 's law and Gustafson 's law assume that the running time of the serial part of the program is independent of the number of processors . Amdahl 's law assumes that the entire problem is of fixed size so that the total amount of work to be done in parallel is also independent of the number of processors , whereas Gustafson 's law assumes that the total amount of work to be done in parallel varies linearly with the number of processors . 
 = = = Dependencies = = = 
 Understanding data dependencies is fundamental in implementing parallel algorithms . No program can run more quickly than the longest chain of dependent calculations ( known as the critical path ) , since calculations that depend upon prior calculations in the chain must be executed in order . However , most algorithms do not consist of just a long chain of dependent calculations ; there are usually opportunities to execute independent calculations in parallel . 
 Let Pi and Pj be two program segments . Bernstein 's conditions describe when the two are independent and can be executed in parallel . For Pi , let Ii be all of the input variables and Oi the output variables , and likewise for Pj . Pi and Pj are independent if they satisfy 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Violation of the first condition introduces a flow dependency , corresponding to the first segment producing a result used by the second segment . The second condition represents an anti @-@ dependency , when the second segment produces a variable needed by the first segment . The third and final condition represents an output dependency : when two segments write to the same location , the result comes from the logically last executed segment . 
 Consider the following functions , which demonstrate several kinds of dependencies : 
 1 : function <unk> ( a , b ) 
 2 : c : = a * b 
 3 : d : = 3 * c 
 4 : end function 
 In this example , instruction 3 cannot be executed before ( or even in parallel with ) instruction 2 , because instruction 3 uses a result from instruction 2 . It violates condition 1 , and thus introduces a flow dependency . 
 1 : function <unk> ( a , b ) 
 2 : c : = a * b 
 3 : d : = 3 * b 
 4 : e : = a + b 
 5 : end function 
 In this example , there are no dependencies between the instructions , so they can all be run in parallel . 
 Bernstein 's conditions do not allow memory to be shared between different processes . For that , some means of enforcing an ordering between accesses is necessary , such as <unk> , barriers or some other synchronization method . 
 = = = Race conditions , mutual exclusion , synchronization , and parallel slowdown = = = 
 <unk> in a parallel program are often called threads . Some parallel computer architectures use smaller , lightweight versions of threads known as fibers , while others use bigger versions known as processes . However , " threads " is generally accepted as a generic term for subtasks . Threads will often need to update some variable that is shared between them . The instructions between the two programs may be interleaved in any order . For example , consider the following program : 
 If instruction 1B is executed between 1A and 3A , or if instruction 1A is executed between 1B and 3B , the program will produce incorrect data . This is known as a race condition . The programmer must use a lock to provide mutual exclusion . A lock is a programming language construct that allows one thread to take control of a variable and prevent other threads from reading or writing it , until that variable is unlocked . The thread holding the lock is free to execute its critical section ( the section of a program that requires exclusive access to some variable ) , and to unlock the data when it is finished . Therefore , to guarantee correct program execution , the above program can be rewritten to use locks : 
 One thread will successfully lock variable V , while the other thread will be locked out — unable to proceed until V is unlocked again . This guarantees correct execution of the program . Locks , while necessary to ensure correct program execution , can greatly slow a program . 
 Locking multiple variables using non @-@ atomic locks introduces the possibility of program deadlock . An atomic lock locks multiple variables all at once . If it cannot lock all of them , it does not lock any of them . If two threads each need to lock the same two variables using non @-@ atomic locks , it is possible that one thread will lock one of them and the second thread will lock the second variable . In such a case , neither thread can complete , and deadlock results . 
 Many parallel programs require that their subtasks act in synchrony . This requires the use of a barrier . Barriers are typically implemented using a software lock . One class of algorithms , known as lock @-@ free and wait @-@ free algorithms , altogether avoids the use of locks and barriers . However , this approach is generally difficult to implement and requires correctly designed data structures . 
 Not all parallelization results in speed @-@ up . Generally , as a task is split up into more and more threads , those threads spend an ever @-@ increasing portion of their time communicating with each other . Eventually , the overhead from communication dominates the time spent solving the problem , and further parallelization ( that is , splitting the workload over even more threads ) increases rather than decreases the amount of time required to finish . This is known as parallel slowdown . 
 = = = Fine @-@ grained , coarse @-@ grained , and embarrassing parallelism = = = 
 Applications are often classified according to how often their subtasks need to synchronize or communicate with each other . An application exhibits fine @-@ grained parallelism if its subtasks must communicate many times per second ; it exhibits coarse @-@ grained parallelism if they do not communicate many times per second , and it exhibits embarrassing parallelism if they rarely or never have to communicate . Embarrassingly parallel applications are considered the easiest to <unk> . 
 = = = Consistency models = = = 
 Parallel programming languages and parallel computers must have a consistency model ( also known as a memory model ) . The consistency model defines rules for how operations on computer memory occur and how results are produced . 
 One of the first consistency models was Leslie Lamport 's sequential consistency model . Sequential consistency is the property of a parallel program that its parallel execution produces the same results as a sequential program . Specifically , a program is sequentially consistent if " … the results of any execution is the same as if the operations of all the processors were executed in some sequential order , and the operations of each individual processor appear in this sequence in the order specified by its program " . 
 Software transactional memory is a common type of consistency model . Software transactional memory borrows from database theory the concept of atomic transactions and applies them to memory accesses . 
 Mathematically , these models can be represented in several ways . Petri nets , which were introduced in Carl Adam Petri 's 1962 doctoral thesis , were an early attempt to codify the rules of consistency models . Dataflow theory later built upon these , and Dataflow architectures were created to physically implement the ideas of <unk> theory . Beginning in the late 1970s , process calculi such as Calculus of Communicating Systems and Communicating Sequential Processes were developed to permit algebraic reasoning about systems composed of interacting components . More recent additions to the process calculus family , such as the π @-@ calculus , have added the capability for reasoning about dynamic topologies . <unk> such as Lamport 's TLA + , and mathematical models such as traces and Actor event diagrams , have also been developed to describe the behavior of concurrent systems . 
 = = = Flynn 's taxonomy = = = 
 Michael J. Flynn created one of the earliest classification systems for parallel ( and sequential ) computers and programs , now known as Flynn 's taxonomy . Flynn classified programs and computers by whether they were operating using a single set or multiple sets of instructions , and whether or not those instructions were using a single set or multiple sets of data . 
 The single @-@ instruction @-@ single @-@ data ( <unk> ) classification is equivalent to an entirely sequential program . The single @-@ instruction @-@ multiple @-@ data ( SIMD ) classification is analogous to doing the same operation repeatedly over a large data set . This is commonly done in signal processing applications . Multiple @-@ instruction @-@ single @-@ data ( <unk> ) is a rarely used classification . While computer architectures to deal with this were devised ( such as systolic arrays ) , few applications that fit this class materialized . Multiple @-@ instruction @-@ multiple @-@ data ( <unk> ) programs are by far the most common type of parallel programs . 
 According to David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy , " Some machines are hybrids of these categories , of course , but this classic model has survived because it is simple , easy to understand , and gives a good first approximation . It is also — perhaps because of its understandability — the most widely used scheme . " 
 = = Types of parallelism = = 
 = = = Bit @-@ level parallelism = = = 
 From the advent of very @-@ large @-@ scale integration ( VLSI ) computer @-@ chip fabrication technology in the 1970s until about 1986 , speed @-@ up in computer architecture was driven by doubling computer word size — the amount of information the processor can manipulate per cycle . Increasing the word size reduces the number of instructions the processor must execute to perform an operation on variables whose sizes are greater than the length of the word . For example , where an 8 @-@ bit processor must add two 16 @-@ bit integers , the processor must first add the 8 lower @-@ order bits from each integer using the standard addition instruction , then add the 8 higher @-@ order bits using an add @-@ with @-@ carry instruction and the carry bit from the lower order addition ; thus , an 8 @-@ bit processor requires two instructions to complete a single operation , where a 16 @-@ bit processor would be able to complete the operation with a single instruction . 
 Historically , 4 @-@ bit microprocessors were replaced with 8 @-@ bit , then 16 @-@ bit , then 32 @-@ bit microprocessors . This trend generally came to an end with the introduction of 32 @-@ bit processors , which has been a standard in general @-@ purpose computing for two decades . Not until recently ( c . 2003 – 2004 ) , with the advent of x86 @-@ 64 architectures , have 64 @-@ bit processors become commonplace . 
 = = = Instruction @-@ level parallelism = = = 
 A computer program , is in essence , a stream of instructions executed by a processor . Without instruction @-@ level parallelism , a processor can only issue less than one instruction per clock cycle ( IPC < 1 ) . These processors are known as <unk> processors . These instructions can be re @-@ ordered and combined into groups which are then executed in parallel without changing the result of the program . This is known as instruction @-@ level parallelism . Advances in instruction @-@ level parallelism dominated computer architecture from the mid @-@ 1980s until the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 All modern processors have multi @-@ stage instruction pipelines . Each stage in the pipeline corresponds to a different action the processor performs on that instruction in that stage ; a processor with an N @-@ stage pipeline can have up to N different instructions at different stages of completion and thus can issue one instruction per clock cycle ( IPC = 1 ) . These processors are known as scalar processors . The canonical example of a <unk> processor is a RISC processor , with five stages : instruction fetch ( IF ) , instruction decode ( ID ) , execute ( EX ) , memory access ( MEM ) , and register write back ( WB ) . The Pentium 4 processor had a 35 @-@ stage pipeline . 
 Most modern processors also have multiple execution units . They usually combine this feature with <unk> and thus can issue more than one instruction per clock cycle ( IPC > 1 ) . These processors are known as superscalar processors . Instructions can be grouped together only if there is no data dependency between them . <unk> and the <unk> algorithm ( which is similar to <unk> but makes use of register renaming ) are two of the most common techniques for implementing out @-@ of @-@ order execution and instruction @-@ level parallelism . 
 = = = Task parallelism = = = 
 Task <unk> is the characteristic of a parallel program that " entirely different calculations can be performed on either the same or different sets of data " . This contrasts with data parallelism , where the same calculation is performed on the same or different sets of data . Task parallelism involves the decomposition of a task into sub @-@ tasks and then allocating each sub @-@ task to a processor for execution . The processors would then execute these sub @-@ tasks simultaneously and often cooperatively . Task parallelism does not usually scale with the size of a problem . 
 = = Hardware = = 
 = = = Memory and communication = = = 
 Main memory in a parallel computer is either shared memory ( shared between all processing elements in a single address space ) , or distributed memory ( in which each processing element has its own local address space ) . Distributed memory refers to the fact that the memory is logically distributed , but often implies that it is physically distributed as well . Distributed shared memory and memory virtualization combine the two approaches , where the processing element has its own local memory and access to the memory on non @-@ local processors . <unk> to local memory are typically faster than accesses to non @-@ local memory . 
 Computer architectures in which each element of main memory can be accessed with equal latency and bandwidth are known as uniform memory access ( UMA ) systems . Typically , that can be achieved only by a shared memory system , in which the memory is not physically distributed . A system that does not have this property is known as a non @-@ uniform memory access ( NUMA ) architecture . Distributed memory systems have non @-@ uniform memory access . 
 Computer systems make use of caches — small and fast memories located close to the processor which store temporary copies of memory values ( nearby in both the physical and logical sense ) . Parallel computer systems have difficulties with caches that may store the same value in more than one location , with the possibility of incorrect program execution . These computers require a cache coherency system , which keeps track of cached values and strategically purges them , thus ensuring correct program execution . Bus snooping is one of the most common methods for keeping track of which values are being accessed ( and thus should be purged ) . Designing large , high @-@ performance cache coherence systems is a very difficult problem in computer architecture . As a result , shared memory computer architectures do not scale as well as distributed memory systems do . 
 Processor – processor and processor – memory communication can be implemented in hardware in several ways , including via shared ( either <unk> or multiplexed ) memory , a crossbar switch , a shared bus or an interconnect network of a myriad of topologies including star , ring , tree , hypercube , fat hypercube ( a hypercube with more than one processor at a node ) , or n @-@ dimensional mesh . 
 Parallel computers based on interconnected networks need to have some kind of routing to enable the passing of messages between nodes that are not directly connected . The medium used for communication between the processors is likely to be hierarchical in large multiprocessor machines . 
 = = = Classes of parallel computers = = = 
 Parallel computers can be roughly classified according to the level at which the hardware supports parallelism . This classification is broadly analogous to the distance between basic computing nodes . These are not mutually exclusive ; for example , clusters of symmetric multiprocessors are relatively common . 
 = = = = Multi @-@ core computing = = = = 
 A multi @-@ core processor is a processor that includes multiple processing units ( called " cores " ) on the same chip . This processor differs from a superscalar processor , which includes multiple execution units and can issue multiple instructions per clock cycle from one instruction stream ( thread ) ; in contrast , a multi @-@ core processor can issue multiple instructions per clock cycle from multiple instruction streams . IBM 's Cell microprocessor , designed for use in the Sony PlayStation 3 , is a prominent multi @-@ core processor . Each core in a multi @-@ core processor can potentially be superscalar as well — that is , on every clock cycle , each core can issue multiple instructions from one thread . 
 Simultaneous multithreading ( of which Intel 's Hyper @-@ Threading is the best known ) was an early form of pseudo @-@ multi @-@ <unk> . A processor capable of simultaneous multithreading includes multiple execution units in the same processing unit — that is it has a superscalar architecture — and can issue multiple instructions per clock cycle from multiple threads . Temporal multithreading on the other hand includes a single execution unit in the same processing unit and can issue one instruction at a time from multiple threads . 
 = = = = Symmetric multiprocessing = = = = 
 A symmetric multiprocessor ( SMP ) is a computer system with multiple identical processors that share memory and connect via a bus . Bus contention prevents bus architectures from scaling . As a result , <unk> generally do not comprise more than 32 processors . Because of the small size of the processors and the significant reduction in the requirements for bus bandwidth achieved by large caches , such symmetric multiprocessors are extremely cost @-@ effective , provided that a sufficient amount of memory bandwidth exists . 
 = = = = Distributed computing = = = = 
 A distributed computer ( also known as a distributed memory multiprocessor ) is a distributed memory computer system in which the processing elements are connected by a network . Distributed computers are highly scalable . 
 = = = = = Cluster computing = = = = = 
 A cluster is a group of loosely coupled computers that work together closely , so that in some respects they can be regarded as a single computer . Clusters are composed of multiple standalone machines connected by a network . While machines in a cluster do not have to be symmetric , load balancing is more difficult if they are not . The most common type of cluster is the Beowulf cluster , which is a cluster implemented on multiple identical commercial off @-@ the @-@ shelf computers connected with a TCP / IP Ethernet local area network . Beowulf technology was originally developed by Thomas Sterling and Donald Becker . The vast majority of the TOP500 supercomputers are clusters . 
 Because grid computing systems ( described below ) can easily handle embarrassingly parallel problems , modern clusters are typically designed to handle more difficult problems — problems that require nodes to share intermediate results with each other more often . This requires a high bandwidth and , more importantly , a low @-@ latency interconnection network . Many historic and current supercomputers use customized high @-@ performance network hardware specifically designed for cluster computing , such as the Cray Gemini network . As of 2014 , most current supercomputers use some off @-@ the @-@ shelf standard network hardware , often <unk> , <unk> , or Gigabit Ethernet . 
 = = = = = Massively parallel computing = = = = = 
 A massively parallel processor ( MPP ) is a single computer with many networked processors . MPPs have many of the same characteristics as clusters , but MPPs have specialized interconnect networks ( whereas clusters use commodity hardware for networking ) . MPPs also tend to be larger than clusters , typically having " far more " than 100 processors . In an MPP , " each CPU contains its own memory and copy of the operating system and application . Each subsystem communicates with the others via a high @-@ speed interconnect . " 
 IBM 's Blue Gene / L , the fifth fastest supercomputer in the world according to the June 2009 TOP500 ranking , is an MPP . 
 = = = = = Grid computing = = = = = 
 Grid computing is the most distributed form of parallel computing . It makes use of computers communicating over the Internet to work on a given problem . Because of the low bandwidth and extremely high latency available on the Internet , distributed computing typically deals only with embarrassingly parallel problems . Many distributed computing applications have been created , of which SETI @ home and Folding @ home are the best @-@ known examples . 
 Most grid computing applications use middleware , software that sits between the operating system and the application to manage network resources and standardize the software interface . The most common distributed computing middleware is the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing ( BOINC ) . Often , distributed computing software makes use of " spare cycles " , performing computations at times when a computer is idling . 
 = = = = Specialized parallel computers = = = = 
 Within parallel computing , there are specialized parallel devices that remain niche areas of interest . While not domain @-@ specific , they tend to be applicable to only a few classes of parallel problems . 
 = = = = = <unk> computing with field @-@ programmable gate arrays = = = = = 
 <unk> computing is the use of a field @-@ programmable gate array ( FPGA ) as a co @-@ processor to a general @-@ purpose computer . An FPGA is , in essence , a computer chip that can rewire itself for a given task . 
 <unk> can be programmed with hardware description languages such as VHDL or <unk> . However , programming in these languages can be tedious . Several vendors have created C to HDL languages that attempt to emulate the syntax and semantics of the C programming language , with which most programmers are familiar . The best known C to HDL languages are <unk> @-@ C , Impulse C , <unk> @-@ C , and Handel @-@ C. Specific subsets of <unk> based on C + + can also be used for this purpose . 
 AMD 's decision to open its <unk> technology to third @-@ party vendors has become the enabling technology for high @-@ performance reconfigurable computing . According to Michael R. D 'Amour , Chief Operating Officer of DRC Computer Corporation , " when we first walked into AMD , they called us ' the socket stealers . ' Now they call us their partners . " 
 = = = = = General @-@ purpose computing on graphics processing units ( GPGPU ) = = = = = 
 General @-@ purpose computing on graphics processing units ( GPGPU ) is a fairly recent trend in computer engineering research . GPUs are co @-@ processors that have been heavily optimized for computer graphics processing . Computer graphics processing is a field dominated by data parallel operations — particularly linear algebra matrix operations . 
 In the early days , GPGPU programs used the normal graphics APIs for executing programs . However , several new programming languages and platforms have been built to do general purpose computation on GPUs with both Nvidia and AMD releasing programming environments with CUDA and Stream SDK respectively . Other GPU programming languages include <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Nvidia has also released specific products for computation in their Tesla series . The technology consortium <unk> Group has released the OpenCL specification , which is a framework for writing programs that execute across platforms consisting of CPUs and GPUs . AMD , Apple , Intel , Nvidia and others are supporting OpenCL . 
 = = = = = Application @-@ specific integrated circuits = = = = = 
 Several application @-@ specific integrated circuit ( ASIC ) approaches have been devised for dealing with parallel applications . 
 Because an ASIC is ( by definition ) specific to a given application , it can be fully optimized for that application . As a result , for a given application , an ASIC tends to outperform a general @-@ purpose computer . However , ASICs are created by UV photolithography . This process requires a mask set , which can be extremely expensive . A mask set can cost over a million US dollars . ( The smaller the transistors required for the chip , the more expensive the mask will be . ) Meanwhile , performance increases in general @-@ purpose computing over time ( as described by Moore 's law ) tend to wipe out these gains in only one or two chip generations . High initial cost , and the tendency to be overtaken by Moore 's @-@ law @-@ driven general @-@ purpose computing , has rendered ASICs unfeasible for most parallel computing applications . However , some have been built . One example is the <unk> RIKEN <unk> @-@ 3 machine which uses custom ASICs for molecular dynamics simulation . 
 = = = = = Vector processors = = = = = 
 A vector processor is a CPU or computer system that can execute the same instruction on large sets of data . Vector processors have high @-@ level operations that work on linear arrays of numbers or vectors . An example vector operation is A = B × C , where A , B , and C are each 64 @-@ element vectors of 64 @-@ bit floating @-@ point numbers . They are closely related to Flynn 's SIMD classification . 
 Cray computers became famous for their vector @-@ processing computers in the 1970s and 1980s . However , vector processors — both as CPUs and as full computer systems — have generally disappeared . Modern processor instruction sets do include some vector processing instructions , such as with Freescale Semiconductor 's <unk> and Intel 's Streaming SIMD Extensions ( SSE ) . 
 = = Software = = 
