 = = = Parallel programming languages = = = 
 Concurrent programming languages , libraries , APIs , and parallel programming models ( such as algorithmic skeletons ) have been created for programming parallel computers . These can generally be divided into classes based on the assumptions they make about the underlying memory architecture — shared memory , distributed memory , or shared distributed memory . Shared memory programming languages communicate by manipulating shared memory variables . Distributed memory uses message passing . POSIX Threads and <unk> are two of the most widely used shared memory APIs , whereas Message Passing Interface ( MPI ) is the most widely used message @-@ passing system API . One concept used in programming parallel programs is the future concept , where one part of a program promises to deliver a required datum to another part of a program at some future time . 
 CAPS <unk> and <unk> are also coordinating their effort to make hybrid multi @-@ core parallel programming ( <unk> ) directives an open standard called OpenHMPP . The OpenHMPP directive @-@ based programming model offers a syntax to efficiently offload computations on hardware accelerators and to optimize data movement to / from the hardware memory . OpenHMPP directives describe remote procedure call ( RPC ) on an accelerator device ( e.g. GPU ) or more generally a set of cores . The directives annotate C or Fortran codes to describe two sets of functionalities : the offloading of procedures ( denoted <unk> ) onto a remote device and the optimization of data transfers between the CPU main memory and the accelerator memory . 
 The rise of consumer GPUs has led to support for compute kernels , either in graphics APIs ( referred to as compute shaders ) , in dedicated APIs ( such as OpenCL ) , or in other language extensions . 
 = = = Automatic parallelization = = = 
 Automatic parallelization of a sequential program by a compiler is the holy grail of parallel computing . Despite decades of work by compiler researchers , automatic parallelization has had only limited success . 
 Mainstream parallel programming languages remain either explicitly parallel or ( at best ) partially implicit , in which a programmer gives the compiler directives for parallelization . A few fully implicit parallel programming languages exist — <unk> , Parallel Haskell , <unk> , System C ( for <unk> ) , <unk> @-@ C , VHDL , and <unk> . 
 = = = Application checkpointing = = = 
 As a computer system grows in complexity , the mean time between failures usually decreases . Application checkpointing is a technique whereby the computer system takes a " snapshot " of the application — a record of all current resource allocations and variable states , akin to a core dump — ; this information can be used to restore the program if the computer should fail . Application checkpointing means that the program has to restart from only its last checkpoint rather than the beginning . While checkpointing provides benefits in a variety of situations , it is especially useful in highly parallel systems with a large number of processors used in high performance computing . 
 = = Algorithmic methods = = 
 As parallel computers become larger and faster , it becomes feasible to solve problems that previously took too long to run . Parallel computing is used in a wide range of fields , from bioinformatics ( protein folding and sequence analysis ) to economics ( mathematical finance ) . Common types of problems found in parallel computing applications are : 
 dense linear algebra ; 
 sparse linear algebra ; 
 spectral methods ( such as Cooley – Tukey fast Fourier transform ) 
 N @-@ body problems ( such as Barnes – Hut simulation ) ; 
 structured grid problems ( such as Lattice Boltzmann methods ) ; 
 unstructured grid problems ( such as found in finite element analysis ) ; 
 Monte Carlo method ; 
 combinational logic ( such as brute @-@ force cryptographic techniques ) ; 
 graph traversal ( such as sorting algorithms ) ; 
 dynamic programming ; 
 branch and bound methods ; 
 graphical models ( such as detecting hidden Markov models and constructing Bayesian networks ) ; 
 finite @-@ state machine simulation . 
 = = Fault @-@ tolerance = = 
 Parallel computing can also be applied to the design of fault @-@ tolerant computer systems , particularly via lockstep systems performing the same operation in parallel . This provides redundancy in case one component should fail , and also allows automatic error detection and error correction if the results differ . These methods can be used to help prevent single event upsets caused by transient errors . Although additional measures may be required in embedded or specialized systems , this method can provide a cost effective approach to achieve n @-@ modular redundancy in commercial off @-@ the @-@ shelf systems . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of true ( <unk> ) parallelism go back to Luigi Federico <unk> and his Sketch of the Analytic Engine Invented by Charles Babbage . IBM introduced the 704 in 1954 , through a project in which Gene Amdahl was one of the principal architects . It became the first commercially available computer to use fully automatic floating @-@ point arithmetic commands . 
 In April 1958 , S. Gill ( Ferranti ) discussed parallel programming and the need for branching and waiting . Also in 1958 , IBM researchers John Cocke and Daniel Slotnick discussed the use of parallelism in numerical calculations for the first time . Burroughs Corporation introduced the <unk> in 1962 , a four @-@ processor computer that accessed up to 16 memory modules through a crossbar switch . In 1967 , Amdahl and Slotnick published a debate about the feasibility of parallel processing at American Federation of Information Processing Societies Conference . It was during this debate that Amdahl 's law was coined to define the limit of speed @-@ up due to parallelism . 
 In 1969 , company Honeywell introduced its first Multics system , a symmetric multiprocessor system capable of running up to eight processors in parallel . <unk> , a 1970s multi @-@ processor project at Carnegie Mellon University , was among the first multiprocessors with more than a few processors . The first bus @-@ connected multiprocessor with snooping caches was the Synapse N + 1 in 1984 . " 
 SIMD parallel computers can be traced back to the 1970s . The motivation behind early SIMD computers was to <unk> the gate delay of the processor 's control unit over multiple instructions . In 1964 , Slotnick had proposed building a massively parallel computer for the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . His design was funded by the US Air Force , which was the earliest SIMD parallel @-@ computing effort , ILLIAC IV . The key to its design was a fairly high parallelism , with up to 256 processors , which allowed the machine to work on large datasets in what would later be known as vector processing . However , ILLIAC IV was called " the most infamous of supercomputers " , because the project was only one fourth completed , but took 11 years and cost almost four times the original estimate . When it was finally ready to run its first real application in 1976 , it was outperformed by existing commercial supercomputers such as the Cray @-@ 1 . 
 = M @-@ 26 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 26 is a 96 @.@ 355 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 155 @.@ 068 km ) state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan , running from two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Rockland to its junction with US Highway 41 ( US 41 ) in Copper Harbor . It generally runs southwest @-@ to @-@ northeast in the western half or Michigan 's Upper Peninsula . The northernmost segment , which closely parallels the shore of Lake Superior on the west side of the Keweenaw Peninsula , is highly scenic . 
 M @-@ 26 previously reached the Wisconsin border , but a section of the highway became US 45 . Other changes on the northern end of M @-@ 26 incorporated highways that were previously numbered M @-@ 111 and M @-@ 206 in the Eagle Harbor and Eagle River area . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Southern terminus to Houghton = = = 
 M @-@ 26 starts at an intersection with US 45 east of Rockland in Michigan 's Ontonagon County . From there it runs through the town of Mass City to the junction with M @-@ 38 east of Greenland . The two highways join for a short distance before M @-@ 26 separates turning northeast to Winona across the Houghton County line . In Twin Lakes M @-@ 26 passes the shores of the namesake lakes and Twin Lakes State Park . M @-@ 26 passes through wooded , hilly terrain in western Houghton County . The segment of roadway in South Range was recently realigned to smooth out curves in the roadway . From there north , M @-@ 26 runs generally downhill on approaching the western business district of Houghton and the Portage Lake Lift Bridge from the west . 
 = = = Portage Lake Lift Bridge = = = 
 The Portage Lake Lift Bridge connects the cities of Hancock and Houghton , Michigan by crossing over the Portage Waterway , an arm of Portage Lake which cuts across the Keweenaw Peninsula with a canal linking the final several miles to Lake Superior to the northwest . 
 As its name states , the bridge is a lift bridge with the middle section capable of being lifted from its low point of four feet clearance over the water to a clearance of thirty two feet to allow boats to pass underneath . The Portage Lake Lift Bridge is the widest and heaviest double decked vertical lift bridge in the world . The lower deck of the bridge was originally open to rail traffic , but this level is now closed to trains and is used in the winter for snowmobile traffic . Throughout the 1960s , 70s and 80s , the bridge was painted the same color as the Mackinac Bridge — cream and forest green — however , in the early 1990s , it was repainted in a cream and robins egg blue color scheme — exactly the same colors as the National Park Service 's ship Ranger III — to some demoting Houghton as the " Gateway to Isle Royale " . 
 = = = Hancock to Copper Harbor = = = 
 On the north end of the bridge , M @-@ 26 turns east while US 41 turns west into Hancock . M @-@ 26 passes through Ripley at the base of the Mt . Ripley Ski Area before turning north to Dollar Bay on the shore of the heavy polluted Torch Lake . Next are the twin communities of Lake Linden and Hubbell . M @-@ 26 forms the main streets of these as it passes north from Hubbell into Lake Linden . The highway then runs back to the west to rejoin US 41 in Calumet . US 41 / M @-@ 26 connects with the northern end of M @-@ 203 on the north side of town before heading out to Keweenaw County . In the town of Phoenix , M @-@ 26 separates from US 41 one last time , turning west for a stretch along the northern shoreline of the Keweenaw Peninsula . It passes through the communities of Eagle River ( county seat of Keweenaw County ) and Eagle Harbor . 
 M @-@ 26 in Eagle River crosses the namesake river on the glue @-@ laminated Eagle River Timber Bridge . The 152 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) bridge features two timber frame arches of 74 feet ( 23 m ) and 79 feet ( 24 m ) in length . The connecting work between the wood elements is steel . There are hinge points in the center of each arch . The deck is wood covered with an asphalt driving surface . Enough wood was used in construction to fabricate three or four average @-@ sized homes . All the wood was pressure @-@ treated , and the steel was galvanized and epoxy @-@ coated . <unk> of preservative and <unk> bolts will be the routine maintenance required every three years . 
 Past Eagle Harbor , M @-@ 26 meets the highly scenic Brockway Mountain Drive . The northern terminus of M @-@ 26 is located in Copper Harbor . The terminus is just past the second intersection with Brockway Mountain Drive near the marina and the location of the Isle Royale Queen ferry to Isle Royale National Park . 
 = = History = = 
 Before it was a state highway , many parts of the original route of M @-@ 26 was used as a military road , connecting Fort Wilkins at Copper Harbor with Fort Howard at Green Bay , Wisconsin . From 1919 until 1934 , M @-@ 26 was routed southward to the Wisconsin state line to a connection with STH @-@ 26 along what is now US 45 . 
 The original northern terminus of M @-@ 26 was in Laurium at M @-@ 15 ( now US 41 ) ; it was extended by 1927 along US 41 to Mohawk and then replacing M @-@ 83 to Gay . This extension would be reversed in 1933 when the Mohawk to Gay routing was turned over to Keweenaw County control . A second extension in 1935 along US 41 to Phoenix replaced M @-@ 129 between Phoenix and Eagle Harbor . At this time , M @-@ 206 was designated from M @-@ 26 to the Eagle Harbor light house . A rerouting of M @-@ 26 in November 1940 moved it between Phoenix and Eagle River , replacing M @-@ 111 . The segment between Phoenix and Eagle River along Copper Falls Mine Road was turned over to Keweenaw County at this time . 
 In 1979 , M @-@ 26 was rerouted through Dakota Heights , bisecting it . Park Avenue had formerly served as the main route from Houghton to Atlantic Mine , but this was replaced by the new route of the highway . 
 The Lake Shore Drive Bridge , which had carried M @-@ 26 over the Eagle River , was relegated to pedestrian use in 1990 after the adjacent Eagle River Timber Bridge opened for traffic . 
 In 2006 , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) opened a bypass around the southwest and southern edge of South Range in order to provide a safer route through the town . As of 4 October 2006 , MDOT has transferred jurisdiction of the necessary pieces of roadway to complete the M @-@ 26 bypass of South Range . 
 = = = M @-@ 111 = = = 
 After 1938 , the M @-@ 111 designation was given to an old M @-@ 6 routing in the Keweenaw Peninsula that ran between Eagle River and Phoenix along what is , now , modern @-@ day M @-@ 26 parallel to Eagle River . That incarnation lasted two years until M @-@ 111 was deleted and M @-@ 26 was realigned over it . The M @-@ 111 designation has not been used since being deleted in 1940 . 
 = = = M @-@ 206 = = = 
 M @-@ 206 was a state highway that served as a spur route from M @-@ 26 into Eagle Harbor and the Eagle Harbor Lighthouse in Keweenaw County in 1935 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Joran van der Sloot = 
 Joran Andreas Petrus van der Sloot ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> vɑn <unk> <unk> ] ; born 6 August 1987 ) is a Dutch citizen , the murderer of Stephany Flores Ramírez in Lima , in 2010 , and the primary suspect in the 2005 disappearance of Natalee Holloway , in Aruba . 
 After Flores Ramírez 's murder on 30 May 2010 van der Sloot fled to Chile , where he was arrested and extradited back to Peru for questioning regarding the murder . On 7 June 2010 , he confessed to bludgeoning Flores . He later tried to formally retract his confession , claiming that he had been intimidated by the National Police of Peru and framed by the FBI . A Peruvian judge ruled on 25 June 2010 that the confession was valid and on 13 January 2012 , Van der Sloot was sentenced to 28 years imprisonment for Flores ' murder . 
 Five years earlier , while living in Aruba , van der Sloot had been the primary suspect in the disappearance of American teenager Natalee Holloway , who disappeared in Aruba on 30 May 2005 , exactly five years before Flores ' murder . Van der Sloot was indicted by a federal grand jury in the United States for wire fraud and extortion related to Holloway 's whereabouts . Holloway 's disappearance remains unsolved . 
 The Holloway and Flores cases both attracted widespread media attention ; Time magazine declared Van der Sloot 's arrest the top crime story of 2010 . Van der Sloot was the subject of international news coverage from prison , leading to controversies that resulted in the investigation and suspension of several Peruvian officials . 
 = = Background = = 
 Joran van der Sloot was born in Arnhem , Netherlands . He is one of three sons born to Paul van der Sloot ( 1952 – 2010 ) , a lawyer , and Anita van der Sloot @-@ <unk> , an art teacher . In 1990 , his family moved from Arnhem to Aruba , where he was an honor student at the International School of Aruba . He was considered a star soccer and tennis athlete at the school . Van der Sloot competed in doubles tennis with his father at the Moët et Chandon Anniversary Cup in 2005 . He hoped to play for Saint Leo University near Tampa , Florida . Van der Sloot 's mother said he had a problem with lying and had a tendency to sneak out of the house at night to go to casinos . 
 = = Natalee Holloway disappearance = = 
 Van der Sloot ( then age 17 ) , along with the Kalpoe brothers , Deepak ( then age 21 ) and Satish ( then age 18 ) , was arrested on 9 June 2005 , as a suspect in the 30 May 2005 disappearance of an 18 @-@ year @-@ old American woman , Natalee Holloway , who was declared legally dead six years after she disappeared . The Kalpoes were released from custody on 4 July , but were re @-@ arrested on 26 August on suspicion of rape and murder , while van der Sloot remained in custody . Van der Sloot and the Kalpoes were released on 3 September because of a lack of evidence . After his release , Van Der Sloot was required to stay within Dutch territory pending the results of the investigation . On 5 September 2005 , van der Sloot returned to the Netherlands to study international business management at the <unk> University of Applied Sciences . On 14 September , a higher court removed the travel restrictions . Gerold G. Dompig , former deputy commissioner of the Aruba Police Force , stated that the initial arrests were made prematurely under pressure from Holloway 's family . Dompig charged that the family sidetracked the investigation by making it difficult for the police to collect evidence to solve the case . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 On 26 September 2005 , van der Sloot told the American television show A Current Affair that neither he nor the Kalpoe brothers had sex with Natalee , but he admitted that they initially agreed to lie to the authorities . He said that they first told police that Holloway was dropped off alone at her hotel , while he later said that he was dropped off with her at the beach . He stated that he left Holloway alone at the beach at her request and that he regretted it . 
 On 6 February 2006 , on Good Morning America , van der Sloot 's parents stated that their son was unfairly singled out and that the investigation left them devastated . 
 On 16 February 2006 , while van der Sloot and his father were in New York City for an interview with ABC Primetime , they were served with a lawsuit filed by Natalee 's parents , Beth and Dave Holloway , alleging personal injury ; the case was dismissed on jurisdictional grounds that August . 
 In April 2007 , De <unk> Natalee Holloway ( The Case of Natalee Holloway ) , a Dutch language book by van der Sloot and reporter <unk> <unk> , was published by Sijthoff in the Netherlands . Van der Sloot started writing the book while attending business classes in Arnhem . He stated in the introduction , " I see this book as my opportunity to be open and honest about everything that happened , for anyone who wants to read it . " 
 = = = 2007 search and arrest = = = 
 On 27 April 2007 , a new search involving some twenty investigators was launched at van der Sloot 's parents ' home on Aruba . Dutch authorities searched the yard and surrounding area , using shovels and thin metal rods to penetrate the dirt . A spokesman for the prosecutor 's office , Vivian van der Biezen , stated " The investigation has never stopped and the Dutch authorities are completely reviewing the case for new indications " . A statement released directly from the prosecutor 's office stated : " The team has indications that justify a more thorough search . " Investigators did not comment on what prompted the new search , except that it was not related to van der Sloot 's book . 
 On 21 November 2007 , van der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers were re @-@ arrested in Arnhem , Netherlands and Aruba for " suspicion of involvement in voluntary manslaughter and causing serious bodily harm that resulted in the death of Natalee Holloway " because of what the Aruba prosecutor 's office stated was " new incriminating evidence " related to the disappearance of Holloway . Van der Sloot was returned to Aruba on 23 November , and a court hearing on 26 November ruled to continue his detention for eight days . The Kalpoe brothers were released on 1 December . Van der Sloot was ordered released on 7 December , and he was released without charge the same day . 
 = = = 2008 Dutch television sting operations = = = 
 On 11 January 2008 , after being challenged on the Dutch late @-@ night talk show Pauw & <unk> by crime reporter Peter R. de Vries , Van der Sloot threw a glass of red wine into De Vries ' face . 
 On 3 February 2008 , an undercover video made by De Vries aired on Dutch television , purporting to show van der Sloot smoking marijuana and admitting to being present during Holloway 's death . The show was watched by 7 million viewers in the Netherlands and was the most popular non @-@ sports program in Dutch television history . Patrick van der Eem , working undercover for De Vries , had befriended van der Sloot , who was unaware that he was being taped when he said that Holloway had suffered some kind of seizure while having sex on the beach . After failing to revive her , van der Sloot said that he summoned a friend named Daury . The two men never phoned for medical help nor did they check Natalee to determine if she might still be alive . Then , according to van der Sloot , Daury volunteered to load her on a boat and he dumped Natalee 's body into the sea . The prosecutor in Aruba determined the video was admissible , but the evidence was deemed " insufficient " to warrant van der Sloot 's , or anyone 's , arrest . Although the taped confession appeared damning , van der Sloot argued that he was lying to impress van der Eem , whom he believed to be a drug dealer . On 22 September 2008 , in New York City , De Vries accepted an International Emmy Award in Current Affairs for his coverage while accompanied by Beth Holloway . Under pressure of the attention from the program , van der Sloot voluntarily checked into a psychiatric clinic before departing for Thailand . He moved to Muang Ake , a suburb of Bangkok , to study business at <unk> University , but dropped out and bought <unk> Cup , a restaurant next to the campus that served sandwiches and pizza . 
 In November 2008 , De Vries aired undercover footage of van der Sloot making preparations for the apparent sex trafficking of Thai women in Bangkok . De Vries claimed that van der Sloot was making $ 13 @,@ 000 for every woman sold into prostitution in the <unk> van der Sloot used the alias of " Murphy Jenkins " to avoid Thai authorities . Peruvian Minister of Justice Aurelio Pastor said that Thailand is pursuing criminal charges against van der Sloot . According to The National Enquirer , he is being investigated for his involvement in the disappearance of young women he may have recruited for a Thai sex slave gang while posing as a production consultant for a modeling agency that would send them to Europe . 
 On 19 April 2009 , van der Sloot was portrayed by actor Jacques <unk> in the Lifetime television film Natalee Holloway , which was based on the bestselling book Loving Natalee : A Mother 's Testament of Hope and Faith by Natalee 's mother Beth Holloway . The movie brought in the highest television ratings in Lifetime 's 11 @-@ year history at the time . Van der Sloot himself watched the film one evening in 2010 , according to his friend John Ludwick , and said that some parts were true while others were not . 
 In August 2009 , van der Sloot was spotted in Macau at the Asia Pacific Poker Tour . He won over $ 12 @,@ 000 that year in an online poker tournament . He described himself on his YouTube page as " a professional poker player " and cited the poker strategy guide Ace on the River as his favorite book . In early 2010 , van der Sloot sold his restaurant business and returned to Aruba after the death of his father . 
 = = = Father 's involvement in the case = = = 
 Joran 's father , Paulus Antonius Petrus Johanna " Paul " van der Sloot ( 15 February 1952 – 10 February 2010 ) , was arrested on 22 June 2005 , for questioning in Holloway 's disappearance . Paul was ordered released on 26 June after three days of questioning . According to Aruba 's chief prosecutor , one of the Kalpoe brothers told investigators that Paul , who at the time was training to be a judge , advised that without a body , the police would have no case . Beth Twitty ( Holloway 's married name at the time ) pursued van der Sloot 's parents in the ensuing media circus on Aruba . She said that Paul acknowledged that they could not control their son and had sent him to a psychiatrist . 
 On 10 November 2005 , Paul van der Sloot won an unjust detention action against the Aruban government , clearing him as a suspect and allowing him to retain his government contract . The elder van der Sloot then brought a second action , seeking monetary damages for himself and his family because of his false arrest . The action was initially successful , but the award of 40 @,@ 000 Aruban florins ( US $ 22 @,@ 300 ) was reversed on appeal . The family 's finances were depleted by the legal expenses . In January 2007 , Paul found work as a managing partner at the law firm that represented him . 
 On 24 November 2008 , On the Record aired an interview with Joran van der Sloot in which he said that he sold Holloway into sexual slavery , receiving money both when Holloway was taken , and later on to keep quiet . He also alleged that he paid the Kalpoe brothers for their assistance , and that his father paid off two police officers who had learned that Holloway was taken to Venezuela . Joran van der Sloot later retracted the statements made in the interview . The show also aired part of an audio recording provided by van der Sloot , which he alleged is a phone conversation between him and his father , in which the father displays knowledge of his son 's purported involvement in human trafficking . According to Mos , the voice heard on the recording is not that of Paul van der Sloot . The Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf reported that the " father 's " voice is almost certainly that of Joran himself , trying to speak in a lower tone . 
 On 8 January 2010 , Paul cancelled his partnership at the law firm where he had been working . On 10 February 2010 , he died of a heart attack at the age of 57 while playing tennis in Aruba . Joran returned to Aruba soon afterward and turned to gambling . His mother Anita said that Joran had severe mental problems and blamed himself for his father 's death . He left before she could have him psychiatrically committed , leaving a note : " I 'm gone , do not worry . " 
 = = = 2010 charges in the United States = = = 
 Around 29 March 2010 , van der Sloot allegedly contacted John Q. Kelly , legal representative of Natalee 's mother Beth Holloway , with an offer to reveal the location of her daughter 's body and the circumstances surrounding her death for an advance of $ 25 @,@ 000 against a total of $ 250 @,@ 000 . Kelly said that he secretly went to Aruba in April to meet with van der Sloot , who was desperate for money , and gave him $ 100 . Kelly notified the Federal Bureau of Investigation to set up a sting operation with the Aruban authorities . On 10 May , van der Sloot allegedly accepted the amount of $ 15 @,@ 000 by wire transfer to his account in the Netherlands , following a cash payment of $ 10 @,@ 000 that was videotaped by undercover investigators in Aruba . In exchange , van der Sloot told Kelly that his father buried Holloway 's remains in the foundation of a house . Authorities determined that the information that he in return provided was false , because the house had not yet been built at the time of Holloway 's disappearance . Van der Sloot later e @-@ mailed Kelly that he lied about the house . Holloway was shocked that the FBI did not promptly file extortion charges against van der Sloot , allowing him to leave freely with the money to Bogotá , Colombia , on his way to Lima , Peru . The FBI and the office of the U.S. Attorney contended that the case had not yet been sufficiently developed . 
 On 3 June 2010 , the U.S. District Court of Northern Alabama charged van der Sloot with extortion and wire fraud . U.S. Attorney Joyce White Vance issued an arrest warrant through Interpol to have van der Sloot prosecuted in the United States . On 4 June , at the request of the U.S. Justice Department , Dutch authorities raided and confiscated items from two homes in the Netherlands , one of them belonging to reporter Jaap <unk> who had previously interviewed van der Sloot and claimed knowledge of his criminal activities . Aruban investigators used information gathered from the extortion case to launch a new search at a beach , but no new evidence was found . The Solicitor General said they would not seek van der Sloot 's extradition to Aruba . On 30 June , a federal grand jury formally indicted van der Sloot of the two charges . The indictment filed with the U.S. District Court seeks the forfeiture of the $ 25 @,@ 100 that had been paid to van der Sloot . 
 In an interview published by De Telegraaf on 6 September 2010 , van der Sloot admitted to the extortion plot , stating : " I wanted to get back at Natalee 's family . Her parents have been making my life tough for five years . " Van der Sloot 's attorney said that his client was not paid for the interview and suggested that " maybe there were some mistakes in the translation . " 
 On 9 March 2014 , the Peruvian government announced that van der Sloot would face extradition to the United States in the year 2038 to face charges of extortion and wire fraud , after completion of his 28 @-@ year sentence in Peru for the murder of Stephany Tatiana Flores Ramírez ( see below ) . In February 2016 , an undercover reporter filmed Joran confessing to the murder of Natalee Holloway . The film shows Joran , in Dutch , laughing over how he never told the truth about the whole event and that he did in fact kill Natalee . His Peruvian wife is also present during this conversation . 
 = = Death of Stephany Flores = = 
 On 30 May 2010 , the fifth anniversary of Holloway 's disappearance , Stephany Tatiana Flores Ramírez , 21 , died at the Hotel TAC , in the Miraflores District of Lima , Peru . On 2 June , a hotel employee found her beaten body in room 309 , which had been registered in van der Sloot 's name . He had departed from the hotel without returning the room key and left the television running . A tennis racquet , identified by the coroner as a possible homicide weapon , was recovered from the room . A hotel guest and an employee came forward to say they saw van der Sloot and the victim entering the hotel room together , and the police obtained video of the two playing cards at the same table the night before at the Atlantic City Casino in Lima . Van der Sloot had entered Peru via Colombia on 14 May 2010 to attend the Latin American Poker Tour . 
 Flores Ramírez was a business student less than a year from graduation at the University of Lima . She was the daughter of Ricardo Flores , a former president of the Peruvian Automobile Club and winner of the " <unk> del Inca " rally in 1991 . A prominent businessman and entertainment organizer , he ran for vice president in 2001 and for president five years later on fringe tickets . Flores said that police found date rape drugs in his daughter 's car , parked about 50 blocks from the hotel where she died . Her jewelry , money , ID and credit cards were missing , including about $ 1 @,@ 000 her father had given her to purchase a laptop , and over $ 10 @,@ 000 she had won earlier at the casino . Stephany reportedly kept this money in her car , but a police search found no money in it . 
 After Flores Ramírez 's family reported her missing , police retrieved the hotel surveillance tape and obtained van der Sloot 's name and national identification number . Her brother 's wife discovered van der Sloot 's background in a Google search about an hour before her body was found . 
 = = = Arrest = = = 
 Peruvian officials named van der Sloot as the lone suspect in the homicide investigation . Interpol issued an international arrest warrant for van der Sloot , believing that he had fled the country to Chile and may have been traveling to Argentina to return to Aruba . Van der Sloot was sighted entering Chile via the <unk> border crossing , north of Arica , on 31 May 2010 . His ex @-@ girlfriend , Melody <unk> , said that van der Sloot sent her a text message asking for money to buy a ticket back to Aruba . 
 On 3 June , van der Sloot was arrested near <unk> by the Investigations Police of Chile while traveling in a rented taxi on Highway 68 between the coastal city of Viña del Mar and the capital Santiago . He was found with a laptop , foreign currency , a business card case , detailed charts of ocean currents around Lima , and bloody clothes . His phone 's SIM card was missing , which made mobile phone tracking of his location impossible . He told Chilean police that unidentified armed robbers hid in the hotel room and killed Flores Ramírez when she disobeyed their order to be quiet . Van der Sloot 's Dutch attorney claimed that his client was on his way to Santiago to turn himself in . He was subsequently expelled and transported by Chilean police in a Cessna 310 back to Arica to be handed over to Peruvian authorities at the <unk> border crossing on 4 June . Van der Sloot arrived at Lima police headquarters on 5 June , where he was interrogated about the death while represented by attorney Luz Maria Romero Chinchay . The Dutch embassy provided a translator for his defense . He was held in a seventh floor cell and permitted to contact his mother . Van der Sloot was placed on suicide watch by guards after it was reported that he deliberately hit his head against a wall . On 10 June , he was moved to a cell at the prosecutor 's office in central Lima . 
 = = = Forensic investigation = = = 
 Surveillance video from the Atlantic City Casino recorded Flores Ramírez winning $ 10 @,@ 000 at a baccarat table area on 25 May 2010 , while accompanied by a male friend who was not van der Sloot . According to casino spokesperson Luis Laos , she also won $ 237 playing poker on 29 May and it was common for people to know the identities of big winners . Laos stated that van der Sloot did not win any money that night . At 3 : 00 a.m. on 30 May , Flores Ramírez was recorded entering the casino alone and walking to a poker table where van der Sloot was <unk> van der Sloot had not registered for the Latin American Poker Tour . The deadline to pay the $ 2 @,@ 700 entry fee for the 2 June event at the casino was 30 May . 
 Police released hotel security video showing van der Sloot and Flores Ramírez entering the Hotel TAC together at about 5 : 00 a.m. on 30 May . At about 8 : 10 a.m. , he is shown walking across the street to a supermarket and returning with bread and two cups of coffee . Around 8 : 45 a.m. , he is seen leaving the hotel alone with his bags . 
 An autopsy ruled that Flores Ramírez did not have sexual intercourse before her death and that she was not under the influence of enough alcohol to prevent her from resisting an attack . She suffered blunt force trauma to her head , causing a brain hemorrhage , cranial fracture , and breaking her neck . She also suffered significant injuries to her face and showed signs of asphyxiation , according to court documents . Flores Ramírez tested positive for the presence of amphetamines . The lab report does not indicate whether the victim took the drugs willingly or unknowingly . The stains on van der Sloot 's clothes matched the blood type of Flores Ramírez . Blood was also found on the floor , hallway , and mattress in the hotel room . Police stated that DNA tests would be conducted on the clothes , skin found under the victim 's fingernails , and the previously recovered tennis racquet . Ricardo Flores stated in interviews that his daughter 's body needed to be exhumed to gather the fingernail DNA evidence , and that her body had not been cremated for this reason . 
 On 14 March 2011 , the National Police of Peru provided a copy of the hard disk drive from van der Sloot 's laptop computer to the FBI . Colonel Oscar González of the high tech division of the Peruvian police stated that the U.S. federal investigation was interested in information related to Holloway 's disappearance and the alleged extortion of her family . Peruvian detectives determined that the laptop accessed information about the Holloway case before Flores Ramírez arrived in Van der Sloot 's hotel room ; it was then used to visit two poker websites at around the time Flores Ramírez was present in the room . According to a police dossier , the laptop was later used to search Google for the subjects : " relationship between the Peruvian and Chilean police " , " Chilean border pass " , " buses in Chile " , and " countries that do not extradite in Latin America . " 
 = = = Confession and retraction = = = 
 On 7 June 2010 , van der Sloot reportedly confessed to killing Flores Ramírez , after hours of interrogation . He initially proclaimed his innocence . According to an expert in Peruvian law , the confession fit a defense strategy of trying to get the charge reduced to manslaughter , which is punishable by 6 to 20 years in prison , while a conviction for murder could result in up to 35 years imprisonment . The prosecution was seeking a sentence of 30 years . Peru does not issue life sentences in standard cases of murder and has abolished capital punishment in all but exceptional circumstances , such as crimes committed under military law . A life sentence can be issued for a murder committed during the commission of a robbery . Peruvian president Alan García Pérez used the case to seek the reinstatement of the death penalty for murder . 
 On 8 June , Peruvian investigators reportedly planned to take van der Sloot back to the hotel room for a re @-@ enactment of the crime scene as part of standard procedure , but waived it on the basis that his alleged confession was remarkably complete and corroborated by evidence . In the written confession released by Peruvian police , van der Sloot recounted that he briefly left the hotel to get some coffee and bread , and returned to find Flores Ramírez using his laptop computer without his permission . A police source stated that she may have found information linking him to the disappearance of Holloway . An altercation allegedly began and she attempted to escape . According to the written confession that has been released by Peruvian authorities , van der Sloot stated , " I did not want to do it . The girl intruded into my private life . . . she didn 't have any right . I went to her and I hit her . She was scared , we argued and she tried to escape . I grabbed her by the neck and hit her . " Van der Sloot reportedly stated that he was stoned on marijuana at the time . A detective linked to the case said that van der Sloot considered getting rid of the body in a suitcase , but decided against it because he would have been stopped at the front desk . He then reportedly drank espresso and took amphetamines to counter fatigue before fleeing . 
 Criminal police chief Cesar Guardia said van der Sloot " let slip that he knew the place " where Holloway 's body is buried . Guardia stated that the interrogation was limited to their case in Peru , which he considered " practically closed , " and that questions about Holloway 's disappearance were avoided . Guardia said that the confession contains lies because van der Sloot 's " toxicological report shows no signs that he had ingested any kind of drug . " Felonies committed under the influence of drugs can gain leniency in Peruvian courts . Guardia said that the motive for the crime was robbery . Van der Sloot reportedly offered a different motive for killing Flores Ramírez , stating that he " feared that she would go to the police . " On 14 June , Peruvian authorities released written transcripts of van der Sloot 's alleged confession . His mother Anita expressed concern that her son 's confession may have been coerced . According to van der Sloot 's former attorney Luz Maria Romero Chinchay , his mother advised him not to make any statements nor sign anything , but it was too late . 
 Van der Sloot later retracted this confession in a prison cell interview with Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf , claiming that he had been intimidated and " tricked " by police with a promise to be transferred to the Netherlands . He stated that at the time he signed the confession documents , he did not understand the content as it was in Spanish . He was quoted : " In my blind panic , I signed everything , but didn 't even know what it said . " Van der Sloot said that he was lured to Peru and framed by another gambler named Elton Garcia , who he claimed was working undercover for the FBI . Van der Sloot 's attorney Maximo Alonso Altez Navarro stated his intention to resign because the case " created many problems " for him . He had been threatened and harassed for taking the case , and van der Sloot 's family was unable to afford his legal expenses . However , Altez Navarro stayed on to file a motion to void the confession on the grounds that his client was not properly represented during his interrogation . On 25 June , Superior Court Judge Wilder <unk> <unk> rejected the motion , noting that van der Sloot was represented by a state @-@ appointed lawyer and provided a translator by the Dutch embassy . Altez Navarro said that van der Sloot was as " depressed " as anyone in prison would be . 
 = = = Criminal proceedings = = = 
 On 11 June 2010 , Lima Superior Court Judge Juan Buendia ordered van der Sloot held on charges of first @-@ degree murder and robbery , determining that he acted with " ferocity and great cruelty " . Under Peruvian law , Van der Sloot was not eligible to be released on bail , and would be tried by a panel of three judges rather than a jury . A simple majority of the three was required for conviction . Police transported van der Sloot on the same day from Lima 's Palace of Justice in an armored truck while angry onlookers yelled and threw rotten lettuce . He was taken to Miguel Castro Castro maximum security prison and placed in a cell near the prison director 's office for his own safety . He is registered as inmate # <unk> and separated from the general prison population under 24 @-@ hour guard in a high @-@ security cell block where the only other inmate is alleged Colombian hitman Hugo Trujillo Ospina . Van der Sloot reportedly offered to disclose the location of Holloway 's body in exchange for transfer to an Aruban prison because of fear for his life in Miguel Castro Castro prison . President Alan García Pérez said that van der Sloot would have to stand trial for the homicide before any extradition request would be considered . He also stated that van der Sloot will serve his prison sentence in Peru . There is no treaty for the transfer of prisoners between Peru and the Netherlands . 
 On 15 June , Aruban and Peruvian authorities announced that they would cooperate in their respective cases involving van der Sloot . Aruban investigators expected to be able to interview van der Sloot in Peru in August , after Peruvian authorities had completed their investigation . At his first formal hearing within the on @-@ site courtroom of Miguel Castro Castro prison on 21 June , Van der Sloot refused to discuss the case with Judge Carlos Morales Cordova , claiming that his rights and due process were violated . Van der Sloot filed a complaint with the National Police of Peru , accusing chief detective Miguel Angel <unk> Ore of misconduct . He also claimed that his laptop had been improperly searched . Van der Sloot 's defense counsel filed a motion of habeas corpus disputing the legality of his detention and to nullify statements he gave to police , but the motion was declared " unfounded " by Superior Court Judge Wilder <unk> <unk> on 25 June . The judge upheld all three depositions given by van der Sloot to police and stated that the defendant 's laptop was sealed by the court . Defense attorney Altez Navarro vowed to appeal all the way to the Supreme Court of Peru and the Inter @-@ American Court of Human Rights with a legal strategy to " paralyze the process " . The Peruvian court said that this would not hold up the case against van der Sloot . 
 Altez Navarro stated that he filed suit against attorney Luz Maria Romero Chinchay , who first represented van der Sloot during his interrogation , charging her with abuse of authority , conspiracy to commit a crime , and misrepresentation because he did not find her name on the list of public defenders from the Ministry of Justice . Altez Navarro also filed a complaint against van der Sloot 's translator , insisting that he misrepresented himself as an official translator of the Dutch embassy . Romero Chinchay rejected the claims against her , stating that van der Sloot had selected her as a private attorney after declining another defense attorney appointed by the state . She contradicted his claims that he did not understand what he was signing by stating that she was able to speak with him in perfect Spanish . She said that van der Sloot was interested in talking about the Holloway case , thinking that it might get him extradited to Aruba . Romero Chinchay also said that when she told van der Sloot that she noticed he was signing various documents with very different signatures , he signaled for her to be quiet . 
 Altez Navarro stated on 21 August 2010 that the case was stagnating because an official interpreter was unable to be found for the case in Peru . The Peruvian association of translators and interpreters and the Dutch embassy both separately stated at the time that they have been unable to locate one to officially translate Spanish into Dutch . Unlike Aruba and the United States , Peru does not guarantee the right to a speedy trial . On 6 September , a Peruvian appeals court voted 2 to 1 to reject van der Sloot 's motion that he is being unlawfully held . Because 3 votes are required for a decision , if a fourth judge votes in van der Sloot 's favor , a fifth judge will be required to break the tie . Peruvian statutes permit a suspect to be detained for up to 18 months for interrogation , though Altez Navarro expressed skepticism that law enforcement officers will do so with his client . 
 In February 2011 , Altez Navarro filed a " violent emotion " defense with the court , arguing that van der Sloot had entered into a state of temporary insanity because Flores Ramírez found out about his connection to Holloway from his laptop computer . Under Peruvian law , if the judge accepts this crime of passion argument , the sentence for such a plea could be reduced to only 3 to 5 years ; Altez Navarro noted that this could allow van der Sloot to be eligible for parole in as soon as 20 months . Oscar González of the Peruvian police stated that an examination of van der Sloot 's laptop determined that Flores Ramírez did not access such information while she was in the hotel room with him . 
 = = = Guilty plea and conviction = = = 
 On 11 January 2012 , van der Sloot pleaded guilty to the " qualified murder " and simple robbery of Flores . He was convicted and sentenced to 28 years imprisonment for the murder on 13 January , and , he must pay $ 75 @,@ 000 to the Flores family . Hours after learning of the sentence , van der Sloot was transferred to a maximum security prison , Piedras <unk> , located north of Lima . He is currently expected to be released on 10 June 2038 . 
 In August 2014 , van der Sloot was transferred to <unk> prison in the mountainous South of Peru , where circumstances are harsh due to the location 's altitude . Two months later , a Dutch online news service claimed that van der Sloot was stabbed and critically injured by fellow prisoners in Peru . Although van der Sloot 's wife 's claim of a stabbing is contested by Peruvian authorities , photos have been published showing van der Sloot as suffering from multiple stab wounds from two separate attacks . 
 = = = Public reaction = = = 
 Public outcry in Peru has been fueled by local media , which labeled van der Sloot a " monster , " " serial killer , " and " psychopath . " The coverage of this controversy highlighted cases of other women dying at the hands of foreigners . Peruvian and Colombian newspapers published articles about the investigation of the disappearance of two young women who frequented casinos during van der Sloot 's stay in at least two Bogotá hotels from 6 to 14 May 2010 , prior to entering Peru . However , the Administrative Department of Security of Colombia do not consider van der Sloot a suspect as they believe his presence in Bogotá was merely in transit to Peru . 
 Dutch daily newspaper <unk> warned that the overwhelming pressure on authorities of van der Sloot 's presumed guilt risked turning the case into a show trial . The Dutch consulate told Peruvian authorities that it was concerned how van der Sloot was being treated and presented to the media . 
 In December 2010 , Time magazine named van der Sloot 's arrest the most notable criminal event of the year , ahead of the Belgian love triangle skydiving murder case , the Chinese school attacks and the Elizabeth Smart kidnapping trial . ABC News listed the coverage of van der Sloot 's murder confession by Good Morning America among the most read stories from its website in 2010 . CBS 42 , the news affiliate in Birmingham near Holloway 's hometown , named the criminal charges filed against van der Sloot in 2010 among the top ten stories of the year in Alabama . Radio Netherlands Worldwide identified him as one of the most talked about Dutch people of the year . 
 He generates a lot of media attention , which costs us time and it is not good for the relationship between the Netherlands and Peru . 
 = = = Media coverage at Miguel Castro prison = = = 
 Van der Sloot 's cell became the target of a media circus , with reporters vying to gain exclusive access and report about his prison surroundings . Since his incarceration , he has only consented to interviews to De Telegraaf , in which he admitted to extorting the Holloway family and said that he received a number of marriage proposals in his cell , including one from a woman who wanted to have his child . Van der Sloot reportedly receives fan mail from around the world , though mostly from women residing in the United States and the Netherlands . According to sources within the prison , Van der Sloot sought $ 1 million in exchange for an on @-@ camera interview . 
 The Office of Internal Affairs of the National Penitentiary Institute of Peru began administrative and disciplinary action on 23 August 2010 , when Peruvian network América Televisión aired a picture of van der Sloot with three other inmates that had been taken with official photographic equipment at Miguel Castro Castro prison . The photo included van der Sloot casually posing with Colombian hitman Hugo Trujillo Ospina , accused of the contract killing of Peruvian entrepreneur Myriam <unk> , and American William Trickett Smith II , accused of killing and dismembering his Peruvian wife . Van der Sloot and Smith have been referred to by local media as " the foreigners accused of the most talked @-@ about assassinations in our country . " 
 On 11 September 2010 , Beth Holloway and Peter R. De Vries traveled to Peru with a Dutch television crew to visit the prison . According to van der Sloot 's attorney Maximo Alonso Altez Navarro , his client was taken to meet them " practically by force . " Altez Navarro stated that the meeting with Holloway took " less than one minute . " Holloway said that she told van der Sloot that she had " no hate in her soul " for him and asked about her daughter 's disappearance , to which van der Sloot responded by saying that he could not speak to her without his lawyer present and handing her his business card . According to Altez Navarro , Holloway was " snuck " into the prison without being identified by the Dutch media crew who she was with . A prison spokesperson stated that Holloway 's name was not found in the visitor registry . Holloway and the crew were removed from the prison , reportedly after a hidden camera was discovered by the guards . Representatives for Holloway and De Vries denied that a hidden camera was involved or that anything was seized . Miguel Castro Castro prison warden Alex <unk> Peña was suspended after video segments of the confrontation between Holloway 's mother and van der Sloot later began airing on Dutch network <unk> . 
 In October 2010 , América Televisión broadcast video of a transaction for marijuana within the prison that was conducted by a shirtless man who was addressed as " gringo Van der Sloot . " Defense attorney Altez Navarro said that the situation was " staged " and asked the National Penitentiary Institute to investigate how it was leaked . Prison spokesperson Bruno Guzman said that van der Sloot had been painting his cell " to improve his conditions " and that the incident was being investigated . 
 In November 2010 , a forensic expert determined that a jawbone found on an Aruban beach was from a young woman . A part of the bone was sent to The Hague for testing by the Netherlands Forensic Institute against Natalee Holloway 's dental records . According to Altez Navarro , Van der Sloot began laughing when notified of the developments . Aruba Solicitor @-@ General Taco Stein later announced that the bone was confirmed to be not from Holloway . 
 Van der Sloot 's mother Anita stated in a Dutch interview that her son could have killed Flores Ramírez and that she will not visit him at the prison . She said in another interview that she hopes to talk to the family of the victim and apologize to them . 
 " I believe in karma , I believe that very strongly . I believe that if you do things that you shouldn 't do , that a lot of shit happens to you , " she said . " He didn 't want to listen to his parents . He didn 't listen to me , this last time . I tried to do my best . I don 't think I could have done more . He 's considered an adult right now . He has to do whatever he needs to do , and that is tell the truth ( about ) what happened . " 
 In February 2011 , Altez Navarro protested a decision by prison officials to deny Radio Netherlands Worldwide permission for a subsequent interview with van der Sloot . Altez Navarro claimed that the ruling was influenced by upcoming general elections . 
 On 5 July 2011 , St. Martin 's Press published Portrait of a Monster : Joran van der Sloot , a Murder in Peru , and the Natalee Holloway Mystery by Lisa Pulitzer and Cole Thompson . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In a prison ceremony on 4 July 2014 , van der Sloot was married to Leidy ( alt . Leydi ) Figueroa , a Peruvian woman whom he met while she was selling goods inside the prison . She was 7 months pregnant with his child at the time . On 28 September 2014 L. Figueroa gave birth to an 8 lb baby girl in Peru 
 = Maryland Route 10 = 
 Maryland Route 10 ( MD 10 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as the Arundel Expressway , the highway runs 7 @.@ 17 miles ( 11 @.@ 54 km ) from MD 2 in Pasadena north to Interstate 695 ( I @-@ 695 ) near Glen Burnie . MD 10 is a four- to six @-@ lane freeway that serves as a bypass of MD 2 through Pasadena and Glen Burnie in northeastern Anne Arundel County . The Arundel Expressway was planned as a Baltimore – Annapolis freeway to provide relief to MD 2 between the cities as early as the 1950s . However , the portion of MD 10 south of Pasadena was removed from state plans when the I @-@ 97 corridor was chosen for the intercity freeway in the 1970s . MD 10 was constructed from I @-@ 695 to MD 710 in the early 1970s and continued south to MD 648 in the late 1970s . The freeway was extended south to MD 100 and completed to MD 2 in the late 1980s and early 1990s , respectively . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 10 begins at an intersection with MD 2 ( Governor Ritchie Highway ) in Pasadena . The highway heads north as a four @-@ lane freeway to a partial interchange with MD 100 ( Paul T. Pitcher Memorial Highway ) . There is no access from northbound MD 10 to eastbound MD 100 or from westbound MD 100 to southbound MD 10 . MD 10 and MD 100 briefly run concurrently northwest as an eight @-@ lane freeway and diverge at another partial interchange ; in both carriageways , traffic must move over two lanes to remain on the same route . Just north of the MD 100 split , MD 10 has a half @-@ diamond interchange with MD 177 ( Mountain Road ) . That interchange has ramps from southbound MD 10 to MD 177 and from MD 177 to northbound MD 10 . Traffic from eastbound MD 100 to northbound MD 10 and from southbound MD 10 to westbound MD 100 uses MD 177 and MD 2 as intermediaries . 
 MD 10 continues north from MD 177 through the east side of Glen Burnie as a six @-@ lane freeway . The highway crosses over Marley Creek and has a partial cloverleaf interchange with MD 648 ( Baltimore – Annapolis Boulevard ) . MD 10 parallels MD 270 ( Furnace Branch Road ) north then meets the latter highway at a partial cloverleaf interchange . The highway crosses Furnace Branch and has a partial cloverleaf interchange with MD 710 ( Ordnance Road ) , where northbound MD 10 becomes two lanes wide . MD 10 reaches its northern terminus at a trumpet interchange with I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) . The sweeping ramp from MD 10 to westbound I @-@ 695 merges into a collector @-@ distributor lane that allows access from MD 10 to northbound MD 2 in Brooklyn Park . 
 MD 10 is a part of the main National Highway System for its entire length . 
 = = History = = 
 The Arundel Expressway was proposed as early as 1956 as a freeway connecting Baltimore and Annapolis to relieve congestion on MD 2 . By 1966 , the highway was planned to begin at MD 173 at the city limits of Baltimore , intersect a planned cross @-@ Patapsco section of the Baltimore Beltway , follow its current path to Pasadena , then continue paralleling MD 2 south to near U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) and US 301 . The portion of the Arundel Expressway inside the Beltway was removed from plans in 1967 , with the Beltway instead serving to connect the expressway with highways into Baltimore . The portion of the freeway south of Pasadena was planned to have intermediate interchanges at MD 648 in Severna Park and Jones Station Road ( now College Parkway ) in Arnold , and a toll plaza just south of the MD 100 interchange . The portion of the Arundel Expressway south of MD 100 was removed from state plans by 1975 . Instead of a Baltimore – Annapolis freeway following the MD 2 corridor , in June 1979 the Maryland State Highway Administration announced it was constructing the freeway along the MD 3 and MD 178 corridors . 
 The first section of modern MD 10 to open was the portion of freeway shared with MD 100 , which opened in November 1970 from MD 2 to its eastern terminus . Work began on the Arundel Expressway proper in 1970 when the interchange between the expressway and the Baltimore Beltway was started in 1970 . MD 710 was relocated over much of its length to make way for the construction of the freeways in 1972 . The Arundel Expressway opened from the Beltway to MD 710 in December 1972 and was marked as MD 10 by 1974 . Construction on the extension south to MD 648 was underway by 1975 . MD 10 opened south to MD 270 in October 1977 and to MD 648 in March 1978 . The freeway was proposed to continue south to MD 100 , but that freeway extension was removed from short @-@ term plans by 1981 . 
 Construction began in 1987 to extend MD 10 , which was dubbed the " Road to Nowhere , " from MD 648 to a more logical southern terminus . The freeway opened from MD 648 to MD 100 in October 1988 . The final segment of MD 10 , from MD 100 to MD 2 , opened in March 1991 . The Arundel Expressway was planned to carry 75 @,@ 000 as a complete Baltimore – Annapolis freeway . However , as of 2013 , only 51 @,@ 621 vehicles used the highway daily on its most traveled portion between MD 270 and MD 710 . MD 10 functions as a bypass of MD 2 north of Pasadena , but has not fulfilled its original purpose to relieve traffic congestion on MD 2 south to Annapolis . By the time of MD 10 's completion in 1991 , MD 2 was proposed to be expanded to six lanes south of MD 10 . As of 2013 , MD 2 has yet to be widened south of Pasadena . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . The entire route is in Anne Arundel County . 
 = Heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia = 
 Heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia ( HIT ) is the development of thrombocytopenia ( a low platelet count ) , due to the administration of various forms of heparin , an anticoagulant . HIT predisposes to thrombosis , the abnormal formation of blood clots inside a blood vessel , and when thrombosis is identified the condition is called heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis ( <unk> ) . HIT is caused by the formation of abnormal antibodies that activate platelets . If someone receiving heparin develops new or worsening thrombosis , or if the platelet count falls , HIT can be confirmed with specific blood tests . 
 The treatment of HIT requires both protection from thrombosis and choice of an agent that will not reduce the platelet count further . Several alternatives are available for this purpose and mainly used are danaparoid , fondaparinux , argatroban and <unk> 
 While heparin was discovered in the 1930s , HIT was not reported until the 1960s . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Heparin may be used for both prevention and the treatment of thrombosis . It exists in two main forms : an " unfractionated " form that can be injected under the skin or through an intravenous infusion , and a " low molecular weight " form that is generally given subcutaneously ( administered under the skin ) . Commonly used low molecular weight <unk> are enoxaparin , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 In HIT , the platelet count in the blood falls below the normal range , a condition called thrombocytopenia . However , it is generally not low enough to lead to an increased risk of bleeding . Most people with HIT will therefore not experience any symptoms . Typically the platelet count will fall 5 – 14 days after heparin is first given ; if someone has received heparin in the previous three months , the fall in platelet count may occur sooner , sometimes within a day . 
 The most common symptom of HIT is enlargement or extension of a previously diagnosed blood clot , or the development of a new blood clot elsewhere in the body . This may take the form of clots either in arteries or veins , causing arterial or venous thrombosis , respectively . Examples of arterial thrombosis are stroke , myocardial infarction ( " heart attack " ) , and acute leg ischemia . Venous thrombosis may occur in the leg or arm in the form of deep vein thrombosis ( DVT ) and in the lung in the form of a pulmonary embolism ( PE ) ; the latter usually originate in the leg but migrate to the lung . 
 In those receiving heparin through an intravenous infusion , a complex of symptoms ( " systemic reaction " ) may occur when the infusion is started . These include fever , chills , high blood pressure , a fast heart rate , shortness of breath , and chest pain . This happens in about a quarter of people with HIT . Others may develop a skin rash consisting of red spots . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Heparin occurs naturally in the human body , but the development of HIT antibodies suggests heparin may act as a hapten , and thus be targeted by the immune system . In HIT , the immune system forms antibodies against heparin when it is bound to a protein called platelet factor 4 ( PF4 ) . These antibodies are usually of the IgG class and their development usually takes about five days . However , those who have been exposed to heparin in the last few months may still have circulating IgG , as IgG @-@ type antibodies generally continue to be produced even when their precipitant has been removed . This is similar to immunity against certain microorganisms , with the difference that the HIT antibody does not persist more than three months . HIT antibodies have been found in individuals with thrombocytopenia and thrombosis who had no prior exposure to heparin , but the majority are found in people who are receiving heparin . 
 The IgG antibodies form a complex with heparin and PF4 in the bloodstream . The tail of the antibody then binds to the <unk> receptor , a protein on the surface of the platelet . This results in platelet activation and the formation of platelet microparticles , which initiate the formation of blood clots ; the platelet count falls as a result , leading to thrombocytopenia . 
 Formation of PF4 @-@ heparin antibodies is common in people receiving heparin , but only a proportion of these develop thrombocytopenia or thrombosis . This has been referred to as an " iceberg phenomenon " . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 HIT may be suspected if blood tests show a falling platelet count in someone receiving heparin , even if the heparin has already been discontinued . Professional guidelines recommend that people receiving heparin have a complete blood count ( which includes a platelet count ) on a regular basis while receiving heparin . 
 However , not all people with a falling platelet count while receiving heparin turn out to have HIT . The timing , severity of the thrombocytopenia , the occurrence of new thrombosis , and the presence of alternative explanations , all determine the likelihood that HIT is present . A commonly used score to predict the likelihood of HIT is the " 4 Ts " score introduced in 2003 . A score of 0 – 8 points is generated ; if the score is 0 @-@ 3 , HIT is unlikely . A score of 4 – 5 indicates intermediate probability , while a score of 6 – 8 makes it highly likely . Those with a high score may need to be treated with an alternative drug while more sensitive and specific tests for HIT are performed , while those with a low score can safely continue receiving heparin as the likelihood that they have HIT is extremely low . In an analysis of the reliability of the 4T score , a low score had a negative predictive value of 0 @.@ 998 , while an intermediate score had a positive predictive value of 0 @.@ 14 and a high score a positive predictive value of 0 @.@ 64 ; intermediate and high scores therefore warrant further investigation . 
 The first screening test in someone suspected of having HIT is aimed at detecting antibodies against heparin @-@ PF4 complexes . This may be with a laboratory test of the ELISA ( enzyme @-@ linked immunosorbent assay ) type . The ELISA test , however , detects all circulating antibodies that bind heparin @-@ PF4 complexes , and may also falsely identify antibodies that do not cause HIT . Therefore , those with a positive ELISA are tested further with a functional assay . This test uses platelets and serum from the patient ; the platelets are washed and mixed with serum and heparin . The sample is then tested for the release of serotonin , a marker of platelet activation . If this serotonin release assay ( SRA ) shows high serotonin release , the diagnosis of HIT is confirmed . The SRA test is difficult to perform and is usually only done in regional laboratories . 
 If someone has been diagnosed with HIT , some recommend routine Doppler <unk> of the leg veins to identify deep vein <unk> , as this is very common in HIT . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Given the fact that HIT predisposes strongly to new episodes of thrombosis , it is not sufficient to simply discontinue the heparin administration . Generally , an alternative anticoagulant is needed to suppress the thrombotic tendency while the generation of antibodies stops and the platelet count recovers . To make matters more complicated , the other most commonly used anticoagulant , warfarin , should not be used in HIT until the platelet count is at least 150 x 10 ^ 9 / L because there is a very high risk of warfarin necrosis in people with HIT who have low platelet counts . Warfarin necrosis is the development of skin gangrene in those receiving warfarin or a similar vitamin K inhibitor . If the patient was receiving warfarin at the time when HIT is diagnosed , the activity of warfarin is reversed with vitamin K. <unk> platelets is discouraged , as there is a theoretical risk that this may worsen the risk of thrombosis ; the platelet count is rarely low enough to be the principal cause of significant hemorrhage . 
 Various non @-@ heparin agents are used to provide anticoagulation in those with strongly suspected or proven HIT : danaparoid , fondaparinux , <unk> and argatroban . These are alternatives to heparin therapy . Not all agents are available in all countries , and not all are approved for this specific use . For instance , argatroban is only recently licensed in the United Kingdom , and danaparoid is not available in the United States . Fondaparinux , a Factor Xa inhibitor , is commonly used off label for HIT treatment in the United States . 
 According to a systematic review , people with HIT treated with <unk> showed a relative risk reduction of clinical outcome ( death , amputation , etc . ) to be 0 @.@ 52 and 0 @.@ 42 when compared to patient controls . In addition , people treated with argatroban for HIT showed a relative risk reduction of the above clinical outcomes to be 0 @.@ 20 and 0 @.@ 18 . <unk> production stopped on May 31 , 2012 . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The exact number of cases of HIT in the general population is unknown . What is known is that women receiving heparin after a recent surgical procedure , particularly cardiothoracic surgery , have a higher risk , while the risk is very low in women just before and after giving birth . Some studies have shown that HIT is less common in those receiving low molecular weight heparin . 
 = = History = = 
 While heparin was introduced for clinical use in the late 1930s , new thrombosis in people treated with heparin was not described until 1957 , when vascular surgeons reported the association . The fact that this phenomenon occurred together with thrombocytopenia was reported in 1969 ; prior to this time , platelet counts were not routinely performed . A 1973 report established HIT as a diagnosis , as well as suggesting that its features were the result of an immune process . 
 Initially , various theories existed about the exact cause of the low platelets in HIT . Gradually , evidence accumulated on the exact underlying mechanism . In 1984 @-@ 1986 , John G. Kelton and colleagues at McMaster University Medical School developed the laboratory tests that could be used to confirm or exclude heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia . 
 Treatment was initially limited to aspirin and warfarin , but the 1990s saw the introduction of a number of agents that could provide anticoagulation without a risk of recurrent HIT . Older terminology distinguishes between two forms of heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia : type 1 ( mild , non @-@ immune mediated and self @-@ limiting fall in platelet count ) and type 2 , the form described above . Currently , the term HIT is used without a modifier to describe the immune @-@ mediated severe form . 
 = Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney = 
 Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney , known in Japan as Gyakuten Saiban 4 ( Japanese : <unk> , lit . " Turnabout Trial 4 " ) , is a visual novel adventure video game developed by Capcom for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . It is the fourth video game in the Ace Attorney series , and was originally released in Japan on April 12 , 2007 ; it was later released in North America , Europe and Australia in 2008 . 
 The game takes place seven years after the previous game , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Trials and Tribulations . Phoenix Wright , the main character of previous titles in the series , has been stripped of his attorney 's badge , and Apollo Justice , an up @-@ and @-@ coming attorney , becomes his apprentice , working with Phoenix 's adopted daughter Trucy on four cases . The player 's goal is to get their clients declared not guilty ; to do this , they investigate the cases and cross @-@ examine witnesses . When finding inconsistencies in witness testimonies , the player is able to present pieces of evidence that contradict the witnesses ' statements . They can also use the " perceive " system , in which they are able to see nervous motions or actions during witness testimonies , similar to a tell in poker . 
 The game was developed by a team of 28 staff members , including producer Minae Matsukawa , director Mitsuru Endo , and character designer Kazuya Nuri . Series creator Shu Takumi , who wrote the game 's scenario and took on a supervisory role for the production , had wanted the series to end with Trials and Tribulations , as he felt that Phoenix 's character had been explored fully ; when it was decided that the game would get made , he wanted it to have a new main character with a new story , and wanted Phoenix to not make an appearance . Despite this , it was decided that Phoenix would be the accused in the first case in the game . Apollo Justice sold around 250 @,@ 000 copies during the first retail week and 515 @,@ 417 by the end of 2007 , and has been mostly positively received by critics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney is , like the rest of the Ace Attorney series , a cross between the adventure game and visual novel genres . The player 's goal is to defend their clients in four cases , and prove their innocence . The gameplay is separated into two types of situations : Investigations and trials . 
 During the investigation phase of each case , the player explores the game world by either using the stylus or the D @-@ pad to select the actions they wish to engage in : Examine , Move , Talk , or Present . The player converses with non @-@ player characters by selecting dialogue and can move around the game world by selecting the locations they wish to travel to . Information gained during Investigation Mode can be used during the Trial phase of the game and items picked up can be used as evidence . The player cannot progress without completing certain actions . Ema Skye , a character from the DS remake of the original Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney game , often provides the player with opportunities to use DS features such as the microphone to perform actions such as dusting for fingerprints . 
 The trial portions consist of listening to and cross @-@ examining witness testimonies . The player is given the option to either Press or Present evidence in response to statements made by witnesses . The player can either select their choice or yell into the microphone . By choosing Press , the player questions the witness 's statement , which sometimes causes the witness to change their testimony . When finding inconsistencies in the testimony , the player may choose Present in order to show a piece of evidence that they think contradicts the testimony . The player has a health bar , representing the judge 's patience . If the player presents incorrect pieces of evidence or choose incorrect answers to questions in court , health is lost . If the health bar reaches zero , the player loses the game and their client is declared guilty . A new system , known as the " <unk> System , " can be used to look for motions or actions made by witnesses that show nervousness , similar to a tell in poker . The move comes with the catchphrase , " Gotcha ! " ( " There ! " ( <unk> ! , Soko da ! ) in Japanese ) . The game also includes a " Crime Recreation Mode " that models evidence or the crime scene in a 3 @-@ D rendition and allow the player to explore the recreation to look for clues . Additionally , the game often recreates the crime in cutscene sequences , allowing the player to observe the action and find contradictions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Apollo Justice takes place seven years after the previous game in the series , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Trials and Tribulations . The game consists of several cases and trials , called <unk> . In four separate <unk> , the main character , Apollo Justice , must defend his clients against the charge of murder . After the first Turnabout , Apollo works for retired attorney Phoenix Wright , who lost his attorney 's badge due to unknowingly falsifying evidence and now runs the " Wright Talent Agency " to support his adopted daughter , Trucy Wright , a magician from the disbanded Troupe Gramarye and who helps Apollo out during investigations and in court . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In the first case , Turnabout Trump ( <unk> , Gyakuten no <unk> ) , Phoenix , now a pianist , is accused of murder . Apollo , under the tutelage of Phoenix 's friend , Kristoph Gavin , is called to defend Phoenix and find the true murderer . Unbeknownst to Apollo , he uses falsified evidence to find the real murderer , Kristoph , and proves Phoenix 's innocence . 
 The second case , Turnabout Corner ( <unk> , Gyakuten Rensa no <unk> , lit . " Turnabout Connected Corners " ) , begins with Apollo joining Phoenix 's combined law office and talent agency , the Wright Anything Agency . He and Trucy investigate three separate but simultaneous incidents : a hit @-@ and @-@ run , a panty @-@ theft , and a missing noodle stand . Seemingly unrelated at first , it is proven that the cases are all connected to a murder that occurred on the same night ; <unk> <unk> , the son of the local <unk> family gang , is accused of the crime . Apollo defends him , and faces off against Kristoph 's brother , prosecutor Klavier Gavin , in court ; Apollo connects the cases to convict the true murderer , <unk> 's fiancée , <unk> <unk> . 
 In Turnabout Serenade ( <unk> , Gyakuten no <unk> ) , the third case , Klavier invites Apollo and Trucy to a concert for his band , the <unk> . A murder occurs during the show , and Apollo and Trucy receive the task of defending the main suspect , pianist Machi <unk> , one of the concert 's guest stars . Aided by the other guest star , the <unk> singer Lamiroir , Apollo proves <unk> 's innocence by unraveling a complicated plot to smuggle cocoons and uncovers the real murderer , Klavier 's bandmate and detective <unk> <unk> . 
 In the fourth and final case , Turnabout Succession ( <unk> , Gyakuten o Tsugu Mono , lit . " Successor to Turnabout " ) , Apollo defends Vera Misham , who has been accused of poisoning her father , Drew . As the finale of Apollo Justice , Turnabout Succession reveals the mysteries surrounding Phoenix 's last case as an attorney , as well as the history of Troupe Gramarye and how Trucy came to be his adopted daughter . It is also revealed to Phoenix that Trucy and Apollo are half @-@ siblings , and that Lamiroir is really their birth mother , Thalassa Gramarye . This is the sole session of the game where the player can interact as Phoenix . In the end , it is discovered that Kristoph Gavin was responsible for the deaths of Drew Misham and Zak Gramarye , the attempted murder of Vera Misham , and the fake evidence that forced Phoenix to retire . At this point , the player can determine Vera Misham 's verdict through the Jurist System . Choosing " Not Guilty " results in Vera being declared not guilty , while Phoenix promises Lamiroir that he will tell Apollo and Trucy the truth someday and considers retaking the bar exam and returning to law . Choosing " Guilty " leads to an alternate ending in which the court agrees on a " hung jury , " leaving the actual verdict to be decided the next day . Vera succumbs to poison she unwittingly consumed during the trial and dies before her verdict is decided . 
 = = Development = = 
 Apollo Justice was developed by a team of 28 staff members . It was produced by Minae Matsukawa and directed by Mitsuru Endo , with character design and art by Kazuya Nuri , while series creator Shu Takumi wrote the game 's scenario and took on a supervisory role . Takumi had wanted the series to end with the previous game , as he felt its main character , Phoenix Wright , had been fully explored and that his story had been told ; he said that it is important to know when to end a story , that he did not want the series to become a shadow of its former self , and that he did not see any reason to continue it . When it was still decided that a fourth game would be made , Takumi wanted it to have a new main character and a new story ; he did not plan to have Phoenix appear in the game , but his colleagues wanted him in the game in some form , which led to him being the accused in the first case in the game . 
 Early in development , it was proposed that the game would use 3D graphics , as a way to make a big impact worthy of the start of a new Ace Attorney series ; eventually they settled for a 2D style , with a few 3D elements . Apollo Justice was the first game in the series to feature videos created using motion @-@ capture data . A male staff member of the Research & Development team was chosen to be the motion @-@ capture actor for a female character ; the producer described him as being " a natural " at it . Voice acting was also provided by Capcom staff members . During development , staff members visited real courts to watch and study the trials . Most of the game 's music was composed by Toshihiko Horiyama , with Hideki <unk> composing three songs and Akemi Kimura and Shu Takumi composing two songs each . A soundtrack album , Gyakuten Saiban 4 Original Soundtrack , was released on June 27 , 2007 . A concert , based on the music from Ace Attorney and entitled Gyakuten Meets Orchestra , took place in Tokyo in April 2008 . A CD of the concert was published on July 16 , 2008 . 
 Alexander O. Smith , who worked as a writer on the localization of the first Ace Attorney game , also worked on the localization of Apollo Justice . Localization of the game was already in progress by August 2007 . The name " Apollo Justice " was decided in collaboration between the Japanese and American divisions of Capcom ; it took them twenty @-@ two meetings to decide on it . The name refers to how Apollo fights for justice . During the localization , there was some debate about the use of the word " panties " to describe Trucy 's magical bloomers , a prop she uses in her magic shows ; some on the localization team felt that it was inappropriate to joke about an underage girl 's panties , and wanted them to be localized as " magic pants " , while some felt that the joke would be lost if the player already knew that they were massive bloomers . Janet Hsu , one of the staff members working on the localization , made an argument for " emotional accuracy " , saying that the Japanese version of the game was trying to make the player feel at unease over looking for what they might imagine to be " sexy lingerie " , and then let the player feel relief at finding out that it is a prop for a magic show . In the end , they were referred to as " panties " . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The game was announced in 2005 , and was originally planned to be released in 2006 in Japan . A demo version of the game was first made available at Tokyo Game Show in 2006 , and an English trailer was presented at the following year 's Tokyo Game Show . The game was eventually released in Japan on April 12 , 2007 , with North American , European , and Australian releases following on February 19 , 2008 , May 9 , 2008 , and May 22 , 2008 , respectively . In Japan , a limited edition of the game was made available . It includes branded headphones , an Ace Attorney dictionary on a DS card , and a series highlights DVD . A keychain depicting Apollo was included with preorders purchased at GameStop and the online Capcom store . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Apollo Justice : Ace Attorney has received generally positive reception , holding a score of 78 / 100 at the review aggregator Metacritic . It received four nines out of ten , totaled to thirty @-@ six out of forty , from video game magazine Famitsu . However , 1UP.com commented that , " the Phoenix Wright games are by far the best @-@ written titles you 'll find on the DS , and Justice is no different . " 1UP.com also commented that the added features made especially for the DS were " super engaging even though the actual actions aren 't that difficult to do . " On 21 November 2013 , RPGFan placed the game 5th on their top 20 Nintendo DS games list . 
 IGN largely agreed with 1UP but commented that " the first Apollo Justice title plays identically to the Phoenix Wright trilogy " . IGN Australia noted out that complaints about the previous games , such as that " finding the right path through the game feels like a process of trial and error " and that players could beat the game by " routinely pressing at every available opportunity and then using a minimum of logic , " were not fixed in Apollo Justice . " Additionally , " the game 's rather obtuse , long @-@ way @-@ around approach to problem solving " caused what IGN viewed to be unnecessary delays to the game . IGN also felt that new features were " a little gimmicky " but did not " detract from the experience in the slightest . " However , IGN Australia thought the game was " great " overall . The game was nominated for " Best Story " in IGN 's 2008 Video Game Awards , though it did not win . 
 These views were echoed by many reviews . GameSpot felt that the story , while strong , " moves along at a snail 's pace " and that " many of the series ' flaws are still present . " A " lack of innovation and change " was the main sticking point for GamePro , who thought of Apollo Justice as " a solid distillation of the franchise formula . " The Nintendo World Report felt that the game " builds upon the Phoenix Wright trilogy " even though " [ g ] <unk> remains mostly unchanged . " GameSpy pointed out that the game 's use of the DS 's touch features , " vastly improves the experience " though the crime scene reenactment is " all too brief . " 
 Apollo Justice sold around 250 @,@ 000 copies during the first retail week , and had more than 500 @,@ 000 copies shipped by the end of its second week in Japan . By the end of 2007 , it had sold 515 @,@ 417 units . While not as successful in terms of sales in North America , the game still placed fifth in games sold for the Nintendo DS during its release week . 
 = Doris Sands Johnson = 
 Dame Doris Sands Johnson DBE ( 19 June 1921 – 21 June 1983 ) was a Bahamian teacher , suffragette , and politician . She was the first Bahamian woman to contest an election in the Bahamas , the first female Senate appointee , and the first woman granted a leadership role in the Senate . Once in the legislature , she was the first female to be made a government minister and then was elected as the first woman President of the Senate . She was the first female to serve as Acting Governor General of the Bahamas , and was honored as Dame Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II . 
 Born on New Providence Island , she completed her secondary education and became a teacher . After teaching for 17 years , Johnson returned to school to earn a master 's and doctorate degree in educational administration . During this period , she traveled back and forth between school and her Bahamian home organizing labor and suffrage efforts . Upon graduation , Johnson was unable to find work because of her activism . She made a compelling speech to the Bahamian legislature in 1959 , pleading for women 's suffrage and subsequently made a similar plea to the Colonial Office in London . Once the right to vote had been secured , Johnson immediately entered politics in 1961 , running in the first election in which women were allowed to participate . Though she lost her bid , she worked with the Progressive Liberal Party to gain Bahamian independence . When the country gained its freedom from colonial rule , Johnson was appointed to the Senate and served the government until her death , a decade later . 
 = = Background and education = = 
 Doris Louise Sands was born on 19 June 1921 in St. Agnes , New Providence , The Bahamas , to Sarah Elizabeth ( née Fyne ) and John Albert Sands . After completing her secondary education , Sands began teaching at the age of fifteen . On 3 January 1943 at Zion Baptist Church in Nassau , Sands married <unk> Allen Johnson . They subsequently had one son and Johnson worked for 17 years to earn the money to further her education . Around 1953 , she was able to enroll at Virginia Union University in Richmond , Virginia , graduating with a bachelor 's degree in education . She returned to the Bahamas in 1956 and joined the Progressive Liberal Party ( PLP ) . Granted a four @-@ year government scholarship to further her education in Canada , Johnson enrolled in a master 's degree program in educational administration . Beginning her studies at MacDonald College of Education of McGill University , she earned her master 's degree and began work on her doctorate at the Ontario College of Education at the University of Toronto . In the midst of her studies , the government terminated the scholarship during her third year of studying abroad , under the guise that her master 's degree had been completed . Johnson believed that the scholarship was terminated because she had been active in organizing . She helped found the Women ’ s Suffrage Movement in the Bahamas , and in 1958 both the Bahamian Federation of Labour and the National Council of Women , traveling home intermittently during her studies to work towards enfranchisement . She returned home , but was advised that the only available positions for teaching administrators were in outlying islands . 
 = = Political rise = = 
 Feeling that her employment opportunities were being blocked , that same year , on 19 January 1959 , Johnson asked to address the members of the Bahamian House of the Assembly , but was told she could only speak after the session adjourned , to which she agreed . In her speech , she pointed out that a petition had been submitted to the House in 1958 for suffrage , which Members had claimed showed only 13 petitioners and 529 signatories . She provided mimeographed copies showing the actual number was 2 @,@ 829 people and included people from Abaco , Andros , Cat Island , Eleuthera , Exuma , Grand Bahama , Long Island , and New Providence . She went on to complain that women were being taxed without representation and reasoned that should the vote not be extended to them , they should no longer have to pay taxes . She insisted that women were working members of society and were ready , willing , and able to participate as full citizens . Though the Members of Parliament were impressed with the speech , they did nothing . 
 In 1960 , Johnson , as leader of the Women 's Suffrage Movement , and Eugenia Lockhart , the organization 's secretary , went to London to plead the case for suffrage . They met with the London branch of the International Alliance of Women to discuss the situation in the Bahamas , claiming that though they had the support of the majority of Bahamian women , many women could not voice their approval because they were employed by merchants and the government who were opposed to the cause . They also sought an audience at the Colonial Office to air their grievances , accompanied by the chairman of the PLP , Henry Milton Taylor . They met with the Secretary of State for the Colonies , Iain Macleod , and two women British Parliamentarians , Baroness Joan Vickers and Baroness Eirene White . The Bahamians were assured that their case was accepted and that change would soon follow . They returned , but no change was forthcoming . 
 Supporters rallied and collected funds for Johnson to complete her education in the United States , and she enrolled at New York University , completing her Doctor of Education in 1962 . When suffrage passed in 1961 , Johnson immediately entered the fray , accepting a nomination as a PLP candidate for the Eleuthera District . She wrote a booklet entitled The Next Step : Votes for Women in which she explained useful information for voting , such as how to register to vote and cast a ballot . She lost the race , but three years later participated in a debate in the push for majority rule on the parliamentary imbalance in the Bahamas with a delegation from the PLP at the United Nations . At that meeting , she met the president of her alma mater from Virginia Union , and agreed to accept a teaching post at Southern University in Baton Rouge , Louisiana . A little over a year later , Johnson left Louisiana and came back to the Bahamas to participate in the 1967 elections . The PLP won the majority of seats and she became the first woman appointee to serve in the Bahamian Senate . One of her first acts was to form a committee to help the Haitian diaspora who had fled to the Bahamas because of unrest in their own country . With an estimated 20 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 refugees and a government decree to stop issuing work permits to Haitians , the situation was critical . The following year , PLP had a landslide victory in the 1968 election and Johnson was reappointed to the Senate , and appointed as the first woman to lead government business . 
 From 1968 to 1973 , Johnson was the Transportation Minister and her appointment was the first time a woman had served in the Bahamian Cabinet . In 1972 , Johnson published a book entitled The Quiet Revolution in the Bahamas , which discussed the struggle for racial parity and independence , likening the efforts in the Bahamas to the American Civil Rights Movement and Martin Luther King 's fight . The book has been called " one of the most important accounts of the events and personalities involved in the attainment of Majority Rule and Independence in The Bahamas " . The following year , when the Bahama 's gained independence from Britain , Johnson resigned from her post as Minister and was elected as the first female President of the Senate . In 1977 , shortly after being reelected to the presidency , Johnson received Queen Elizabeth II . In 1979 , she briefly served as acting Governor General of the Bahamas , the first woman ever to do so , and that same year was honored as Dame Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire . 
 Besides her official roles , Johnson served as a founding member of the Bahamas Folklore Group and spoke at various women 's groups in the Bahamas and United States . She also served as president of the National Women 's Housing Association and coordinator of the Bahamas Baptist Missionary and Educational Convention 's Women 's Auxiliary . 
 Johnson died on 21 June 1983 . Posthumously , a high school was dedicated in 2002 in Nassau , which bears her name . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 19 January 1959 ) . Call for Equal Rights for All Bahamian Women ( Speech ) . Meeting of the Members of the House of Assembly . Government House , Nassau , Bahamas . Contained in Fawkes , Sir Randol F. ( 2003 ) . Fawkes , Rosalie J. ; Fawkes , Francis ; Fawkes , David , eds . The Faith That Moved the Mountain : A Memoir of a Life and the Times ( PDF ) ( Memorial ed . ) . Nassau , Bahamas : Dodd <unk> pp. 204 – 210 . 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 1962 ) . A guide for the establishment of an advisory council to the Bahamas Board of Education : based upon a study of advisory services to the Central British Educational Authority from 1899 to 1959 ( Ed . D. ) . New York University . 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 1962 ) . The Next Step : Votes for Women . Nassau , Bahamas . 
 Johnson , Doris L. The Man on the Black Horse . Nassau , Bahamas . 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 1972 ) . The Quiet Revolution in the Bahamas . Nassau , Bahamas : Family Islands Press . 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 1973 ) . Age of Awareness . Nassau , Bahamas . 
 Johnson , Doris L. ( 1989 ) . " Political Change " . In Collinwood , Dean W. ; Dodge , Steve . Modern Bahamian Society . Parkersburg , IA , USA : Caribbean Books. pp. 33 – 38 . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Glee ( TV series ) = 
 Glee is an American musical comedy @-@ drama television series that aired on the Fox network in the United States from May 19 , 2009 , to March 20 , 2015 . It focuses on the fictitious William McKinley High School glee club , New Directions , which competes on the show choir competition circuit while its disparate members deal with social issues , especially regarding sexuality and race , relationships , and learning to become an effective team . The initial twelve @-@ member cast included club director and Spanish teacher Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) , guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) , Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , and eight club members played by Dianna Agron , Chris Colfer , Kevin McHale , Lea Michele , Cory Monteith , Amber Riley , Mark Salling , and Jenna Ushkowitz . In subsequent seasons , the main cast has expanded to fourteen and fifteen members . 
 The series was created by Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk , and Ian Brennan , the latter of whom first conceived of Glee as a film . The three wrote all of the show 's episodes for the first two seasons , and Murphy and Falchuk initially served as the show 's main directors . The pilot episode was broadcast on May 19 , 2009 , and the first season aired from September 9 , 2009 , to June 8 , 2010 . Subsequent seasons aired in September through May . The sixth and final season aired from January to March 2015 . Glee features on @-@ screen performance @-@ based musical numbers that were selected by Murphy , who aimed to maintain a balance between show tunes and chart hits , and produced by Adam Anders and Peer Åström . Songs covered in the show were released through the iTunes Store during the week of broadcast , and a series of Glee albums have been released by Columbia Records . The music of Glee has been a commercial success , with over thirty @-@ six million digital single sales and eleven million album sales worldwide through October 2011 . The series ' merchandise also includes DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases , an iPad application , and karaoke games for the Wii . There were live concert tours by the show 's cast after the first and second seasons completed shooting ; a concert film based on the 2011 tour , Glee : The 3D Concert Movie , was produced by Murphy and Fox and directed by Kevin Tancharoen . 
 During its first season , Glee received generally favorable reviews from critics , with Metacritic 's weighted average of 77 out of 100 based on eighteen critical reviews . The season was nominated for nineteen Emmy Awards , four Golden Globe Awards , six Satellite Awards and fifty @-@ seven other awards , with wins including the 2010 Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy , and Emmy awards for Jane Lynch , guest @-@ star Neil Patrick Harris and Murphy 's direction of the pilot episode . In 2011 , the show once again won the Golden Globe for Best Television Series , and Jane Lynch and Chris Colfer won Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actress and Best Supporting Actor respectively , and Gwyneth Paltrow won the Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series . The show was also chosen by Fox to fill the coveted time slot that followed the network 's coverage of Super Bowl XLV in 2011 . 
 On October 17 , 2013 , in the wake of the death of Cory Monteith three months prior , and one week after his tribute episode " The Quarterback " aired , Murphy announced that the sixth season would be the final one of the series . After 121 episodes and over 728 music performances , Glee came to an end on March 20 , 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series focuses on a high school show choir , also known as a glee club , in the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima , Ohio . Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) takes over the glee club after the former teacher Sandy Ryerson ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) is fired for inappropriate contact with a male student . With a rag @-@ tag group of misfit teenagers , Will attempts to restore the glee club to its former glory while tending to his developing feelings for his co @-@ worker Emma ( Jayma Mays ) , as well as defending the glee club 's existence from the conniving cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) . A major focus of the series is the students in the glee club : their relationships as couples , their love of singing and desire for popularity coming into conflict due to their membership in the low @-@ status club , and the many vicissitudes of life in high school and as a teenager . 
 Season 1 features the fictional high school show choir New Directions competing for the first time on the show choir circuit , winning at the Sectionals competition ( episode 13 ) but losing at Regionals ( season finale / episode 22 ) , while its members and faculty deal with sex , relationships , homosexuality , teenage pregnancy , disabilities , acceptance and other social issues . The central characters are glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) , Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) , and glee club members Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , Artie ( Kevin McHale ) , Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) , Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) , Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , Puck ( Mark Salling ) , Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) and Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) . 
 Season 2 follows the club through wins at the Sectionals ( episode 9 ) and Regionals ( episode 16 ) competitions before losing at the Nationals competition in New York City ( season finale / episode 22 ) , while its members and faculty deal with sex , relationships , religion , homophobia , bullying , rumors , teenage drinking , death and other social issues . The season 's stories revolve around the same Glee club members as first season , with Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) added to the main cast , along with Kurt 's father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) . 
 Season 3 follows the club through wins at Sectionals ( episode 8 ) and Regionals competitions ( episode 14 ) , before they win the Nationals competition ( episode 21 ) in Chicago . The characters deal with gender identity , adoption , domestic abuse , teenage suicide , bullying , disabilities , texting while driving , college and other social issues . Glee club members added to the main cast were Mike Chang ( Harry Shum Jr . ) and transfer student Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) , while Jessalyn Gilsig as Terri Schuester was written out of the series and Mike O 'Malley as Burt returned to recurring status . The McKinley High class of 2012 graduates at the end of the season . 
 Season 4 continues in Lima with a new generation of students but also follows some of the McKinley graduates from the third season , notably to the fictional New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts ( NYADA ) in New York City . The season follows the club through a loss at the Sectionals competition ( episode 9 ) and subsequent reinstatement when the winning Dalton Academy Warblers were found to have used banned substances ( human growth hormone ) ( episode 12 ) before winning at the Regionals competition ( episode 22 ) , which meant they would be attending their third consecutive National show choir competition . In the meantime , Rachel Berry and Kurt Hummel navigate NYADA and their lives as aspiring performers , plus their relationships with Finn and Blaine . Issues during the season include sex , bulimia , gender identity , child molestation , dyslexia , school violence , and pregnancy scares . Former main cast members Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) and Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) were credited as guest stars , while previously recurring glee club member Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) was promoted to the main cast . 
 Season 5 , unlike previous seasons , continues the school year begun in the previous season . The season shows the reigning champion glee club finishing second at Nationals competition ( episode 11 ) before the club is permanently disbanded by Sue Sylvester , now school principal , for budgetary reasons ( episode 12 ) , leaving the focus on graduation . The show then jumps several months forward in time and deals entirely with the alumni 's lives in New York City for the remainder of the season , including Rachel 's successful Broadway debut . Throughout this season , the club and its alumni deal with relationships ; death and mourning ; body image , gay bashing , intimacy , and other social issues . Several main cast members dropped to recurring guest stars as of this season : Amber Riley as Mercedes , Mark Salling as Puck , Harry Shum Jr. as Mike and Heather Morris as Brittany . New main cast members included glee club members introduced in the fourth season : Melissa Benoist as Marley Rose , Alex Newell as Unique Adams , Blake Jenner as Ryder Lynn , Jacob Artist as Jake Puckerman , and Becca Tobin as Kitty Wilde . Actor Cory Monteith died during summer before the fifth season was shot ; his character , Finn Hudson , died in the season 's third episode , The Quarterback . 
 Season 6 focuses on Rachel Berry , who returns to McKinley after her television pilot fails . She decides to reconstitute the glee club with all @-@ new McKinley students and with Kurt 's help . Will Schuester is now coaching rival club Vocal Adrenaline , while Blaine is coaching the Dalton Academy Warblers . All of the new main cast members from the fifth season have returned to guest star status in this final season when they appear ; Amber Riley as Mercedes rejoins the main cast , and Dot @-@ Marie Jones as Coach Beiste joins the main cast for the first time . The cast members deal with gay marriage , gender identity , transitioning and other social issues . The newly reconstituted club wins the Nationals competition , Sue is fired as principal and Will is hired to be the principal of a McKinley High repurposed as a magnet arts school , with Sam as the new director of New Directions . The finale jumps five years into the future : Rachel has married Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) , wins a Tony Award , and is a surrogate mother for Kurt and Blaine ( who are themselves Broadway stars ) . Artie has directed Tina in a film , Mercedes is a highly successful recording artist , and Sue has just been re @-@ elected Vice President of the United States . The McKinley auditorium is renamed for Finn . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 In casting Glee , Murphy sought out actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles . Instead of using traditional network casting calls , he spent three months on Broadway , where he found Matthew Morrison , who had previously starred on stage in Hairspray and The Light in the Piazza ; Lea Michele , who starred in Spring Awakening ; and Jenna Ushkowitz , who had been in the Broadway revival of The King and I. 
 Actors lacking theatrical experience needed to demonstrate , during their auditions , that they could also sing and dance . Chris Colfer had no previous professional experience , but Murphy wrote in the character Kurt Hummel for him . Jayma Mays auditioned with the song " Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch Me " from The Rocky Horror Show , while Cory Monteith initially submitted a tape of himself acting only , and was requested to submit a second , musical tape , in which he sang " a cheesy , ' 80s music @-@ video @-@ style version " of REO Speedwagon 's " Can 't Fight This Feeling " . Kevin McHale came from a boy @-@ band background , having previously been part of the group Not Like Them . He explained that the diversity of the cast 's backgrounds reflects the range of different musical styles within the show itself : " It 's a mix of everything : classic rock , current stuff , R & B. Even the musical theatre stuff is switched up . You won 't always recognize it . " Jane Lynch was originally supposed to have a recurring role , but was made a series regular when a Damon Wayans pilot she was working on for ABC fell through . The cast is contracted for a potential three Glee films , with their contract stating that " [ The actor ] hereby grants Fox three exclusive , irrevocable options to engage [ the actor ] in up to , respectively , three feature @-@ length motion pictures . " Murphy said in December 2010 that he wasn 't interested in doing a Glee movie " as a story " , and added , " I might do it as a live concert thing . " Glee : The 3D Concert Movie , filmed during the 2011 Glee Live ! In Concert ! tour , was released on August 12 , 2011 . 
 Glee has featured as many as fifteen main roles with star billing , after starting with twelve . Morrison plays Will Schuester , McKinley High 's Spanish teacher , who becomes glee @-@ club director and hopes to restore it to its former glory . Lynch plays Sue Sylvester , head coach of the " Cheerios " cheerleading squad , and the Glee Club 's nemesis . Mays appears as Emma Pillsbury , the school 's <unk> guidance counselor who has feelings for Will , and Jessalyn Gilsig plays Terri Schuester , Will 's wife whom he eventually divorces after five years of marriage and the discovery that she has faked being pregnant instead of revealing she had suffered a false pregnancy . Michele plays Rachel Berry , talented star of the glee club who is often bullied by the Cheerios and football players , but grows closer to them as the show progresses . Rachel has an on @-@ and @-@ off relationship with Finn Hudson starting in season one ; they become engaged in season three . Monteith played Finn , star quarterback of the school 's football team who risks alienation by his friends after joining the glee club . Also in the club are Amber Riley as Mercedes Jones , a fashion @-@ conscious diva who initially resents having to sing back @-@ up ; Colfer as Kurt Hummel , a fashionable gay male countertenor ; McHale as Artie Abrams , a guitar player and paraplegic ; and Ushkowitz as Tina Cohen @-@ Chang , an Asian American student with a fake speech impediment . Dianna Agron plays Quinn Fabray , Finn 's cheerleader girlfriend , who later joins the glee club to keep an eye on him . Mark Salling plays Noah " Puck " Puckerman , a good friend of Finn 's on the football team who at first disapproves of Finn joining the glee club , but later joins it himself . Naya Rivera and Heather Morris , who portray Cheerios and glee club vocalists Santana Lopez and Brittany Pierce respectively , were originally recurring actors , but were promoted to series regulars in the second season . Mike O 'Malley , who plays Kurt 's father Burt Hummel , also became a series regular on season two . Gilsig and O 'Malley no longer appeared on the list of starring actors at the beginning of the third season , though O 'Malley was a recurring guest star in at least six episodes during the season . Two actors were promoted to series regulars as of the third season : Harry Shum , Jr. as football player and glee club member Mike Chang and Darren Criss as former Dalton Academy Warbler and new club member Blaine Anderson , both of whom started as recurring actors , Shum in the first season and Criss in the second . For the fourth season , Chord Overstreet , who started as a recurring actor in the second season , playing glee club member Sam Evans , was promoted to the main cast , while Agron and Mays were credited as recurring guest stars . 
 Many of the original characters graduated from McKinley High at the end of the third season . Murphy said , " We didn 't want to have a show where they were in high school for eight years . We really wanted to be true to that experience . " Adult characters played by Matthew Morrison and Jane Lynch would remain to provide continuity to the series , though according to Falchuk , some students — Rachel , Finn and Kurt in particular — would likely remain on the show after they graduate . In May 2012 , Murphy said that just because a character on the show graduates high school does not mean that they are leaving , " A lot of people have been writing Dianna 's off the show , Amber 's off the show — they 're not off the show . I think Amber was talking about that bittersweet feeling of , ' I 'll never be in the choir room with that exact group of people . ' At least that 's what she told me ... When I read that [ tweet , ] I said , ' I think people will misconstrue that . ' She 's excited about where her character is going . They all are . I wanted to do the right thing by all of them . " He then continued : " They 're all coming back . Anyone who is a regular is coming back . Everyone said yes . " 
 On June 28 , 2013 , the media reported that Morris , Riley , Salling , and Shum would be changing from starring status to guest starring roles for the fifth season , and on the following day that Jacob Artist , Melissa Benoist , Blake Jenner , Alex Newell and Becca Tobin , who play Jake Puckerman , Marley Rose , Ryder Lynn , Wade " Unique " Adams and Kitty Wilde , respectively , were all being promoted to the show 's main cast . 
 On July 13 , 2013 , Monteith was found dead in his room at the Fairmont Pacific Rim hotel in Vancouver , British Columbia . An autopsy completed on July 15 indicated that he died of alcohol and heroin overdose . On July 20 , 2013 , Ryan Murphy said in various media outlets that Cory would have a tribute in season five 's third episode , which would deal with the death of Monteith 's character , Finn . 
 On July 30 , 2013 , Mays confirmed that she would depart the show after the fifth season to work on other projects , but stated that she would be open to returning as a guest star in the future . 
 On July 7 , 2014 , it was confirmed that Rivera would be placed on a recurring status for the sixth and final season , by her request . On August 28 , a website revealed that Amber Riley would once again become a regular along with Dot @-@ Marie Jones while Jayma Mays would be on a recurring status . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Ian Brennan conceived Glee based on his own experience as a member of the Prospect High School show choir in Mount Prospect , Illinois . He initially envisioned Glee as a film , rather than a television series , and wrote the first draft in August 2005 with the aid of Screenwriting for Dummies . He completed the script in 2005 , but could not generate interest in the project for several years . Mike Novick , a television producer and a friend of Brennan 's from Los Angeles , was a member of the same gym as Ryan Murphy , and gave him a copy of Brennan 's script . Murphy had been in a show choir in college , and felt he could relate to the script . Murphy and his Nip / Tuck colleague Brad Falchuk suggested that Glee be produced as a television show . The script was entirely rewritten , and was picked up by Fox within fifteen hours of being received . Murphy attributed that , in part , to the network 's success with American Idol . " It made sense for the network with the biggest hit in TV , which is a musical , to do something in that vein " , he said . Murphy and Falchuk became the show 's executive producers and showrunners , Brennan became a co @-@ executive producer and Novick a producer . Brennan , Falchuk and Murphy started by writing " all the episodes " . 
 Glee is set at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima , Ohio . Murphy chose a Midwest setting as he himself grew up in Indiana , and recalled childhood visits to Ohio to the Kings Island theme park . Although set in Lima , the show is filmed at Paramount Studios and Helen Bernstein High School in Hollywood . 
 Murphy has said that he has never seen a High School Musical film , to which Glee has been compared , and that his interest lay in creating a " postmodern musical " , rather than " doing a show where people burst into song " , drawing more heavily on the format of Chicago . Murphy intended the show to be a form of escapism . " There 's so much on the air right now about people with guns , or sci @-@ fi , or lawyers running around . This is a different genre , there 's nothing like it on the air at the networks and cable . Everything 's so dark in the world right now , that 's why Idol worked . It 's pure escapism , " he said . Murphy intended to make a family show to appeal to adults as well as children , with adult characters starring equally alongside the teenage leads , and as of October 2009 he had already mapped out plans for the series covering three years of broadcast . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The three creators — Murphy , Falchuk , and Brennan — plan the stories together . For the first two seasons , they were the only writers , and after taking joint credit for the pilot episode and the episode that opened the fall 2009 season , they began rotating taking a single <unk> credit , based in large part on the person " who ’ s taken the lead in story breaking or who wrote a draft " . Brennan noted that the writing process is " fast and loose , with the emphasis on fast " , and quotes Murphy as having said , in terms of their roles in episode creation , " I 'm sort of the brain . Brad 's sort of the heart . Ian 's sort of the funny bone " , which Brennan says " is true in a lot of ways " . Some of the characters are written more by one writer than by the others . Brennan writes most of Sue 's material , and Falchuk frequently writes the scenes between Kurt and Burt Hummel , though Murphy contributes a great deal to Kurt . 
 Starting with season three , a writing staff of six was hired : Ali Adler , Roberto Aguirre @-@ Sacasa , Marti Noxon , Michael Hitchcock , Matt Hodgson and Ross Maxwell . The season 's fourth episode , " Pot o ' Gold " , was written by Adler , the first not credited to the show 's three creators . 
 Adler and Noxon did not return for the show 's fourth season and instead House writers Russel Friend and Garrett Lerner , and Stacy Traub were hired . 
 = = = Music and choreography = = = 
 The series features numerous song covers sung onscreen by the characters . Ryan Murphy is responsible for selecting all of the songs used , and has said that he strives to maintain a balance between chart hits and show tunes : " I want there to be something for everybody in every episode . That 's a tricky mix , but that 's very important — the balancing of that . " According to Murphy , the song choices are integral to script development , " Each episode has a theme at its core . After I write the script , I will choose songs that help to move the story along . " In a 2010 interview with Allison <unk> , Chris Colfer noted that " there have been a couple of times when I have gone to Ryan Murphy ( Glee creator ) and told him a couple of things that have happened to me , and then he writes it into the show . Or he 'll ask me what song I would want to sing , in this situation or in that situation . I don ’ t think any of us directly try to give input on the character or on the storyline , but they definitely steal things from us . " For the second season , a shift toward using more Top 40 songs was seen , in an effort to appeal more to the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 Murphy was surprised at the ease with which use of songs was approved by the record labels approached , and explained : " I think the key to it is they loved the tone of it . They loved that this show was about optimism and young kids , for the most part , reinterpreting their classics for a new audience . " A minority of those approached refused to allow their music to be used , including Bryan Adams , Guns N ' Roses and Coldplay ; however , in June 2010 , Coldplay reversed their decision , allowing Glee the rights to their catalog . Adams posted on his Twitter account that the producers of Glee had never requested permission from him and urged them to " pick up the phone " . Composer and musician Billy Joel offered many of his songs for use on the show , and other artists have offered use of their songs for free . A series of Glee soundtrack albums have been released through Columbia Records . Songs featured on the show are available for digital download through iTunes up to two weeks before new episodes air , and through other digital outlets and mobile carriers a week later . Glee music producers Adam Anders and Peer Astrom have begun to add original music to the show , including two original songs , " Loser Like Me " and " Get It Right " , on the March 15 , 2011 episode . 
 Glee is choreographed by Zach Woodlee and features four to eight production numbers per episode . Once Murphy selects a song , rights are cleared with its publishers by music supervisor P. J. Bloom , and music producers Adam Anders and Peer Astrom rearrange it for the Glee cast . Numbers are pre @-@ recorded by the cast , while Woodlee constructs the accompanying dance moves , which are then taught to the cast and filmed . Studio recordings of tracks are then made . The process begins six to eight weeks before each episode is filmed , and can end as late as the day before filming begins . Each episode costs at least $ 3 million to produce , and can take up to ten days to film as a result of the elaborate choreography . In late 2010 , Bloom reported the process has been even shorter ; " as quick as a few weeks " . For the second season , the creators were offered listens of upcoming songs in advance by publishers and record labels , with production occurring even before song rights are cleared . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Prior to the second episode 's premiere , Glee 's cast went on tour at several Hot Topic stores across the nation . The cast sang the U.S. national anthem at the third game of the 2009 World Series . Macy 's invited them to perform at the 2009 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , but host broadcaster NBC declined because Glee aired on a rival network . Murphy commented on the cast 's exclusion : " I completely understand NBC 's position , and look forward to seeing a Jay Leno float . " 
 The show 's success sent the cast on a concert tour , Glee Live ! In Concert ! after the first season 's <unk> . They visited Phoenix , Chicago , Los Angeles , and New York . The cast also recorded a cover of Wham ! ' s " Last Christmas " , which was released as a single in late 2009 but didn 't appear in the show until " A Very Glee Christmas " on December 10 , 2010 . Morrison , Lynch , Michele , Monteith , and Colfer reprised their roles as Will , Sue , Rachel , Finn , and Kurt respectively for a cameo appearance in an episode of The Cleveland Show that aired January 16 , 2011 . Michele , Monteith , and Riley appeared as campers in the twenty @-@ second season premiere of The Simpsons . 
 Lynch , Colfer , Monteith , and Riley appeared at the 2010 MTV VMAs on September 12 , 2010 . When Agron , Michele , and Monteith posed for a set of risqué photos for the November 2010 edition of GQ magazine , Parents Television Council ( PTC ) criticized the show ; PTC president Tim Winter commented that Glee has many young fans , and that " by authorizing this kind of near @-@ pornographic display , the creators of the program have established their intentions on the show ’ s direction . And it isn 't good for families . " 
 The promotional posters for the first season have the show 's stars using their right hands to make an " L " to fill in the L of the word Glee . The second season 's promotional posters have the stars throwing slushies at the camera in pairs . The third season 's promotional posters have the stars getting <unk> thrown at them by Sue Sylvester . While the cast concert tour , Glee Live ! In Concert ! , began on May 15 , 2010 , and presented concerts in four cities in the US that month , the second edition , with an almost @-@ entirely new set list , toured for four weeks in the US and Canada from May 21 through June 18 , 2011 , and followed with twelve days in England and Ireland , from June 22 through July 3 , 2011 . The cast also performed on the seventh season of The X Factor on December 5 , 2010 . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 The first season of Glee consists of twenty @-@ two episodes . The pilot episode was originally broadcast on May 19 , 2009 . The series returned on September 9 , 2009 , airing an additional twelve episodes on Wednesdays in the 9 : 00 pm timeslot until December 9 , 2009 , for a total of thirteen episodes . On September 21 , 2009 , nine more episodes were ordered for the first season by Fox , and the first of these episodes was broadcast on April 13 , 2010 . These episodes aired on Tuesday evenings at 9 : 00 pm . On January 11 , 2010 , it was announced that Fox had commissioned a second season of the show . The second season began production in June 2010 . Season two began on September 21 , 2010 , airing in the 8 : 00 pm time slot on Tuesdays , and consists of twenty @-@ two episodes . The show was chosen by Fox to fill the coveted timeslot that followed the network 's coverage of Super Bowl XLV in 2011 , and the network originally planned to move the show to the 9 : 00 pm time slot on Wednesdays following the post – Super Bowl broadcast . However , Fox later revised its schedule , leaving Glee on Tuesdays in order to concentrate on building up its weaker Wednesday and Thursday line @-@ ups . A third season was ordered by Fox on May 23 , 2010 , before the end of the first season . The early renewal of the show allowed the production team to cut costs and to plan ahead when writing scripts . The third season broadcasts remained in the show 's Tuesday 8 : 00 pm time slot , and began airing on September 20 , 2011 . The show 's fourth season changed both date and time of broadcast : it moved to Thursdays in the 9 : 00 pm time slot , and aired after that evening 's 8 : 00 pm music competition " results " shows — The X Factor in the fall and American Idol in midseason . The show was renewed for both a fifth and sixth season at the same time , on April 19 , 2013 . Reruns were also syndicated to local US stations from 2013 to 2015 . 
 Glee has been syndicated for broadcast in many countries worldwide , including Australia , where cast members visited to promote the show prior to its September 2009 debut on Network Ten . Midway through season four , Glee was moved to Network Ten 's digital channel Eleven due to poor ratings . It also airs in Canada on City , formerly Global , New Zealand , and Fiji . It is broadcast in South Africa , where Fox beams the episodes directly to the M @-@ Net broadcast center in Johannesburg rather than delivering the tapes . Asian countries that broadcast Glee include Bangladesh , the Philippines , India , Malaysia , and Singapore . 
 = = = UK trademark dispute = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , E4 broadcast the first two seasons of Glee , showing episodes months after they were first aired in the US . Sky1 broadcast the series starting with the third season , airing episodes two days after their US broadcast . However , the show has come under a trademark dispute in the UK with The Glee Club , a small chain of independent live stand @-@ up comedy and live music venues . In February 2014 , an English High Court judge ruled that the show " diluted and tarnished " the reputation of the comedy club chain . In a later ruling in July 2014 , the High Court ordered Fox to use a different title for the show in the UK , saying there was a " likelihood of confusion " between the two brands . In February 2016 , Fox lost an appeal against the decision . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Three soundtrack albums were released to accompany Glee 's first season : Glee : The Music , Volume 1 , Glee : The Music , Volume 2 and Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . Two extended plays ( EP ) accompanied the episodes " The Power of Madonna " and " Journey to Regionals " : Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna and Glee : The Music , Journey to Regionals respectively . Glee : The Music , The Complete Season One , a compilation album featuring all 100 studio recordings from the first season , was released exclusively to the iTunes Store . Five soundtrack albums were released to accompany Glee 's second season : Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album , featuring Christmas @-@ themed songs , and Glee : The Music , Volume 4 , were both released in November 2010 ; Glee : The Music , Volume 5 , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers , and Glee : The Music , Volume 6 were 2011 releases , in March , April , and May , respectively . An EP entitled Glee : The Music , The Rocky Horror Glee Show was released to accompany the Halloween episode , " The Rocky Horror Glee Show " . Two EPs were released exclusively at the Target discount chain : Glee : The Music , Love Songs in the last week of 2010 , and Glee : The Music , Dance Party in early September 2011 . 
 Glee has been released on several DVD and Blu @-@ ray box @-@ sets . Glee – Pilot Episode : Director 's Cut features the pilot episode and a preview of the second episode , " Showmance " . Glee – Volume 1 : Road to Sectionals contains the first thirteen episodes of season one , and Glee – Volume 2 : Road to Regionals contains the final nine episodes of the first season . Glee – The Complete First Season was released on September 13 , 2010 . Three boxed sets were released for the second season : Glee Season 2 : Volume 1 containing the first ten episodes on January 25 , 2011 , and both Glee Season 2 : Volume 2 with the final twelve episode and Glee : The Complete Second Season with all twenty @-@ two on September 13 , 2011 . All three were released on DVD ; only the complete season is available on Blu @-@ ray . 
 Little , Brown Books is in the process of publishing five Glee – related young adult novels , which are being developed in collaboration with the show 's producers and writers . The first three novels have been written by Sophia Lowell ; the first , Glee : The Beginning , was released in August 2010 and serves as a prequel to the events of the television series . Subsequent novels include Glee : Foreign Exchange , released in February 2011 , and Glee : Summer Break , released in July 2011 . 
 Twentieth Century Fox Consumer Products have plans for a line of Glee – related merchandise including games , electrical products , greeting cards , apparel and stationery . Macy 's carry a line of Glee – related clothing , and Claire 's stock accessories . 
 <unk> Studios published a Glee content version of the mobile game Band Stars by Six Foot Kid in collaboration with Fox Digital Entertainment on March 27 , 2014 , currently available on iOS platforms , but with plans to release to Android . The game is available for free download with some Glee content available immediately including Kurt Hummel and Will Schuester . 12 characters from the Glee TV show are available for purchase and download in two separate packs . Pack 1 contains : Rachel Berry , Mercedes Jones , Noah ( Puck ) Puckerman , Jake Puckerman and Quinn Fabray . Pack 2 contains : Artie Abrams , Tina Cohen @-@ Chang , Blaine Anderson , Santana Lopez , Brittany Pierce and Unique Adams . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The pilot episode of Glee averaged 9 @.@ 62 million viewers , and the following eleven episodes attained between 6 @.@ 10 and 7 @.@ 65 million . The mid @-@ season finale was watched by 8 @.@ 13 million viewers , with the show returning in April 2010 to a season high of 13 @.@ 66 million viewers . The following six episodes attained between 11 @.@ 49 and 12 @.@ 98 million viewers , falling to 8 @.@ 99 million for the penultimate episode " Funk " . Viewing figures rose to 11 @.@ 07 million viewers for the season finale , giving Glee the highest finale rating for a new show in the 2009 – 10 television season . Only the first twenty episodes of the first season were accounted for when calculating the season average due to the final two episodes airing outside the traditional sweeps period . On February 6 , 2011 , after the Super Bowl , Glee received its highest ever ratings , with over 26 @.@ 8 million tuning in to see the special episode , with a peak of 39 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 2011 , Glee generated $ 2 million advertising revenue per half @-@ hour . In 2012 , the show was the fourth @-@ highest revenue earning show of the year , with US $ 2 @.@ 83 million ad revenue per half @-@ hour , behind Two and a Half Men , The X Factor and American Idol . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Glee received a Metacritic score of 78 out of 100 in its first season , based on reviews by eighteen critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . It was praised by several critics in year @-@ end " best of " reviews in 2009 . James Poniewozik of Time ranked it the eighth best television show of the year , commenting : " when Glee works — which is often — it is transcendent , tear @-@ jerking and thrilling like nothing else on TV . " Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker ranked it ninth , calling it " Hands down the year 's most novel show [ and ] also its least likely success " , Lisa Respers France of CNN wrote that while ordinarily Glee 's premise would have been " a recipe for disaster " , the show has " such quirky charm and bravado that it is impossible not to get swept up " . Reviews for subsequent seasons on Metacritic , reflecting their initial episodes , were not quite as good — the second season 's score was 76 out of 100 from eleven reviews , and the fourth season received a score of 73 out of 100 from six reviews . Even with these stellar reviews from a multitude of critics , Glee 's later seasons lost millions of viewers . 
 Nancy Gibbs of Time magazine wrote that she had heard the series described as " anti @-@ Christian " by a youth minister , and commented : 
 It is easy to see his point , if you look at the specifics . [ ... ] The students lie , they cheat , they steal , they lust , they lace the bake @-@ sale cupcakes with pot in order to give the student body a severe case of the <unk> . Nearly all the Ten Commandments get violated at one point or another , while the audience is invited to laugh at people 's pain and folly and humiliation . [ ... ] It insults kids to suggest that simply watching Characters Behaving Badly onscreen means they 'll take that as permission to do the same themselves . [ ... ] And it 's set in high school , meaning it 's about a journey not just to college and career but to identity and conviction , the price of popularity , the compromises we must make between what we want and what we need . " 
 Variety 's Brian Lowry was critical of the show 's early episodes , highlighting acting and characterization issues and deeming the adult cast " over @-@ the @-@ top buffoons " , with the exception of Mays ' Emma , who he felt offered " modest redemption " . Though he praised Colfer and Michele 's performances , Lowry wrote that the show 's talent was squandered by its " jokey , cartoonish , wildly uneven tone " , deeming the series a " one @-@ hit wonder " . Following the show 's mid @-@ season finale , Lowry wrote that while Glee " remains a frustrating mess at times " , its " vibrant musical numbers and talented cast have consistently kept it on [ his ] TiVo must list " conceding that " even with its flaws , TV would be poorer without Glee . " 
 As Glee 's initial success pulled in a large audience , John Doyle of The Globe and Mail wrote that the early shows " felt fresh , mainly because the motley crew of kids had a kind of square naïveté . " Doyle notes that the early success took Glee away from its original characters and plot , focusing more on celebrity guests . " The gaiety is gone from Glee . You should have set it in its prime , mere months ago " . Matthew Gilbert of Boston Globe similarly wrote that " It has become a powerful , promotional machine , long on hype and short on the human <unk> <unk> once made it so addictive " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The show 's musical performances have been a commercial success , with over thirty @-@ six million copies of Glee cast single releases purchased digitally , and over eleven million albums purchased worldwide through October 2011 . In 2009 , the Glee cast had twenty @-@ five singles chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , the most by any artist since The Beatles had thirty @-@ one songs in the chart in 1964 ; in 2010 , it placed eighty singles on the Billboard Hot 100 , far outstripping the previous record . In February 2011 , Glee surpassed Elvis Presley as the act with the most songs placed on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , though fewer than one @-@ fourth of them have charted for more than one week . The cast performance of " Don 't Stop Believin ' " was certified gold on October 13 , 2009 , achieving over 500 @,@ 000 digital sales , and on March 16 , 2011 , received platinum certification for having sales of over a million . The series ' cover version had a positive effect on sales of Rihanna 's " Take a Bow " , which increased by 189 percent after the song was covered in the Glee episode " Showmance " . 
 However , there has also been critical condemnation of the cast performances . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone commented that Matthew Morrison " couldn 't rap his way out of a 98 ° rehearsal " , and Allmusic 's Andrew Leahey wrote that Cory Monteith and Dianna Agron " can 't sing nearly as well as their co @-@ stars " . E ! Online 's Joal Ryan criticized the show for its " overproduced soundtrack " and complained that many songs rely too heavily on the pitch @-@ correcting software Auto @-@ Tune : " For every too @-@ brief moment of Lea Michele sounding raw — and lovely — on a " What a Girl Wants " , or Monteith singing a perfectly credible REO Speedwagon in the shower , there 's Michele and Monteith sounding like 1990s @-@ era Cher on " No Air " , or Monteith sounding like the Monteith <unk> @-@ 200 on the out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ shower version of " Can 't Fight This Feeling " . 
 During the second season , Rob Sheffield for Rolling Stone noted the Britney Spears and Rocky Horror tribute episodes as examples when he lauded Glee and its choice of music . He praised Murphy for his selection and resurrection of " forgotten " pop songs and compared the show 's uniqueness to " MTV in its prime " as the embodiment of popular culture . 
 Some artists , including Slash , Kings of Leon and Foo Fighters , have declined to have their songs used on the show . Murphy has been publicly critical of these refusals , which has led to exchanges in the press between him and a number of artists . A slated cover of Sir Mix @-@ a @-@ Lot 's " Baby Got Back " in the season four episode " Sadie Hawkins " has been criticized for blatantly copying a rendition of the song by Jonathan Coulton without his permission , without giving creative credit . Side @-@ by @-@ Side comparison shows the waveforms appear remarkably similar . Other artists have come forward with allegations of plagiarism in light of this development . It was reported that musician Prince had not given permission for Glee to cover his hit " Kiss " before filming the performance of the cover . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 Fans of Glee are commonly referred to as " <unk> " , a portmanteau of " glee " and " geek " . Fox ran a " Biggest <unk> " competition , measuring fans ' Glee @-@ related activity on social networking websites such as Facebook and MySpace , and found that the growth of the fanbase outpaced the network 's science @-@ fiction shows . The cast 's Hot Topic tour was titled " The Gleek Tour " . Glee is one of the most tweeted @-@ about TV shows . In 2011 , it was the top trending US TV show . On IMDb , Glee is the seventh highest ranking TV series of the period 2002 – 2012 . Fans have recreated many of its musical numbers in tribute to the show , sharing them on YouTube . Based on this trend , show producers included instrumental versions of some songs on the show 's soundtracks . 
 Similarly , Glee fans have created portmanteaus of character couples , such as " <unk> " for Finn and Rachel , " Klaine " for Kurt and Blaine , and " Brittana " for Brittany and Santana . This fact has been referenced in various second season episodes , notably " Furt " , which is itself a coinage for the new stepbrothers Finn and Kurt , and " Rumours " . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Glee has received a number of awards and nominations . In 2009 , the series won five Satellite Awards : " Best Musical or Comedy TV Series " , " Best Actor " and " Actress in a Musical or Comedy TV Series " for Morrison and Michele , " Best Supporting Actress " for Lynch and " Special Achievement for Outstanding Guest Star " for Kristin Chenoweth . In 2010 , the show won a Golden Globe Award for " Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy " . Morrison , Michele and Lynch also received acting nominations . The series was nominated for two Writers Guild of America Awards , with screenplays nominated in the " Comedy Series " and " New Series " categories . It also won a Peabody Award in 2009 . The Glee cast won the " Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series " award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards . Paris Barclay and Ryan Murphy both received nominations for " Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series " at the Directors Guild of America Awards for their work on Glee . In July 2010 , Glee received nineteen Emmy Award nominations , including " Outstanding Comedy Series " , " Outstanding Lead Actor – Comedy Series " for Morrison and " Outstanding Lead Actress – Comedy Series " for Michele ; it won four of these , including " Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series " for Lynch and " Outstanding Guest Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series " for Neil Patrick Harris . Paris Barclay was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy for Best Directing in a Comedy Series in 2010 for his episode " Wheels " . 
 On January 16 , 2011 the show won a Golden Globe for " Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy " and both Lynch and Colfer won Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actress and Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series , Miniseries , or TV Film . In July 2011 , Glee received twelve Emmy nominations and won two : Gwyneth Paltrow was named Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her portrayal of Holly Holliday , and the show won the Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series category . It received three Emmy nominations in July 2012 , and four in July 2013 . 
 The cast was invited to sing at the White House by Michelle Obama in April 2010 for the annual Easter Egg Roll . 
 = = Film = = 
 Glee : The Concert Movie , a concert film based on the four @-@ week North American segment of the 2011 Glee Live ! In Concert ! tour and featuring the cast of the series in performance and backstage , was released in the United States and the United Kingdom on August 12 , 2011 , for a two @-@ week limited engagement . The film is directed by Kevin Tancharoen . 
 = = Related media = = 
 In January 2010 , it was announced that open auditions would be held for three new roles to be introduced in Glee 's second season . They were open to amateurs and professionals aged sixteen to twenty @-@ six , and were intended to be the subject of a multi @-@ part television special , set to air in the lead @-@ in to the second season premiere in fall 2010 , with the new cast members revealed in the first episode . Murphy commented : " Anybody and everybody now has a chance to be on a show about talented underdogs . We want to be the first interactive musical comedy on television . " On June 22 , 2010 , Josef Adalian of New York magazine revealed that the reality show would not go ahead , due to Murphy 's desire to concentrate on the main series , and fear that the distraction of the reality show may damage Glee . Adalian reported that the production team would still choose several winners from the entrants and invite them to appear on Glee for at least one episode . In June 2010 , it was announced that Oxygen would host a reality series set to air in June 2011 , featuring performers competing for a spot on Glee . The Glee Project started airing on June 12 , 2011 , and the final episode was broadcast on August 21 , 2011 . The winning prize was a seven @-@ episode guest @-@ starring role in Glee 's third season , which was awarded to two contestants , with a two @-@ episode role given to two other finalists . 
 On June 7 , 2010 , UK broadcaster Channel 4 aired <unk> : The Real Show Choirs of America on its E4 station . The documentary explored the American show choir phenomenon which inspired Glee . Narrated by Nick Grimshaw , it went behind the scenes with real @-@ life glee clubs and detailed celebrity show choir alumni including Lance Bass , Ashton Kutcher , Blake Lively and Anne Hathaway . It was selected as recommended viewing by The Guardian , with the comment : " it 's a fascinating look at the real @-@ life New Directions , and it 's equally as crackers as its TV champion . " The newspaper 's Lucy Mangan reviewed the documentary positively , writing : " It will , one way or another , fill your heart to bursting " , and commenting that : " Glee , it turns out , is not a gloriously ridiculous , highly polished piece of escapism . It is cinéma vérité . " It was watched by 411 @,@ 000 viewers , a 2 @.@ 3 % audience share . 
 In summer 2010 , Channel 5 in the United Kingdom aired Don 't Stop Believing , a reality talent show inspired by Glee 's success . The series featured live shows in which established and new musical performance groups competed against each other , performing well @-@ known songs in new arrangements , with viewers voting on the winner . Solo singers were also sought to join a group to represent the United Kingdom on the American glee club circuit . Five 's controller Richard <unk> stated : " There 's an explosion in musical performance groups and Don 't Stop Believing will tap into that exciting groundswell . " The show was hosted by Emma Bunton , who told The Belfast Telegraph that she is a " huge fan " of Glee . The show 's judges were former EastEnders actress Tamsin Outhwaite , Blue member Duncan James , singer Anastacia and High School Musical choreographer Charles " Chucky " <unk> . 
 = Pilot ( Smallville ) = 
 The pilot episode of the television series Smallville premiered on The WB on October 16 , 2001 . It was written by series developers Alfred Gough and Miles Millar , and directed by David Nutter . The Smallville pilot introduces the characters of Clark Kent , an orphaned alien with superhuman abilities , and his friends and family who live in the fictional town of Smallville , Kansas . It follows Clark as he first learns of his alien origins , and attempts to stop a vengeful student from killing Smallville High School students . The episode introduces many themes that were designed to run either the course of the season or the entire series , such as the triangular relationships of the main characters . 
 Production was set in Vancouver , Canada , used for its " middle America " landscape , with five months devoted to casting the right actors in the lead roles . Filming for the pilot officially began four days after the last actor was cast for the series . When time constraints would not allow the production crew to physically create the sets , computer @-@ generated imagery was used to digitally insert set pieces into a scene . When the series premiere was broadcast , it broke several of The WB 's viewership records . It was generally well received by critics , and was nominated for various awards , winning two . 
 = = Plot and themes introduced = = 
 The episode begins in 1989 when a meteor shower hits Smallville ; at the same time a small spacecraft , containing an alien boy , crashes in front of Jonathan and Martha Kent 's ( played by John Schneider and Annette O 'Toole ) truck . They adopt the superhumanly powerful child and name him Clark . Gough and Millar use this opening scene to establish that the three lead characters of the series , Clark , Lana and Lex , share a common bond — they are all without one or both parents : Clark is the only survivor of his homeworld ; Lana 's parents are killed in the meteor shower ; and Lex is alienated from his father , Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) , after being rendered bald by the meteor blast . 
 The episode jumps forward twelve years to when Clark ( Tom Welling ) is trying to find his identity . He is unable to handle being told of his alien origins and runs away from home . Although he is attracted to Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) , he cannot get close to her without falling over in pain because she wears a necklace made of meteor rock ( kryptonite ) , which is a radioactive fragment of Clark 's destroyed homeworld . This was a concept Gough and Millar devised to establish a reason for Clark 's clumsiness . In other media , it is usually portrayed as an act he puts on to deceive people of his true identity . But Clark and Lana do share an intimate moment at a cemetery , where Lana is visiting the grave of her parents . In such scenes , Gough and Millar created a theme of loneliness through the life stories of Clark and Lana . Lana 's boyfriend , Whitney Fordman ( Eric Johnson ) , becomes jealous of Clark and Lana 's friendship and ties Clark to a scarecrow pole , using Lana 's necklace , indirectly , to subdue Clark . This image of Clark , in just his underwear and a red " S " painted on his chest , stretches back to Gough and Millar 's foundation for the series , which was about taking Clark down to the basic elements of the Superman character . 
 In the second strand of the story , Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) and Clark develop a " yin and yang " relationship . Clark first saves Lex from drowning when they get into a car accident ; at the end of the episode , Lex saves Clark when he is strung up in the cornfield and immobilized by kryptonite . Jeremy Creek ( Adrian <unk> ) — who was mutated by the meteor rocks , gaining special powers — puts the three former jocks , who tied him to a scarecrow pole during the meteor shower , into comas . He sets out to kill everyone attending the school 's dance , after witnessing Clark experience the same hazing he did , but Clark is able to arrive in time to stop him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Gough and Millar had five months for casting , but their primary focus was on finding an actor to play Clark Kent . They received Kristin Kreuk 's audition tape for the role of Lana Lang and liked it so much that they immediately showed her to the network . Tom Welling , after twice turning down the producers ' attempts to get him to audition for the role of Clark Kent , eventually accepted the opportunity to be part of the show . It was David Nutter who finally convinced Welling to read the script for the pilot , after finding Welling 's picture in a photo album at the casting director 's office . Welling 's manager did not want him to take the role because it could hurt his feature film career , but Welling liked the script and agreed to come in for an audition . Welling 's reason for turning down the role was because the producers were keeping quiet on what the show was really about , which left him with the impression the show was going to be " Superman in high school " , something he did not want to do . Nutter promised to let Welling read the script if he came in and auditioned . After auditioning , Welling was given the script to read , which he thought was " amazing " . For one of his auditions , he read the graveyard scene , from the pilot , with Kristin Kreuk ; the network thought they had " great chemistry " . No one could agree on which actors had the best audition for Lex Luthor . Michael Rosenbaum auditioned twice , and , believing he did not take his first audition seriously , outlined a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ page scene from the pilot . He indicated all the places to be funny , charismatic , or menacing , and performed so well that everyone agreed he was " the guy " . 
 John Schneider was brought in to play Jonathan Kent . Schneider was already well known as Bo Duke from The Dukes of Hazzard , and Gough believed Schneider 's experience from The Dukes of Hazzard added believability to the idea that he could have grown up running a farm . Cynthia Ettinger was originally cast as Martha Kent , but during filming it was generally agreed — Ettinger included — that she was not right for the role . Annette O 'Toole , who previously portrayed Lana Lang in Superman III , and who was fresh off the recent cancellation of her television series The Huntress , was cast in Ettinger 's place , reshooting the scenes Ettinger had filmed . 
 Eric Johnson , after auditioning for the roles of Lex and Clark , was cast as Lana Lang 's boyfriend Whitney Fordman . Johnson only spent one day filming his scenes for the pilot . Allison Mack toyed with the idea of auditioning for the role of Lana Lang but chose instead to audition for the role of Chloe Sullivan . The character was created just for the series and was intended to add ethnic diversity to the cast , but part of the reason Gough and Millar chose to cast Mack , against their initial intentions to give the character an ethnic background , was because they were impressed with Allison Mack 's " rare ability to deliver large chunks of <unk> [ sic ] dialogue conversationally " . Sam Jones III , who plays Pete Ross , was the last of the series regulars to be cast . Gough and Millar saw Jones four days before they began filming for the pilot . In the comics , Pete Ross is Caucasian , and the producers chose to cast Jones , who is African @-@ American , against the mythology . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Once Warner Bros. Television secured the rights to the show , Gough and Millar set out to write the script and find a director for the pilot . Gough and Millar were fans of director David Nutter 's previous work ; they considered him to be a " preeminent pilot director " . David Nutter joined the project because he wanted to make a pilot that respected the audience but that was still fun and smart . Nutter also believes in creating shows that appeal to a wide variety of audiences . He wanted the final scene for the pilot , in which Clark fantasizes about dancing with Lana , to express the show 's essence . According to Welling , " It brings them close — not as close as Clark would like , but at the end of [ this ] episode , he imagines that he 's with her and can really see it happening . " 
 Production was initially slated to take place in Australia , but Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada had more of the " middle America " feel for which the creators were looking . The area offered a site for the Kent farm , including their barn , and the city itself doubled as Metropolis . Vancouver provided a cheaper shooting location , and was in the same time zone as Los Angeles . Filming began in March 2001 ; Nutter spent sixteen days on main unit filming and an additional five days for second unit filming . Time constraints forced Nutter to film strictly from Adrien Van <unk> 's 150 – page storyboard when filming the opening meteor shower scene . Much of the look for Smallville came from Millar , who wanted the epitome of " Smalltown , USA " . Construction coordinator Rob Maier explained , " It had to be cleaner than clean , nicer than nice , more beautiful than it would be in the real world . All of the people in Smallville are beautiful ; all of the colors are bright and sharp . " For the Kent farm , Nutter wanted to have " an old world sensibility and tone " . For the pilot , the production crew only built a kitchen and dining room to represent the Kent home . All the exterior shots of the farm were taken at the Andalinis farm , owned by a local couple who also gave the crew permission to paint their forest green house yellow . Since the Vancouver farm already had a barn , the production crew only had to build a loft with stairs leading up to it . 
 Exterior shots of the Luthor Mansion were shot at the Hatley Castle in Victoria , two hours west of Vancouver by ferry . Time constraints forced scenes , which were shot from multiple angles , to sometimes be shot at separate locations . A scene involving Whitney ( Eric Johnson ) and Lana ( Kristin Kreuk ) sitting on her porch was shot at two different locations . Close @-@ ups of Whitney were shot under a football stadium , while close @-@ ups of Lana were shot in a potato @-@ processing factory . Unable to shoot at the house being used as the Lang residence , the crew built Lana 's front porch inside a sewage processing facility for the final scene of the episode where Lana walks up the stairs to her house . The local sewage treatment facility is also the site for the LuthorCorp pesticide plant , which Lex was sent to Smallville to manage . The crash site of Clark 's ship was shot at the <unk> where Mission to Mars was filmed . Smallville 's Main Street was filmed in both the town of Merritt , which is three hours east of Vancouver , and in the town of Cloverdale . Most of the filming took place in Cloverdale , since the town had a long stretch of vacant buildings that could double as Smallville 's Main Street . When the production crew came to film the opening teaser , they had to decorate the town with ribbons and balloons , as well as paint some of the buildings to attain Millar 's idea of " Smalltown , USA " . Two sets were built just for the pilot . The Kent storm cellar was built as a cover set inside the farm 's barn . For the cemetery scene between Clark and Lana , production designer Bernard Hides built the entire cemetery from scratch in an empty field . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 On @-@ set computer @-@ generated effects for the pilot were done by Thomas Special Effects . Certain scenes , because of time and money , had to be created digitally . The opening sequence showing the destruction of the water tower by a meteor was created on the computer . A persistent problem during production was the lack of cornfields . As realistic corn was a necessity for a show based in Kansas , this became a problem for the filmmakers . Over 10 @,@ 000 stalks of corn were grown in a greenhouse for the pilot , but they only grew two feet high , which was not usable to the crew . The day the crew was filming the scene for Clark 's landing there were no cornfields in the surrounding area . The cornfields had to be digitally added . Digital corn was a common substitute for the undersized corn that was grown , but for scenes where digital corn was not an option , six hundred stalks of fake corn were flown in from a manufacturer in Arizona . Other digital effects include the flattened cornfield where Lex was caught in a meteorite blast . Some scenes required physical effects , instead of computer imagery . When Lex drives his car off a bridge and hits Clark , the stunt performer , who doubled as Wolverine in the film X @-@ Men , was literally hit by the car as it went over the bridge . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Pilot " premiered on The WB on October 16 , 2001 . 8 @.@ 4 million viewers watched the pilot 's debut , breaking The WB 's record for highest ratings for a new series . The pilot broke The WB 's ratings record for the 18 – 49 male demographic , with 3 @.@ 9 million viewers ; it became the third @-@ highest rated debut for the overall adult 18 – 49 demographic , with an average 3 @.@ 8 million viewers . The premiere also finished first with viewers age 12 – 34 , leading Warner Bros. President of Entertainment Jordan Levin to credit the series with invigorating the network 's Tuesday night lineup . The pilot won an Emmy Award for Sound Editing ; it had also been nominated for Visual Effects but lost to UPN 's Star Trek : Enterprise . The special effects team won a Leo Award for Best Visual Effects in a Dramatic Series . Casting directors Deedee Bradley , Coreen Mayrs , and Barbara Miller were nominated for an Artios Award for their work on the pilot . The pilot was nominated for two Golden Reel Awards , one for Effects & Foley Sound Editing and one for Music Sound Editing . Peter Wunstorf was also nominated for an American Society of Cinematographers Award for his work on the pilot . The pilot , along with the second episode " Metamorphosis " , was released in Canada as a special pilot movie . The episodes were altered on the DVD ; formatted in 1 @.@ 78 widescreen , and presented with no opening segment and an alternate closing . It also contained the same special features present in the DVD box set of the first season . 
 The pilot received favorable reviews upon its release . Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette thought it was a " respectful addition to Superman lore " and had " all the markings of a super series " . Owen noted the Christ @-@ like imagery of the scene , stating , " Is it any wonder Clark gets tied up there since Superman , too , was ' sent to save us ' ? " Echoing Owen , DVD Verdict noted the same symbolism : 
 Superman is , in a way , the secular pop culture stand @-@ in for Jesus Christ , a messiah figure for our generation . The series makes this theme explicit in its pilot episode , in which Clark is symbolically ' crucified ' in a cornfield . That striking bit of symbolism becomes the central preoccupation of the series ; Clark is the savior who sacrifices all for the greater good of humanity , and Smallville shows us how he comes to accept and embrace that role . 
 Elizabeth White of Media Life believed the show had potential to be a big hit for The WB but felt it needed to survive not only its time slot — Tuesdays at 9 : 00 p.m. ( EST ) — but also the audience 's expectations of " what Superman should be " . USA Today 's Robert Bianco was a bit more mixed in his criticism . Bianco stated , " For all its innovations , there 's also something rehashed and repetitive about Smallville ... shows often look more familiar at the outset than they do as they progress . There 's talent and intelligence at work in Smallville . Given time , maybe they 'll find a more distinctive voice . " Jeremy Conrad , from IGN , swore to himself that he would never watch Smallville , because he was a " huge Superman fan " and he did not like the idea the creators would be making changes to the Superman mythology . After viewing the pilot , Conrad stated , " It 's a very solid start to the series , and one of the better pilot episodes I 've seen in a while . " In The Futon Critic 's 50 best episodes of 2001 rankings , the pilot was placed 31st , with Brian Ford Sullivan stating , " Smallville opened us to a surprisingly fresh take on the Superman myth @-@ this time showing us the humble beginnings of a young Clark Kent . " 
 The CW re @-@ aired the pilot on Friday , April 8 , 2011 in preparation for the series finale . The episode was watched by 1 @.@ 55 million viewers and achieved a 0 @.@ 5 Adults 18 @-@ 49 rating , despite only 92 % coverage . 
 = Kepler @-@ 10c = 
 Kepler @-@ 10c is an exoplanet orbiting the G @-@ type star Kepler @-@ 10 , located around 568 light @-@ years away in Draco . Its discovery was announced by Kepler in May 2011 , although it had been seen as a planetary candidate since January 2011 , when Kepler @-@ 10b was discovered . The team confirmed the observation using data from NASA 's Spitzer Space Telescope and a technique called Blender that ruled out most false positives . Kepler @-@ 10c was the third transiting planet to be confirmed statistically ( based on probability rather than actual observation ) , after Kepler @-@ 9d and Kepler @-@ 11g . The Kepler team considers the statistical method that led to the discovery of Kepler @-@ 10c as what will be necessary to confirm many planets in Kepler 's field of view . 
 Kepler @-@ 10c orbits its host star every forty @-@ five days at a quarter of the average distance between the Sun and Earth . It has a radius more than double that of Earth , but a higher density , suggesting a mainly rocky composition with around 5 – 20 % ices by mass . For comparison , the Earth 's oceans represent only 0 @.@ 02 % of our planet 's mass , with an additional amount potentially a few times this stored in the mantle . 
 = = Discovery and confirmation = = 
 In January 2011 , the closely orbiting planet Kepler @-@ 10b was confirmed in the orbit of the star Kepler @-@ 10 after measurements of its transiting behavior ( where it crosses in front of Kepler @-@ 10 , periodically dimming it ) and a radial velocity effect detected in Kepler @-@ 10 's spectrum provided the information needed to prove that it was indeed a planet . An additional , longer @-@ period dimming was detected in Kepler @-@ 10 's spectrum , suggesting that a second planet existed in the system ; however , there remained the possibility that this signal could have some other cause , and that the transit event was a false positive . Attempts to measure the radial velocity effects of this object , now named KOI 072 @.@ 02 , were fruitless ; therefore , to rule out false positive scenarios , the Kepler team used a technique called Blender . 
 The application of Blender was supplemented by use of the <unk> instrument on the Spitzer Space Telescope , which was used on August 30 and November 15 , 2010 , to further define Kepler @-@ 10 's light curve at the point where KOI 072 @.@ 02 appeared to transit it . It was found that the transiting object did not produce a color , an aspect that is characteristic of stars . This suggested even further that KOI 072 @.@ 02 was a planet . In addition , the <unk> instrument found no difference in the transit signal when comparing the star 's light curve in the infrared and in visible light ; stars that are aligned with Kepler @-@ 10 might appear visibly similar , but would appear different in the infrared . 
 The WIYN Observatory 's 3.5m telescope was used for speckle imaging on June 18 , 2010 ; in addition , the <unk> camera on the Palomar Observatory 's 5m telescope was used for its adaptive optics capabilities . These observations , combined with observations of Kepler @-@ 10 's spectrum taken from the W.M. Keck Observatory , ruled out the possibility that a nearby star 's light was corrupting the observed spectrum of Kepler @-@ 10 and creating the results that had led astronomers to believe that a second planet existed in Kepler @-@ 10 's orbit . All of these possibilities , with the exception of if such a star existed exactly behind or in front of Kepler @-@ 10 , were effectively ruled out ; even with this , the Kepler team found that if a star was indeed aligned with Kepler @-@ 10 as seen from Earth , such a star would probably not be a giant star . 
 With a greater degree of certainty established , the Kepler team compared the models formed using Blender to the photometric observations collected by the Kepler satellite . The Blender technique allowed the Kepler team to rule out the majority of the alternatives including , notably , that of triple star systems . Blender then allowed the Kepler team to determine that although all models representing hierarchical triple stars ( a binary system between a single star and a double star ) can resemble the light curve of Kepler @-@ 10 , the aforementioned follow @-@ up observations would have detected them all . The only possible blends remaining after ruling out hierarchical triple stars was that of determining if the curve is caused by interference from a background star , or if it is indeed caused by the orbit of a transiting planet . 
 Comparisons of KOI 072 @.@ 02 to the 1235 other Kepler Objects of Interest in Kepler 's field of vision allowed astronomers to use models that led to the confirmation of KOI 072 @.@ 02 as a planet with a high degree of certainty . KOI 072 @.@ 02 was then renamed Kepler @-@ 10c . The planet 's confirmation was announced at the Boston meeting of the American Astronomical Society on May 23 , 2011 . 
 Kepler @-@ 10c was the first Kepler target to be observed using Spitzer with the hope of detecting a shallow transit dip in a light curve . At the time of Kepler @-@ 10c 's discovery , Spitzer was the only facility capable of detecting shallow transits in the Kepler data to an extent at which the data could be meaningfully analyzed . The planet was also the third transiting planet that was validated through an analysis of statistical data ( rather than actual observation ) , after the planets Kepler @-@ 9d and Kepler @-@ 11g . In Kepler @-@ 10c 's confirmation paper , the Kepler team discussed how a large fraction of planets in Kepler 's field of view would be confirmed in this statistical manner . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 10 is a G @-@ type star located 173 parsecs ( 564 light years ) from Earth . It is 0 @.@ 895 solar masses and 1 @.@ 056 solar radii , making it slightly less massive than the Sun , but approximately the same size . 
 With an effective temperature of <unk> K , Kepler @-@ 10 is cooler than the Sun . The star is also metal @-@ poor and far older : its metallicity is measured at [ Fe / H ] = − 0 @.@ 15 ( 29 % less iron than in the Earth 's Sun ) . Kepler @-@ 10 has a measured age of approximately 10 @.@ 6 billion years . 
 Kepler @-@ 10 has an apparent magnitude of 11 @.@ 2 , which means that the star is invisible to the naked eye from the perspective of an observer on Earth . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 10c is the outermost of the two known planets of Kepler @-@ 10 , completing one orbit of the star every 45 @.@ <unk> days at a distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU . The inner planet , Kepler @-@ 10b , is a rocky planet that orbits every ~ 0 @.@ 8 days at a distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU . Kepler @-@ 10c 's equilibrium temperature is estimated at 584 K , almost four times hotter than Jupiter 's . The planet 's orbital inclination is <unk> , or almost edge @-@ on with respect to Earth and to Kepler @-@ 10 . Transits have been observed at points where Kepler @-@ 10c has crossed in front of its host star . 
 Kepler @-@ 10c has a mass of 15 – 19 Earth masses . With a radius only 2 @.@ 35 ( 2 @.@ 31 to 2 @.@ 44 ) times that of Earth ( and so a volume 12 – 15 times that of Earth ) , and a density higher than Earth 's ( 6 – 8 g cm − 3 ) , it is unlikely to contain significant amounts of hydrogen and helium gas . <unk> or accreted hydrogen @-@ rich atmospheres would have been lost over the 10 @.@ 6 billion @-@ year lifetime of the Kepler @-@ 10 system . Instead , the composition is likely to be mainly rocky , with a water fraction of 5 – 20 % by mass . The bulk of this water is likely to be in the form of high @-@ pressure " hot ice " phases . 
 = Auriga ( constellation ) = 
 Auriga is one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd @-@ century astronomer Ptolemy and remains one of the 88 modern constellations . Located north of the celestial equator , its name is the Latin word for " charioteer " , associating it with various mythological charioteers , including Erichthonius and Myrtilus . Auriga is most prominent during winter evenings in the Northern Hemisphere , along with the five other constellations that have stars in the Winter Hexagon asterism . Because of its northern declination , Auriga is only visible in its entirety as far as 34 ° south ; for observers farther south it lies partially or fully below the horizon . A large constellation , with an area of 657 square degrees , it is half the size of the largest constellation , Hydra . 
 Its brightest star , Capella , is an unusual multiple star system among the brightest stars in the night sky . Beta Aurigae is an interesting variable star in the constellation ; Epsilon Aurigae , a nearby eclipsing binary with an unusually long period , has been studied intensively . Because of its position near the winter Milky Way , Auriga has many bright open clusters in its borders , including M36 , M37 , and M38 , popular targets for amateur astronomers . In addition , it has one prominent nebula , the Flaming Star Nebula , associated with the variable star AE Aurigae . 
 In Chinese mythology , Auriga 's stars were incorporated into several constellations , including the celestial emperors ' chariots , made up of the modern constellation 's brightest stars . Auriga is home to the radiant for the Aurigids , Zeta Aurigids , Delta Aurigids , and the hypothesized Iota Aurigids . 
 = = History and mythology = = 
 The first record of Auriga 's stars was in Mesopotamia as a constellation called GAM , representing a scimitar or crook . However , this may have represented just Capella ( Alpha Aurigae ) or the modern constellation as a whole ; this figure was alternatively called <unk> or <unk> in the <unk> The crook of Auriga stood for a goat @-@ herd or shepherd . It was formed from most of the stars of the modern constellation ; all of the bright stars were included except for <unk> , traditionally assigned to both Taurus and Auriga . Later , Bedouin astronomers created constellations that were groups of animals , where each star represented one animal . The stars of Auriga comprised a herd of goats , an association also present in Greek mythology . The association with goats carried into the Greek astronomical tradition , though it later became associated with a charioteer along with the shepherd . 
 In Greek mythology , Auriga is often identified as the mythological Greek hero Erichthonius of Athens , the chthonic son of Hephaestus who was raised by the goddess Athena . Erichthonius was generally credited to be the inventor of the quadriga , the four @-@ horse chariot , which he used in the battle against the usurper <unk> , the event that made Erichthonius the king of Athens . His chariot was created in the image of the Sun 's chariot , the reason Zeus placed him in the heavens . The Athenian hero then dedicated himself to Athena and soon after , Zeus raised him into the night sky in honor of his ingenuity and heroic deeds . 
 Auriga , however , is sometimes described as Myrtilus , who was Hermes 's son and the charioteer of Oenomaus . The association of Auriga and Myrtilus is supported by depictions of the constellation , which rarely show a chariot . Myrtilus 's chariot was destroyed in a race intended for suitors to win the heart of Oenomaus 's daughter Hippodamia . Myrtilus earned his position in the sky when Hippodamia 's successful suitor , Pelops , killed him , despite his complicity in helping Pelops win her hand . After his death , Myrtilus 's father Hermes placed him in the sky . Yet another mythological association of Auriga is Theseus 's son Hippolytus . He was ejected from Athens after he refused the romantic advances of his stepmother Phaedra , who committed suicide as a result . He was killed when his chariot was wrecked , but revived by Asclepius . Regardless of Auriga 's specific representation , it is likely that the constellation was created by the ancient Greeks to commemorate the importance of the chariot in their society . 
 An incidental appearance of Auriga in Greek mythology is as the limbs of Medea 's brother . In the myth of Jason and the Argonauts , as they journeyed home , Medea killed her brother and dismembered him , flinging the parts of his body into the sea , represented by the Milky Way . Each individual star represents a different limb . 
 Capella is associated with the mythological she @-@ goat Amalthea , who breast @-@ fed the infant Zeus . It forms an asterism with the stars Epsilon Aurigae , Zeta Aurigae , and Eta Aurigae , the latter two of which are known as the Haedi ( the Kids ) . Though most often associated with Amalthea , Capella has sometimes been associated with Amalthea 's owner , a nymph . The myth of the nymph says that the goat 's hideous appearance , resembling a Gorgon , was partially responsible for the Titans ' defeat , because Zeus skinned the goat and wore it as his aegis . The asterism containing the three goats had been a separate constellation ; however , Ptolemy merged the Charioteer and the Goats in the 2nd century Almagest . Before that , Capella was sometimes seen as its own constellation — by Pliny the Elder and Manilius — called Capra , Caper , or <unk> , all of which relate to its status as the " goat star " . Zeta Aurigae and Eta Aurigae were first called the " Kids " by <unk> , an ancient Greek astronomer . 
 Traditionally , illustrations of Auriga represent it as a chariot and its driver . The charioteer holds a goat over his left shoulder and has two kids under his left arm ; he holds the reins to the chariot in his right hand . However , depictions of Auriga have been inconsistent over the years . The reins in his right hand have also been drawn as a whip , though Capella is almost always over his left shoulder and the Kids under his left arm . The 1488 atlas Hyginus deviated from this typical depiction by showing a four @-@ wheeled cart driven by Auriga , who holds the reins of two oxen , a horse , and a zebra . Jacob <unk> depicted Auriga in his Hyginus of 1535 as a charioteer with a two @-@ wheeled cart , powered by two horses and two oxen . Arabic and Turkish depictions of Auriga varied wildly from those of the European Renaissance ; one Turkish atlas depicted the stars of Auriga as a mule , called <unk> <unk> by Johann Bayer . One unusual representation of Auriga , from 17th @-@ century France , showed Auriga as Adam kneeling on the Milky Way , with a goat wrapped around his shoulders . 
 Occasionally , Auriga is seen not as the Charioteer but as Bellerophon , the mortal rider of Pegasus who dared to approach Mount Olympus . In this version of the tale , Jupiter pitied Bellerophon for his foolishness and placed him in the stars . 
 Some of the stars of Auriga were incorporated into a now @-@ defunct constellation called Telescopium Herschelii . This constellation was introduced by Maximilian Hell to honor William Herschel 's discovery of Uranus . Originally , it included two constellations , Tubus <unk> Major [ sic ] , in Gemini , Lynx , and Auriga , and Tubus <unk> Minor [ sic ] in Orion and Taurus ; both represented Herschel 's telescopes . Johann Bode combined Hell 's constellations into Telescopium Herschelii in 1801 , located mostly in Auriga . 
 Since the time of Ptolemy , Auriga has remained a constellation and is officially recognized by the International Astronomical Union , although like all modern constellations , it is now defined as a specific region of the sky that includes both the ancient pattern and the surrounding stars . In 1922 , the IAU designated its recommended three @-@ letter abbreviation , " Aur " . The official boundaries of Auriga were created in 1930 by Eugène Delporte as a polygon of 21 segments . Its right ascension is between <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> and its declination is between 27 @.@ 9 ° and 56 @.@ 2 ° in the equatorial coordinate system . 
 = = = In non @-@ Western astronomy = = = 
 The stars of Auriga were incorporated into several Chinese constellations . <unk> , the five chariots of the celestial emperors and the representation of the grain harvest , was a constellation formed by Alpha Aurigae , Beta Aurigae , Beta Tauri , Theta Aurigae , and Iota Aurigae . <unk> or Zhu was one of three constellations which represented poles for horses to be tethered . They were formed by the triplets of Epsilon , Zeta , and Eta Aurigae ; Nu , Tau , and Upsilon Aurigae ; and Chi and 26 Aurigae , with one other undetermined star . <unk> , the pond where the sun set and <unk> , a pond , bridge , or pier , were other constellations in Auriga , though the stars that composed them are undetermined . <unk> , representing chairs for the emperor and other officials , was made up of nine stars in the east of the constellation . <unk> , a constellation mostly formed from stars in Camelopardalis representing different types of crops , included the northern stars of Delta and Xi Aurigae . 
 In ancient Hindu astronomy , Capella represented the heart of Brahma and was important religiously . Ancient Peruvian peoples saw Capella , called <unk> , as a star intimately connected to the affairs of shepherds . 
 In Brazil , the Bororo people incorporate the stars of Auriga into a massive constellation representing a caiman ; its southern stars represent the end of the animal 's tail . The eastern portion of Taurus is the rest of the tail , while Orion is its body and Lepus is the head . This constellation arose because of the prominence of <unk> in daily Amazonian life . There is evidence that Capella was significant to the Aztec people , as the Late Classic site Monte <unk> has a marker for the star 's heliacal rising . Indigenous peoples of California and Nevada also noticed the bright pattern of Auriga 's stars . To them , the constellation 's bright stars formed a curve that was represented in crescent @-@ shaped petroglyphs . The indigenous Pawnee of North America recognized a constellation with the same major stars as modern Auriga : Alpha , Beta , Gamma ( Beta Tauri ) , Theta , and Iota Aurigae . 
 The people of the Marshall Islands featured Auriga in the myth of Dümur , which tells the story of the creation of the sky . Antares in Scorpius represents Dümur , the oldest son of the stars ' mother , and the Pleiades represent her youngest son . The mother of the stars , <unk> , is represented by Capella ; she lived on the island of <unk> . She told her sons that the first to reach an eastern island would become the King of the Stars , and asked Dümur to let her come in his canoe . He refused , as did each of her sons in turn , except for Pleiades . Pleiades won the race with the help of <unk> , and became the King of the Stars . Elsewhere in the central Caroline Islands , Capella was called <unk> <unk> ( variations include <unk> <unk> , <unk> @-@ el @-@ ul , and <unk> <unk> ) , meaning " north of Aldebaran " . Different names were noted for Auriga and Capella in Eastern Pacific societies . On Pukapuka , the figure of modern Auriga was called Te Wale @-@ o @-@ <unk> ( " The house of <unk> " ) ; in the Society Islands , it was called <unk> @-@ nui ( " Great Valley " ) . Capella itself was called Tahi @-@ <unk> ( " Unique Sovereign " ) in the Societies . Hoku @-@ lei was the name for Capella but may have been the name for the whole constellation ; the name means " Star @-@ wreath " and refers to one of the wives of the Pleiades , called <unk> . 
 The stars of Auriga feature in Inuit constellations . <unk> , meaning " collar @-@ bones " , was a constellation that included Capella ( Alpha Aurigae ) , Menkalinan ( Beta Aurigae ) , Pollux ( Beta <unk> ) , and Castor ( Alpha <unk> ) . Its rising signalled that the constellation <unk> , made up of Altair ( Alpha Aquilae ) , <unk> ( Gamma Aquilae ) , and sometimes <unk> ( Beta Aquilae ) , would rise soon . <unk> , which represented the dawn following the winter solstice , was an incredibly important constellation in the Inuit mythos . It was also used for navigation and time @-@ keeping at night . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 = = = = Bright stars = = = = 
 Alpha Aurigae ( Capella ) , the brightest star in Auriga , is a G8III class star ( G @-@ type giant ) 43 light @-@ years away and the sixth brightest star in the night sky at magnitude 0 @.@ 08 . Its traditional name is a reference to its mythological position as Amalthea ; it is sometimes called the " Goat Star " . Capella 's names all point to this mythology . In Arabic , Capella was called al- ' <unk> , meaning " the goat " , and in Sumerian , it was called <unk> , " the goat star " . On Ontong Java , Capella was called <unk> . Capella is a spectroscopic binary with a period of 104 days ; the components are both yellow giants , more specifically , the primary is a G @-@ type star and the secondary is between a G @-@ type and F @-@ type star in its evolution . The secondary is formally classified as a <unk> class star ( G @-@ type giant ) . The primary has a radius of 11 @.@ 87 solar radii ( R ☉ ) and a mass of 2 @.@ 47 solar masses ( M ☉ ) ; the secondary has a radius of 8 @.@ 75 R ☉ and a mass of 2 @.@ 44 M ☉ . The two components are separated by 110 million kilometers , almost 75 % of the distance between the Earth and the Sun . The star 's status as a binary was discovered in 1899 at the Lick Observatory ; its period was determined in 1919 by J.A. Anderson at the 100 @-@ inch Mt . Wilson Observatory telescope . It appears with a golden @-@ yellow hue , though Ptolemy and Giovanni Battista Riccioli both described its color as red , a phenomenon attributed not to a change in Capella 's color but to the idiosyncrasies of their color sensitivities . Capella has an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 3 and a luminosity of 160 times the luminosity of the Sun , or 160 L ☉ ( the primary is 90 L ☉ and the secondary is 70 L ☉ ) . It may be loosely associated with the Hyades , an open cluster in Taurus , because of their similar proper motion . Capella has one more companion , Capella H , which is a pair of red dwarf stars located 11 @,@ 000 astronomical units ( 0 @.@ 17 light @-@ years ) from the main pair . 
 Beta Aurigae ( Menkalinan , <unk> ) is a bright <unk> class star ( A @-@ type subgiant ) . Its Arabic name comes from the phrase <unk> <unk> al- ' <unk> , meaning " shoulder of the charioteer " and is a reference to Beta Aurigae 's location in the constellation . Menkalinan is 81 light @-@ years away and has a magnitude of 1 @.@ 90 . Like Epsilon Aurigae , it is an eclipsing binary star that varies in magnitude by <unk> The two components are blue @-@ white stars that have a period of 3 @.@ 96 days . Its double nature was revealed spectroscopically in 1890 by Antonia Maury , making it the second spectroscopic binary discovered , and its variable nature was discovered <unk> 20 years later by Joel Stebbins . Menkalinan has an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 6 and a luminosity of 50 L ☉ . The component of its motion in the direction of Earth is 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) per second . Beta Aurigae may be associated with a stream of about 70 stars including Delta Leonis and Alpha Ophiuchi ; the proper motion of this group is comparable to that of the Ursa Major Moving Group , though the connection is only hypothesized . Besides its close eclipsing companion , Menkalinan has two other stars associated with it . One is an unrelated optical companion , discovered in 1783 by William Herschel ; it has a magnitude of 10 @.@ 5 and has a separation of 184 arcseconds . The other is likely associated gravitationally with the primary , as determined by their common proper motion . This 14th magnitude star was discovered in 1901 by Edward Emerson Barnard . It has a separation of 12 @.@ 6 arcseconds , and is around 350 astronomical units from the primary . 
 = = = = Other bright stars = = = = 
 Besides the particularly bright stars of Alpha and Beta Aurigae , the constellation has many dimmer stars . Gamma Aurigae , now Beta Tauri ( El Nath , <unk> ) is a <unk> class star ( B @-@ type giant ) . It was originally considered to be a part of both Auriga and Taurus , but is now classified only as Beta Tauri . Iota Aurigae , also called <unk> and <unk> , is a <unk> class star ( K @-@ type bright giant ) of magnitude 2 @.@ 69 ; it is 494 light @-@ years away from Earth . It evolved from a B @-@ type star to a K @-@ type star over the estimated 30 – 45 million years since its birth . Iota Aurigae has an absolute magnitude of − 2 @.@ 3 and a luminosity of 700 L ☉ . It is classed as a particularly luminous bright giant , but appears dimmer than it should because dust clouds in the Milky Way block some of its light ; astronomers estimate that it appears 0 @.@ 6 magnitudes fainter . It is also a hybrid star , an x @-@ ray producing giant star that emits x @-@ rays from its corona and has a cool stellar wind . Though its proper motion is just 0 @.@ 02 arcseconds per year , it has a radial velocity of 10 @.@ 5 miles ( 16 @.@ 9 km ) per second in recession . The traditional name <unk> , sometimes shortened to " <unk> " , comes from the Arabic phrase al @-@ <unk> dh 'il <unk> , meaning " shoulder of the rein holder " . Iota Aurigae may end as a supernova , but because it is close to the mass limit for such stars , it may instead become a white dwarf . 
 Delta Aurigae , the northernmost bright star in Auriga , is a K0III @-@ type star ( K @-@ type giant ) , 126 light @-@ years from Earth and approximately 1 @.@ 3 billion years old . It has a magnitude of 3 @.@ 72 , an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 2 , and a luminosity of 60 L ☉ . About 12 times the radius of the Sun , Delta Aurigae weighs only two solar masses and rotates with a period of almost one year . Though it is often listed as a single star , it actually has three very widely spaced optical companions . One is a double star of magnitude 11 , two arcminutes from Delta , and the other is a star of magnitude 10 , three arcminutes from Delta . 
 Lambda Aurigae ( Al Hurr ) is a <unk> @-@ V @-@ type star ( G @-@ type star intermediate between a subgiant and main @-@ sequence star ) of magnitude 4 @.@ 71 . It has an absolute magnitude of 4 @.@ 4 and is located 41 light @-@ years from Earth . It has very weak emissions in the infrared spectrum , like Epsilon Aurigae . In photometric observations of Epsilon , an unusual variable , Lambda Aurigae is commonly used as a comparison star . It is reaching the end of its hydrogen @-@ fusing lifespan at an age of 6 @.@ 2 billion years . It also has an unusually high radial velocity at 83 km / second . Though older than the Sun , it is similar in many ways ; its mass is 1 @.@ 07 solar masses , a radius of 1 @.@ 3 solar radii , and a rotational period of 26 days . However , it differs from the Sun in its metallicity ; its iron content is 1 @.@ 15 times that of the Sun and it has relatively less nitrogen and carbon . Like Delta , it has several optical companions and is often categorized as a single star . The brightest companions are of magnitude 10 , separated by 175 and 203 arcseconds . The dimmer companions are of magnitude 13 and 14 , 87 and 310 arcseconds from Lambda , respectively . Nu Aurigae is a <unk> ( G @-@ type giant ) star of magnitude 3 @.@ 97 , 230 light @-@ years from Earth . It has a luminosity of 60 L ☉ and an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 2 . Nu Aurigae is a giant star with a radius of 20 – 21 solar radii and a mass of approximately 3 solar masses . It may technically be a binary star ; its companion , sometimes listed as optical and separated by 56 arcseconds , is a dwarf star of spectral type K6 and magnitude 11 @.@ 4 . Its period is more than 120 @,@ 000 years and it orbits at least 3700 AU from the primary . 
 = = = = Eclipsing binary stars = = = = 
 The most prominent variable star in Auriga is Epsilon Aurigae ( Al Maz , Almaaz ) , an F0 class eclipsing binary star with an unusually long period of 27 years ; its last minima occurred from 1982 – 1984 and 2009 – 2011 . The distance to the system is disputed , variously cited as 4600 and <unk> light @-@ years . The primary is a white supergiant , and the secondary may be itself a binary star within a large dusty disk . Its maximum magnitude is 3 @.@ 0 , but it stays at a minimum magnitude of 3 @.@ 8 for around a year ; its most recent eclipse began in 2009 . The primary has an absolute magnitude of − 8 @.@ 5 and an unusually high luminosity of 200 @,@ 000 L ☉ , the reason it appears so bright at such a great distance . Epsilon Aurigae is the longest @-@ period eclipsing binary currently known . The first observed eclipse of Epsilon Aurigae occurred in 1821 , though its variable status was not confirmed until the eclipse of 1847 – 1848 . From that time forward , many theories were put forth as to the nature of the eclipsing component . Epsilon Aurigae has a <unk> component , which is visible as a 14th magnitude companion separated from the primary by 28 @.@ 6 arcseconds . It was discovered by Sherburne Wesley Burnham in 1891 at the Dearborn Observatory , and is about 0 @.@ 5 light @-@ years from the primary . 
 Another eclipsing binary in Auriga , part of the Haedi asterism with Epsilon Aurigae , is Zeta Aurigae ( <unk> ) , an eclipsing binary star at a distance of 776 light @-@ years with a period of 2 years and 8 months . It has an absolute magnitude of − 2 @.@ 3 . The primary is an orange @-@ hued <unk> @-@ type star ( K @-@ type bright giant ) and the secondary is a smaller blue star similar to Regulus ; its period is 972 days . The secondary is a <unk> @-@ type star , a B @-@ type main @-@ sequence star . Zeta Aurigae 's maximum magnitude is 3 @.@ 7 and its minimum magnitude is 4 @.@ 0 . The full eclipse of the small blue star by the orange giant lasts 38 days , with two partial phases of 32 days at the beginning and end . The primary has a diameter of 150 D ☉ and a luminosity of 700 L ☉ ; the secondary has a diameter of 4 D ☉ and a luminosity of 140 L ☉ . Zeta Aurigae was spectroscopically determined to be a double star by Antonia Maury in 1897 and was confirmed as a binary star in 1908 by William Wallace Campbell . The two stars orbit each other about 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 miles ( 800 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) apart . Zeta Aurigae is moving away from Earth at a rate of 8 miles ( 13 km ) per second . The last star in the asterism is Eta Aurigae , a B3 class star located 243 light @-@ years from Earth with a magnitude of 3 @.@ 17 . It is a B3V class star , meaning that it is a blue @-@ white hued main @-@ sequence star . Eta Aurigae is a part of the Haedi or " Kids " asterism , along with Zeta and Epsilon Aurigae . Eta Aurigae has an absolute magnitude of − 1 @.@ 7 and a luminosity of 450 L ☉ . Eta Aurigae is moving away from Earth at a rate of 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) per second . 
 T Aurigae ( Nova Aurigae 1891 ) was a nova discovered at magnitude 5 @.@ 0 on January 23 , 1892 , by Thomas David Anderson . It became visible to the naked eye by December 10 , 1891 , as shown on photographic plates examined after the nova 's discovery . It then brightened by a factor of 2 @.@ 5 from December 11 to December 20 , when it reached a maximum magnitude of 4 @.@ 4 . T Aurigae faded slowly in January and February 1892 , then faded quickly during March and April , reaching a magnitude of 15 in late April . However , its brightness began to increase in August , reaching magnitude 9 @.@ 5 , where it stayed until 1895 . Over the subsequent two years , its brightness decreased to 11 @.@ 5 , and by 1903 , it was approximately 14th magnitude . By 1925 , it had reached its current magnitude of 15 @.@ 5 . When the nova was discovered , its spectrum showed material moving at a high speed towards Earth . However , when the spectrum was examined again in August 1892 , it appeared to be a planetary nebula . Observations at the Lick Observatory by Edward Emerson Barnard showed it to be disc @-@ shaped , with clear nebulosity in a diameter of 3 arcseconds . The shell had a diameter of 12 arcseconds in 1943 . T Aurigae is classified as a slow nova , similar to DQ Herculis . Like DQ Herculis , WZ Sagittae , Nova Persei 1901 and Nova Aquilae 1918 , it is a very close binary with a very short period . T Aurigae 's period of 4 @.@ 905 hours , comparable to DQ Herculis 's period of 4 @.@ 65 hours , and has a partial eclipse period of 40 minutes . 
 = = = = Other variable stars = = = = 
 There are many other variable stars of different types in <unk> <unk> Aurigae ( <unk> ) is an orange @-@ hued supergiant , which ranges between magnitudes 4 @.@ 8 and 5 @.@ 7 , though not with a regular period . It has a spectral class of <unk> , an average magnitude of 4 @.@ 91 , and an absolute magnitude of − 5 @.@ 7 . <unk> is <unk> light @-@ years from Earth . RT Aurigae is a Cepheid variable which ranges between magnitudes 5 @.@ 0 and 5 @.@ 8 over a period of 3 @.@ 7 days . A yellow @-@ white supergiant , it lies at a distance of 1600 light @-@ years . It was discovered to be variable by English amateur T.H. Astbury in 1905 . It has a spectral class of <unk> , meaning that it is an F @-@ type supergiant star . RX Aurigae is a Cepheid variable as well ; it varies in magnitude from a minimum of 8 @.@ 0 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 3 ; its spectral class is <unk> . It has a period of 11 @.@ 62 days . RW Aurigae is the prototype of its class of irregular variable stars . Its variability was discovered in 1906 by Lydia <unk> at the Moscow Observatory . RW Aurigae 's spectrum indicates a turbulent stellar atmosphere , and has prominent emission lines of calcium and hydrogen . Its spectral type is G5V : e . SS Aurigae is an SS Cygni @-@ type variable star , classified as an explosive dwarf . Discovered by Emil <unk> in 1907 , it is almost always at its minimum magnitude of 15 , but brightens to a maximum up to 60 times brighter than the minimum an average of every 55 days , though the period can range from 50 days to more than 100 days . It takes about 24 hours for the star to go from its minimum to maximum magnitude . SS Aurigae is a very close binary star with a period of 4 hours and 20 minutes . Both components are small <unk> stars ; there has been dispute in the scientific community about which star originates the outbursts . <unk> Aurigae is a variable red giant star at a distance of 2 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . It has a period of approximately 234 days and ranges between magnitudes 5 @.@ 0 and 7 @.@ 0 . 
 AE Aurigae is a blue @-@ hued main @-@ sequence variable star . It is normally of magnitude 6 @.@ 0 , but its magnitude varies irregularly . AE Aurigae is associated with the 9 @-@ light @-@ year @-@ wide Flaming Star Nebula ( IC 405 ) , which it illuminates . However , AE Aurigae likely entered the nebula only recently , as determined through the discrepancy between the radial velocities of the star and the nebula , 36 miles ( 58 km ) per second and 13 miles ( 21 km ) per second , respectively . It has been hypothesized that AE Aurigae is a " runaway star " from the young cluster in the Orion Nebula , leaving the cluster approximately 2 @.@ 7 million years ago . It is similar to 53 Arietis and Mu Columbae , other runaway stars from the Orion cluster . Its spectral class is <unk> , meaning that it is an O @-@ type main @-@ sequence star . The Flaming Star Nebula , is located near IC 410 in the celestial sphere . IC 410 obtained its name from its appearance in long exposure <unk> ; it has extensive filaments that make AE Aurigae appear to be on fire . 
 There are four Mira variable stars in Auriga : R Aurigae , UV Aurigae , U Aurigae , and X Aurigae , all of which are type M stars . More specifically , R Aurigae is of type <unk> , UV Aurigae is of type C6 ( a carbon star ) , U Aurigae is of type M9 , and X Aurigae is of type K2 . R Aurigae , with a period of 457 @.@ 5 days , ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13 @.@ 9 to a maximum of 6 @.@ 7 . UV Aurigae , with a period of 394 @.@ 4 days , ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 10 @.@ 6 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 4 . U Aurigae , with a period of 408 @.@ 1 days , ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13 @.@ 5 to a maximum of 7 @.@ 5 . X Aurigae , with a particularly short period of 163 @.@ 8 days , ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13 @.@ 6 to a maximum of 8 @.@ 0 . 
 = = = = Binary and double stars = = = = 
 Auriga is home to several less prominent binary and double stars . Theta Aurigae ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a blue @-@ white <unk> class binary star of magnitude 2 @.@ 62 with a luminosity of 75 L ☉ . It has an absolute magnitude of 0 @.@ 1 and is 165 light @-@ years from Earth . The secondary is a yellow star of magnitude 7 @.@ 1 , which requires a telescope of 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in aperture to resolve ; the two stars are separated by 3 @.@ 6 arcseconds . It is the eastern vertex of the constellation 's pentagon . Theta Aurigae is moving away from Earth at a rate of 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) per second . Theta Aurigae additionally has a second optical companion , discovered by Otto Wilhelm von Struve in 1852 . The separation was at 52 arcseconds in 1978 and has been increasing since then because of the proper motion of Theta Aurigae , 0 @.@ 1 arcseconds per year . The separation of this magnitude 9 @.@ 2 component was 2 @.@ 2 arcminutes ( 130 @.@ 7 arcseconds ) in 2007 with an angle of 350 ° . 4 Aurigae is a double star at a distance of 159 light @-@ years . The primary is of magnitude 5 @.@ 0 and the secondary is of magnitude 8 @.@ 1 . 14 Aurigae is a white optical binary star . The primary is of magnitude 5 @.@ 0 and is at a distance of 270 light @-@ years ; the secondary is of magnitude 7 @.@ 9 and is at a distance of 82 light @-@ years . HD <unk> is spectroscopic binary of magnitude 5 @.@ 9 , with a spectral type assessed as either <unk> or <unk> , and a period of seven days . 
 = = = = Stars with planetary systems = = = = 
 There are five stars with confirmed planetary systems in Auriga ; there is also a white dwarf with a suspected planetary system . HD 40979 has one planet , HD 40979 b . It was discovered in 2002 through radial velocity measurements on the parent star . HD 40979 is 33 @.@ 3 parsecs from Earth , a spectral class F8V star of magnitude 6 @.@ 74 — just past the limit of visibility to the naked eye . It is of similar size to the Sun , at 1 @.@ 1 solar masses and 1 @.@ 21 solar radii . The planet , with a mass of 3 @.@ 83 Jupiter masses , orbits with a semi @-@ major axis of 0 @.@ 83 AU and a period of 263 @.@ 1 days . HD <unk> has one planet as well . HD <unk> b was discovered through radial velocity measurements in 2004 . It has a mass of 1 @.@ 79 Jupiter masses and orbits every 890 @.@ 76 days at a distance of 1 @.@ 92 AU . Its parent star is faint , at an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 88 , a <unk> type star 49 parsecs away . It has a mass of 1 @.@ 02 solar masses and a radius of 1 @.@ 27 solar radii . HD 43691 b is a significantly larger planet , with a mass of 2 @.@ 49 Jupiter masses ; it is also far closer to its parent star , HD 43691 . Discovered in 2007 from radial velocity measurements , it orbits at a distance of 0 @.@ 24 AU with a period of 36 @.@ 96 days . HD 43691 has a radius identical to the Sun 's , though it is more dense — its mass is 1 @.@ 38 solar masses . It is a <unk> type star of magnitude 8 @.@ 03 , 93 @.@ 2 parsecs from Earth . 
 HD 49674 is a star in Auriga with one planet orbiting it . This G5V type star is faint , at magnitude 8 @.@ 1 , and fairly distant , at 40 @.@ 7 parsecs from Earth . Like the other stars , it is similar in size to the Sun , with a mass of 1 @.@ 07 solar masses and a radius of 0 @.@ 94 solar radii . Its planet , HD 49674 b , is a smaller planet , at 0 @.@ 115 Jupiter masses . It orbits very close to its star , at 0 @.@ 058 AU , every 4 @.@ 94 days . HD 49674 b was discovered by radial velocity observations in 2002 . HAT @-@ P @-@ 9 b is the most recently confirmed exoplanet in Auriga , orbiting the star HAT @-@ P @-@ 9 . Unlike the other exoplanets in Auriga , detected by radial velocity measurements , HAT @-@ P @-@ 9 b was detected using the transit method in 2008 . It has a mass of 0 @.@ 67 Jupiter masses and orbits just 0 @.@ 053 AU from its parent star , with a period of 3 @.@ 92 days ; its radius is 1 @.@ 4 Jupiter radii , making it a hot Jupiter . Its parent star , HAT @-@ P @-@ 9 , is an F @-@ type star approximately 480 parsecs from Earth . It has a mass of 1 @.@ 28 solar masses and a radius of 1 @.@ 32 solar radii . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The galactic anticenter is located about 3 @.@ 5 ° to the east of Beta Aurigae . This marks the point on the celestial sphere opposite the location of the Galactic Center ; hence , this region marks a less extensive and less luminous part of the dust band that forms the spiral arms of the Milky Way . Auriga has many open clusters and other objects because the Milky Way runs through it . The three brightest open clusters are M36 , M37 and M38 , all of which are visible in binoculars or a small telescope in suburban skies . A larger telescope resolves individual stars . Three other open clusters are NGC 2281 , lying close to <unk> Aurigae , NGC 1664 , which is close to ε Aurigae , and IC 410 ( surrounding NGC 1893 ) , a cluster with nebulosity next to IC 405 , the Flaming Star Nebula , found about midway between M38 and ι Aurigae . AE Aurigae , a runaway star , is a bright variable star currently located within the Flaming Star Nebula . 
 M36 ( NGC 1960 ) is a young galactic open cluster with approximately 60 stars , most of which are relatively bright ; however , only about 40 stars are visible in most amateur instruments . It is at a distance of 3900 light @-@ years and has an overall magnitude of 6 @.@ 0 ; it is 14 light @-@ years wide . Its apparent diameter is 12 @.@ 0 arcminutes . Of the three open clusters in Auriga , M36 is both the smallest and the most concentrated , though its brightest stars are approximately 9th magnitude . It was discovered in 1749 by Guillaume Le Gentil , the first of Auriga 's major open clusters to be discovered . M36 features a 10 @-@ arcminute @-@ wide knot of bright stars in its center , anchored by Struve 737 , a double star with components separated by 10 @.@ 7 arcseconds . Most of the stars in M36 are B type stars with rapid rates of rotation . M36 's Trumpler class is given as both I 3 r and II 3 m . Besides the central knot , most of the cluster 's other stars appear in smaller knots and groups . 
 M37 ( NGC 2099 ) is an open cluster , larger than M36 and at a distance of 4200 light @-@ years . It has 150 stars , making it the richest cluster in Auriga ; the most prominent member is an orange star that appears at the center . M37 is approximately 25 light @-@ years in diameter . It is the brightest open cluster in Auriga with a magnitude of 5 @.@ 6 ; it has an apparent diameter of 23 @.@ 0 arcminutes . M37 was discovered in 1764 by Charles Messier , the first of many astronomers to laud its beauty . It was described as " a virtual cloud of glittering stars " by Robert Burnham , Jr. and Charles Piazzi Smyth commented that the star field was " strewed [ sic ] ... with sparkling gold @-@ dust " . The stars of M37 are older than those of M36 ; they are approximately 200 million years old . Most of the constituent stars are A type stars , though there are at least 12 red giants in the cluster as well . M37 's Trumpler class is given as both I 2 r and II 1 r . The stars visible in a telescope range in magnitude from 9 @.@ 0 to 13 @.@ 0 ; there are two 9th magnitude stars in the center of the cluster and an east to west chain of 10th and 11th magnitude stars . 
 M38 is a diffuse open cluster at a distance of 3900 light @-@ years , the least concentrated of the three main open clusters in Auriga ; it is classified as a Trumpler Class II 2 r or III 2 r cluster because of this . It appears as a cross @-@ shaped or pi @-@ shaped object in a telescope and contains approximately 100 stars ; its overall magnitude is 6 @.@ 4 . M38 , like M36 , was discovered by Guillaume Le Gentil in 1749 . It has an apparent diameter of approximately 20 arcseconds and a true diameter of about 25 light @-@ years . Unlike M36 or M37 , M38 has a varied stellar population . The majority of the population consists of A and B type main sequence stars , the B type stars being the oldest members , and a number of G type giant stars . One yellow @-@ hued G type star is the brightest star in M38 at a magnitude of 7 @.@ 9 . The brightest stars in M38 are magnitude 9 and 10 . M38 is accompanied by NGC 1907 , a smaller and dimmer cluster that lies half a degree south @-@ southwest of M38 ; it is at a distance of 4200 light @-@ years . The smaller cluster has an overall magnitude of 8 @.@ 2 and a diameter of 6 @.@ 0 arcminutes , making it about a third the size of M38 . However , NGC 1907 is a rich cluster , classified as a Trumpler Class I 1 m n cluster . It has approximately 12 stars of magnitude 9 – 10 , and at least 25 stars of magnitude 9 – 12 . 
 IC 410 , a faint nebula , is accompanied by the bright open cluster NGC 1893 . The cluster is thin , with a diameter of 12 arcminutes and a population of approximately 20 stars . Its accompanying nebula has very low surface brightness , partially because of its diameter of 40 arcminutes . It appears in an amateur telescope with brighter areas in the north and south ; the brighter southern patch shows a pattern of darker and lighter spots in a large instrument . NGC 1893 , of magnitude 7 @.@ 5 , is classified as a Trumpler Class II 3 r n or II 2 m n cluster , meaning that it is not very large and is somewhat bright . The cluster possesses approximately 30 stars of magnitude 9 – 12 . In an amateur instrument , IC 410 is only visible with an Oxygen @-@ III filter . NGC 2281 is a small open cluster at a distance of 1500 light @-@ years . It contains 30 stars in a crescent shape . It has an overall magnitude of 5 @.@ 4 and a fairly large diameter of 14 @.@ 0 arcseconds , classified as a Trumpler Class I 3 m cluster . The brightest star in the cluster is magnitude 8 ; there are approximately 12 stars of magnitude 9 – 10 and 20 stars of magnitude 11 – 13 . 
 NGC 1931 is a nebula in Auriga , slightly more than one degree to the west of M36 . It is considered to be a difficult target for an amateur telescope . NGC 1931 has an approximate integrated magnitude of 10 @.@ 1 ; it is 3 by 3 arcminutes . However , it appears to be elongated in an amateur telescope . Some observers may note a green hue in the nebula ; a large telescope will easily show the nebula 's " peanut " shape , as well as the quartet of stars that are engulfed by the nebula . The open cluster portion of NGC 1931 is classed as a I 3 p n cluster ; the nebula portion is classed as both an emission and reflection nebula . NGC 1931 is approximately 6000 light @-@ years from Earth and could easily be confused with a comet in the eyepiece of a telescope . 
 NGC 1664 is a fairly large open cluster , with a diameter of 18 arcminutes , and moderately bright , with a magnitude of 7 @.@ 6 , comparable to several other open clusters in Auriga . One open cluster with a similar magnitude is NGC 1778 , with a magnitude of 7 @.@ 7 . This small cluster has a diameter of 7 arcminutes and contains 25 stars . NGC 1857 , a small cluster , is slightly brighter at magnitude 7 @.@ 0 . It has a diameter of 6 arcminutes and contains 40 stars , making it far more concentrated than the similar @-@ sized NGC 1778 . Far dimmer than the other open clusters is NGC 2126 at magnitude 10 @.@ 2 . Despite its dimness , NGC 2126 is as concentrated as NGC 1857 , having 40 stars in a diameter of 6 arcminutes . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 Auriga is home to two meteor showers . The Aurigids , named for the entire constellation and formerly called the " Alpha Aurigids " , are renowned for their intermittent outbursts , such as those in 1935 , 1986 , 1994 , and 2007 . They are associated with the comet Kiess ( C / 1911 N1 ) , discovered in 1911 by Carl Clarence Kiess . The association was discovered after the outburst in 1935 by Cuno <unk> and Arthur <unk> . The Aurigid outburst on September 1 , 1935 prompted the investigation of a connection with Comet Kiess , though the 24 @-@ year delay between the comet 's return caused doubt in the scientific community . However , the outburst in 1986 erased much of this doubt . Istvan <unk> , a Hungarian amateur meteor observer , observed many bright meteors radiating from Auriga in a fashion very similar to the confirmed 1935 outburst . Because the position of <unk> 's observed radiant and the 1935 radiant were close to the position of Comet Kiess , the comet was confirmed as the source of the Aurigid meteor stream . 
 The Aurigids had a spectacular outburst in 1994 , when many grazing meteors — those that have a shallow angle of entry and seem to rise from the horizon — were observed in California . The meteors were tinted blue and green , moved slowly , and left trails at least 45 ° long . Because they had such a shallow angle of entry , some 1994 Aurigids lasted up to 2 seconds . Though there were only a few visual observers for part of the outburst , the 1994 Aurigids peak , which lasted less than two hours , was later confirmed by Finnish amateur radio astronomer Ilkka <unk> . The connection with Comet Kiess was finally confirmed in 1994 . The 2007 outburst of the Aurigids was predicted by Peter <unk> and was observed by astronomers worldwide . Despite some predictions that there would be no Alpha Aurigid outburst , many bright meteors were observed throughout the shower , which peaked on September 1 as predicted . Much like in the 1994 outburst , the 2007 Aurigids were very bright and often colored blue and green . The maximum zenithal hourly rate was 100 meteors per hour , observed at 4 : 15 am , California time ( 12 : 15 UTC ) by a team of astronomers flying on NASA planes . 
 The Aurigids are normally a placid Class II meteor shower that peaks in the early morning hours of September 1 , beginning on August 28 every year . Though the maximum zenithal hourly rate is 2 – 5 meteors per hour , the Aurigids are fast , with an entry velocity of 67 kilometres ( 42 mi ) / sec . The annual Aurigids have a radiant located about two degrees north of Theta Aurigae , a third @-@ magnitude star in the center of the constellation . The Aurigids end on September 4 . Some years , the maximum rate has reached 9 – 30 meteors per hour . 
 The other meteor showers radiating from Auriga are far less prominent and capricious than the Alpha Aurigids . The Zeta Aurigids are a weak shower with a northern and southern branch lasting from December 11 to January 21 . The shower peaks on January 1 and has very slow meteors , with a maximum rate of 1 – 5 meteors per hour . It was discovered by William Denning in 1886 and was discovered to be the source of rare fireballs by Alexander Stewart Herschel . There is another faint stream of meteors called the " Aurigids " , unrelated to the September shower . This shower lasts from January 31 to February 23 , peaking from February 5 through February 10 ; its slow meteors peak at a rate of approximately 2 per hour . The Delta Aurigids are a faint shower radiating from Auriga . It was discovered by a group of researchers at New Mexico State University and has a very low peak rate . The Delta Aurigids last from September 22 through October 23 , peaking between October 6 and October 15 . They may be related to the September Epsilon Perseids , though they are more similar to the Coma <unk> in that the Delta Aurigids last longer and have a dearth of bright meteors . They too have a hypothesized connection to an unknown short period retrograde comet . The Iota Aurigids are a hypothesized shower occurring in mid @-@ November ; its parent body may be the asteroid 2000 <unk> , but this connection is highly disputed . The hypothesized Iota Aurigids may instead be a faint stream of Taurids . 
 = Prague Spring = 
 The Prague Spring ( Czech : <unk> <unk> , Slovak : <unk> jar ) was a period of political liberalization in Czechoslovakia during the era of its domination by the Soviet Union after World War II . It began on 5 January 1968 , when reformist Alexander Dubček was elected First Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia ( KSČ ) , and continued until 21 August when the Soviet Union and other members of the Warsaw Pact invaded the country to halt the reforms . 
 The Prague Spring reforms were a strong attempt by Dubček to grant additional rights to the citizens of Czechoslovakia in an act of partial decentralization of the economy and democratization . The freedoms granted included a loosening of restrictions on the media , speech and travel . After national discussion of dividing the country into a federation of three republics , Bohemia , Moravia @-@ Silesia and Slovakia , Dubček oversaw the decision to split into two , the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic . This was the only formal change that survived the end of Prague Spring , though the relative success of the nonviolent resistance undoubtedly prefigured and facilitated the peaceful transition to liberal democracy with the collapse of Soviet hegemony in 1989 . 
 The reforms , especially the decentralization of administrative authority , were not received well by the Soviets , who , after failed negotiations , sent half a million Warsaw Pact troops and tanks to occupy the country . A large wave of emigration swept the nation . A spirited non @-@ violent resistance was mounted throughout the country , involving attempted fraternization , painting over and turning street signs ( on one occasion an entire invasion force from Poland was routed back out of the country after a day 's wandering ) , defiance of various curfews , etc . While the Soviet military had predicted that it would take four days to subdue the country the resistance held out for eight months , and was only circumvented by diplomatic stratagems ( see below ) . There were sporadic acts of violence and several suicides by self @-@ immolation ( such as that of Jan Palach ) , but there was no military resistance . Czechoslovakia remained controlled until 1989 , when the velvet revolution ended pro @-@ Soviet rule peacefully , undoubtedly drawing upon the successes of the non @-@ violent resistance twenty years earlier . The resistance also became an iconic example of civilian @-@ based defense , which , along with unarmed civilian peacekeeping constitute the two ways that nonviolence can be and occasionally has been applied directly to military or paramilitary threats . 
 After the invasion , Czechoslovakia entered a period of normalization : subsequent leaders attempted to restore the political and economic values that had prevailed before Dubček gained control of the KSČ . Gustáv Husák , who replaced Dubček and also became president , reversed almost all of Dubček 's reforms . The Prague Spring inspired music and literature such as the work of Václav Havel , Karel Husa , Karel Kryl , and Milan Kundera 's novel The Unbearable Lightness of Being . 
 = = Background = = 
 The process of de @-@ Stalinization in Czechoslovakia had begun under Antonín Novotný in the late 1950s and early 1960s , but had progressed more slowly than in most other states of the Eastern Bloc . Following the lead of Nikita Khrushchev , Novotný proclaimed the completion of socialism , and the new constitution , accordingly , adopted the name Czechoslovak Socialist Republic . The pace of change , however , was sluggish ; the rehabilitation of Stalinist @-@ era victims , such as those convicted in the <unk> trials , may have been considered as early as 1963 , but did not take place until 1967 . 
 In the early 1960s , Czechoslovakia underwent an economic downturn . The Soviet model of industrialization applied poorly to Czechoslovakia . Czechoslovakia was already quite industrialized before World War II and the Soviet model mainly took into account less developed economies . Novotný 's attempt at restructuring the economy , the 1965 New Economic Model , spurred increased demand for political reform as well . 
 = = = 1967 Writers ' Congress = = = 
 As the strict regime eased its rules , the Union of Czechoslovak Writers cautiously began to air discontent , and in the union 's gazette , Literární noviny , members suggested that literature should be independent of Party doctrine . 
 In June 1967 , a small fraction of the Czech writer 's union sympathized with radical socialists , specifically Ludvík Vaculík , Milan Kundera , Jan <unk> , Antonín Jaroslav <unk> , Pavel <unk> and Ivan <unk> . 
 A few months later , at a party meeting , it was decided that administrative actions against the writers who openly expressed support of reformation would be taken . Since only a small part of the union held these beliefs , the remaining members were relied upon to discipline their colleagues . Control over Literární noviny and several other publishing houses was transferred to the Ministry of Culture , and even members of the party who later became major reformers — including Dubček — endorsed these moves . 
 = = Dubček 's rise to power = = 
 As President Antonín Novotný was losing support , Alexander Dubček , First Secretary of the regional Communist Party of Slovakia , and economist Ota <unk> challenged him at a meeting of the Central Committee . Novotný then invited Soviet premier Leonid Brezhnev to Prague that December , seeking support ; but Brezhnev was surprised at the extent of the opposition to Novotný and thus supported his removal as Czechoslovakia 's leader . Dubček replaced Novotný as First Secretary on 5 January 1968 . On 22 March 1968 , Novotný resigned his presidency and was replaced by Ludvík Svoboda , who later gave consent to the reforms . 
 Early signs of change were few . When the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia ( KSČ ) Presidium member Josef Smrkovský was interviewed in a Rudé <unk> article , entitled " What Lies Ahead " , he insisted that Dubček 's appointment at the January Plenum would further the goals of socialism and maintain the working class nature of the Communist Party . 
 = = = Literární listy = = = 
 However , right after Dubček assumed power , the scholar Eduard <unk> became chairman of the Union of Czechoslovak Writers and thus editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the previously hard @-@ line communist weekly Literární noviny , which under Novotny had been filled with party loyalists . Goldstucker tested the boundaries of Dubček ’ s devotion to freedom of the press when he appeared on a television interview as the new head of the union . On 4 February , in front of the entire nation , he openly criticized Novotny , exposing all of Novotny ’ s previously unreported policies and explaining how they were preventing progress in Czechoslovakia . 
 Despite the official government statement that allowed for freedom of the press , this was the first trial of whether or not Dubček was serious about reforms . Goldstucker suffered no repercussions , and Dubček instead began to build a sense of trust among the media , the government , and the citizens . It was under <unk> that the journal 's name was changed to Literární listy , and on 29 February 1968 , the Writers ’ Union published the first copy of the censor @-@ free Literární listy . By August 1968 , Literární listy had a circulation of 300 @,@ 000 , making it the most published periodical in Europe . 
 = = Socialism with a human face = = 
 On the 20th anniversary of Czechoslovakia ’ s " Victorious February " , Dubček delivered a speech explaining the need for change following the triumph of socialism . He emphasized the need to " enforce the leading role of the party more effectively " and acknowledged that , despite Klement Gottwald 's urgings for better relations with society , the Party had too often made heavy @-@ handed rulings on trivial issues . Dubček declared the party 's mission was " to build an advanced socialist society on sound economic foundations ... a socialism that corresponds to the historical democratic traditions of Czechoslovakia , in accordance with the experience of other communist parties ... " 
 In April , Dubček launched an " Action Programme " of <unk> , which included increasing freedom of the press , freedom of speech , and freedom of movement , with economic emphasis on consumer goods and the possibility of a multiparty government . The programme was based on the view that " Socialism cannot mean only liberation of the working people from the domination of exploiting class relations , but must make more provisions for a fuller life of the personality than any bourgeois democracy . " It would limit the power of the secret police and provide for the federalization of the ČSSR into two equal nations . The programme also covered foreign policy , including both the maintenance of good relations with Western countries and cooperation with the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc nations . It spoke of a ten @-@ year transition through which democratic elections would be made possible and a new form of democratic socialism would replace the status quo . 
 Those who drafted the Action Programme were careful not to criticize the actions of the post @-@ war Communist regime , only to point out policies that they felt had outlived their usefulness . For instance , the immediate post @-@ war situation had required " centralist and directive @-@ administrative methods " to fight against the " remnants of the bourgeoisie . " Since the " antagonistic classes " were said to have been defeated with the achievement of socialism , these methods were no longer necessary . Reform was needed , for the Czechoslovak economy to join the " scientific @-@ technical revolution in the world " rather than relying on Stalinist @-@ era heavy industry , labour power , and raw materials . Furthermore , since internal class conflict had been overcome , workers could now be duly rewarded for their qualifications and technical skills without contravening Marxism @-@ Leninism . The Programme suggested it was now necessary to ensure important positions were " filled by capable , educated socialist expert cadres " in order to compete with capitalism . 
 Although it was stipulated that reform must proceed under KSČ direction , popular pressure mounted to implement reforms immediately . Radical elements became more vocal : anti @-@ Soviet polemics appeared in the press ( after the formal abolishment of censorship on 26 June 1968 ) , the Social Democrats began to form a separate party , and new unaffiliated political clubs were created . Party conservatives urged repressive measures , but Dubček counselled moderation and re @-@ emphasized KSČ leadership . At the Presidium of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in April , Dubček announced a political programme of " socialism with a human face " . In May , he announced that the Fourteenth Party Congress would convene in an early session on 9 September . The congress would incorporate the Action Programme into the party statutes , draft a federalization law , and elect a new Central Committee . 
 Dubček 's reforms guaranteed freedom of the press , and political commentary was allowed for the first time in mainstream media . At the time of the Prague Spring , Czechoslovak exports were declining in competitiveness , and Dubček 's reforms planned to solve these troubles by mixing planned and market economies . Within the party , there were varying opinions on how this should proceed ; certain economists wished for a more mixed economy while others wanted the economy to remain mostly socialist . Dubček continued to stress the importance of economic reform proceeding under Communist Party rule . 
 On 27 June Ludvík Vaculík , a leading author and journalist , published a manifesto titled The Two Thousand Words . It expressed concern about conservative elements within the KSČ and so @-@ called " foreign " forces . Vaculík called on the people to take the initiative in implementing the reform programme . Dubček , the party Presidium , the National Front , and the cabinet denounced this manifesto . 
 = = = Publications and media = = = 
 Dubček ’ s relaxation of censorship ushered in a brief period of freedom of speech and the press . The first tangible manifestation of this new policy of openness was the production of the previously hard @-@ line communist weekly Literarni noviny , renamed Literarni listy . 
 Freedom of the press also opened the door for the first honest look at Czechoslovakia ’ s past by Czechoslovakia ’ s people . Many of the investigations centered on the country ’ s history under communism , especially in the instance of the Joseph Stalin @-@ period . In another television appearance , Goldstucker presented both doctored and <unk> photographs of former communist leaders who had been purged , imprisoned , or executed and thus erased from communist history . The Writer ’ s Union also formed a committee in April 1968 , headed by the poet Jaroslav Seifert , to investigate the persecution of writers after the Communist takeover in February 1948 and rehabilitate the literary figures into the Union , bookstores and libraries , and the literary world . Discussions on the current state of communism and abstract ideas such as freedom and identity were also becoming more common ; soon , non @-@ party publications began appearing , such as the trade union daily <unk> ( Labour ) . This was also helped by the Journalists Union , which by March 1968 had already convinced the Central Publication Board , the government censor , to allow editors to receive uncensored subscriptions for foreign papers , allowing for a more international dialogue around the news . 
 The press , the radio , and the television also contributed to these discussions by hosting meetings where students and young workers could ask questions of writers such as Goldstucker , Pavel <unk> , and Jan Prochazka and political victims such as Josef Smrkovský , Zdenek <unk> , and Gustav Husak . Television also broadcast meetings between former political prisoners and the communist leaders from the secret police or prisons where they were held . Most importantly , this new freedom of the press and the introduction of television into the lives of everyday Czechoslovak citizens moved the political dialogue from the intellectual to the popular sphere . 
 = = Soviet reaction = = 
 Initial reaction within the Communist Bloc was mixed . Hungary 's János Kádár was highly supportive of Dubček 's appointment in January , but Leonid Brezhnev and others grew concerned about Dubček 's reforms , which they feared might weaken the position of the Communist Bloc during the Cold War . 
 At a 23 March meeting in Dresden in East Germany , leaders of the " Warsaw Five " ( USSR , Hungary , Poland , Bulgaria and East Germany ) questioned a Czechoslovak delegation over the planned reforms , suggesting any talk of " democratization " was a veiled critique of other policies . Władysław Gomułka and János Kádár were less concerned with the reforms themselves than with the growing criticisms levelled by the Czechoslovak media , and worried the situation might be " similar to the prologue of the Hungarian counterrevolution " . Some of the language in April 's KSČ Action Programme may have been chosen to assert that no counter @-@ revolution was planned , but Kieran Williams suggests that Dubček was perhaps surprised at , but not resentful of , Soviet suggestions . 
 The Soviet leadership tried to stop , or limit , the changes in the ČSSR through a series of negotiations . The Soviet Union agreed to bilateral talks with Czechoslovakia in July at <unk> nad <unk> , near the Slovak @-@ Soviet border . At the meeting , with attendance of Brezhnev , Alexei Kosygin , Nikolai Podgorny , Mikhail Suslov and others on the Soviet side and Dubček , Svoboda , Oldřich Černík , Smrkovský and others on the Czechoslovak side , Dubček defended the proposals of the reformist wing of the KSČ while pledging commitment to the Warsaw Pact and Comecon . The KSČ leadership , however , was divided between vigorous reformers ( Josef Smrkovský , Oldřich Černík , and František Kriegel ) who supported Dubček , and conservatives ( Vasil <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Oldřich <unk> ) who adopted an anti @-@ reformist stance . 
 Brezhnev decided on compromise . The KSČ delegates reaffirmed their loyalty to the Warsaw Pact and promised to curb " anti @-@ socialist " tendencies , prevent the revival of the Czechoslovak Social Democratic Party , and control the press more effectively . The Soviets agreed to withdraw their armed forces ( still in Czechoslovakia after manoeuvres that June ) and permit the 9 September Party Congress . 
 On 3 August representatives from the " Warsaw Five " and Czechoslovakia met in Bratislava and signed the Bratislava Declaration . The declaration affirmed unshakable fidelity to Marxism @-@ Leninism and proletarian internationalism and declared an implacable struggle against " bourgeois " ideology and all " anti @-@ socialist " forces . The Soviet Union expressed its intention to intervene in a Warsaw Pact country if a " bourgeois " system — a pluralist system of several political parties representing different factions of the capitalist class — was ever established . After the Bratislava conference , the Soviet Army left Czechoslovak territory but remained along its borders . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 As these talks proved unsatisfactory , the Soviets began to consider a military alternative . The Soviet Union 's policy of compelling the socialist governments of its satellite states to subordinate their national interests to those of the " Eastern Bloc " ( through military force if needed ) became known as the Brezhnev Doctrine . On the night of 20 – 21 August 1968 , Eastern Bloc armies from five Warsaw Pact countries – the Soviet Union , the GDR , Bulgaria , Poland and Hungary — invaded the ČSSR . 
 That night , 200 @,@ 000 troops and 2 @,@ 000 tanks entered the country . They first occupied the <unk> International Airport , where air deployment of more troops was arranged . The Czechoslovak forces were confined to their barracks , which were surrounded until the threat of a counter @-@ attack was assuaged . By the morning of 21 August Czechoslovakia was occupied . 
 Neither Romania nor Albania took part in the invasion . During the invasion by the Warsaw Pact armies , 72 Czechs and Slovaks were killed ( 19 of those in Slovakia ) , 266 severely wounded and another 436 slightly injured . Alexander Dubček called upon his people not to resist . Nevertheless , there was scattered resistance in the streets . Road signs in towns were removed or painted over — except for those indicating the way to Moscow . Many small villages renamed themselves " Dubcek " or " Svoboda " ; thus , without navigational equipment , the invaders were often confused . 
 Although , on the night of the invasion the Czechoslovak Presidium declared that Warsaw Pact troops had crossed the border without the knowledge of the ČSSR government , the Soviet Press printed an unsigned request – allegedly by Czechoslovak party and state leaders – for " immediate assistance , including assistance with armed forces " . At the 14th KSČ Party Congress ( conducted secretly , immediately following the intervention ) , it was emphasized that no member of the leadership had invited the intervention . More recent evidence suggests that conservative KSČ members ( including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Indra , and <unk> ) did send a request for intervention to the Soviets . The invasion was followed by a previously unseen wave of emigration , which was stopped shortly thereafter . An estimated 70 @,@ 000 fled immediately with an eventual total of some 300 @,@ 000 . 
 The Soviets attributed the invasion to the " Brezhnev Doctrine " which stated that the U.S.S.R. had the right to intervene whenever a country in the Eastern Bloc appeared to be making a shift towards capitalism . There is still some uncertainty , however , as to what provocation , if any , occurred to make the Warsaw Pact armies invade . The days leading up to the invasion was a rather calm period without any major events taking place in Czechoslovakia . 
 = = = Reactions to the invasion = = = 
 In Czechoslovakia , especially in the week immediately following the invasion , popular opposition was expressed in numerous spontaneous acts of nonviolent resistance . On 16 January 1969 , student Jan Palach set himself on fire in Prague 's Wenceslas Square to protest against the renewed suppression of free speech . Civilians purposely gave wrong directions to invading soldiers , while others identified and followed cars belonging to the secret police . 
 The generalized resistance caused the Soviet Union to abandon its original plan to oust the First Secretary . Dubček , who had been arrested on the night of 20 August was taken to Moscow for negotiations . There , he and several other leaders ( including all the highest @-@ ranked officials President Svoboda , Prime Minister Černík and Chairman of the National Assembly Smrkovský ) signed , under heavy psychological pressure from Soviet politicians , the Moscow Protocol and it was agreed that Dubček would remain in office and a programme of moderate reform would continue . 
 On 25 August citizens of the Soviet Union who did not approve of the invasion protested in Red Square ; seven protesters opened banners with anti @-@ invasion slogans . The demonstrators were arrested and later punished ; the protest was dubbed " anti @-@ Soviet " . 
 A more pronounced effect took place in Romania , where Nicolae Ceaușescu , Prime Secretary of the Romanian CP , already a staunch opponent of Soviet influences and a self @-@ declared Dubček supporter , gave a public speech in Bucharest on the day of the invasion , depicting Soviet policies in harsh terms . Albania withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in opposition calling the invasion an act of " social @-@ imperialism " . In Finland , a country under some Soviet political influence , the occupation caused a major scandal . 
 Like the Italian and French Communist parties , the Communist Party of Finland denounced the occupation . Nonetheless , Finnish president Urho Kekkonen was the very first Western politician to officially visit Czechoslovakia after August 1968 ; he received the highest Czechoslovakian honours from the hands of President Ludvík Svoboda , on 4 October 1969 . The Portuguese communist secretary @-@ general Álvaro <unk> was one of few political leaders from western Europe to have supported the invasion for being counter @-@ <unk> along with the Luxembourg party and conservative factions of the Greek party . 
 Most countries offered only vocal criticism following the invasion . The night of the invasion , Canada , Denmark , France , Paraguay , the United Kingdom and the United States requested a meeting of the United Nations Security Council . At the meeting , the Czechoslovak ambassador Jan Muzik denounced the invasion . Soviet ambassador Jacob Malik insisted the Warsaw Pact actions were " fraternal assistance " against " antisocial forces " . 
 The next day , several countries suggested a resolution condemning the intervention and calling for immediate withdrawal . Eventually , a vote was taken with ten members supporting the motion ; Algeria , India , and Pakistan abstained ; the USSR ( with veto power ) and Hungary opposed . Canadian delegates immediately introduced another motion asking for a UN representative to travel to Prague and work toward the release of the imprisoned Czechoslovak leaders . 
 By 26 August a new Czechoslovak representative requested the whole issue be removed from the Security Council 's agenda . Shirley Temple Black visited Prague in August 1968 to prepare for becoming the US Ambassador for a free Czechoslovakia . However , after the 21 August invasion she became part of a U.S. Embassy @-@ organized convoy of vehicles that evacuated U.S. citizens from the country . In August 1989 , she returned to Prague as U.S. Ambassador , three months before the Velvet Revolution that ended 41 years of Communist rule . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In April 1969 , Dubček was replaced as first secretary by Gustáv Husák , and a period of " normalization " began . Dubček was expelled from the KSČ and given a job as a forestry official . 
 Husák reversed Dubček 's reforms , purged the party of its liberal members , and dismissed from public office professional and intellectual elites who openly expressed disagreement with the political transformation . Husák worked to reinstate the power of the police and strengthen ties with the rest of the Communist bloc . He also sought to re @-@ centralize the economy , as a considerable amount of freedom had been granted to industries during the Prague Spring . Commentary on politics was forbidden in mainstream media , and political statements by anyone not considered to have " full political trust " were also banned . The only significant change that survived was the federalization of the country , which created the Czech Socialist Republic and the Slovak Socialist Republic in 1969 . In 1987 , the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev acknowledged that his liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika owed a great deal to Dubček 's " socialism with a human face " . When asked what the difference was between the Prague Spring and Gorbachev 's own reforms , a Foreign Ministry spokesman replied , " Nineteen years . " 
 Dubček lent his support to the Velvet Revolution of December 1989 . After the collapse of the Communist regime that month , Dubček became chairman of the federal assembly under the Havel administration . He later led the Social Democratic Party of Slovakia , and spoke against the dissolution of Czechoslovakia prior to his death in November 1992 . 
 = = = Normalization and censorship = = = 
 The Warsaw Pact invasion included attacks on media establishments , such as Radio Prague and Czechoslovak Television , almost immediately after the initial tanks rolled into Prague on 21 August 1968 . While both the radio station and the television station managed to hold out for at least enough time for initial broadcasts of the invasion , what the Soviets did not attack by force they attacked by reenacting party censorship . In reaction to the invasion , on 28 August 1968 , all Czechoslovak publishers agreed to halt production of newspapers for the day to allow for a " day of reflection " for the editorial staffs . Writers and reporters agreed with Dubcek to support a limited reinstitution of the censorship office , as long as the institution was to only last three months . Finally , by September 1968 , the Czechoslovak Communist Party plenum was held to instate the new censorship law . In the words of the Moscow @-@ approved resolution , " The press , radio , and television are first of all the instruments for carrying into life the policies of the Party and state . " 
 While this was not yet the end of the media ’ s freedom after the Prague Spring , it was the beginning of the end . During November , the Presidium , under Husak , declared that the Czechoslovak press could not make any negative remarks about the Soviet invaders or they would risk violating the agreement they had come to at the end of August . When the weeklies Reporter and Politika responded harshly to this threat , even going so far as to not so subtly criticize the Presidium itself in Politika , the government banned Reporter for a month , suspended Politika indefinitely , and prohibited any political programs from appearing on the radio or television . 
 The intellectuals were stuck at a bypass ; they recognized the government ’ s increasing normalization , but they were unsure whether to trust that the measures were only temporary or demand more . For example , still believing in Dubcek ’ s promises for reform , Milan Kundera published the article “ <unk> udel ” ( Our Czech Destiny ) in Literarni listy on 19 December . He wrote : " People who today are falling into depression and defeatism , commenting that there are not enough guarantees , that everything could end badly , that we might again end up in a <unk> of censorship and trials , that this or that could happen , are simply weak people , who can live only in illusions of certainty . " 
 In March 1969 , however , the new Soviet @-@ backed Czechoslovakian government instituted full censorship , effectively ending the hopes that normalization would lead back to the freedoms enjoyed during the Prague Spring . A declaration was presented to the Presidium condemning the media as co @-@ conspirators against the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact in their support of Dubcek ’ s liberalization measures . Finally , on 2 April 1969 , the government adopted measures " to secure peace and order " through even stricter censorship , forcing the people of Czechoslovakia to wait until the thawing of Eastern Europe for the return of a free media . 
 Former students from Prague , including Constantine Menges , and Czech refugees from the crisis , who were able to escape or resettle in Western Countries continued to advocate for human rights , religious liberty , freedom of speech and political asylum for Czech political prisoners and dissidents . Many raised concerns about the Soviet Union and Red Army 's continued military occupation of the Czechoslovakia in the 1970s and 1980s , prior to the fall of the Berlin Wall and collapse of Communism in Moscow and Eastern Europe . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 The Prague Spring deepened the disillusionment of many Western leftists with Soviet views . It contributed to the growth of <unk> ideas in Western communist parties , which sought greater distance from the Soviet Union , and eventually led to the dissolution of many of these groups . A decade later , a period of Chinese political liberalization became known as the Beijing Spring . It also partly influenced the Croatian Spring in Yugoslavia . In a 1993 Czech survey , 60 % of those surveyed had a personal memory linked to the Prague Spring while another 30 % were familiar with the events in another form . The demonstrations and regime changes taking place in North Africa and the Middle East from December 2010 have frequently been referred to as an " Arab Spring " . 
 The event has been referenced in popular music , including the music of Karel Kryl , <unk> <unk> 's Requiem , and Karel Husa 's Music for Prague 1968 . The Israeli song " Prague " , written by Shalom <unk> and performed by Arik Einstein at the Israel Song Festival of 1969 , was a lamentation on the fate of the city after the Soviet invasion and mentions Jan Palach 's Self @-@ immolation . " They Can 't Stop The Spring " , a song by Irish journalist and songwriter John Waters , represented Ireland in the Eurovision Song Contest in 2007 . Waters has described it as " a kind of Celtic celebration of the Eastern European revolutions and their eventual outcome " , quoting Dubček 's alleged comment : " They may crush the flowers , but they can 't stop the Spring . " 
 The Prague Spring is featured in several works of literature . Milan Kundera set his novel The Unbearable Lightness of Being during the Prague Spring . It follows the repercussions of increased Soviet presence and the dictatorial police control of the population . A film version was released in 1988 . The Liberators , by Viktor Suvorov , is an eyewitness description of the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia , from the point of view of a Soviet tank commander . Rock ' n ' Roll , a play by award @-@ winning Czech @-@ born English playwright Tom Stoppard , references the Prague Spring , as well as the 1989 Velvet Revolution . <unk> <unk> <unk> also ends her memoir Under a Cruel Star with a first hand account of the Prague Spring and the subsequent invasion , and her reflections upon these events . 
 In film there has been an adaptation of The Unbearable Lightness of Being , and also the movie <unk> from director Jan <unk> and screenwriter Petr <unk> , which depicts the events of the Prague Spring and ends with the invasion by the Soviet Union and their allies . The Czech musical film , <unk> from Filip <unk> , also depicts the events , the invasion and subsequent wave of emigration . 
 The number 68 has become iconic in the former Czechoslovakia . Hockey player Jaromír Jágr , whose grandfather died in prison during the rebellion , wears the number because of the importance of the year in Czechoslovak history . A former publishing house based in Toronto , 68 Publishers , that published books by exiled Czech and Slovak authors , took its name from the event . 
 = 1945 Homestead hurricane = 
 The 1945 Homestead hurricane was the most intense tropical cyclone to strike the U.S. state of Florida since 1935 . The ninth tropical storm , third hurricane , and third major hurricane of the season , it developed east @-@ northeast of the Leeward Islands on September 12 . Moving briskly west @-@ northwestward , the storm became a major hurricane on September 13 . The system moved over the Turks and Caicos Islands the following day and then Andros on September 15 . Later that day , the storm peaked as a Category 4 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Late on September 15 , the hurricane made landfall on Key Largo and then in southern Miami @-@ Dade County , and across Homestead , FL where much damage was done and winds were clocked at Homestead Army Air Corps Base at 145 mph . 
 Thereafter , the hurricane began to weaken while moving across Florida , falling to Category 1 intensity only several hours after landfall late on September 15 . Eventually , it curved north @-@ northeastward and approached the east coast of Florida again . Late on September 16 , the storm emerged into the Atlantic near St. Augustine and weakened to a tropical storm early on the following day . The cyclone made another landfall near the Georgia @-@ South Carolina state line later on September 17 . The system continued to weaken and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone near the border of North Carolina and Virginia early on September 18 . 
 The storm caused significant damage and 22 deaths in the Turks and Caicos Islands and the Bahamas . In Florida , the hardest hit area was Miami @-@ Dade County . Most of the city of Homestead was destroyed , while at the Richmond Naval Air Station , a fire ignited during the storm burned down three hangars worth $ 3 million ( 1945 USD ) each . Throughout the state , the strong winds destroyed 1 @,@ 632 residences and damaged 5 @,@ 372 homes others . Four people died , including the fire chief of the Richmond station . Homestead Army Air Corps Base , to the east of Homestead was completely destroyed . At the base , hurricane winds of " up to 145 miles per hour tore through the Air Field 's buildings . Enlisted housing facilities , the nurses ' dormitory , and the Base Exchange were all destroyed . The roof was ripped from what would later become building 741 , the " Big Hangar " . The base laundry and fire station were both declared total losses . The few remaining aircraft were tossed about like leaves . " 
 In the Carolinas , the storm produced heavy rainfall , causing flash flooding , particularly along the Cape Fear River in North Carolina . Overall , the hurricane resulted in 26 fatalities and about $ 60 million in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The hurricane was first observed on September 12 about 235 mi ( 380 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda in the Lesser Antilles . Around that time , the winds were estimated at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , and later that day , the Hurricane Hunters recorded peripheral winds of 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) . Moving quickly to the west @-@ northwest , the hurricane quickly intensified while passing north of Puerto Rico , reaching the equivalent of a modern @-@ day major hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The strength was based on another Hurricane Hunters mission reporting flight @-@ level winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . After passing north of Hispaniola , the hurricane turned moved toward the Bahamas , approaching or passing over Grand Turk Island at 0530 UTC on September 14 . A station on the island observed a barometric pressure of 977 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) during the passage , and nearby Clarence Town reported winds of 104 mph ( 168 km / h ) . While moving through the Bahamas , the hurricane turned more to the northwest . It was a smaller than average storm , and continued intensifying while moving toward southeastern Florida . 
 At 1930 UTC on September 15 , the hurricane made landfall on Key Largo , and about a half hour later struck the Florida mainland . The center passed very close to Homestead Air Reserve Base about an hour after landfall , where a central barometric pressure of 951 mbar ( 28 @.@ 1 inHg ) was recorded . The observation suggested a landfall pressure of 949 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) , and based on its small size and peak winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) ; equivalent to a Category 4 on the current Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . This estimate was backed up by gust of 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) at Carysfort Reef Light . The hurricane weakened over Florida while curving to the north and north @-@ northeast , although the proximity to water and the passage over the Everglades limited substantial weakening . Hurricane @-@ force winds spread across much of Florida until the storm emerged into the western Atlantic near St. Augustine late on September 16 . At around 0000 UTC the next day , the hurricane weakened to tropical storm status . About 11 hours later , it made another landfall near the border between Georgia and South Carolina with winds of 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) . 
 After continuing through the southeast United States , the storm became extratropical near the border of North Carolina and Virginia midday on September 18 . Although it initially maintained tropical storm @-@ force winds , the former hurricane weakened below gale @-@ force on September 19 while it was near Philadelphia . The storm continued rapidly to the northeast , moving through New England and along the coast of Maine before turning more to the east . Late on September 19 , the storm moved across Nova Scotia , passing southeast of Newfoundland the next day . It was last observed late on September 20 dissipating to the east of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Although hurricane warnings were initially issued for the Leeward Islands , the cyclone passed north of the Lesser Antilles . In advance of the storm , aircraft were evacuated from the Naval Air Station in Miami , Florida , where hundreds of planes left vulnerable locations . Residents were advised to heed advisories in Florida , the Bahamas , and northern Cuba . On September 15 , hurricane @-@ force winds were expected to affect areas from Fort Lauderdale , Florida through the Florida Keys , and hurricane warnings were accordingly released for this region . Storm warnings also extended north to Melbourne and Tampa . Military personnel sought shelter at Hialeah Race Track , while residents boarded homes and evacuated from coastal areas to public structures . Boats were utilized to transport people from barrier islands , and small watercraft were secured along the Miami River . However , Grady Norton , the head of the United States Weather Bureau , stated before the storm that Miami would " miss the worst of it " . The American Red Cross reported that 25 @,@ 000 people sought shelter within their services during the storm . Local officials from Cape Hatteras , North Carolina to Brunswick , Georgia ordered evacuations for coastal locations . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In the Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands , 22 people were killed . The hurricane demolished three @-@ quarters of the structures on Grand Turk Island , while the remaining intact buildings were damaged . The cyclone also produced heavy damage on Long Island , though damages were not reported in Nassau . Peak gusts were estimated near 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in Nassau . After the storm , The Daily Gleaner initiated a fund to offer aid for residents in the Turks and Caicos Islands . 
 In south Florida , peak gusts were estimated near 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) at the Army Air Base in Homestead . The strong winds destroyed 1 @,@ 632 residences across the state , while 5 @,@ 372 homes received damages . In Miami , gusts reached 107 mph ( 170 km / h ) , and damages were minimal , mostly snapped power lines , compared to communities in southern Dade County . Nearly 200 people were injured at the Richmond Naval Air Station , when a fire ignited during the storm , affecting three hangars worth $ 3 million each and destroying 25 blimps , 366 planes , and 150 automobiles . Damages to the Miami area was estimated at $ 40 million . An additional fire also destroyed a furniture factory and a tile manufacturing plant in the northwestern portion of downtown Miami . One death was reported in the area , the fire chief of Richmond 's fire department , and 26 required hospitalization . Another death was recorded after a schooner ran aground in present @-@ day Bal Harbour , Florida , killing its chief engineer . 
 Homestead was mostly flooded underwater , with the first floor of city hall and the fire department completely flooded and nearly all its residences destroyed . The historical Horde Hardware building collapsed while a local church was flatted by the winds . In the Florida Keys , hundreds of residences were damaged . The Florida East Coast Railway station at Goulds collapsed . Crop losses was estimated to be $ 4 million and most of its avocado harvest was destroyed . Four people died across the state . 
 Minor reports of damage was reported in Central and Northern Florida , with St. Augustine reporting a 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) wind gust . In Charleston , South Carolina , strong winds caused high waves , but the storm arrived at low tide and produced modest damage . Rainfall peaked at 8 @.@ 0 inches ( 200 mm ) at Belton , South Carolina . In Aiken , South Carolina , heavy precipitation caused damage to unpaved streets . Inland , the system produced heavy rainfall over North Carolina , peaking at 14 @.@ 8 inches ( 380 mm ) in Rockingham , North Carolina in the period covering September 13 through September 18 . This rain led to saturated grounds , allowing new water to spill into streams . Many crop fields and dwellings were flooded near the Cape Fear River as levels rose to record heights . The towns of Moncure , Fayetteville , and Elizabethtown exceeded flood stage levels . Broken dams in Richmond County produced significant flash floods . Few deaths were reported , but economic losses were extensive . In Hopewell , New Jersey , the remnants of the system produced winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , though major damage was not reported . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the aftermath of the storm , more than 1 @,@ 000 Red Cross workers were activated in response to the cyclone . A force of 400 German prisoner of wars and 200 Bahamian laborers participated in the cleanup process . 
 = Order of the Arrow = 
 The Order of the Arrow ( OA ) is most commonly known as the National Honor Society of the Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) . A more clear definition would be that the society was created to honor Scouts that best exemplify the Scout Oath and Law . It uses American Indian @-@ styled traditions and ceremonies to bestow recognition on Scouts selected by their peers as best exemplifying the ideals of Scouting . The society was created by E. Urner Goodman , with the assistance of Carroll A. Edson , in 1915 as a means of reinforcing the Scout Oath and the Scout Law . The goal was to establish these as lifelong guidelines , and to encourage continued participation in Scouting and camping . Influenced in part by camp traditions , and Indian folklore , the OA uses " safeguarded " symbols , handshakes , and ceremonies to impart a sense of community . The use of these traditions has been controversial and been criticized by Native American groups . 
 Inducted members , known as Arrowmen or Brothers , are organized into local youth @-@ led lodges that harbor fellowship , promote camping , and render service to Boy Scout councils and their communities . Members wear identifying insignia on their uniforms , most notably the OA pocket flap ( representing their individual lodge ) and the OA sash ( worn at official OA functions ) and are eligible for special OA awards . The OA program sponsors several events , awards , and training functions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and development of the society = = = 
 In 1915 , E. Urner Goodman , a newly hired field executive for the Philadelphia Council , was assigned to serve as director of the council 's summer camp at Treasure Island Scout Reservation on the Delaware River . He believed that the summer camp experience should do more than just teach proficiency in Scoutcraft skills ; rather , the principles embodied in the Scout Oath and Scout Law should become realities in the lives of Scouts . Along with his assistant camp director , Carroll A. Edson , he started an experimental program , <unk> ( " Brotherhood " in the Lenape language ) , to recognize those Scouts best exemplifying those traits as an example to their peers . 
 Goodman and Edson decided that a " camp fraternity " was the way to improve the summer camp experience and to keep the older boys coming back . In developing this program they borrowed from the traditions and practices of several other organizations . Edward Cave 's Boy 's Camp Book ( 1914 ) was consulted for the concept of a camp society that would perpetuate camp traditions . College fraternities were also influential for their concepts of brotherhood and rituals , and the idea of new members pledging themselves to the new organization . Inspired by Ernest Thompson Seton 's previous Woodcraft Indians program , American Indian lore was used to make the organization interesting and appealing to youth . Other influences include the Brotherhood of Andrew and Phillip , a Presbyterian church youth group with which Goodman had been involved as a young man , and Freemasonry . 
 The traditions and rituals of Freemasonry contributed more to the basic structure of the OA ritual than any other organization . In fact , there appears to be no known fraternal organization more faithful in form to Freemasonry than OA . Familiar terms such as " lodge " and " obligation " were borrowed from Masonic practice , as were most of the ceremonial structures and ritual formulae . Even the early national meeting was called a " Grand Lodge , " a Masonic reference . Of course , despite several facts — the common intent to impart a sense of obligation to a higher moral authority ; that groups such as OA that employ these rituals share many of the moral precepts ; and even that there are historical connections to the founders of OA and other organizations to Freemasonry — nothing should imply any political connection to Freemasonry itself . 
 They ultimately devised a program where troops chose , at the summer camp 's conclusion , those boys from among their number who best exemplified the ideals of Scouting . Those elected were acknowledged as having displayed , in the eyes of their fellow Scouts , a spirit of unselfish service and brotherhood . Edson helped Goodman research the traditions and language of the Lenni Lenape — also known as the Delaware — who had once inhabited Treasure Island . The brotherhood of Scout honor campers with its American Indian overtones was a success and was repeated again the following summer at Treasure Island . Those Scouts honored at Treasure Island in 1915 and 1916 would become members of what is now Unami Lodge . 
 By 1921 , Goodman had spoken to Scout leaders in surrounding states about the honor society resulting in a number of lodges being established by Scout councils in the northeastern United States . The name of the society was changed to Order of the Arrow , and in October 1921 , Goodman convened the first national meeting of what was then called the " National Lodge of the Order of the Arrow " in Philadelphia — where Goodman was elected as Grand Chieftain . Committees were organized to formulate a constitution , refine ceremonial rituals , devise insignia , and plan future development . 
 In the early 1920s , many Scout executives were skeptical of what they called " secret camp fraternities . " By September 1922 , opposition to the Order of the Arrow was such that a formal resolution opposing " camp fraternities " was proposed at a national meeting of Scout executives . Goodman argued against the motion : " Using the Scout ideals as our great objective " , he said , a camp activity that will " further the advancement of those ideals " should not be suppressed . The motion was narrowly defeated , and the fledgling Order continued as an experimental program throughout the 1920s and 1930s . In 1931 , there were OA lodges in seven percent of BSA councils nationwide . By 1948 , about two @-@ thirds of the BSA councils had established OA lodges . That year , the OA was also integrated as an official part of the Scouting program . 
 = = = Order in the 21st century = = = 
 Over the century since the Order of the Arrow 's founding , more than one million Scouts and Scouters have worn the OA sash on their uniforms , denoting membership in the Brotherhood . The four stated purposes of the Order of the Arrow are : " ( 1 ) Recognize those who best exemplify the Scout Oath and Law in their daily lives and through that recognition cause others to conduct themselves in a way that warrants similar recognition ; ( 2 ) Promote camping , responsible outdoor adventure , and environmental stewardship as essential components of every Scout ’ s experience , in the unit , year @-@ round , and in summer camp ; ( 3 ) Develop leaders with the willingness , character , spirit and ability to advance the activities of their units , our Brotherhood , Scouting , and ultimately our nation ; and ( 4 ) <unk> the Scout habit of helpfulness into a life purpose of leadership in cheerful service to others . 
 In a new program of national service conducted from June through August 2008 , the OA offered <unk> to both youth and adult Arrowmen . Described as " one of the largest conservation efforts in Scouting 's history " by the Boy Scouts of America , approximately 3 @,@ 500 Arrowmen converged on five national forests to work on various conservation projects such as building new trails and helping preserve nearly extinct species , as well as removing invasive species , in cooperation with the U.S. Forest Service . The five national forests are : Mark Twain National Forest , Manti @-@ La Sal National Forest , George Washington and Jefferson National Forests , Shasta @-@ Trinity National Forest and Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest . 
 = = Membership = = 
 More than 180 @,@ 000 youth and adults are members of the Order of the Arrow . This number is approximately one @-@ seventh of the total number of those registered in the BSA . Youth members are elected by their local unit . In contrast to Boy Scouting , where youth members are under 18 and adult members are over 18 , OA youth members include all persons under 21 years of age while those 21 and over are considered adult members . 
 The OA is a part of the Boy Scout program . Youth members are elected from Boy Scout troops and Varsity Scout teams . To be eligible for induction , a Scout must have achieved the rank of First Class , spent at least 15 days and nights camping within the last two years ( six of which at a resident camp ) , and gain the approval of their unit leader . Once elected , a youth must complete their Ordeal within one year . Adults who had not previously joined the Order as a youth member may become members by being nominated by the unit , district , or council committee and then approved by the lodge adult selection committee . Adults must meet the same camping requirement . In addition , at least one youth from the adult 's troop or team must be elected to the OA in that year for an adult to be nominated . A unit may nominate up to one third of the number of adults as the number of youth elected . Honorary membership was once bestowed in special circumstances , as with Franklin D. Roosevelt and Dwight D. Eisenhower , but this practice was officially discontinued in 1953 . 
 = = = Ordeal = = = 
 After being elected or nominated , candidates may participate in a call @-@ out ceremony to recognize those Scouts and Scouters that were selected before they attend their Ordeal . The call @-@ out ceremony may be performed at summer camp , a camporee , a call @-@ out weekend or at a unit meeting . Candidates subsequently participate in an Ordeal , intended to emphasize service and selflessness . During the induction , " candidates maintain complete silence , receive small amounts of food , work on camp improvement projects , and are required to sleep alone , apart from other campers , which teaches significant values . " If they succeed in their ordeal the candidates are then welcomed as Ordeal members in a formal Ordeal Ceremony . 
 = = = Brotherhood = = = 
 Ordeal members are entitled to all the same rights and privileges of membership in the Order as Brotherhood and Vigil Honor members — there are no ranks within the Order . However , moving on to Brotherhood membership offers an opportunity to reaffirm one 's commitment to the Order . Arrowmen may " seal " their membership after ten months by demonstrating their knowledge of the traditions and obligations of the OA . They then participate in an induction ceremony and become Brotherhood members . 
 While the Ordeal consists primarily of physical impressions , " the Brotherhood ceremony is one of deeper and quieter mental impressions . " 
 = = = Vigil Honor = = = 
 The Vigil Honor is a recognition given to Arrowmen for distinguished contributions beyond the immediate responsibilities of their position or office to their lodge , the Order of the Arrow , Scouting , or their Scout Camp . The Vigil Honor may be conferred upon Arrowmen who have completed a minimum of two years as a Brotherhood member and have performed exceptional service above and beyond their immediate responsibilities through leadership , exemplary efforts , and dedication . However , under no circumstances should tenure in Scouting or the Order of the Arrow be considered as reason enough for a Vigil Honor recommendation . Selection is annual and is limited to one person for every 50 members of the lodge , and members of the Order can be inducted into the Vigil Honor only with the written approval of the national Order of the Arrow committee . 
 As a part of the Vigil Honor induction , each new Vigil Honor member is given a Vigil Honor name in the language of the Lenni Lenape , on whom the traditions and ceremonies of the Order are based . An English translation of the Vigil Honor name is also provided , and the name often represents a characteristic of the individual . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The Order of the Arrow places great emphasis on being a youth @-@ led organization . Only youth under the age 21 are voting members and are eligible to hold elected offices . Professional and volunteer adults are appointed in non @-@ voting advisory positions at the chapter , lodge , and section levels . 
 = = = Lodge = = = 
 The basic unit of the OA is the lodge , which is chartered to a local BSA council . The lodge chief is the elected youth leader , the lodge adviser is a BSA adult volunteer appointed by the Scout executive , and the lodge staff adviser is the council Scout executive or his designated council professional Scouter . The lodge youth officers , consisting of the lodge chief , one or more vice chiefs , a secretary , and a treasurer are responsible for organizing and leading the various programs and activities of the lodge . Many lodges have standing committees responsible for ceremonies , service projects , publications , unit elections , camp promotions , and dance teams composed of youth members . Lodges can also divide into chapters , usually corresponding to districts within the council . The chapter is led by the elected youth chapter chief , chapter vice chiefs , secretary , and a volunteer adult is appointed as the adviser , the district executive is the professional ( staff ) adviser . 
 = = = Section = = = 
 Lodges are grouped into sections that are then grouped into regions . The section chief is the elected youth leader , a volunteer adult is appointed as the section adviser , and the area director ( or his designate ) is the professional ( staff ) adviser . In addition to the section chief , the section has two additional elected officers . The vice chief and secretary are elected immediately following the election of the section chief at the section 's annual business meeting . All sections gather annually at a section conclave held in the late spring or early fall . The section officers lead the planning of this weekend with the help of the lodge chiefs in the section . 
 = = = Region = = = 
 The Order of the Arrow is organized into four regions , Central , Southern , Northeast and Western Region ; the boundaries of each OA region correspond with the boundaries of the BSA 's regions . Each region has an elected region chief , a volunteer adult who is appointed as the region chairman to oversee its region committee , and an appointed professional ( staff ) adviser . Each region chief is elected at the national planning meeting the day after the election of the national chief and vice chief by a caucus of the section chiefs from the given region . The members of the region committee consists of the region chief , the region chairman , all national committeemen from the region , and other appointed adult volunteers . Each region annually has a gathering of all section officers and advisers . As a region they are trained in topics relevant to their jobs . Each region also provides opportunities for Order of the Arrow members to go through a National Leadership Seminar . This weekend course is highly rated and a lasting memory for many members . 
 = = = National = = = 
 The national chief and the national vice chief are selected by a caucus of the section chiefs at the outset of the Order of the Arrow 's national planning meeting . At the national level , the OA is headed by the national Order of the Arrow committee of which the national chief and national vice chief are voting <unk> national adult leadership includes the volunteer national chairman and the OA director , a professional Scouter . 
 = = Symbols = = 
 Arrowmen are identified by a white sash bearing a red arrow that is worn over their right shoulder . An Ordeal member wears a sash with a lone arrow . The Brotherhood member wears a sash bearing an arrow with a red bar at each end of the arrow . A Vigil Honor member wears a sash with the same bars of as the Brotherhood sash at each end of the arrow , and a Vigil Honor triangle on the center of the shaft . Members wear the sash at Order of the Arrow functions and special Scouting activities when members need to be identified as Arrowmen rendering special services . The OA sash is not worn at the same time as the merit badge sash , nor worn folded in the belt . The sash as a form of recognition dates to the founding of the Order and has a long history of changes in usage and design . 
 The OA Universal Ribbon is worn suspended from the right uniform shirt pocket button . Vigil Honor recipients may add the Vigil Honor pin to the ribbon . Lodge affiliation is indicated by the wearing of the lodge emblem ( commonly known as a lodge flap ) , an embroidered patch worn on the right pocket flap of the uniform shirt . Each lodge flap has a unique design , generally reflecting the name , geography or history of the lodge . Special issues of flaps may be created to commemorate anniversaries and other events and are a popular item for those who engage in Scouting memorabilia collecting . 
 Arrowmen also exchange a special handshake as a token of brotherhood , along with other signs and passwords . A signature acronym , WWW ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> - The Brotherhood of Cheerful Service ) is often depicted in publications , regalia , etc . 
 = = Ceremonies = = 
 The Order of the Arrow utilizes three nationally standardized ceremonies for Ordeal , Brotherhood , and Vigil Honor memberships using themes , stories , and symbols centered on American Indian traditions as interpreted by the Order of the Arrow . It also utilizes symbolic progression , so that no symbols are introduced before the proper time . This is done to keep the sense of mystery surrounding the ceremonies and their various symbols . There is an element of mystery in the ceremonies for the sake of its effect on the participants , and so the three membership ceremonies are not performed in public . The ceremonies were standardized almost from the beginning of the OA to avoid misunderstandings regarding the diversity of religious beliefs among BSA members . 
 Ceremonies were once considered to be secret , and consequently the OA has been viewed by some as a secret society . With the introduction of Youth Protection program guidelines in 1980s , the BSA has made clear that any concerned parent , guardian , or religious leader may view a video of the ceremonies , attend meetings , or read ceremonial texts upon request to a council , district , lodge , or chapter official to assure themselves that there is nothing objectionable . Such persons are asked to safeguard the details relating to ceremonies for the sake of the participants . The intent of the provision for parents and religious leaders to be allowed access to ceremonies is to ensure that there is no religious conflict or violations of youth protection guidelines occurring . Parents have long been discouraged in many Lodges from seizing the opportunity to use the provision for photo opportunities with their sons , and some lodges have instituted bans on photography during the ceremonies . Hazing or demeaning initiation pranks are also prohibited by the OA and the BSA . 
 The ceremonies utilize symbolic settings , rites , and principles to convey various Scouting ideals to participants . As one author depicts a ceremony , " The values of the Order of the Arrow , ' a brotherhood of cheerful service , ' were passed on during a night @-@ time ceremony : an arrowhead outlined with stones on the ground , candles on the stones , a huge bonfire at the base of the arrowhead , and at the point of the arrow a lectern from which was read , and danced , the story of heroic sacrifice for others . " Ceremonies also utilize the OA song , commonly referred to by its first line of lyrics as Firm Bound in Brotherhood , and titled Order of the Arrow Official Song and The Order of the Arrow Song in the printed music score of official OA publications . It was written in 1921 by OA founder E. Urner Goodman to the Russian hymn tune God Save the Tsar ! , composed by Alexei Lvov in the 19th century . 
 OA ceremony teams are also occasionally asked to assist local Cub Scout and Boy Scout units with special ceremonies including Arrow of Light ceremonies for the Cub Scouts and Eagle Scout ceremonies for Boy Scouts . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Awards are separate and distinct from the membership levels of Ordeal and Brotherhood . Awards available through the Order of the Arrow include : Vigil Honor , Founder 's Award , Distinguished Service Award , Lifetime Achievement Award , Red Arrow Award , E. Urner Goodman Camping Award . 
 = = Events = = 
 Most lodges hold several annual events , such as one or two annual lodge fellowships , an annual lodge recognition dinner , and one or more Ordeal weekends which usually include Brotherhood ceremonies as well . Many larger lodges delegate responsibility for Ordeal weekends and other service projects upon the individual chapters . Individual summer camps may also host " OA days " during which members of the OA may receive small tokens of recognition in exchange for showing their sash . 
 The section conclave is an annual activity ( prior to 1972 known as an Area OA Conference ) involving three or more lodges in an established geographic area . Each conclave is led by section youth officers elected from among the member lodges at the previous year 's conclave , and the event itself is prepared in cooperation with various other lodge officers , and with one lodge serving as the " host lodge " . 
 The national OA committee also sponsors various national service opportunities , the oldest of which is the National OA Service Corps at the national Scout jamborees , at which Arrowmen have helped with many functions including shows and the Outdoor Adventure Program exhibit . 
 = = = High Adventure Program = = = 
 The National OA Committee also sponsors service groups to the three National High Adventure Bases , originally starting with the Order of the Arrow Trail Crew at the Philmont Scout Ranch working to build new trails and repair old ones . This expanded to the Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases with the OA Wilderness Voyage , repairing the portage trails in the Boundary Waters area , and then to Florida National High Adventure Sea Base in 2005 with Ocean Adventure , which works to remove invasive species on some of the Keys and promoting and carrying out of the Bleach watch program in the Florida Keys . In the summer of 2009 , the OA began the OA Canadian Odyssey program which provided service similar to the OA Wilderness Voyage to the Donald <unk> Canoe Base in <unk> , Ontario of Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases . 
 = = = National Order of the Arrow Conference = = = 
 The National Order of the Arrow Conference ( <unk> ) is a multi @-@ day event which usually takes place on a university campus , bringing together thousands of delegates from OA lodges around the nation for training and activities . <unk> are held every two years , with exceptions made to align the event with significant anniversaries . As a youth @-@ led organization , these national conferences are organized and directed by the elected section and region youth officers , who serve on committees responsible for various conference aspects under the leadership of the conference vice @-@ chief . Events include training for programs , leadership and American Indian culture ; competitions in athletics , ceremonies , cooking and American Indian dances ; and exhibits on OA history , outdoor activities and camping . There are also opportunities to talk with national leaders , perform service work and trade patches . Evening shows have different themes , including American Indian culture and recognition of dance competition winners , presentations of awards including the OA Distinguished Service Award and other entertainment . 
 = = Training = = 
 In addition to training courses available at a <unk> or section conclave , the OA offers specialized leadership training as weekend events for members : Lodge Leadership Development ( LLD ) , National Leadership Seminars ( NLS ) , and National Lodge Adviser Training Seminar ( NLATS ) . LLD is a one @-@ day or two @-@ day event conducted by a lodge to train their officers and advisers . NLS 's are conducted by regions for lodge officers and advisers . Many lodges send key officers to receive training . Typically , each region schedules three or four NLS weekends annually , at geographically dispersed locations within the region . NLATS is a training event for adults , usually held in conjunction with an NLS and conducted by regions , on the role of advisers in the OA . 
 = = = Lodge Leadership Development ( LLD ) = = = 
 The LLD ’ s primary objective is to train and orient lodge and chapter officers to the logistics of operating their chapters and lodges . Lodges are primarily responsible for providing this training to its officers , and there are resources available online to add to the course ’ s syllabus . 
 = = = National Leadership Seminar ( NLS ) = = = 
 Each region in the Order of the Arrow is responsible for putting on three to four <unk> each year in different areas of the region . The NLS has received praise for being one of the most valuable training offered by the BSA . Participants spend a weekend with Arrowmen in different parts of the region learning about the theory and practice of effective leadership . Each region is responsible for their NLS ’ s program , and the weekend is organized by the region chief and his support staff . Primary NLS staff go through a national training weekend called Train the Trainer , put on once every two years . 
 = = = National Lodge Adviser Training Seminar ( NLATS ) = = = 
 Largely considered the adult equivalent of the NLS program , NLATS ’ s primary objective is to provide advanced training to adults in each lodge . NLATS and NLS usually happen concurrently on the same weekend . The event is planned and executed by a staff of adults . 
 = St Joseph 's Convent , Taunton = 
 St Joseph 's Convent is a complex of 18th- and 19th @-@ century buildings in Taunton , Somerset , which were primarily used as a Roman Catholic convent , first by the Franciscans , and then Sisters of St. Joseph of Annecy . The buildings were sold out of the Catholic church in 1976 , and were redeveloped as residential flats in 2005 . The main building is designated by English Heritage as a Grade II * listed building , while the boundary walls on the west side are Grade II listed . 
 The main building was begun in 1772 , as a free hospital for the poor , but funding ran out two years later , and it was completed as a private residence . In the early 19th century , it was bought by a group of Franciscan nuns , who moved from an unsatisfactory site in Winchester . The nuns carried out a number of additions and extensions to the building to make it more suitable for their needs . They moved out of Taunton in 1950 and sold the convent to the Sisters of St. Joseph , who continued to run a school on the site for the next twenty @-@ six years . 
 = = History = = 
 Originally , the site was intended to be a hospital ; on the first stone , which was laid in September 1772 , the engraving describes the building as " a general hospital , for the relief of the sick poor . " That foundation stone was laid by Frederick North , Lord North , the British Prime Minister at the time . In 1774 , the building work stopped when funds ran out , and shortly after it was sold to recover the debts incurred from building it . The building was eventually completed as a personal residence , and came into the hands of James Coles . Upon his death , the house , known as Taunton Lodge , was put up for sale . This was brought to the attention of a group of Franciscan nuns . The nuns had left Bruges in Belgium , and arrived in England in 1794 to avoid persecution during the French Revolution . They initially settled in Winchester , but the buildings they utilised there were not suitable for their permanent use , and in October 1806 , they were ordered to look for somewhere else to establish themselves . 
 Mr Knight of Cannington alerted the nuns to the sale of Taunton Lodge , and they raised the £ 3 @,@ 150 required to purchase it . They completed the purchase in early May 1807 , after some minor quibbles with the Coles family . When the abbess visited the Lodge prior to the purchase , she had identified that it would require £ 1 @,@ 000 worth of improvements in addition to the money already spent on its acquisition . The plans included extending the existing building to gain a staircase and some dormitories for the school girls , and the addition of a new wing that would include a chapel , infirmary , four cells , and rooms for the male chaplain and servants . The new building was began in March 1808 , and by June of that year , the entire community had moved from Winchester , despite the work being ongoing . The shell of the new body was completed by the autumn of 1808 , but the work was delayed due to a lack of finances as £ 1 @,@ 908 had already been spent on altering the old building . This cost did not include the erection of the new wing , thus the constructions costs were already far surpassing the original estimate . 
 Within two years of being built , the roof on the new wing had to be replaced as it had started sinking ; the joists " were made of bad wood & put in the wrong way " . It was too close to winter in 1810 for the work to be completed that year , and it had to be left until the following spring . The wing was completed , with replacement roof , by January 1812 , at a total cost of just over £ 2 @,@ 230 . A storm in 1818 damaged the roof in the original building , and on inspection it was found that the whole roof should be replaced ; this was completed by September of the same year . 
 The convent continued to be significantly expanded over the next twenty years , and in 1858 the Franciscans purchased a plot of land adjacent to the convent for the erection of a church , rectory and school . This was gifted to the local Bishop , and St George 's Church was opened on the site two years later . 
 In 1950 , the Franciscans sold the convent buildings to the Sisters of St. Joseph of Annecy . The latter had been in Taunton since the 1920s , running St George 's School , and upon purchasing the convent , set up St Joseph 's Convent School , which catered for boys and girls up to the age of 11 , and girls on to 18 . That school continued to operate until 1976 , when the property was bought by the nearby King 's College , who used it as accommodation for their boarding students . In 2005 , the building complex was converted to " high quality " residential flats . 
 = = = 1809 miracle = = = 
 In March 1809 a miracle was reported as occurring at the convent . It is recorded that one of the nuns , Sister Mary Ann Wood , sustained a deep cut across her arm while opening a sash window . She was attended by a local surgeon , who judged that the muscles , and most of the tendons had been severed . The wound healed over after three weeks , but she continued to suffer sharp pain for four months . During all this time , she was not able to use her hand or arm , and despite attempting a variety of different methods to repair the broken tendons , the doctor eventually declared that she may regain use of her forefinger and thumb , but not the rest of her fingers . By this time , her arm and hand had withered , and Sister Mary Ann decided to make a <unk> ( nine prayers ) to Saint Winifred . She began her prayers on 6 August , and placed a piece of moss on her arm ; she said that she felt intense pain , and considered removing the moss , but opted not to . The following morning , she awoke , and her hand and arm were returned to full strength . The surgeon who had been tending to her was said to have " at first declared the case a miracle ; but human respect prevented him from publicly attesting it . " The Right Reverend Peter Collingridge , Vicar Apostolic of the Western District , after consulting a Catholic surgeon in London , declared " that the cure was supernatural and an evident miracle . " 
 = = = 1851 case of Augusta Talbot = = = 
 In 1851 , the House of Commons was petitioned by Craven Berkeley , who had previously sat as the member of parliament for Cheltenham . He claimed that his step @-@ daughter , Augusta Talbot , had been forced to join the Franciscan Convent in Taunton as a postulant ( the first stage to become a nun ) , rather than a pupil . Her father had died in 1839 and then her mother , after remarrying , died in 1841 , and with the subsequent death of her brother , she was due to inherit £ 80 @,@ 000 . After the death of her mother , Talbot had been placed in the care of Francis Talbot , 5th Earl of Shrewsbury , her father 's half @-@ brother . Berkeley alleged that the <unk> first attempted to marry her to François VII de La Rochefoucauld , and then when she refused , placed her at the Taunton convent against her will . The allegation followed that when Talbot became a nun , her inheritance , which was due to her in June 1852 , would become property of the convent , or the greater Catholic church . Berkeley also protested that he and his daughter were not allowed to communicate with Talbot , though Thomas Wilde , 1st Baron Truro , the Lord Chancellor , noted that Berkeley had not tried to see Talbot for nine years . Lord Truro contacted Talbot , who stated that she was not a postulant , and she was amenable to his plans to remove her from the convent and place her in the care of a new guardian in London . He duly did so , and rejected Berkeley 's petition , upon the basis of his previous lack of contact with Talbot . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The main building is a symmetrical three @-@ storey house built of red brick , with a yellow brick central range which was added later . The building has a cornice and parapet , and a bowed end which projects to the east . On the south side , there is an additional attic storey . The house retains its original sash windows , and on the first floor some of the windows have wrought @-@ iron <unk> . An addition to the building has been made in the south @-@ west , including an arcade on the ground floor , and a bell tower . Further additions were made to the main building in the 19th century , including a Gothic chapel of red brick with ashlar dressings to the north . There are later buildings on either side of the chapel : to the west is a 19th @-@ century building with a two @-@ storey entrance porch , while a Gothic cloister , comprising two walks with scissor @-@ trussed timber roofs , lies to the east . There is a further extension to the south , which is not part of the Grade II * listing . 
 A summerhouse was added to the grounds , probably alongside the 19th @-@ century additions to the main building . It was constructed of red and white brick , and had a steep slate roof . The east side displayed a crucifix . The building was Grade II listed in July 1975 , but has since been demolished . The stone walls around the site are Grade II listed where they are the original " high stone rubble wall with brick capping " ; in other places they have been renovated in newer red brick . 
 = Battle of Horseshoe Bend ( 1832 ) = 
 The Battle of Horseshoe Bend , also referred to as the Battle of Pecatonica and the Battle of Bloody Lake , was fought on June 16 , 1832 in present @-@ day Wisconsin at an oxbow lake known as " Horseshoe Bend " , which was formed by a change in course of the Pecatonica River . The battle was a major turning point in the Black Hawk War , despite being of only minor military significance . The small victory won by the U.S. militia at Horseshoe Bend helped restore public confidence in the volunteer force following an embarrassing defeat at Stillman 's Run . The Battle of Horseshoe Bend ended with three militia men killed in action and a party of eleven Kickapoo warriors dead . 
 The militia men involved in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend proved their ability to obey orders , act as a disciplined unit , and show bravery . Unlike at Stillman 's Run , the troops waited for Colonel Henry Dodge 's commands before acting on the field of battle . When ordered to charge , the men obeyed and eventually won a fight that descended into a bloody hand @-@ to @-@ hand battle . A memorial marker was erected to commemorate the battle in 1922 . Today the battleground at Horseshoe Bend is a county park . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a consequence of an 1804 treaty between Governor William Henry Harrison of Indiana Territory and a group of Sauk and Fox leaders regarding land settlement , the Sauk and Fox tribes vacated their lands in Illinois and moved west of the Mississippi in 1828 . However , Sauk Chief Black Hawk and others disputed the treaty , claiming that the full tribal councils had not been consulted , nor did those representing the tribes have authorization to cede lands . Angered by the loss of his birthplace , between 1830 and 1831 Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River , but was persuaded to return west each time without bloodshed . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British , he again moved his so @-@ called " British Band " of around 1000 warriors and non @-@ combatants into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return to Iowa , but the undisciplined Illinois Militia force 's actions led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . A number of other small skirmishes and massacres followed and the militias of Michigan Territory and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's Band . The conflict became known as the Black Hawk War . 
 The period between Stillman 's Run and Horseshoe Bend was filled with war @-@ related activity . A series of attacks at Buffalo Grove , the Plum River settlement , Fort Blue Mounds and the war 's most famous incident , the Indian Creek massacre , all took place between mid @-@ May and late June 1832 . In the week before the Battle of Horseshoe Bend , Colonel Henry Dodge of the western Michigan Territory militia was busy responding to various incidents across the region . On the afternoon of June 8 , 1832 , Dodge and his men , including James W. Stephenson , proceeded to Kellogg 's Grove and buried the victims of the St. Vrain massacre . That night Stephenson returned to Galena , Illinois , while Dodge moved to Hickory Point where he remained overnight . The next morning Dodge set out for Dixon 's Ferry , where he camped with General Hugh Brady . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On June 11 , Dodge escorted Brady to the mouth of the Fox River to confer with overall commander General Henry Atkinson . Dodge left the conference with clear authority from Atkinson to deal with the violence in the mining region . He first traveled to his home fort , at Gratiot 's Grove , which he reached on June 13 . The Spafford Farm massacre occurred the following day , and Dodge set out for Fort Hamilton as soon as he heard about it , stopping at Fort Blue Mounds for supplies . On the way to Hamilton , the soldiers passed a German immigrant , Henry Apple , exchanged greetings and kept traveling . Shortly afterwards the soldiers heard gunshots in the distance ; Apple had met with a Kickapoo ambush , likely meant for Dodge himself . Dodge was probably saved by his last minute decision to make a detour from the main route . Later Apple 's horse galloped wildly back past the men , wounded and carrying a large amount of blood in its saddle . The horse continued all the way to Fort Hamilton , where it raised a furor among the inhabitants . 
 A Native American band from the Kickapoo tribe , eleven warriors in all , was responsible for the attack on Apple ; the same band had killed five men at Spafford Farm on June 14 . This band was only loosely affiliated with Black Hawk 's British Band . 
 On hearing the ambush in the distance , Dodge hurried on toward Fort Hamilton ( present @-@ day Wiota , Wisconsin ) where he gathered together a company of 29 mounted volunteers and sped off to intercept the attackers . He led the chase through tangled underbrush until , breaking into prairie , his force caught sight of the raiding party . The Kickapoo crossed the Pecatonica River within sight of the pursuing militia , and entered into an overgrown swamp . The militia followed across the swollen river and dismounted when they reached the swamp . 
 = = Battle = = 
 According to personal accounts of the battle , after dismounting Dodge offered his men a chance to back out of the operation . No one opted out , and 21 men advanced with Dodge in an extended firing line , unsure of the enemy 's location . The remaining eight soldiers were posted as guards on high grounds and near the horses . Unlike the disorganized and undisciplined troops at Stillman 's Run , the volunteers at Horseshoe Bend adhered to military discipline ; they waited for Dodge to give the order before they entered the thicket and swampland in search of their enemy , and once searching they awaited their commander 's order to attack . 
 After the militia advanced about 200 yards ( 200 m ) , the Kickapoo suddenly let loose a loud yell from their hidden position on the bank of an oxbow lake along the river . The warriors fired a volley toward the advancing militia and three men , Samuel Black , Samuel Wells and <unk> Morris , were hit and went down . Dodge did not hesitate and ordered his men to charge , they obeyed and waited until they were within six feet of the Kickapoo before discharging their weapons . The fight , after the initial charge and volley , descended into a hand @-@ to @-@ hand struggle with tomahawks , bayonets , muskets and spears the weapons of choice . The fighting only lasted a few minutes : nine Kickapoo were killed on the spot and the other two were felled while fleeing across the lake . During the hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat a fourth member of the militia , Thomas Jenkins , was wounded . Though short , the Battle of Horseshoe Bend had a lasting impact and influence on the rest of the war . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Battle of Horseshoe Bend , though of little military significance , was a major turning point in the war for the volunteer militia forces and many white settlers . This minor militia victory was the first step in the process of redeeming the militia 's own morale and its standing in the eyes of the settlers on the frontier . Individual accounts claim that the battle at Horseshoe Bend " turn ( ed ) the tide of the war . " It was also notable for the proportion of killed in action to the number of combatants . All eleven Kickapoo that Dodge had pursued into the swamp were killed and scalped by his troops , while the final militia casualties were confined to three dead and one wounded . About an hour after the battle , Colonel William S. Hamilton arrived with friendly Menominee , Sioux and Ho @-@ Chunk warriors . According to Dodge , the friendly warriors were given some of the scalps his men had taken , with which they were " delighted " . Dodge also reported that the Native Americans then proceeded on to the battlefield and mutilated the corpses of the fallen Kickapoo . 
 Of Dodge 's casualties , Thomas Jenkins was only slightly wounded . However , the three Militia men who had been shot as they advanced towards the Kickapoo position all later died . Samuel Wells , <unk> Morris and Samuel Black were transported to Fort Hamilton ; Morris died at the fort , as did Wells , with his head in a comrade 's lap . When informed by the surgeon of his imminent death , Wells requested to speak with Dodge . Wells asked Dodge " if he had behaved like a soldier . " Dodge responded , " Yes , Wells , like a brave one . " Wells then said to the commander , " Send that word to my old father , " and died a short time later . Samuel Black was moved to Fort Defiance , where he lingered for nine days before dying . 
 This was the first battle in which a volunteer force defeated the Native Americans . Dodge became the first of the militia leaders to prove his ability to stand up to the enemy . He quickly became the " rising star " of the conflict , having helped negotiate the release of the Hall sisters after the Indian Creek massacre and proved himself at Horseshoe Bend . 
 The battlefield at Horseshoe Bend is now a campground located within a county park in Lafayette County , Wisconsin . The Black Hawk Memorial Park is maintained by the Lafayette County Sportsmen Alliance , Yellowstone Flint and Cap club , and the Friends of Woodford Park . In 1922 , a marker was erected by the <unk> chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution and the residents of Woodford to commemorate the Battle of Horseshoe Bend ; it is still visible today . The battlefield was listed on the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service on July 28 , 2011 . 
 = The New York Times = 
 The New York Times ( sometimes abbreviated to NYT ) is an American daily newspaper , founded and continuously published in New York City since September 18 , 1851 , by The New York Times Company . The New York Times has won 117 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other news organization . 
 The paper 's print version has the second @-@ largest circulation , behind The Wall Street Journal , and the largest circulation among the metropolitan newspapers in the United States of America . The New York Times is ranked 39th in the world by circulation . Following industry trends , its weekday circulation has fallen to fewer than one million daily since 1990 . 
 Nicknamed for years as " The Gray Lady " , The New York Times has long been regarded within the industry as a national " newspaper of record " . The New York Times is owned by The New York Times Company . Arthur Ochs Sulzberger , Jr . , the Publisher and the Chairman of the Board , is a member of the Ochs @-@ Sulzberger family that has controlled the paper since 1896 . The New York Times international version , formerly the International Herald Tribune , is now called the International New York Times . 
 The paper 's motto , " All the News That 's Fit to Print " , appears in the upper left @-@ hand corner of the front page . Since the mid @-@ 1970s , The New York Times has greatly expanded its layout and organization , adding special weekly sections on various topics supplementing the regular news , editorials , sports , and features . In recent times , The New York Times has been organized into the following sections : News , Editorials / Opinions @-@ Columns / Op @-@ Ed , New York ( metropolitan ) , Business , Sports of The Times , Arts , Science , Styles , Home , Travel , and other features . 
 On Sunday , The New York Times is supplemented by the Sunday Review ( formerly the Week in Review ) , The New York Times Book Review , The New York Times Magazine and T : The New York Times Style Magazine . The New York Times stayed with the broadsheet full page set @-@ up ( as some others have changed into a tabloid lay @-@ out ) and an eight @-@ column format for several years , after most papers switched to six , and was one of the last newspapers to adopt color photography , especially on the front page . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The New York Times was founded as the New @-@ York Daily Times on September 18 , 1851 , by journalist and politician Henry Jarvis Raymond ( 1820 – 69 ) , then a Whig Party member and later second chairman of the newly organized Republican Party National Committee , and former banker George Jones . Sold for a penny ( equivalent to 28 cents today ) , the inaugural edition attempted to address various speculations on its purpose and positions that preceded its release : 
 We shall be Conservative , in all cases where we think Conservatism essential to the public good ; — and we shall be Radical in everything which may seem to us to require radical treatment and radical reform . We do not believe that everything in Society is either exactly right or exactly wrong ; — what is good we desire to preserve and improve ; — what is evil , to exterminate , or reform . 
 The newspaper shortened its name to The New @-@ York Times in 1857 . It dropped the hyphen in the city name in the 1890s . On April 21 , 1861 , The New York Times departed from its original Monday – Saturday publishing schedule and joined other major dailies in adding a Sunday edition to offer daily coverage of the Civil War . One of the earliest public controversies it was involved with was the Mortara Affair , the subject of twenty editorials it published alone . 
 The main office of The New York Times was attacked during the New York Draft Riots sparked by the beginning of military conscription for the Northern Union Army now instituted in the midst of the Civil War on July 13 , 1863 . At " Newspaper Row " , across from City Hall , Henry Raymond , owner and editor of The New York Times , averted the rioters with " Gatling " ( early machine , rapid @-@ firing ) guns , one of which he manned himself . The mob now diverted , instead attacked the headquarters of abolitionist publisher Horace Greeley 's New York Tribune until forced to flee by the Brooklyn City Police , who had crossed the East River to help the Manhattan authorities . 
 The newspaper 's influence grew during 1870 – 1 when it published a series of exposés on William <unk> ( " Boss " ) Tweed , leader of the city 's Democratic Party — popularly known as " Tammany Hall " ( from its early 19th Century meeting headquarters ) — that led to the end of the " Tweed Ring 's " domination of New York 's City Hall . In the 1880s , The New York Times transitioned gradually from editorially supporting Republican Party candidates to becoming more politically independent and analytical . In 1884 , the paper supported Democrat Grover Cleveland ( former Mayor of Buffalo and Governor of New York State ) in his first presidential campaign . While this move cost The New York Times ' readership among its more progressive and Republican readers , the paper eventually regained most of its lost ground within a few years and slowly acquired a reputation for even @-@ handedness and accurate modern reporting , especially by the 1890s under the guidance of its new owner and publisher , Adolph Ochs of Chattanooga , Tennessee . The New York Times was acquired by Ochs , publisher of the Chattanooga Times , in 1896 . The following year , he coined the paper 's slogan , " All The News That 's Fit To Print " , which has since been printed in a box in the upper left hand corner of the front page ; this was a jab at competing papers such as Joseph Pulitzer 's New York World and William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal which were now being known for a lurid , sensationalist and often inaccurate reporting of facts and opinions known by the end of the century as " yellow journalism " . Under Ochs ' guidance , continuing and expanding upon the Henry Raymond tradition , ( which were from the era of James Gordon Bennett of the New York Herald which predated Pulitzer and Hearst 's arrival in New York ) , The New York Times achieved international scope , circulation , and reputation . In 1904 , The New York Times received the first on @-@ the @-@ spot wireless telegraph transmission from a naval battle , a report of the destruction of the Imperial Russian Navy 's Baltic Fleet at the Battle of Port Arthur in the Straits of Tsushima off the eastern coast of Korea in the Yellow Sea in the western Pacific Ocean after just sailing across the globe from Europe from the press @-@ boat <unk> during the Russo @-@ Japanese War ( one of the most important and history @-@ changing naval battles in history ) . In 1910 , the first air delivery of The New York Times to Philadelphia began . The New York Times ' first trans @-@ Atlantic delivery by air to London occurred in 1919 by dirigible . In 1920 , a " 4 A.M. Airplane Edition " was sent by plane to Chicago so it could be in the hands of Republican convention delegates by evening . 
 In the 1940s , the paper extended its breadth and reach . The crossword began appearing regularly in 1942 , and the fashion section in 1946 . The New York Times began an international edition in 1946 . The international edition stopped publishing in 1967 , when The New York Times joined the owners of the New York Herald Tribune and The Washington Post to publish the International Herald Tribune in Paris . The paper bought AM radio station WQXR ( 1560 kHz ) in 1944 . Its " sister " FM station , <unk> , would become WQXR @-@ FM ( 96 @.@ 3 MHz ) . Branded as " The Radio Stations of The New York Times " , its classical music radio format was simulcast on both the AM & FM frequencies until December 1992 , when the big @-@ band and pop standards music format of station WNEW ( 1130 kHz – now WBBR / " Bloomberg Radio " ) was transferred to and adopted by WQXR ; in recognition of the format change , WQXR changed its call letters to WQEW ( a " hybrid " combination of " WQXR " and " WNEW " ) . By 1999 , The New York Times was leasing WQEW to ABC Radio for its " Radio Disney " format . In 2007 , WQEW was finally purchased by Disney ; in late 2014 , it was sold to Family Radio ( a religious radio network ) and became <unk> . On July 14 , 2009 , it was announced that WQXR @-@ FM would be sold to the WNYC radio group who , on October 8 , 2009 , moved the station from 96 @.@ 3 to 105 @.@ 9 MHz ( swapping frequencies with Spanish @-@ language station <unk> @-@ FM , which wanted the more powerful transmitter to increase its coverage ) and began operating it as a non @-@ commercial , public radio station . After the purchase , WQXR @-@ FM retained the classical music format , whereas WNYC @-@ FM ( 93 @.@ 9 MHz ) abandoned it , switching to a talk radio format . 
 The New York Times is third in national circulation , after USA Today and The Wall Street Journal . The newspaper is owned by The New York Times Company , in which descendants of Adolph Ochs , principally the Sulzberger family , maintain a dominant role . In 2009 , article circulation dropped 7 @.@ 3 percent to about 928 @,@ 000 ; this is the first time since the 1980s that it has fallen under one million . As of February 2013 , the paper reported a circulation of 1 @,@ 317 @,@ 100 copies in weekdays and 1 @,@ 781 @,@ 100 copies on Sundays . In the New York City metropolitan area , the paper costs $ 2 @.@ 50 Monday through Saturday and $ 5 on Sunday . The New York Times has won 117 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other newspaper . 
 In 2009 , the newspaper began production of local inserts in regions outside of the New York area . Beginning October 16 , 2009 , a two @-@ page " Bay Area " insert was added to copies of the Northern California edition on Fridays and Sundays . The newspaper commenced production of a similar Friday and Sunday insert to the Chicago edition on November 20 , 2009 . The inserts consist of local news , policy , sports , and culture pieces , usually supported by local advertisements . 
 In addition to its New York City headquarters , the newspaper has ten news bureaus in the New York region , eleven national news bureaus and 26 foreign news bureaus . The New York Times reduced its page width to 12 inches ( 300 mm ) from 13 @.@ 5 inches ( 340 mm ) on August 6 , 2007 , adopting the width that has become the U.S. newspaper industry standard . 
 Because of its steadily declining sales attributed to the rise of online alternative media and social media , the newspaper has been going through a downsizing for several years , offering buyouts to workers and cutting expenses , in common with a general trend among print news media . 
 = = = Headquarters building = = = 
 The newspaper 's first building was located at 113 Nassau Street in New York City . In 1854 , it moved to 138 Nassau Street , and in 1858 to 41 Park Row , making it the first newspaper in New York City housed in a building built specifically for its use . 
 The newspaper moved its headquarters to the Times Tower , located at 1475 Broadway in 1904 , in an area called Longacre Square , that was later renamed Times Square in honor of the newspaper . The top of the building – now known as One Times Square – is the site of the New Year 's Eve tradition of lowering a lighted ball , that was started by the paper . The building is also notable for its electronic news ticker – popularly known as " The Zipper " – where headlines crawled around the outside of the building . It is still in use , but is now operated by the Reuters news agency . After nine years in its Times Square tower , the newspaper had an annex built at 229 West 43rd Street . After several expansions , the 43rd Street building became the newspaper 's main headquarters in 1960 and the Times Tower on Broadway was sold the following year . It served as the newspaper 's main printing plant until 1997 , when the newspaper opened a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art printing plant in the College Point section of the borough of Queens . 
 A decade later , The New York Times moved its newsroom and businesses headquarters from West 43rd Street to a new tower at 620 Eighth Avenue between West 40th and 41st Streets , in Manhattan – directly across Eighth Avenue from the Port Authority Bus Terminal . The new headquarters for the newspaper , known officially as The New York Times Building but unofficially called the new " Times Tower " by many New Yorkers , is a skyscraper designed by Renzo Piano . 
 = = = New York Times v. Sullivan = = = 
 The paper 's involvement in a 1964 libel case helped bring one of the key United States Supreme Court decisions supporting freedom of the press , New York Times Co. v. Sullivan . In it , the United States Supreme Court established the " actual malice " standard for press reports about public officials or public figures to be considered defamatory or libelous . The malice standard requires the plaintiff in a defamation or libel case prove the publisher of the statement knew the statement was false or acted in reckless disregard of its truth or falsity . Because of the high burden of proof on the plaintiff , and difficulty in proving malicious intent , such cases by public figures rarely succeed . 
 = = = The Pentagon Papers = = = 
 In 1971 , the Pentagon Papers , a secret United States Department of Defense history of the United States ' political and military involvement in the Vietnam War from 1945 to 1967 , were given ( " leaked " ) to Neil Sheehan of The New York Times by former State Department official Daniel Ellsberg , with his friend Anthony Russo assisting in copying them . The New York Times began publishing excerpts as a series of articles on June 13 . Controversy and lawsuits followed . The papers revealed , among other things , that the government had deliberately expanded its role in the war by conducting air strikes over Laos , raids along the coast of North Vietnam , and offensive actions taken by U.S. Marines well before the public was told about the actions , all while President Lyndon B. Johnson had been promising not to expand the war . The document increased the credibility gap for the U.S. government , and hurt efforts by the Nixon administration to fight the ongoing war . 
 When The New York Times began publishing its series , President Richard Nixon became incensed . His words to National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger included " People have gotta be put to the torch for this sort of thing ... " and " Let 's get the son @-@ of @-@ a @-@ bitch in jail . " After failing to get The New York Times to stop publishing , Attorney General John Mitchell and President Nixon obtained a federal court injunction that The New York Times cease publication of excerpts . The newspaper appealed and the case began working through the court system . On June 18 , 1971 , The Washington Post began publishing its own series . Ben <unk> , a Post editor , had obtained portions of the papers from Ellsberg . That day the Post received a call from the Assistant Attorney General , William Rehnquist , asking them to stop publishing . When the Post refused , the U.S. Justice Department sought another injunction . The U.S. District court judge refused , and the government appealed . On June 26 , 1971 the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to take both cases , merging them into New York Times Co. v. United States 403 US 713 . On June 30 , 1971 , the Supreme Court held in a 6 – 3 decision that the injunctions were unconstitutional prior restraints and that the government had not met the burden of proof required . The justices wrote nine separate opinions , disagreeing on significant substantive issues . While it was generally seen as a victory for those who claim the First Amendment enshrines an absolute right to free speech , many felt it a lukewarm victory , offering little protection for future publishers when claims of national security were at stake . 
 = = = Discrimination in employment = = = 
 Discriminatory practices restricting women in editorial positions were part of the history , correlating with effects on the journalism published at the time . The newspaper 's first general woman reporter was Jane Grant , who described her experience afterwards . She wrote , " In the beginning I was charged not to reveal the fact that a female had been hired " . Other reporters nicknamed her Fluff and she was subjected to considerable hazing . Because of her gender , promotions were out of the question , according to the then @-@ managing editor . She was there for fifteen years , interrupted by World War I. 
 In 1935 , Anne McCormick wrote to Arthur Hays Sulzberger , " I hope you won 't expect me to revert to ' woman 's @-@ point @-@ of @-@ view ' stuff . " Later , she interviewed major political leaders and appears to have had easier access than her colleagues did . Even those who witnessed her in action were unable to explain how she got the interviews she did . Clifton Daniel said , " [ After World War II , ] I 'm sure Adenauer called her up and invited her to lunch . She never had to grovel for an appointment . " Covering world leaders ' speeches after World War II at the National Press Club was limited to men by a Club rule . When women were eventually allowed in to hear the speeches , they still were not allowed to ask the speakers questions , although men were allowed and did ask , even though some of the women had won Pulitzer Prizes for prior work . Times reporter Maggie Hunter refused to return to the Club after covering one speech on assignment . Nan Robertson 's article on the Union Stock Yards , Chicago , was read aloud as anonymous by a professor , who then said , " ' It will come as a surprise to you , perhaps , that the reporter is a girl , ' he began ... [ G ] <unk> ; amazement in the ranks . ' She had used all her senses , not just her eyes , to convey the smell and feel of the stockyards . She chose a difficult subject , an offensive subject . Her imagery was strong enough to revolt you . ' " The New York Times hired Kathleen McLaughlin after ten years at the Chicago Tribune , where " [ s ] he did a series on maids , going out herself to apply for housekeeping jobs . " 
 = = = End of tenure track = = = 
 In February 2013 , the paper stopped offering lifelong positions for its journalists and editors . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 In 1896 , Adolph Ochs bought The New York Times , a money @-@ losing newspaper , and formed the New York Times Company . The Ochs @-@ Sulzberger family , one of the United States ' newspaper dynasties , has owned The New York Times ever since . After the publisher went public in the 1960s , the family continued to exert control through its ownership of the vast majority of Class B voting shares . Class A shareholders are permitted restrictive voting rights while Class B shareholders are allowed open voting rights . 
 The Ochs @-@ Sulzberger family trust controls roughly 88 percent of the company 's class B shares . Any alteration to the dual @-@ class structure must be ratified by six of eight directors who sit on the board of the Ochs @-@ Sulzberger family trust . The Trust board members are Daniel H. Cohen , James M. Cohen , Lynn G. <unk> , Susan W. <unk> , Michael Golden , Eric M. A. Lax , Arthur O. Sulzberger , Jr. and Cathy J. Sulzberger . 
 Turner Catledge , the top editor at The New York Times from 1952 to 1968 , wanted to hide the ownership influence . Arthur Sulzberger routinely wrote memos to his editor , each containing suggestions , instructions , complaints , and orders . When Catledge would receive these memos he would erase the publisher 's identity before passing them to his subordinates . Catledge thought that if he removed the publisher 's name from the memos it would protect reporters from feeling pressured by the owner . 
 = = = Carlos Slim loan and investment = = = 
 On January 20 , 2009 , The New York Times reported that Carlos Slim , Mexican telecommunications magnate and the world 's second richest person , lent it $ 250 million " to help the newspaper company finance its businesses " . Since then , Slim has made additional investments in Times stock . As of October 6 , 2011 , according to Reuters , his position was estimated at over 8 @.@ 1 % of Class A shares . 
 On January 20 , 2015 , Slim increased his stake in the New York Times to 16 @.@ 8 % when he exercised stock options to purchase 15 @.@ 9 million shares , acquired as part of a repayment plan on a loan given to the New York Times Co. during the financial crisis in 2009 . Although this acquisition made him the largest shareholder in the company , it does not give him the ability to control the newspaper , as his stake allows him to vote only for Class A directors , who compose just a third of the company 's board . 
 = = = Dual @-@ class shares = = = 
 Dual @-@ class structures caught on in the mid @-@ 20th century as families such as the Grahams of The Washington Post Company sought to gain access to public capital without losing control . Dow Jones & Co . , publisher of The Wall Street Journal , had a similar structure and was controlled by the Bancroft family but was later bought by News Corporation in 2007 , which itself is controlled by Rupert Murdoch and his family through a similar dual @-@ class structure . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Sections = = = 
 The newspaper is organized in three sections , including the magazine . 
 News : Includes International , National , Washington , Business , Technology , Science , Health , Sports , The Metro Section , Education , Weather , and Obituaries . 
 Opinion : Includes Editorials , Op @-@ Eds and Letters to the Editor . 
 Features : Includes Arts , Movies , Theater , Travel , NYC Guide , Food , Home & Garden , Fashion & Style , Crossword , The New York Times Book Review , T : The New York Times Style Magazine , The New York Times Magazine , and Sunday Review . 
 Some sections , such as Metro , are only found in the editions of the paper distributed in the New York – New Jersey – Connecticut Tri @-@ State Area and not in the national or Washington , D.C. editions . Aside from a weekly roundup of reprints of editorial cartoons from other newspapers , The New York Times does not have its own staff editorial cartoonist , nor does it feature a comics page or Sunday comics section . In September 2008 , The New York Times announced that it would be combining certain sections effective October 6 , 2008 , in editions printed in the New York metropolitan area . The changes folded the Metro Section into the main International / National news section and combined Sports and Business ( except Saturday through Monday , when Sports is still printed as a standalone section ) . This change also included having the name of the Metro section be called New York outside of the Tri @-@ State Area . The presses used by The New York Times allow four sections to be printed simultaneously ; as the paper had included more than four sections all days except Saturday , the sections had to be printed separately in an early press run and collated together . The changes will allow The New York Times to print in four sections Monday through Wednesday , in addition to Saturday . The New York Times ' announcement stated that the number of news pages and employee positions will remain unchanged , with the paper realizing cost savings by cutting overtime expenses . According to Russ Stanton , editor of the Los Angeles Times , a competitor , the newsroom of The New York Times is twice the size of the Los Angeles Times , which currently has a newsroom of 600 . In March 2014 , Vanessa Friedman was named the " fashion director and chief fashion critic " of The New York Times . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 When referring to people , The New York Times generally uses honorifics , rather than unadorned last names ( except in the sports pages , Book Review and Magazine ) . It stayed with an eight @-@ column format until September 7 , 1976 , years after other papers had switched to six , and it was one of the last newspapers to adopt color photography , with the first color photograph on the front page appearing on October 16 , 1997 . In the absence of a major headline , the day 's most important story generally appears in the top @-@ right column , on the main page . The typefaces used for the headlines are custom variations of Cheltenham . The running text is set at 8 @.@ 7 point Imperial . 
 Joining a roster of other major American newspapers in the last ten years , including USA Today , The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post , The New York Times announced on July 18 , 2006 , that it would be narrowing the width of its paper by six inches . In an era of dwindling circulation and significant advertising revenue losses for most print versions of American newspapers , the move , which would result in a five percent reduction in news coverage , would have a target savings of $ 12 million a year for the paper . The change from the traditional 54 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) broadsheet style to a more compact 48 @-@ inch web width ( 12 @-@ inch page width ) was addressed by both Executive Editor Bill Keller and The New York Times President Scott <unk> @-@ <unk> in memos to the staff . Keller defended the " more reader @-@ friendly " move indicating that in cutting out the " flabby or redundant prose in longer pieces " the reduction would make for a better paper . Similarly , Keller confronted the challenges of covering news with " less room " by proposing more " rigorous editing " and promised an ongoing commitment to " hard @-@ hitting , ground @-@ breaking journalism " . The official change went into effect on August 6 , 2007 . 
 The New York Times printed a display advertisement on its first page on January 6 , 2009 , breaking tradition at the paper . The advertisement for CBS was in color and was the entire width of the page . The newspaper promised it would place first @-@ page advertisements on only the lower half of the page . 
 In August 2014 , The New York Times decided to increase their use of the term " torture " in stories about harsh interrogations , shifting from their previous description of the interrogations as " harsh " or " brutal " . 
 The paper maintains a strict profanity policy ; e.g. a 2007 review of a concert by punk band Fucked Up completely avoided mention of the group 's name . 
 On April 28 , 2016 , Levien and Times company CEO Mark Thompson were named in a 2016 federal class action lawsuit that claimed the advertising department purged older black employees and denied others ' promotions because they favored younger whites . Older black employees considered Levien guilty of racist innuendo for telling staff members like their customers . 
 = = = Reputation and awards = = = 
 The New York Times has established links regionally with 16 bureaus in the New York region , nationally , with 11 bureaus within the US , and globally , with 26 foreign news bureaus . 
 The New York Times has won 117 Pulitzer Prizes , more than any other newspaper . The prize is awarded for excellence in journalism in a range of categories . 
 It has also won four Peabody Awards , including a personal one for Jack Gould in 1956 . 
 = = = Web presence = = = 
 The New York Times has had a presence on the Web since 1996 , and has been ranked one of the top websites . Accessing some articles requires registration , though this could be bypassed in some cases through Times RSS feeds . The website had 555 million pageviews in March 2005 . The domain nytimes.com attracted at least 146 million visitors annually by 2008 according to a Compete.com study . The New York Times Web site ranks 59th by number of unique visitors , with over 20 million unique visitors in March 2009 making it the most visited newspaper site with more than twice the number of unique visitors as the next most popular site . Also , as of May 2009 , nytimes.com produced 22 of the 50 most popular newspaper blogs . 
 In September 2005 , the paper decided to begin subscription @-@ based service for daily columns in a program known as TimesSelect , which encompassed many previously free columns . Until being discontinued two years later , TimesSelect cost $ 7 @.@ 95 per month or $ 49 @.@ 95 per year , though it was free for print copy subscribers and university students and faculty . To avoid this charge , bloggers often reposted TimesSelect material , and at least one site once compiled links of reprinted material . On September 17 , 2007 , The New York Times announced that it would stop charging for access to parts of its Web site , effective at midnight the following day , reflecting a growing view in the industry that subscription fees cannot outweigh the potential ad revenue from increased traffic on a free site . In addition to opening almost the entire site to all readers , The New York Times news archives from 1987 to the present are available at no charge , as well as those from 1851 to 1922 , which are in the public domain . Access to the Premium <unk> section continues to require either home delivery or a subscription for $ 6 @.@ 95 per month or $ 39 @.@ 95 per year . Times columnists including Nicholas Kristof and Thomas Friedman had criticized TimesSelect , with Friedman going so far as to say " I hate it . It pains me enormously because it 's cut me off from a lot , a lot of people , especially because I have a lot of people reading me overseas , like in India ... I feel totally cut off from my audience . " 
 The New York Times was made available on the iPhone and iPod Touch in 2008 , and on the iPad mobile devices in 2010 . It was also the first newspaper to offer a video game as part of its editorial content , Food Import Folly by <unk> Games . In 2010 , The New York Times editors collaborated with students and faculty from New York University 's Studio 20 Journalism Masters program to launch and produce The Local East Village , a <unk> blog designed to offer news " by , for and about the residents of the East Village " . That same year , reCAPTCHA helped to digitize old editions of The New York Times . 
 In 2012 , The New York Times introduced a Chinese @-@ language news site , cn.nytimes.com , with content created by staff based in Shanghai , Beijing and Hong Kong , though the server was placed outside of China to avoid censorship issues . In March 2013 , The New York Times and National Film Board of Canada announced a partnership entitled A Short History of the Highrise , which will create four short documentaries for the internet about life in highrise buildings as part of the NFB 's Highrise project , utilizing images from the newspaper 's photo archives for the first three films , and user @-@ submitted images for the final film . The third project in the series , " A Short History of the Highrise " , won a Peabody Award in 2013 . 
 Falling print advertising revenue and projections of continued decline resulted in a paywall being instituted in 2011 , regarded as modestly successful after garnering several hundred thousand subscriptions and about $ 100 million in revenue as of March 2012 . The paywall was announced on March 17 , 2011 , that starting on March 28 , 2011 ( March 17 , 2011 for Canada ) , it would charge frequent readers for access to its online content . Readers would be able to access up to 20 articles each month without charge . ( Although beginning in April 2012 , the number of free @-@ access articles was halved to just ten articles per month . ) Any reader who wanted to access more would have to pay for a digital subscription . This plan would allow free access for occasional readers , but produce revenue from " heavy " readers . Digital subscriptions rates for four weeks range from $ 15 to $ 35 depending on the package selected , with periodic new subscriber promotions offering four @-@ week all @-@ digital access for as low as 99 ¢ . Subscribers to the paper 's print edition get full access without any additional fee . Some content , such as the front page and section fronts will remain free , as well as the Top News page on mobile apps . In January 2013 , The New York Times ' Public Editor Margaret M. Sullivan announced that for the first time in many decades , the paper generated more revenue through subscriptions than through advertising . 
 The paper 's website was hacked on August 29 , 2013 , by the Syrian Electronic Army , a hacking group that supports the government of Syrian President Bashar al @-@ Assad . The SEA managed to penetrate the paper 's domain name registrar , Melbourne IT , and alter DNS records for The New York Times , putting some of its websites out of service for hours . 
 The food section has links to a website at <unk> and to a searchable restaurant guide to NYC restaurants . The New York Times has published several cookbooks , the latest , The Essential New York Times Cookbook : Classic Recipes for a New <unk> and has thousands of recipes on file . 
 = = = Mobile presence = = = 
 The Times Reader is a digital version of The New York Times . It was created via a collaboration between the newspaper and Microsoft . Times Reader takes the principles of print journalism and applies them to the technique of online reporting . Times Reader uses a series of technologies developed by Microsoft and their Windows Presentation Foundation team . It was announced in Seattle in April 2006 , by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr . , Bill Gates , and Tom Bodkin . In 2009 , the Times Reader 2 @.@ 0 was rewritten in Adobe AIR . In December 2013 , the newspaper announced that the Times Reader app would be discontinued on January 6 , 2014 , urging readers of the app to instead begin using the subscription @-@ only " Today 's Paper " app . 
 In 2008 , The New York Times created an app for the iPhone and iPod touch which allowed users to download articles to their mobile device enabling them to read the paper even when they were unable to receive a signal . In April 2010 , The New York Times announced it would begin publishing daily content through an iPad app . As of October 2010 , The New York Times iPad app is ad @-@ supported and available for free without a paid subscription , but translated into a subscription @-@ based model in 2011 . 
 In 2010 , the newspaper also launched an App for Android smartphones , followed later by an App for Windows phones . 
 = = = Chinese @-@ language version = = = 
 In June 2012 , The New York Times launched its first official foreign @-@ language variant , cn.nytimes.com , in Chinese , viewable in both traditional and simplified Chinese characters . The project was led by Craig S. Smith on the business side and Philip P. Pan on the editorial side . 
 The site 's initial success was interrupted in October that year following the publication of an investigative article by David Barboza about the finances of Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao 's family . In retaliation for the article , the Chinese government blocked access to both nytimes.com and cn.nytimes.com inside the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) . 
 Despite Chinese government interference , however , the Chinese @-@ language operations have continued to develop , adding a second site , <unk> , iOS and Android apps and newsletters , all of which are accessible inside the PRC . The China operations also produce three print publications in Chinese . Traffic to cn.nytimes.com , meanwhile , has risen due to the widespread use of VPN technology in the PRC and to a growing Chinese audience outside mainland China . New York Times articles are also available to users in China via the use of mirror websites , apps , domestic newspapers , and social media . The Chinese platforms now represent one of The New York Times ' top five digital markets globally . The current editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Chinese platforms is Ching @-@ Ching Ni . 
