 The symbol of the slave ship is furthered by specific set designs , including the round window in Ben Geisler 's office which resembles a porthole , as well as the walkway leading to Mayhew 's bungalow , which resembles the boarding ramp of a watercraft . Several lines of dialogue make clear by the film 's end that Barton has become a slave to the studio : " [ T ] he contents of your head " , Lipnick 's assistant tells him , " are the property of Capitol Pictures " . After Barton turns in his script , Lipnick delivers an even more brutal punishment : " Anything you write will be the property of Capitol Pictures . And Capitol Pictures will not produce anything you write " . This contempt and control is representative of the opinions expressed by many writers in Hollywood at the time . As Arthur Miller said in his review of Barton Fink : " The only thing about Hollywood that I am sure of is that its mastication of writers can never be too wildly exaggerated " . 
 = = = " The Common Man " = = = 
 During the first third of the film , Barton speaks constantly of his desire to <unk> " the common man " in his work . In one speech he declares : " The hopes and dreams of the common man are as noble as those of any king . It 's the stuff of life – why shouldn 't it be the stuff of theater ? <unk> , why should that be a hard pill to swallow ? Don 't call it new theater , Charlie ; call it real theater . Call it our theater . " Yet , despite his rhetoric , Barton is totally unable ( or unwilling ) to appreciate the humanity of the " common man " living next door to him . Later in the film , Charlie explains that he has brought various horrors upon him because " you DON 'T <unk> ! " In his first conversation with Charlie , Barton constantly interrupts Charlie just as he is saying " I could tell you some <unk> " , demonstrating that despite his fine words he really isn 't interested in Charlie 's experiences ; in another scene , Barton symbolically demonstrates his deafness to the world by stuffing his ears with cotton to block the sound of his ringing telephone . 
 Barton 's position as screenwriter is of particular consequence to his relationship with " the common man " . By refusing to listen to his neighbor , Barton cannot validate Charlie 's existence in his writing – with disastrous results . Not only is Charlie stuck in a job which demeans him , but he cannot ( at least in Barton 's case ) have his story told . More centrally , the film traces the evolution of Barton 's understanding of " the common man " : At first he is an abstraction to be lauded from a vague distance . Then he becomes a complex individual with fears and desires . Finally he shows himself to be a powerful individual in his own right , capable of extreme forms of destruction and therefore feared and / or respected . 
 The complexity of " the common man " is also explored through the oft @-@ mentioned " life of the mind " . While expounding on his duty as a writer , Barton drones : " I gotta tell you , the life of the mind ... There 's no road map for that territory ... and exploring it can be painful . The kind of pain most people don 't know anything about . " Barton assumes that he is privy to thoughtful creative considerations while Charlie is not . This delusion shares the film 's climax , as Charlie runs through the hallway of the Earle , shooting the detectives with a shotgun and screaming : " <unk> <unk> ME ! I <unk> SHOW YOU THE LIFE OF THE MIND ! ! " Charlie 's " life of the mind " is no less complex than Barton 's ; in fact , some critics consider it more so . 
 Charlie 's understanding of the world is depicted as omniscient , as when he asks Barton about " the two lovebirds next door " , despite the fact that they are several doors away . When Barton asks how he knows about them , Charlie responds : " Seems like I hear everything that goes on in this dump . Pipes or somethin ' . " His total awareness of the events at the Earle demonstrate the kind of understanding needed to show real empathy , as described by Audrey . This theme returns when Charlie explains in his final scene : " Most guys I just feel sorry for . Yeah . It tears me up inside , to think about what they 're going through . How trapped they are . I understand it . I feel for ' em . So I try to help them out . " 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Themes of religious salvation and allusions to the Bible appear only briefly in Barton Fink , but their presence pervades the story . While Barton is experiencing his most desperate moment of confusion and despair , he opens the drawer of his desk and finds a Gideon Bible . He opens it " randomly " to Chapter 2 in the Book of Daniel , and reads from it : " And the king , Nebuchadnezzar , answered and said to the Chaldeans , I recall not my dream ; if ye will not make known unto me my dream , and its interpretation , ye shall be cut in pieces , and of your tents shall be made a dunghill . " This passage reflects Barton 's inability to make sense of his own experiences ( wherein Audrey has been " cut in pieces " ) , as well as the " hopes and dreams " of " the common man " . Nebuchadnezzar is also the title of a novel that Mayhew gives to Barton as a " little entertainment " to " divert you in your sojourn among the Philistines " . 
 Mayhew alludes to " the story of Solomon 's mammy " , a reference to Bathsheba , who gave birth to Solomon after her lover David had her husband Uriah killed . Although Audrey cuts Mayhew off by praising his book ( which Audrey herself may have written ) , the reference foreshadows the love triangle which evolves among the three characters of Barton Fink . Rowell points out that Mayhew is murdered ( presumably by Charlie ) soon after Barton and Audrey have sex . Another Biblical reference comes when Barton flips to the front of the Bible in his desk drawer and sees his own words transposed into the Book of Genesis . This is seen as a representation of his hubris as self @-@ conceived omnipotent master of creation , or alternatively , as a playful juxtaposition demonstrating Barton 's hallucinatory state of mind . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Barton Fink premiered in May 1991 at the Cannes Film Festival . Beating competition which included Jacques Rivette 's La Belle Noiseuse , Spike Lee 's Jungle Fever , and David Mamet 's Homicide , the Coen brothers ' film won three awards : Best Director , Best Actor , and the top prize Palme d 'Or . This sweep of awards in major categories at Cannes was extremely rare , and some critics felt the jury was too generous to the exclusion of other worthy entries . Worried that the triple victory could set a precedent which would undervalue other films , Cannes decided after the 1991 festival to limit each movie to a maximum of two awards . 
 Barton Fink was also nominated for three Academy Awards : Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( Lerner ) , Best Art Direction ( Dennis Gassner , Nancy Haigh ) , and Best Costume Design ( Richard Hornung ) . Lerner lost to Jack Palance for the latter 's role in City Slickers ; the awards for Art Direction ( Gassner and Haigh won by beating themselves ) and Costume Design went to Bugsy . 
 The film was also nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Barton Fink received positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 91 % " Certified Fresh " rating , based on 54 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 6 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads : " <unk> and unsettling , the Coen brothers ' satirical tale of a 1940s playwright struggling with writer 's block is packed with their trademark sense of humor and terrific performances from its cast . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 69 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 The Washington Post critic Rita Kempley described Barton Fink as " certainly one of the year 's best and most intriguing films " . The New York Times critic Vincent Canby called it " an unqualified winner " and " a fine dark comedy of flamboyant style and immense though seemingly effortless technique " . Critic Jim Emerson called Barton Fink " the Coen brothers ' most deliciously , provocatively indescribable picture yet " . 
 Some critics disliked the abstruse plot and deliberately enigmatic ending . Chicago Reader critic Jonathan Rosenbaum warned of the Coens ' " adolescent smarminess and comic @-@ book cynicism " , and described Barton Fink as " a midnight @-@ movie gross @-@ out in Sunday @-@ afternoon art @-@ house clothing " . In a 1994 interview , Joel dismissed criticism of unclear elements in their films : " People have a problem dealing with the fact that our movies are not straight @-@ ahead . They would prefer that the last half of Barton Fink just be about a screenwriter 's writing @-@ block problems and how they get resolved in the real world .... " Talk show host Larry King expressed approval of the movie , despite its uncertain conclusion . He wrote in USA Today : " The ending is something I 'm still thinking about and if they accomplished that , I guess it worked . " 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 The movie opened in the United States on eleven screens on August 23 , 1991 and earned $ 268 @,@ 561 during its opening weekend . During its theatrical release , Barton Fink grossed $ 6 @,@ 153 @,@ 939 in the United States . That the movie failed to recoup the expenses of production amused film producer Joel Silver , with whom the Coens would later work in The Hudsucker Proxy ( 1994 ) : " I don 't think it made $ 5 million , and it cost $ 9 million to make . [ The Coen brothers have ] a reputation for being weird , off @-@ center , inaccessible . " 
 = = Formats = = 
 The film was released in VHS home video format on March 5 , 1992 , and a DVD edition was made available on May 20 , 2003 . The DVD contains a gallery of still photos , theatrical trailers , and eight deleted scenes . The film is also available on Blu @-@ ray Disc , in the UK , in a region @-@ free format that will work in any Blu @-@ ray player . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 The Coen brothers have expressed interest in making a sequel to Barton Fink called Old Fink , which would take place in the 1960s . " It 's the summer of love and [ Fink is ] teaching at Berkeley . He ratted on a lot of his friends to the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , " said Joel Coen . The brothers have stated that they have had talks with John Turturro about reprising his role as Fink , but they were waiting " until he was actually old enough to play the part . " 
 Speaking to The A.V. Club in June 2011 , Turturro suggested the sequel would be set in the 1970s , and Fink would be a hippie with a large Jewfro . He said " you 'll have to wait another 10 years for that , at least " . 
 = Velodona = 
 Velodona togata is a species of octopus in the monotypic genus Velodona . First described by Carl Chun in 1915 , with a second subspecies discovered by Guy Coburn Robson in 1924 , it was named for the distinctive membranes on its arms . 
 Described as being similar to members of the genera Pareledone , Eledone , and <unk> , V. togata has a large body with large eyes and extensive membranes that link the octopus ' arms together . The species has a single line of suckers on each arm , and its head , mantle , and part of its arms are covered in warts . Although the reproductive habits of V. togata have not been extensively studied , the species is believed to be one of the most fecund among octopuses in its region and depth level , despite the species possessing large eggs and extremely large spermatophores . 
 The species is found in the Indian Ocean , off the coast of South Africa , Mozambique , and Tanzania . The species has been captured from depths between 400 and 750 meters below sea level , and a 2009 study found the species most heavily concentrated between 400 and 600 meters below sea level . V. togata 's conservation status has not been assessed . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Velodona togata is a species of octopus , and the sole member of the genus Velodona . It belongs to the family <unk> , in the order <unk> . The species was first discovered by Carl Chun in 1915 . It has two subspecies , Velodona togata togata — the subspecies originally identified by Chun in 1915 — and Velodona togata capensis , which was first described by Guy Coburn Robson in 1924 . The genus and species were named after the distinctive membranes on Velodona togata togata 's arms . Velo is Latin for " veil " and toga is Latin for " gown " or " mantle " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Chun described the first specimen he caught , a male , as looking similar to the genus Eledone , but with larger membranes , a differently shaped hectocotylus , and a differently shaped funnel organ ( siphon ) . The specimen had " a sac @-@ shaped body and very large eyes " , with arms that " are folded back and have very large membranes which enclose the whole animal " , and had a " characteristic pale coloration " . <unk> Chun , Guy Robson summarized the differences between Eledone and V. togata as " the possession of ( a ) a funnel organ composed of two separate pieces , ( b ) a sigmoid bend in the <unk> arm , and ( c ) the development of extensive lateral membranes on the arms " . Robson , however , was not fully convinced that the shape of the <unk> arm was of value in identifying the species , positing that the curve could have been caused by a shrinkage of the membrane . In comparing the distinctive features of V. togata with other known octopus species , Robson found similarities between V. togata and species in the genera <unk> ( now considered a synonym for Pareledone and Eledone , both in the subfamily <unk> ) , and <unk> ( now considered a synonym for <unk> , in the subfamily <unk> ) . He found V. togata closest to the southern species of <unk> , such as M. <unk> ( now Pareledone <unk> ) and M. brevis ( now Eledone <unk> ) , due to having similar funnel organs and suckers as those species . 
 The specimen 's head , mantle , and dorsal arms were covered in warts of varying sizes . Chun measured the specimen 's mantle as being 99 millimeters wide and 80 millimeters long . The specimen 's head was as wide as the mantle , and was dominated by large eyes , which were measured as 38 millimeters wide and 53 millimeters long , with sickle @-@ shaped pupils . Chun described the arms as being " well developed " , and noted that the dorsal arms were the longest , and the arms got shorter as they moved to the ventral end . V. togata has a single line of suckers on each arm . Chun described the membranes on the arms in detail , stating that " The arms bear dorsal and ventral membranes . The ventral margins are unusually large and extend to the tip of all arms . They are not restricted to the ventral surface but also extend to the dorsal margin of the neighboring ventral arms , where they again continue to the tip , but are more weakly developed . " . The hectocotylus is on the third arm . V. togata contains an ink sac , but it is tiny and does not contain any ink , a common trait in cephalopods that live in deep water where there is little or no light . 
 Velodona togata capensis , the subspecies first described by Guy Coburn Robson in 1924 , differs from Velodona togata togata in three areas that Robson considered significant . Where the mantle of Chun 's specimen ( Velodona togata togata ) was significantly wider than it is long , the mantles of Robson 's specimens had a much smaller difference between width and length , with one specimen having a mantle with identical width and length . The length of the membrane that links the octopus 's arms — the umbrella — was shorter in Robson 's specimens than in Chun 's , and there were additional warts with <unk> on his specimens that were not described in Chun 's specimen . Robson also noted a significant difference in the hectocotylus in Chun 's specimen and those in his specimens . He noted that while two of his specimens appeared to be fully sexually developed , their <unk> looked comparatively underdeveloped . Owing to the difference in overall size between Chun 's and Robson 's specimens , however , Robson conjectured that the difference in <unk> may be due to the specimens ' ages . Robson described the coloring of the specimens as " a rather deep reddish brown ( verging in a distinctly purple shade in one ) " for the males , with a " darker brown " for the female . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Little is known about the reproductive habits of V. togata . A 2009 study , the first to focus on V. togata , conjectured that " The high proportion of immature females obtained in the survey ( 76 % ) and the low proportion of mature females ( 10 % ) could indicate that the spawning season is finishing at the beginning of the autumn . Moreover , the wide size range of the sampled population , with a considerable number of small individuals ( possibly only a few days old ) , suggests the existence of an extended reproduction period . " . Analyzing the spermatophores and eggs of the captured specimens , the 2009 study found that V. togata had a low fecundity value , with females having large eggs and males producing a low number of large spermatophores ( the largest reported of any deep @-@ sea member of the suborder <unk> ) . Despite this , the species was still one of the most fecund among " deep @-@ sea <unk> that inhabit the Southern Ocean " . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The first specimen of Velodona togata ( Velodona togata togata ) was captured off the east coast of Africa at a depth of 749 meters below sea level . The four specimens described by Guy Robson as being members of a separate subspecies ( Velodona togata capensis ) were caught off the " Natal coast " ( modern KwaZulu @-@ Natal coast , South Africa ) at depths of between 220 fathoms ( 402 @.@ 3 meters ) and 250 fathoms ( 457 @.@ 2 meters ) . According to the Integrated Taxonomic Information System ( ITIS ) database , Velodona togata togata is possibly located in the waters north of Zanzibar , Tanzania , while Velodona togata capensis is located off of the " Natal coast , South Africa " . 
 In 2009 , a Spanish research vessel conducted a study of the cephalopod population off the coast of Mozambique . The study found populations of V. togata across the entire study area , which ran most of the coast of Mozambique , with especially high concentrations at the very southern end of the <unk> coast , in the waters near the city of Maputo . The study performed trawls in four depth groups , 200 – 400 , 400 – 500 , 500 – 600 , and 600 – 700 meters below sea level . While V. togata was found in all four depth ranges , they were most abundant between 400 and 600 meters below sea level . The study also noted that males were most common in the shallower two groups , while females were more common in the deeper two groups . 
 = = Status = = 
 The conservation status of Velodona togata has not been assessed by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species as of IUCN Red List version 2013 @.@ 2 . 
 = Order of the Thistle = 
 The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle is an order of chivalry associated with Scotland . The current version of the Order was founded in 1687 by King James VII of Scotland ( James II of England and Ireland ) who asserted that he was reviving an earlier Order . The Order consists of the Sovereign and sixteen Knights and Ladies , as well as certain " extra " knights ( members of the British Royal Family and foreign monarchs ) . The Sovereign alone grants membership of the Order ; he or she is not advised by the Government , as occurs with most other Orders . 
 The Order 's primary emblem is the thistle , the national flower of Scotland . The motto is Nemo me impune lacessit ( Latin for " No one provokes me with impunity " ) . The same motto appears on the Royal Coat of Arms of the United Kingdom for use in Scotland and some pound coins , and is also the motto of the Royal Regiment of Scotland , Scots Guards , The Black Watch ( Royal Highland Regiment ) of Canada and Royal Scots Dragoon Guards . The patron saint of the Order is St Andrew . 
 Most British orders of chivalry cover the whole United Kingdom , but the three most exalted ones each pertain to one constituent country only . The Order of the Thistle , which pertains to Scotland , is the second @-@ most senior in precedence . Its equivalent in England , The Most Noble Order of the Garter , is the oldest documented order of chivalry in the United Kingdom , dating to the middle fourteenth century . In 1783 an Irish equivalent , The Most Illustrious Order of St Patrick , was founded , but has now fallen dormant . 
 = = History = = 
 James VII claimed that he was reviving an earlier Order , but this issue is marked by widely varying claims . 
 According to legend , Achaius , King of Scots ( possibly coming to the aid of Óengus mac Fergusa , King of the Picts ) , while engaged in battle at <unk> with the Saxon King Æthelstan of East Anglia , saw in the heavens the cross of St Andrew . After he won the battle , Achaius is said to have established the Order of the Thistle , dedicating it to the saint , in 786 . The tale is not credible , because the two individuals purported to have fought each other did not even live in the same century . Another story states that Achaius founded the Order in 809 to commemorate an alliance with the Emperor Charlemagne . There is some credibility to this story given the fact that Charlemagne did employ Scottish bodyguards . There is , in addition , a tradition that the order was instituted , or re @-@ instituted , on the battlefield by Robert the Bruce at Bannockburn . 
 The earliest claim now taken seriously by historians is that James III , who adopted the thistle as the royal plant badge and issued coins depicting thistles , founded the Order during the fifteenth century . He allegedly conferred membership of the " Order of the Burr or <unk> " on King Francis I of France . 
 However , there is no conclusive evidence for a fifteenth @-@ century order . A French commentator writing in 1558 described the use of the crowned thistle and the cross of St Andrew on Scottish coins and war banners , and added that there was no Scottish order of knighthood . Similarly , John Lesley writing around 1578 , refers to the three foreign orders of chivalry carved on the gate of James V 's Linlithgow Palace with his ornaments of St Andrew , proper to this nation . Some Scottish order of chivalry may have existed during the sixteenth century , possibly founded by James V and called the Order of St. Andrew , but lapsed by the end of that century . 
 James VII issued letters patent " reviving and restoring the Order of the Thistle to its full glory , lustre and <unk> " on 29 May 1687 . Although the " restoration " in 1687 of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle was accomplished by King James VII & II , the initiative for - essentially - founding this Scottish Royal Order can be attributed to John , 1st Earl and 1st Jacobite Duke of Melfort , then Secretary of State for Scotland , who together with his elder brother James , 4th Earl and 1st Jacobite Duke of Perth , then Lord Chancellor of Scotland , were among the eight Founding Knights . Eight knights , out of a maximum of twelve , were appointed , but the King was deposed in 1688 . His successors , the joint monarchs William and Mary , did not make any further appointments to the Order , which consequently fell into desuetude . In 1703 , however , Anne once again revived the Order of the Thistle , which survives to this day . 
 = = = Knights founder ( restored order ) = = = 
 James , Earl of Perth 
 George , Duke of Gordon 
 John , Marquis of Atholl 
 James , Earl of Arran 
 Kenneth , Earl of Seaforth 
 John , Earl of Melfort 
 George , Earl of Dumbarton 
 Alexander , Earl of Moray 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Kings of Scots — later the Kings of Great Britain and of the United Kingdom — have served as Sovereigns of the Order . When James VII revived the Order , the statutes stated that the Order would continue the ancient number of Knights , which was described in the preceding warrant as " the Sovereign and twelve Knights @-@ Brethren in allusion to the Blessed Saviour and his Twelve Apostles " . In 1827 , George IV augmented the Order to sixteen members . Women ( other than Queens regnant ) were originally excluded from the Order ; George VI created his wife Elizabeth Bowes @-@ Lyon a Lady of the Thistle in 1937 via a special statute , and in 1987 Elizabeth II allowed the regular admission of women to both the Order of the Thistle and the Order of the Garter . 
 From time to time , individuals may be admitted to the Order by special statutes . Such members are known as " Extra Knights " and do not count towards the sixteen @-@ member limit . Members of the British Royal Family are normally admitted through this procedure ; the first to be so admitted was Prince Albert . King Olav V of Norway , the first foreigner to be admitted to the Order , was also admitted by special statute in 1962 . 
 The Sovereign has historically had the power to choose Knights of the Order . From the eighteenth century onwards , the Sovereign made his or her choices upon the advice of the Government . George VI felt that the Orders of the Garter and the Thistle had been used only for political patronage , rather than to reward actual merit . Therefore , with the agreement of the Prime Minister ( Clement Attlee ) and the Leader of the Opposition ( Winston Churchill ) in 1946 , both Orders returned to the personal gift of the Sovereign . 
 Knights and Ladies of the Thistle may also be admitted to the Order of the Garter . Formerly , many , but not all , Knights elevated to the senior Order would resign from the Order of the Thistle . The first to resign from the Order of the Thistle was John , Duke of Argyll in 1710 ; the last to take such an action was Thomas , Earl of Zetland in 1872 . Knights and Ladies of the Thistle may also be deprived of their knighthoods . The only individual to have suffered such a fate was John Erskine , 6th Earl of Mar who lost both the knighthood and the earldom after participating in the Jacobite rising of 1715 . 
 The Order has five officers : the Dean , the Chancellor , the Usher , the Lord Lyon King of Arms and the Secretary . The Dean is normally a cleric of the Church of Scotland . This office was not part of the original establishment , but was created in 1763 and joined to the office of Dean of the Chapel Royal . The two offices were separated in 1969 . The office of Chancellor is mentioned and given custody of the seal of the Order in the 1687 statutes , but no @-@ one was appointed to the position until 1913 . The office has subsequently been held by one of the knights , though not necessarily the most senior . The Usher of the Order is the Gentleman Usher of the Green Rod ( unlike his Garter equivalent , the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod , he does not have another function assisting the House of Lords ) . The Lord Lyon King of Arms , head of the Scottish heraldic establishment and whose office predates his association with the Order serves as King of Arms of the Order . The Lord Lyon often — but not invariably — also serves as the Secretary . 
 = = Habit and insignia = = 
 For the Order 's great occasions , such as its annual service each June or July , as well for coronations , the Knights and Ladies wear an elaborate costume : 
 The mantle is a green robe worn over their suits or military uniforms . The mantle is lined with white taffeta ; it is tied with green and gold tassels . On the left shoulder of the mantle , the star of the Order ( see below ) is depicted . 
 The hat is made of black velvet and is plumed with white feathers with a black egret or heron 's top in the middle . 
 The collar is made of gold and depicts thistles and sprigs of rue . It is worn over the mantle . 
 The St Andrew , also called the badge @-@ appendant , is worn suspended from the collar . It comprises a gold enamelled depiction of St Andrew , wearing a green gown and purple coat , holding a white saltire . Gold rays of a glory are shown emanating from St Andrew 's head . 
 Aside from these special occasions , however , much simpler insignia are used whenever a member of the Order attends an event at which decorations are worn . 
 The star of the Order consists of a silver St Andrew 's saltire , with clusters of rays between the arms thereof . In the centre is depicted a green circle bearing the motto of the Order in gold majuscules ; within the circle , there is depicted a thistle on a gold field . It is worn pinned to the left breast . ( Since the Order of the Thistle is the second @-@ most senior chivalric order in the UK , a member will wear its star above that of other orders to which he or she belongs , except that of the Order of the Garter ; up to four orders ' stars may be worn . ) 
 The broad riband is a dark green sash worn across the body , from the left shoulder to the right hip . 
 At the right hip of the Riband , the badge of the Order is attached . The badge depicts St Andrew in the same form as the badge @-@ appendant surrounded by the Order 's motto . 
 However , on certain collar days designated by the Sovereign , members attending formal events may wear the Order 's collar over their military uniform , formal wear , or other costume . They will then substitute the broad riband of another order to which they belong ( if any ) , since the Order of the Thistle is represented by the collar . 
 Upon the death of a Knight or Lady , the insignia must be returned to the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood . The badge and star are returned personally to the Sovereign by the nearest relative of the deceased . 
 Officers of the Order also wear green robes . The Gentleman Usher of the Green Rod also bears , as the title of his office suggests , a green rod . 
 One unusual recipient of the Order of the Thistle was James , Earl of <unk> ( 1827 @-@ 1905 ) . He was recognized by the Order for his adventurous spirit and his passion for the wilds of Canada . His portrait in marble by William Grant Stevenson depicts a stern man who had placed himself at some risk as he travelled through the Canadian wilderness and wrote about his admiration for the native peoples of North America . 
 = = Chapel = = 
 When James VII created the modern Order in 1687 , he directed that the Abbey Church at the Palace of Holyroodhouse be converted to a Chapel for the Order of the Thistle , perhaps copying the idea from the Order of the Garter ( whose chapel is located in Windsor Castle ) . James VII , however , was deposed by 1688 ; the Chapel , meanwhile , had been destroyed during riots . The Order did not have a Chapel until 1911 , when one was added onto St Giles High Kirk in Edinburgh . Each year , the Sovereign resides at the Palace of Holyroodhouse for a week in June or July ; during the visit , a service for the Order is held . Any new Knights or Ladies are installed at annual services . 
 Each member of the Order , including the Sovereign , is allotted a stall in the Chapel , above which his or her heraldic devices are displayed . Perched on the pinnacle of a knight 's stall is his helm , decorated with mantling and topped by his crest . If he is a peer , the coronet appropriate to his rank is placed beneath the helm . Under the laws of heraldry , women , other than monarchs , do not normally bear helms nor crests ; instead , the coronet alone is used ( if she is a peeress or princess ) . Lady Marion Fraser had a helm and crest included when she was granted arms ; these are displayed above her stall in the same manner as for knights . Unlike other British Orders , the armorial banners of Knights and Ladies of the Thistle are not hung in the chapel , but instead in an adjacent part of St Giles High Kirk . The Thistle Chapel does , however , bear the arms of members living and deceased on stall plates . These enamelled plates are affixed to the back of the stall and display its occupant 's name , arms , and date of admission into the Order . 
 Upon the death of a Knight , helm , mantling , crest ( or coronet or crown ) and sword are taken down . The stall plates , however , are not removed ; rather , they remain permanently affixed to the back of the stall , so that the stalls of the chapel are festooned with a colourful record of the Order 's Knights ( and now Ladies ) since 1911 . The entryway just outside the doors of the chapel has the names of the Order 's Knights from before 1911 inscribed into the walls giving a complete record of the members of the order . 
 = = Precedence and privileges = = 
 Knights and Ladies of the Thistle are assigned positions in the order of precedence , ranking above all others of knightly rank except the Order of the Garter , and above baronets . Wives , sons , daughters and daughters @-@ in @-@ law of Knights of the Thistle also feature on the order of precedence ; relatives of Ladies of the Thistle , however , are not assigned any special precedence . ( Generally , individuals can derive precedence from their fathers or husbands , but not from their mothers or wives . ) 
 Knights of the Thistle prefix " Sir " , and Ladies prefix " Lady " , to their forenames . Wives of Knights may prefix " Lady " to their surnames , but no equivalent privilege exists for husbands of Ladies . Such forms are not used by peers and princes , except when the names of the former are written out in their fullest forms . 
 Knights and Ladies use the post @-@ nominal letters " KT " and " LT " respectively . When an individual is entitled to use multiple post @-@ nominal letters , " KT " or " LT " appears before all others , except " Bt " or " Btss " ( Baronet or Baronetess ) , " VC " ( Victoria Cross ) , " GC " ( George Cross ) and " KG " or " LG " ( Knight or Lady of the Garter ) . 
 Knights and Ladies may encircle their arms with the circlet ( a green circle bearing the Order 's motto ) and the collar of the Order ; the former is shown either outside or on top of the latter . The badge is depicted suspended from the collar . The Royal Arms depict the collar and motto of the Order of the Thistle only in Scotland ; they show the circlet and motto of the Garter in England , Wales and Northern Ireland . 
 Knights and Ladies are also entitled to receive heraldic supporters . This high privilege is shared only by members of the Royal Family , peers , Knights and Ladies of the Garter , and Knights and Dames Grand Cross of the junior orders of chivalry and clan chiefs . 
 = = Current members and officers = = 
 Sovereign : Elizabeth II 
 Knights and Ladies Companion : 
 Andrew , Earl of Elgin and Kincardine KT JP DL ( 1981 ) 
 David , Earl of Airlie KT GCVO PC JP ( 1985 ) 
 Robert , Earl of Crawford and Balcarres KT GCVO PC DL ( 1996 ) 
 Lady Marion Fraser LT ( 1996 ) 
 Norman , Lord Macfarlane of Bearsden KT DL ( 1996 ) 
 James , Lord Mackay of <unk> KT PC QC ( 1997 ) 
 David , Lord Wilson of <unk> KT GCMG ( 2000 ) 
 Stewart , Lord Sutherland of <unk> KT ( 2002 ) 
 Sir Eric Anderson KT ( 2002 ) 
 David , Lord Steel of <unk> KT KBE PC ( 2004 ) 
 George , Lord Robertson of Port Ellen KT GCMG PC ( 2004 ) 
 William , Lord Cullen of <unk> KT PC ( 2007 ) 
 David , Lord Hope of <unk> KT PC QC ( 2009 ) 
 Narendra , Lord Patel KT ( 2009 ) 
 David , Earl of Home KT CVO CBE ( 2014 ) 
 Robert , Lord Smith of Kelvin KT CH ( 2014 ) 
 Extra Knights and Ladies Companion : 
 Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh KG KT OM GBE AK CC CMM QSO PC ADC ( P ) CD ( 1952 ) 
 Prince Charles , Duke of Rothesay KG KT GCB OM AK QSO PC ADC ( P ) CD ( 1977 ) 
 Princess Anne , Princess Royal KG KT GCVO QSO CD ( 2000 ) 
 Prince William , Earl of Strathearn KG KT PC ADC ( P ) ( 2012 ) 
 Officers : 
 Dean : Very Reverend Professor Iain Torrance , TD 
 Chancellor : David , Earl of Airlie KT GCVO PC JP 
 Gentleman Usher of the Green Rod : Rear Admiral Christopher Hope Layman CB DSO <unk> 
 King of Arms : Dr Joseph Morrow ( Lord Lyon King of Arms ) 
 Secretary : Elizabeth Roads <unk> ( <unk> Herald , Lyon Clerk and Keeper of the Records ) 
 = = = Printed = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Fight Club = 
 Fight Club is a 1999 American neo @-@ noir drama film based on the 1996 novel of the same name by Chuck Palahniuk . The film was directed by David Fincher , and stars Brad Pitt , Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter . Norton plays the unnamed protagonist , an " everyman " who is discontented with his white @-@ collar job . He forms a " fight club " with soap maker Tyler Durden , played by Pitt , and they are joined by men who also want to fight recreationally . The narrator becomes embroiled in a relationship with Durden and a dissolute woman , Marla Singer , played by Bonham Carter . 
 Palahniuk 's novel was optioned by 20th Century Fox producer Laura Ziskin , who hired Jim Uhls to write the film adaptation . Fincher was one of four directors the producers considered , and was selected because of his enthusiasm for the film . Fincher developed the script with Uhls and sought screenwriting advice from the cast and others in the film industry . The director and the cast compared the film to Rebel Without a Cause ( 1955 ) and The Graduate ( 1967 ) . Fincher intended Fight Club 's violence to serve as a metaphor for the conflict between a generation of young people and the value system of advertising . The director copied the homoerotic overtones from Palahniuk 's novel to make audiences uncomfortable and keep them from anticipating the twist ending . 
 Studio executives did not like the film and restructured Fincher 's intended marketing campaign to try to reduce anticipated losses . Fight Club failed to meet the studio 's expectations at the box office and received polarized reactions from critics , who debated the explicit violence and moral ambiguity , but praised the acting , directing , themes and messages . It was cited as one of the most controversial and talked @-@ about films of 1999 . The film later found critical and commercial success with its DVD release , which established Fight Club as a cult film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The unnamed narrator ( Edward Norton ) is a traveling automobile recall specialist who suffers from insomnia . One night , he visits a support group for testicular cancer victims , where they assume that he , too , is a victim , and he spontaneously weeps into the nurturing arms of another man , finding a " freedom " that euphorically relieves his insomnia . He becomes addicted to participating in support groups of various kinds , always allowing the groups to assume that he suffers what they do . However , he begins to notice another impostor , Marla Singer ( Helena Bonham Carter ) , whose presence disturbs his bliss . The two negotiate to avoid their attending the same groups , but , before going their separate ways , Marla gives the narrator her phone number . 
 On a flight home from a business trip , the narrator meets Tyler Durden ( Brad Pitt ) , a soap salesman with whom he begins to converse after noticing the two share the same kind of briefcase . After the flight , the narrator returns home to find that his apartment has been demolished by an explosion . He calls Tyler and they meet at a bar . A conversation about consumerism leads to the narrator moving into Tyler 's dilapidated mansion . Outside the bar , Tyler requests that the narrator hit him , which leads the two to engage in a fistfight . They have further fights outside the bar on subsequent nights , and these fights attract growing crowds of men . The fighting eventually moves to the bar 's basement where the men form a " fight club , " a routine opportunity for the men to fight recreationally . 
 Marla overdoses on pills and telephones the narrator for help ; he ignores her , but Tyler answers the call and saves her . Tyler and Marla become sexually involved , and Tyler warns the narrator never to talk to Marla about him . More fight clubs form across the country and , under Tyler 's leadership , they become the anti @-@ materialist and anti @-@ corporate organization called " Project Mayhem . " The narrator complains to Tyler that he wants to be more involved in the organization , but then Tyler suddenly disappears . When a member of Project Mayhem is killed by the police during a botched sabotage operation , the narrator tries to shut down the project , and follows evidence of Tyler 's national travels to track him down . In one city , a Project member greets the narrator as Tyler Durden . The narrator calls Marla from his hotel room and discovers that Marla also believes him to be Tyler . He suddenly sees Tyler in his room , and Tyler reveals that they are dissociated personalities in the same body . When the narrator has believed himself to be asleep , Tyler has been controlling his body and travelling to different locations . 
 The narrator blacks out after the conversation , and when he awakes , he uncovers Tyler 's plans to erase debt by destroying buildings that contain credit card companies ' records . The narrator tries to contact the police , but finds that the officers are members of the Project . He attempts to disarm the explosives in a building , but Tyler subdues him and moves him to the uppermost floor . The narrator , held at gunpoint by Tyler , realizes that , in sharing the same body with Tyler , he himself is actually holding the gun . He fires it into his mouth , shooting through the cheek without killing himself . Tyler collapses with an exit wound to the back of his head , and the narrator stops mentally projecting him . Afterward , Project Mayhem members bring a kidnapped Marla to him , believing him to be Tyler , and leave them alone . The explosives detonate , collapsing many buildings around them ; the narrator and Marla , holding hands , look on . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Fincher said Fight Club was a coming of age film , like the 1967 film The Graduate but for people in their 30s . Fincher described the narrator as an " everyman " ; the character is identified in the script as " Jack " , but left unnamed in the film . Fincher outlined the narrator 's background : " He 's tried to do everything he was taught to do , tried to fit into the world by becoming the thing he isn 't . " The narrator cannot find happiness , so he travels on a path to enlightenment in which he must " kill " his parents , his god , and his teacher . At the start of the film , he has killed his parents . With Tyler Durden , he kills his god by doing things they are not supposed to do . To complete the process of maturing , the narrator has to kill his teacher , Tyler Durden . 
 The character is a 1990s inverse of The Graduate archetype : " a guy who does not have a world of possibilities in front of him , he has no possibilities , he literally cannot imagine a way to change his life . " He is confused and enraged , so he responds to his environment by creating Tyler Durden , a Nietzschean Übermensch , in his mind . While Tyler is who the narrator would want to be , he is not empathetic and does not help the narrator face decisions in his life " that are complicated and have moral and ethical implications " . Fincher explained , " [ Tyler ] can deal with the concepts of our lives in an idealistic fashion , but it doesn 't have anything to do with the compromises of real life as modern man knows it . Which is : You 're not really necessary to a lot of what 's going on . It 's built , it just needs to run now . " While studio executives worried that Fight Club was going to be " sinister and seditious " , Fincher sought to make it " funny and seditious " by including humor to temper the sinister element . 
 Uhls described the film as a " romantic comedy " , explaining , " It has to do with the characters ' attitudes toward a healthy relationship , which is a lot of behavior which seems unhealthy and harsh to each other , but in fact does work for them — because both characters are out on the edge psychologically . " The narrator seeks intimacy , but he avoids it with Marla Singer , seeing too much of himself in her . While Marla is a seductive and <unk> prospect for the narrator , he instead embraces the novelty and excitement that comes with befriending Tyler Durden . The narrator is comfortable being personally connected to Tyler Durden , but he becomes jealous when Tyler becomes sexually involved with Marla . When the narrator argues with Tyler about their friendship , Tyler tells him that being friends is secondary to pursuing the philosophy they have been exploring . Tyler also suggests doing something about Marla , implying that she is a risk to be removed . When Tyler says this , the narrator realizes that his desires should have been focused on Marla and begins to diverge from Tyler 's path . 
 The unreliable narrator is not immediately aware that Tyler Durden originated in him and is being mentally projected . He also mistakenly promotes the fight clubs as a way to feel powerful , though the narrator 's physical condition worsens while Tyler Durden 's appearance improves . While Tyler desires " real experiences " of actual fights like the narrator at first , he manifests a nihilistic attitude of rejecting and destroying institutions and value systems . His impulsive nature , representing the id , conveys an attitude that is seductive and liberating to the narrator and the members of Project Mayhem . Tyler 's initiatives and methods become dehumanizing ; he orders around the members of Project Mayhem with a megaphone similar to camp directors at Chinese re @-@ education camps . The narrator pulls back from Tyler and in the end , he arrives at a middle ground between his two conflicting selves . 
 Norton said , " I feel that Fight Club really , in a way ... probed into the despair and paralysis that people feel in the face of having inherited this value system out of advertising . " Pitt said , " Fight Club is a metaphor for the need to push through the walls we put around ourselves and just go for it , so for the first time we can experience the pain . " Fight Club also parallels the 1955 film Rebel Without a Cause ; both probe the frustrations of the people that live in the system . The characters , having undergone societal emasculation , are reduced to " a generation of spectators " . A culture of advertising defines society 's " external signifiers of happiness " , causing an unnecessary chase for material goods that replaces the more essential pursuit of spiritual happiness . The film references Calvin Klein , IKEA , and the Volkswagen New Beetle . Norton said of the Beetle , " We smash it ... because it seemed like the classic example of a Baby Boomer generation marketing plan that sold culture back to us . " His character also walks through his apartment while visual effects identify his many IKEA possessions . Fincher described the narrator 's immersion , " It was just the idea of living in this fraudulent idea of happiness . " Pitt explained the dissonance , " I think there 's a self @-@ defense mechanism that keeps my generation from having any real honest connection or commitment with our true feelings . We 're rooting for ball teams , but we 're not getting in there to play . We 're so concerned with failure and success — like these two things are all that 's going to sum you up at the end . " 
 The violence of the fight clubs serves not to promote or glorify physical combat , but for participants to experience feeling in a society where they are otherwise numb . The fights tangibly represent a resistance to the impulse to be " cocooned " in society . Norton believed that the fighting between the men strips away the " fear of pain " and " the reliance on material signifiers of their self @-@ worth " , leaving them to experience something valuable . When the fights evolve into revolutionary violence , the film only half @-@ accepts the revolutionary dialectic by Tyler Durden ; the narrator pulls back and rejects Durden 's ideas . Fight Club purposely shapes an ambiguous message , the interpretation of which is left to the audience . Fincher elaborated , " I love this idea that you can have fascism without offering any direction or solution . Isn 't the point of fascism to say , ' This is the way we should be going ' ? But this movie couldn 't be further from offering any kind of solution . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The novel Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk was published in 1996 . Before its publication , a 20th Century Fox book scout sent a galley proof of the novel to creative executive Kevin McCormick . The executive assigned a studio reader to review the proof as a candidate for a film adaptation , but the reader discouraged it . McCormick then forwarded the proof to producers Lawrence Bender and Art Linson , who also rejected it . Producers Josh Donen and Ross Bell saw potential and expressed interest . They arranged unpaid screen readings with actors to determine the script 's length , and an initial reading lasted six hours . The producers cut out sections to reduce the running time , and they used the shorter script to record its dialogue . Bell sent the recording to Laura Ziskin , head of the division Fox 2000 , who listened to the tape and purchased the rights to Fight Club from Palahniuk for $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Ziskin initially considered hiring Buck Henry to write the adaptation , finding Fight Club similar to the 1967 film The Graduate , which Henry had adapted . When a new screenwriter , Jim Uhls , lobbied Donen and Bell for the job , the producers chose him over Henry . Bell contacted four directors to direct the film . He considered Peter Jackson the best choice , but Jackson was too busy filming the 1996 film The Frighteners in New Zealand . Bryan Singer received the book but did not read it . Danny Boyle met with Bell and read the book , but he pursued another film . David Fincher , who had read Fight Club and had tried to buy the rights himself , talked with Ziskin about directing the film . He hesitated to accept the assignment with 20th Century Fox at first because he had an unpleasant experience directing the 1992 film Alien 3 for the studio . To repair his relationship with the studio , he met with Ziskin and studio head Bill Mechanic . In August 1997 , 20th Century Fox announced that Fincher would direct the film adaptation of Fight Club . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Producer Ross Bell met with actor Russell Crowe to discuss his candidacy for the role of Tyler Durden . Producer Art Linson , who joined the project late , met with Pitt regarding the same role . Linson was the senior producer of the two , so the studio sought to cast Pitt instead of Crowe . Pitt was looking for a new film after the failure ( in the US market ) of his 1998 film Meet Joe Black , and the studio believed Fight Club would be more commercially successful with a major star . The studio signed Pitt and offered him a US $ 17 @.@ 5 million salary . 
 For the role of the unnamed narrator , the studio desired a " sexier marquee name " like Matt Damon to increase the film 's commercial prospects ; it also considered Sean Penn . Fincher instead considered Norton a candidate for the role , based on the actor 's performance in the 1996 film The People vs. Larry Flynt . Other studios were approaching Norton for leading roles in developing films like The Talented Mr. Ripley and Man on the Moon . The actor was cast in Runaway Jury , but the film did not reach production . 20th Century Fox offered Norton a $ 2 @.@ 5 million salary to attract him to Fight Club . Norton could not accept the offer immediately because he still owed Paramount Pictures a film ; he had signed a contractual obligation with Paramount to appear in one of the studio 's future films for a smaller salary ( Norton later satisfied the obligation with his role in the 2003 film The Italian Job ) . 
 In January 1998 , 20th Century Fox announced that Pitt and Norton were cast in the film . The actors prepared for their roles by taking lessons in boxing , taekwondo , grappling , and <unk> . Pitt voluntarily visited a dentist to have pieces of his front teeth chipped off so his character would not have perfect teeth . The pieces were restored after filming concluded . 
 Fincher 's first choice for the role of Marla Singer was Janeane Garofalo , who objected to the film 's sexual content . The filmmakers considered Courtney Love and Winona Ryder as candidates early on . The studio wanted to cast Reese Witherspoon , but Fincher objected that she was too young for the role . He chose to cast Bonham Carter based on her performance in the 1997 film The Wings of the Dove . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Uhls started working on an early draft of the adapted screenplay , which excluded a voice @-@ over because the industry perceived at the time that the technique was " hackneyed and trite " . When Fincher joined the film , he thought that the film should have a voice @-@ over , believing that the film 's humor came from the narrator 's voice . The director described the film without a voice @-@ over as seemingly " sad and pathetic " . Fincher and Uhls revised the script for six to seven months and by 1997 had a third draft that reordered the story and left out several major elements . When Pitt was cast , he was concerned that his character , Tyler Durden , was too one @-@ dimensional . Fincher sought the advice of writer @-@ director Cameron Crowe , who suggested giving the character more ambiguity . Fincher also hired screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker for assistance . The director invited Pitt and Norton to help revise the script , and the group drafted five revisions in the course of a year . 
 Palahniuk praised the faithful film adaptation of his novel and applauded how the film 's plot was more streamlined than the book 's . Palahniuk recalled how the writers debated if film audiences would believe the plot twist from the novel . Fincher supported including the twist , arguing , " If they accept everything up to this point , they 'll accept the plot twist . If they 're still in the theater , they 'll stay with it . " Palahniuk 's novel also contained homoerotic overtones , which the director included in the film to make audiences uncomfortable and accentuate the surprise of the film 's twists . The bathroom scene where Tyler Durden bathes next to the narrator is an example of the overtones ; the line , " I 'm wondering if another woman is really the answer we need , " was meant to suggest personal responsibility rather than homosexuality . Another example is the scene at the beginning of the film in which Tyler Durden puts a gun barrel down the narrator 's mouth . 
 The narrator finds redemption at the end of the film by rejecting Tyler Durden 's dialectic , a path that diverged from the novel 's ending in which the narrator is placed in a mental institution . Norton drew parallels between redemption in the film and redemption in The Graduate , indicating that the protagonists of both films find a middle ground between two divisions of self . Fincher considered the novel too infatuated with Tyler Durden and changed the ending to move away from him : " I wanted people to love Tyler , but I also wanted them to be OK with his vanquishing . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Studio executives Mechanic and Ziskin planned an initial budget of US $ 23 million to finance the film , but by the start of production , the budget was increased to $ 50 million . Half was paid by New Regency , but during filming , the projected budget escalated to US $ 67 million . New Regency 's head and Fight Club executive producer Arnon Milchan petitioned Fincher to reduce costs by at least US $ 5 million . The director refused , so Milchan threatened Mechanic that New Regency would withdraw financing . Mechanic sought to restore Milchan 's support by sending him tapes of dailies from Fight Club . After seeing three weeks of filming , Milchan reinstated New Regency 's financial backing . The final production budget was $ 63 million . 
 The fight scenes were heavily choreographed , but the actors were required to " go full out " to capture realistic effects like having the wind knocked out of them . Makeup artist Julie Pearce , who worked for the director on the 1997 film The Game , studied mixed martial arts and pay @-@ per @-@ view boxing to portray the fighters accurately . She designed an extra 's ear to have cartilage missing , citing as inspiration the boxing match in which Mike Tyson bit off part of Evander Holyfield 's ear . Makeup artists devised two methods to create sweat on cue : spraying mineral water over a coat of Vaseline , and using the unadulterated water for " wet sweat " . Meat Loaf , who plays a member of the fight club who has " bitch tits " , wore a 90 @-@ pound ( 40 kg ) fat harness that gave him large breasts for the role . He also wore eight @-@ inch ( 20 cm ) lifts in his scenes with Norton to be taller than him . 
 Filming lasted 138 days , during which Fincher shot more than 1 @,@ 500 rolls of film , three times the average for a Hollywood film . The locations were in and around Los Angeles , including most notably : The Promenade Towers , Melrose Avenue , St. Brendan 's Catholic Church , and Michael Heizer 's public art sculpture " North , South East , West " . Sets were also built in Century City . Production designer Alex McDowell constructed more than 70 sets . The exterior of Tyler Durden 's house was built in Wilmington , California , while the interior was built on a sound stage at the studio 's location . The interior was given a decayed look to illustrate the deconstructed world of the characters . Marla Singer 's apartment was based on photographs of the Rosalind Apartments in downtown LA . Overall production included 300 scenes , 200 locations , and complex special effects . Fincher compared Fight Club to his succeeding and less complex film Panic Room , " I felt like I was spending all my time watching trucks being loaded and unloaded so I could shoot three lines of dialogue . There was far too much transportation going on . " 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Fincher used the Super 35 format to film Fight Club since it gave him maximum flexibility in composing shots . He hired Jeff Cronenweth as cinematographer ; Cronenweth 's father Jordan Cronenweth was the cinematographer who worked for Fincher on the 1992 film Alien 3 but left midway through its production due to Parkinson 's disease . Fincher explored visual styles in his previous films Seven and The Game , and he and Cronenweth drew elements from these styles for Fight Club . 
 They applied a lurid style , choosing to make people " sort of shiny " . The appearance of the narrator 's scenes without Tyler Durden were bland and realistic . The scenes with Tyler were described by Fincher as " more hyper @-@ real in a torn @-@ down , deconstructed sense — a visual metaphor of what [ the narrator is ] heading into " . The filmmakers used heavily desaturated colors in the costuming , makeup , and art direction . Bonham Carter wore opalescent makeup to portray her romantic nihilistic character with a " smack @-@ fiend patina " . Fincher and Cronenweth drew influences from the 1973 film American Graffiti , which applied a mundane look to nighttime exteriors while simultaneously including a variety of colors . 
 The crew took advantage of both natural and practical light at filming locations . The director sought various approaches to the lighting setups , for example choosing several urban locations for the city lights ' effects on the shots ' backgrounds . He and the crew also embraced fluorescent lighting at other practical locations to maintain an element of reality and to light the prostheses depicting the characters ' injuries . On the other hand , Fincher also ensured that scenes were not so strongly lit so the characters ' eyes were less visible , citing cinematographer Gordon Willis ' technique as the influence . 
 Fight Club was filmed mostly at night and Fincher purposely filmed the daytime shots in shadowed locations . The crew equipped the bar 's basement with inexpensive work lamps to create a background glow . Fincher avoided stylish camerawork when filming early fight scenes in the basement and instead placed the camera in a fixed position . In later fight scenes , Fincher moved the camera from the viewpoint of a distant observer to that of the fighter . 
 The scenes with Tyler Durden were staged to conceal that the character was a mental projection of the unnamed narrator . The character was not filmed in two shots with a group of people , nor was he shown in any over the shoulder shots in scenes where Tyler gives the narrator specific ideas to manipulate him . In scenes before the narrator meets Tyler , the filmmakers inserted Tyler 's presence in single frames for subliminal effect . Tyler appears in the background and out of focus , like a " little devil on the shoulder " . Fincher explained the subliminal frames : " Our hero is creating Tyler Durden in his own mind , so at this point he exists only on the periphery of the narrator 's consciousness . " 
 While Cronenweth generally rated and exposed the Kodak film stock normally on Fight Club , several other techniques were applied to change its appearance . Flashing was implemented on much of the exterior night photography , the contrast was stretched to be purposely ugly , the print was adjusted to be underexposed , Technicolor 's <unk> silver retention was used on a select number of prints to increase the density of the film 's blacks , and high @-@ contrast print stocks were chosen to create a " stepped @-@ on " look on the print with a dirty patina . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Fincher hired visual effects supervisor Kevin Tod Haug , who worked for him on The Game , to create visual effects for Fight Club . Haug assigned the visual effects artists and experts to different facilities that each addressed different types of visual effects : CG modeling , animation , compositing , and scanning . Haug explained , " We selected the best people for each aspect of the effects work , then coordinated their efforts . In this way , we never had to play to a facility 's weakness . " Fincher visualized the narrator 's perspective through a " mind 's eye " view and structured a myopic framework for the film audiences . Fincher also used previsualized footage of challenging main @-@ unit and visual effects shots as a problem @-@ solving tool to avoid making mistakes during the actual filming . 
 The film 's title sequence is a 90 @-@ second visual effects composition that depicts the inside of the narrator 's brain at a microscopic level ; the camera pulls back to the outside , starting at his fear center and following the thought processes initiated by his fear impulse . The sequence , designed in part by Fincher , was budgeted separately from the rest of the film at first , but the sequence was awarded by the studio in January 1999 . Fincher hired Digital Domain and its visual effects supervisor Kevin Mack , who won an Academy Award for Visual Effects for the 1998 film What Dreams May Come , for the sequence . The company mapped the computer @-@ generated brain using an L @-@ system , and the design was detailed using renderings by medical illustrator Katherine Jones . The pullback sequence from within the brain to the outside of the skull included neurons , action potentials , and a hair follicle . Haug explained the artistic license that Fincher took with the shot , " While he wanted to keep the brain passage looking like electron microscope photography , that look had to be coupled with the feel of a night dive — wet , scary , and with a low depth of field . " The shallow depth of field was accomplished with the ray tracing process . 
 Other visual effects include an early scene in which the camera flashes past city streets to survey Project Mayhem 's destructive equipment lying in underground parking lots ; the sequence was a three @-@ dimensional composition of nearly 100 photographs of Los Angeles and Century City by photographer Michael Douglas Middleton . The final scene of the demolition of the credit card office buildings was designed by Richard Baily of Image Savant ; Baily worked on the scene for over fourteen months . 
 Midway through the film , Tyler Durden points out the cue mark — nicknamed " cigarette burn " in the film — to the audience . The scene represents a turning point that foreshadows the coming rupture and inversion of the " fairly subjective reality " that existed earlier in the film . The director explained , " Suddenly it 's as though the projectionist missed the changeover , the viewers have to start looking at the movie in a whole new way . " 
 = = = Musical score = = = 
 Fincher was concerned that bands experienced in writing film scores would be unable to tie the movie 's themes together , so he sought a band which had never recorded for film . He pursued Radiohead , but ultimately chose the breakbeat producing duo Dust Brothers to score the film . The duo created a post @-@ modern score that included drum loops , electronic scratches , and computerized samples . Dust Brothers performer Michael Simpson explained the setup : " Fincher wanted to break new ground with everything about the movie , and a nontraditional score helped achieve that . " The film 's climax and end credits feature the song " Where Is My Mind ? " by the Pixies . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Filming concluded in December 1998 , and Fincher edited the footage in early 1999 to prepare Fight Club for a screening with senior executives . They did not receive the film positively and were concerned that there would not be an audience for the film . Executive producer Art Linson , who supported the film , recalled the response : " So many incidences of Fight Club were alarming , no group of executives could narrow them down . " Nevertheless , Fight Club was originally slated to be released in July 1999 but was later changed to August 6 , 1999 . The studio further delayed the film 's release , this time to autumn , citing a crowded summer schedule and a hurried post @-@ production process . Outsiders attributed the delays to the Columbine High School massacre earlier in the year . 
 Marketing executives at 20th Century Fox faced difficulties in marketing Fight Club and at one point considered marketing it as an art film . They considered that the film was primarily geared toward male audiences because of its violence and believed that not even Pitt would attract female filmgoers . Research testing showed that the film appealed to teenagers . Fincher refused to let the posters and trailers focus on Pitt and encouraged the studio to hire the advertising firm Wieden + Kennedy to devise a marketing plan . The firm proposed a bar of pink soap with the title " Fight Club " embossed on it as the film 's main marketing image ; the proposal was considered " a bad joke " by Fox executives . Fincher also released two early trailers in the form of fake public service announcements presented by Pitt and Norton ; the studio did not think the trailers marketed the film appropriately . Instead , the studio financed a $ 20 million large @-@ scale campaign to provide a press junket , posters , billboards , and trailers for TV that highlighted the film 's fight scenes . The studio advertised Fight Club on cable during World Wrestling Entertainment broadcasts , which Fincher protested , believing that the placement created the wrong context for the film . Linson believed that the " ill @-@ conceived one @-@ dimensional " marketing by marketing executive Robert Harper largely contributed to Fight Club 's lukewarm box office performance in the United States . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 The studio held Fight Club 's world premiere at the 56th Venice International Film Festival on September 10 , 1999 . For the American theatrical release , the studio hired the National Research Group to test screen the film ; the group predicted the film would gross between US $ 13 million and US $ 15 million in its opening weekend . Fight Club opened commercially in the United States and Canada on October 15 , 1999 and earned US $ 11 @,@ 035 @,@ 485 in 1 @,@ 963 theaters over the opening weekend . The film ranked first at the weekend box office , defeating Double Jeopardy and The Story of Us , a fellow weekend opener . The gender mix of audiences for Fight Club , argued to be " the ultimate anti @-@ date flick " , was 61 % male and 39 % female ; 58 % of audiences were below the age of 21 . Despite the film 's top placement , its opening gross fell short of the studio 's expectations . Over the second weekend , Fight Club dropped 42 @.@ 6 % in revenue , earning US $ 6 @,@ 335 @,@ 870 . Against its production budget of US $ 63 million , the film grossed US $ 37 million from its theatrical run in the United States and Canada and earned US $ 100 @.@ 9 million in theaters worldwide . The underwhelming North American performance of Fight Club soured the relationship between 20th Century Fox 's studio head Bill Mechanic and media executive Rupert Murdoch , which contributed to Mechanic 's resignation in June 2000 . 
 The British Board of Film Classification reviewed Fight Club for its November 12 , 1999 release in the United Kingdom and removed two scenes involving " an indulgence in the excitement of beating a ( defenseless ) man 's face into a pulp " . The board assigned the film an 18 certificate , limiting the release to adult @-@ only audiences in the UK . The BBFC did not censor any further , considering and dismissing claims that Fight Club contained " dangerously instructive information " and could " encourage anti @-@ social ( behavior ) " . The board decided , " The film as a whole is — quite clearly — critical and sharply parodic of the amateur fascism which in part it portrays . Its central theme of male machismo ( and the anti @-@ social behaviour that flows from it ) is emphatically rejected by the central character in the concluding reels . " The scenes were restored in a two @-@ disc DVD edition released in the UK in March 2007 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Fincher supervised the composition of the DVD packaging and was one of the first directors to participate in a film 's transition to home media . The film was released in two DVD editions . The single @-@ disc edition included a commentary track , while the two @-@ disc special edition included the commentary track , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clips , deleted scenes , trailers , fake public service announcements , the promotional music video " This is Your Life " , Internet spots , still galleries , cast biographies , storyboards , and publicity materials . The director worked on the DVD as a way to finish his vision for the film . Julie Markell , 20th Century Fox 's senior vice president of creative development , said the DVD packaging complemented the director 's vision : " The film is meant to make you question . The package , by extension , tries to reflect an experience that you must experience for yourself . The more you look at it , the more you 'll get out of it . " The studio developed the packaging for two months . The two @-@ disc special edition DVD was packaged to look covered in brown cardboard wrapper . The title " Fight Club " was labeled diagonally across the front , and packaging appeared tied with twine . Markell said , " We wanted the package to be simple on the outside , so that there would be a dichotomy between the simplicity of brown paper wrapping and the intensity and chaos of what 's inside . " Deborah Mitchell , 20th Century Fox 's vice president of marketing , described the design : " From a retail standpoint , [ the DVD case ] has incredible shelf @-@ presence . " 
 Fight Club won the 2000 Online Film Critics Society Awards for Best DVD , Best DVD Commentary , and Best DVD Special Features . Entertainment Weekly ranked the film 's two @-@ disc edition in first place on its 2001 list of " The 50 Essential DVDs " , giving top ratings to the DVD 's content and technical picture @-@ and @-@ audio quality . When the two @-@ disc edition went out of print , the studio re @-@ released it in 2004 because of fans ' requests . The film sold more than 6 million copies on DVD and video within the first ten years , making it one of the largest @-@ selling home media items in the studio 's history , in addition to grossing over $ 55 million in video and DVD rentals . With a weak box office performance in the United States and Canada , a better performance in other territories , and the highly successful DVD release , Fight Club generated a US $ 10 million profit for the studio . 
 The Laserdisc edition was only released in Japan on May 26 , 2000 and features a different cover art , as well as one of the very few Dolby EX soundtracks released on LD . 
 The VHS edition was released on October 31 , 2000 , as a part of 20th Century Fox 's " Premiere Series " line . It includes a featurette after the film , entitled " Behind the Brawl " . 
 Fight Club was released in the Blu @-@ ray Disc format in the United States on November 17 , 2009 . Fox Creative chose Neuron Syndicate to design the art for the format 's packaging , and Neuron commissioned five graffiti artists to create 30 pieces of art . The art encompasses urban aesthetics found on the East Coast and West Coast of the United States as well as influences from European street art . The Blu @-@ ray edition opens with a menu screen for the romantic comedy Never Been Kissed starring Drew Barrymore before leading into the actual Fight Club menu screen . David Fincher got permission from Barrymore to include the fake menu screen . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 When Fight Club premiered at the 56th Venice International Film Festival , the film was fiercely debated by critics . A newspaper reported , " Many loved and hated it in equal measures . " Some critics expressed concern that the film would incite copycat behavior , such as that seen after A Clockwork Orange debuted in Britain nearly three decades previously . Upon the film 's theatrical release , The Times reported the reaction : " It touched a nerve in the male psyche that was debated in newspapers across the world . " Although the film 's makers called Fight Club " an accurate portrayal of men in the 1990s , " some critics called it " irresponsible and appalling " . Writing for the Australian newspaper , Christopher Goodwin stated : " Fight Club is shaping up to be the most contentious mainstream Hollywood meditation on violence since Stanley Kubrick 's A Clockwork Orange . " 
 Janet Maslin , reviewing for The New York Times , praised Fincher 's direction and editing of the film . She wrote that Fight Club carried a message of " contemporary manhood " , and that , if not watched closely , the film could be misconstrued as an endorsement of violence and nihilism . Roger Ebert , reviewing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , called Fight Club " visceral and hard @-@ edged " , and " a thrill ride masquerading as philosophy " that most audiences would not appreciate . Ebert later acknowledged that the film was " beloved by most , not by me " . He was later requested to have a shot @-@ by @-@ shot analysis of Fight Club at the Conference on World Affairs ; he stated that " [ s ] <unk> it over the course of a week , I admired its skill even more , and its thought even less . " Jay Carr of The Boston Globe opined that the film began with an " invigoratingly nervy and imaginative buzz " , but that it eventually became " explosively silly " . Newsweek 's David Ansen described Fight Club as " an outrageous mixture of brilliant technique , puerile philosophizing , trenchant satire and sensory overload " and thought that the ending was too pretentious . Richard Schickel of Time described the director 's mise en scène as dark and damp : " It enforces the contrast between the <unk> of his characters ' aboveground life and their underground one . Water , even when it 's polluted , is the source of life ; blood , even when it 's carelessly spilled , is the symbol of life being fully lived . To put his point simply : it 's better to be wet than dry . " Schickel applauded the performances of Brad Pitt and Edward Norton , but he criticized the film 's " conventionally gimmicky " unfolding and the failure to make Helena Bonham Carter 's character interesting . 
 Cineaste 's Gary <unk> reviewed the critical reception in retrospect : " Many critics praised Fight Club , hailing it as one of the most exciting , original , and thought @-@ provoking films of the year . " He wrote of the negative opinion , " While Fight Club had numerous critical champions , the film 's critical attackers were far more vocal , a negative chorus which became hysterical about what they felt to be the excessively graphic scenes of fisticuffs ... They felt such scenes served only as a mindless glamorization of brutality , a morally irresponsible portrayal , which they feared might encourage impressionable young male viewers to set up their own real @-@ life fight clubs in order to beat each other senseless . " 
 Fight Club was nominated for the 2000 Academy Award for Best Sound Editing , but it lost to The Matrix . Bonham Carter won the 2000 Empire Award for Best British Actress . The Online Film Critics Society also nominated Fight Club for Best Film , Best Director , Best Actor ( Norton ) , Best Editing , and Best Adapted Screenplay ( Uhls ) . Though the film won none of the awards , the organization listed Fight Club as one of the top ten films of 1999 . The soundtrack was nominated for a BRIT Award , losing to Notting Hill . 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , Fight Club holds a rating of 79 % , based on 162 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 3 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Solid acting , amazing direction , and elaborate production design make Fight Club a wild ride . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 66 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Fight Club was one of the most controversial and talked @-@ about films of the 1990s . Like other films released that year , including Magnolia , Being John Malkovich and Three Kings , Fight Club was recognized as an innovator in cinematic form and style since it exploited new developments in filmmaking technology . After Fight Club 's theatrical release , it became more popular via word of mouth , and the positive reception of the DVD established it as a cult film that David Ansen of Newsweek conjectured would enjoy " perennial " fame . The film 's success also heightened Palahniuk 's profile to global renown . 
 Following Fight Club 's release , several fight clubs were reported to have started in the United States . A " Gentleman 's Fight Club " was started in Menlo Park , California in 2000 and had members mostly from the tech industry . Teens and preteens in Texas , New Jersey , Washington state , and Alaska also initiated fight clubs and posted videos of their fights online , leading authorities to break up the clubs . In 2006 , an unwilling participant from a local high school was injured at a fight club in Arlington , Texas , and the DVD sales of the fight led to the arrest of six teenagers . An unsanctioned fight club was also started at Princeton University , where matches were held on campus . The film was suspected of influencing Luke Helder , a college student who planted pipe bombs in mailboxes in 2002 . Helder 's goal was to create a smiley pattern on the map of the United States , similar to the scene in Fight Club in which a building is vandalized to have a smiley on its exterior . On July 16 , 2009 , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old who had formed his own fight club in Manhattan was charged with detonating a homemade bomb outside a Starbucks Coffee shop in the Upper East Side . The New York City Police Department reported the suspect was trying to emulate " Project Mayhem " . In September , 2015 , two employees at <unk> Academy , a New Jersey day care center , were charged with instigating " Fight Club @-@ style " brawls between children ( aged four to six years of age ) . The fights were reportedly filmed and uploaded to Snapchat , a video messaging application , and involved approximately a " dozen boys and girls " . In the videos , one of the perpetrators , Erica Kenny , can be heard making references to Fight Club . The charges stem from an incident that occurred on August 13 , 2015 , but investigators are looking into whether the fights were ongoing . 
 In 2003 , Fight Club was listed as one of the " 50 Best Guy Movies of All Time " by Men 's Journal . In 2006 and 2008 , Fight Club was voted by Empire readers as the eighth and tenth greatest film of all time , respectively . Total Film ranked Fight Club as " The Greatest Film of our Lifetime " in 2007 during the magazine 's tenth anniversary . In 2007 , Premiere selected Tyler Durden 's line , " The first rule of fight club is you do not talk about fight club , " as the 27th greatest movie line of all time . In 2008 , readers of Empire ranked Tyler Durden first on a list of the 100 Greatest Movie Characters . Empire also identified Fight Club as the 10th greatest movie of all time in its 2008 issue The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . 
 In 2010 , two viral mash @-@ up videos featuring Fight Club were released . Ferris Club was a mash @-@ up of Fight Club and the film Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . It portrayed Ferris as Tyler Durden and Cameron as the narrator , " claiming to see the real psychological truth behind the John Hughes classic " . The second video Jane Austen 's Fight Club also gained popularity online as a mash @-@ up of Fight Club 's fighting rules and the characters created by 19th century novelist Jane Austen . 
 = = = American Film Institute nominations = = = 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes – " First rule of Fight Club is – you do not talk about Fight Club . " 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) 
 = Hillingdon House = 
 Hillingdon House is a Grade II listed mansion in Hillingdon , Greater London . The original house was built in 1717 as a hunting lodge for the Duke of Schomberg . It was destroyed by fire and the present house was built in its place in 1844 . 
 The British Government purchased Hillingdon House in 1915 and it became a military hospital . In 1917 , what would become the Royal Air Force station RAF Uxbridge was established within the grounds . In military use , the house has served over time as the first headquarters for No. 11 Group RAF and RAF Bomber Command . The River Pinn passes through the grounds of the house from north to south , splitting the former RAF Uxbridge in two . 
 The Hillingdon House Farm estate to the north of the house includes the Hillingdon Sports and Leisure Complex ( formerly Uxbridge Lido ) . The farm ceased operations in 1965 after the local council served a notice to quit on the tenant . The farmhouse on Honeycroft Hill became a council depot , followed by a plant nursery , before it was sold for residential housing . 
 Under plans approved in early 2011 for the redevelopment of the RAF station , the house will be renovated and converted to include a restaurant . As of 2014 it is not accessible to the public while the site undergoes redevelopment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First house = = = 
 The first house on the site was built as a hunting lodge in 1717 for the Duke of Schomberg , a British army commander of German origin . He is said to have been very argumentative , to the point where he would argue with all those around him bar the enemy . 
 The house eventually passed to the Chetwynd family , who sold it to the Marchioness of Rockingham , widow of Prime Minister The Marquess of Rockingham , in 1786 for £ 9 @,@ 000 . The Marchioness lived there until her own death in 1804 , upon which the estate passed to her stepsister Elizabeth , widow of William Weddell MP . Her husband had left her Newby Hall in Mayfair , therefore having no need of Hillingdon House , she sold it to Josias Du Pré Porcher in 1805 . In 1810 the estate was sold to Richard Henry Cox , a member of the Cox banking family and the grandson of Richard Cox , founder of the travel company Cox & Kings . 
 = = = Second house = = = 
 After the first house burnt down , the present structure was built in 1844 , in a classical Victorian style . In 1892 , an area of the estate south of the house was established as Hillingdon Golf Club , founded by Charles Newton who lived at Hillingdon House , and Charles Stevens , a partner of a local timber company . The estate of Frederick Cox , Richard Henry Cox 's grandson , placed the house on the market in 1914 , describing it as " a brick and stone building , partly stuccoed , with extensive outbuildings and ornamental gardens . " The house and gardens , together with the surrounding parkland and artificial lake created by damming a section of the River Pinn , amounted to more 200 acres ( 81 ha ) . 
 The British Government bought the house and grounds in 1915 , intending to construct a prisoner of war camp within the grounds . Local opposition to the plan led to the house becoming the Canadian Convalescent Hospital to care for troops evacuated from the front line during the First World War . The hospital opened on 20 September 1915 and closed on 12 December 1917 , having had four commanding officers and five sisters @-@ in @-@ charge . 
 On 19 November 1917 , 114 officers and 1156 men of the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) Armament School moved into Hillingdon House , with the RFC making a donation of £ 2289 12s 9d to the Canadian Red Cross . Needing a site for the training of recruits in ground gunnery , the RFC used parts of the estate not required by the Canadian hospital and established a firing range on the opposite side of the river from the house . 
 The Royal Air Force was formed on 1 April 1918 , following the merger of the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service . The Uxbridge site came under the control of the new service , becoming known as the RAF Central Depot , Uxbridge . The site was then split to form administratively two RAF stations : the area east of the River Pinn including Hillingdon House became RAF Hillingdon and the remainder RAF Uxbridge . Among the <unk> trained at Hillingdon was T. E. Lawrence ( ' Lawrence of Arabia ' ) , whose book The Mint , initially censored for its frank use of four @-@ letter words , describes his time there : " Hillingdon House looked forlorn , because of its black windows , behind whose wideness the clerks lounged with their first cups of tea . ' <unk> [ cunts ] , ' sneered Sailor <unk> . " 
 On 1 March 1929 , the Royal Observer Corps established its headquarters at Hillingdon House , where it remained until transferring to RAF Bentley Priory on 1 March 1936 . No. 11 Group formed on the same day under the command of Air Vice Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté , using Hillingdon House as its headquarters . On 13 July , RAF Bomber Command was formed from the old HQ Air Defence of Great Britain and was also based in the house , remaining there until 1940 when the command moved to RAF High Wycombe . 
 No. 11 Group was relocated to RAF Martlesham Heath in 1958 , when control of RAF Hillingdon passed from Fighter Command to RAF Technical Training Command and the entire site became known as RAF Uxbridge . The RAF School of Education moved into Hillingdon House from RAF <unk> on 10 November . Southern Region Air Traffic Services HQ and the Royal Observer Corps ' South East Communications Centre moved into the house in 1960 . On 1 November , the Southern Region Air Traffic Services headquarters moved into Hillingdon House . The station had been home since the end of the war to the London Area Control Centre , renamed the London Air Traffic Control Centre in 1948 and the Uxbridge Air Traffic Control Centre in 1957 . This eventually transferred to RAF West Drayton , which operated as a satellite station of RAF Uxbridge . HQ Military Air Traffic Operations ( HQ <unk> ) moved into Hillingdon House in January 1965 . 
 During the final years of military ownership , Hillingdon House was occupied by the Service Prosecuting Authority and the Civil Aviation Authority 's Air Proximity Board . The house was Grade II listed on 5 June 1984 . 
 = = = Redevelopment = = = 
 On 31 March 2010 , RAF Uxbridge closed as part of a rationalisation of Ministry of Defence facilities in Greater London . Under redevelopment plans approved by Hillingdon Council in January 2011 , the house will be converted to include a restaurant . Provision has also been made to retain the carpenter 's block beside the house . 
 = Pre @-@ Code Hollywood = 
 Pre @-@ Code Hollywood refers to the brief era in the American film industry between the introduction of sound pictures in 1929 and the enforcement of the Motion Picture Production Code censorship guidelines in 1934 , usually labeled , albeit inaccurately , as the " Hays Code " . Although the Code was adopted in 1930 , oversight was poor and it did not become rigorously enforced until July 1 , 1934 , with the establishment of the PCA . Before that date , movie content was restricted more by local laws , negotiations between the Studio Relations Committee ( SRC ) and the major studios , and popular opinion , than strict adherence to the Hays Code , which was often ignored by Hollywood filmmakers . 
 As a result , films in the late 1920s and early 1930s included sexual innuendo , miscegenation , profanity , illegal drug use , promiscuity , prostitution , infidelity , abortion , intense violence , and homosexuality . Strong female characters were ubiquitous , in such films as Female , Baby Face , and Red @-@ Headed Woman . Gangsters in films like The Public Enemy , Little Caesar , and Scarface were seen by many as heroic rather than evil . Along with featuring stronger female characters , films examined female subject matters that would not be revisited until decades later in American films . Nefarious characters were seen to profit from their deeds , in some cases without significant repercussions , and drug use was a topic of several films . Many of Hollywood 's biggest stars such as Clark Gable , Barbara Stanwyck , Joan Blondell and Edward G. Robinson got their start in the era . Other stars who excelled during this period , however , like Ruth Chatterton ( who decamped to England ) and Warren William ( the so @-@ called " king of Pre @-@ Code " , who died in 1948 ) , would wind up essentially forgotten by the general public within a generation . 
 Beginning in late 1933 and escalating throughout the first half of 1934 , American Roman Catholics launched a campaign against what they deemed the immorality of American cinema . This , plus a potential government takeover of film censorship and social research seeming to indicate that movies which were seen to be immoral could promote bad behavior , was enough pressure to force the studios to capitulate to greater oversight . 
 = = Origins of the Code = = 
 In 1922 , after some risqué films and a series of off @-@ screen scandals involving Hollywood stars , the studios enlisted beacon of rectitude and Presbyterian elder William H. " Will " Hays to rehabilitate Hollywood 's image . Hays , later nicknamed the motion picture " Czar " , was paid the then @-@ lavish sum of $ 100 @,@ 000 a year ( equivalent to more than $ 1 @.@ 4 million in 2014 dollars ) . Hays , Postmaster General under Warren G. Harding and former head of the Republican National Committee , served for 25 years as president of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America ( MPPDA ) , where he " defended the industry from attacks , recited soothing nostrums , and negotiated treaties to cease hostilities . " Hollywood mimicked the decision Major League Baseball had made in hiring judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis as League Commissioner the previous year to quell questions about the integrity of baseball in wake of the 1919 World Series gambling scandal ; The New York Times called Hays the " screen Landis " . 
 Hays introduced a set of recommendations dubbed " The Formula " in 1924 , which the studios were advised to heed , and asked filmmakers to describe to his office the plots of pictures they were planning . The Supreme Court had already decided unanimously in 1915 in Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio that free speech did not extend to motion pictures , and while there had been token attempts to clean up the movies before , such as when the studios formed the National Association of the Motion Picture Industry ( <unk> ) in 1916 , little had come of the efforts . 
 = = = Creation of the Code and its contents = = = 
 In 1929 , an American Roman Catholic layman Martin Quigley , editor of the prominent trade paper Motion Picture Herald , and Father Daniel A. Lord , a Jesuit priest , created a code of standards ( which Hays liked immensely ) , and submitted it to the studios . Lord 's concerns centered on the effects sound film had on children , whom he considered especially susceptible to their allure . Several studio heads , including Irving Thalberg of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) , met with Lord and Quigley in February 1930 . After some revisions , they agreed to the stipulations of the Code . One of the main motivating factors in adopting the Code was to avoid direct government intervention . It was the responsibility of the Studio Relations Committee , headed by Colonel Jason S. Joy , to supervise film production and advise the studios when changes or cuts were required . 
 The Code was divided into two parts . The first was a set of " general principles " which mostly concerned morality . The second was a set of " particular applications " which was an exacting list of items that could not be depicted . Some restrictions , such as the ban on homosexuality or the use of specific curse words , were never directly mentioned but were assumed to be understood without clear demarcation . <unk> , the mixing of the races , was forbidden . It stated that the notion of an " adults @-@ only policy " would be a dubious , ineffective strategy that would be difficult to enforce . However , it did allow that " maturer minds may easily understand and accept without harm subject matter in plots which does younger people positive harm . " If children were supervised and the events implied elliptically , the code allowed what Brandeis University cultural historian Thomas Doherty called " the possibility of a cinematically inspired thought crime " . 
 The Code sought not only to determine what could be portrayed on screen , but also to promote traditional values . Sexual relations outside of marriage could not be portrayed as attractive and beautiful , presented in a way that might arouse passion , nor be made to seem right and permissible . All criminal action had to be punished , and neither the crime nor the criminal could elicit sympathy from the audience . Authority figures had to be treated respectfully , and the clergy could not be portrayed as comic characters or villains . Under some circumstances , politicians , police officers and judges could be villains , as long as it was clear that they were the exception to the rule . 
 The entire document contained Catholic undertones and stated that art must be handled carefully because it could be " morally evil in its effects " and because its " deep moral significance " was unquestionable . The Catholic influence on the Code was initially kept secret . A recurring theme was " throughout , the audience feels sure that evil is wrong and good is right . " The Code contained an addendum commonly referred to as the Advertising Code , which regulated film advertising copy and imagery . 
 = = = Enforcement = = = 
 On February 19 , 1930 , Variety published the entire contents of the Code and predicted that state film censorship boards would soon become obsolete . However , the men obligated to enforce the code , Jason Joy , who was the head of the Committee until 1932 , and his successor , Dr. James Wingate , were generally ineffective . The very first film the office reviewed , The Blue Angel , which was passed by Joy without revision , was considered indecent by a California censor . Although there were several instances where Joy negotiated cuts from films , and there were indeed definite — albeit loose — constraints , a significant amount of lurid material made it to the screen . 
 Joy had to review 500 films a year using a small staff and little power . The Hays office did not have the authority to order studios to remove material from a film in 1930 , but instead worked by reasoning and sometimes pleading with them . Complicating matters , the appeals process ultimately put the responsibility for making the final decision in the hands of the studios themselves . 
 One factor in ignoring the Code was the fact that some found such censorship prudish . This was a period in which the Victorian era was sometimes ridiculed as being naïve and backward . When the Code was announced , The Nation , a liberal periodical , attacked it . The publication stated that if crime were never presented in a sympathetic light , then , taken literally , " law " and " justice " would become the same . Therefore , events such as the Boston Tea Party could not be portrayed . And if clergy were always to be presented positively , then hypocrisy could not be examined either . The Outlook agreed , and , unlike Variety , predicted from the beginning the Code would be difficult to enforce . 
 Additionally , the Great Depression of the 1930s led many studios to seek income by any way possible . As films containing racy and violent content resulted in high ticket sales , it seemed reasonable to continue producing such films . Soon , the flouting of the code became an open secret . In 1931 , the Hollywood Reporter mocked the code , and Variety followed suit in 1933 . In the same year as the Variety article , a noted screenwriter stated that " the Hays moral code is not even a joke any more ; it 's just a memory . " 
 = = Early sound film era = = 
 Although the liberalization of sexuality in American film had increased during the 1920s , the pre @-@ Code era is either dated to the start of the sound film era , or more generally to March 1930 , when the Hays Code was first written . Over the protests of <unk> , New York became the first state to take advantage of the Supreme Court 's decision in Mutual Film vs. Ohio by instituting a censorship board in 1921 . Virginia followed suit the following year , and eight individual states had a board by the advent of sound film . 
 Many of these boards were ineffectual . By the 1920s , the New York stage , a frequent source of subsequent screen material , had topless shows ; performances were filled with curse words , mature subject matter , and sexually suggestive dialogue . Early during the sound system conversion process , it became apparent that what might be acceptable in New York would not be so in Kansas . In 1927 , Hays suggested studio executives form a committee to discuss film censorship . Irving G. Thalberg of Metro Goldwyn Mayer ( MGM ) , Sol Wurtzel of Fox , and E. H. Allen of Paramount responded by collaborating on a list they called the " Don 'ts and Be <unk> " , based on items that were challenged by local censor boards , and which consisted of eleven subjects best avoided , and twenty @-@ six to be handled very carefully . The Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) approved the list , and Hays created the SRC to oversee its implementation . But there was still no way to enforce these tenets . The controversy surrounding film standards came to a head in 1929 . 
 Director Cecil B. DeMille was responsible for the increasing discussion of sex in cinema in the 1920s . Starting with Male and Female ( 1919 ) , he made a series of films that examined sex and were highly successful . Films featuring Hollywood 's original " It girl " Clara Bow such as The Saturday Night Kid ( released four days before the October 29 , 1929 , market crash ) highlighted Bow 's sexual attractiveness . 1920s stars such as Bow , Gloria Swanson , and Norma Talmadge freely displayed their sexuality in a straightforward fashion . 
 = = Hollywood during the Great Depression = = 
 The Great Depression presented a unique time for film @-@ making in the United States . The economic disaster brought on by the stock market crash of 1929 changed American values and beliefs in various ways . Themes of American exceptionalism and traditional concepts of personal achievement , self @-@ reliance , and the overcoming of odds lost great currency . Due to the constant empty economic reassurances from politicians in the early years of the Depression , the American public developed an increasingly jaded attitude . 
 The cynicism , challenging of traditional beliefs , and political controversy of Hollywood films during this period mirrored the attitudes of many of their patrons . Also gone was the carefree and adventurous lifestyle of the 1920s . " After two years the Jazz Age seems as far away as the days before the war " , F. Scott Fitzgerald commented in 1931 . In the sense noted by Fitzgerald , understanding the moral climate of the early 1930s is complex . Although films experienced an unprecedented level of freedom and dared to portray things that would be kept hidden for several decades , many in America looked upon the stock market crash as a product of the excesses of the previous decade . In looking back upon the 1920s , events were increasingly seen as occurring in prelude to the market crash . In Dance , Fools , Dance ( 1931 ) , lurid party scenes featuring 1920s flappers are played to excess . Joan Crawford ultimately reforms her ways and is saved ; less fortunate is William Bakewell , who continues on the careless path that leads to his ultimate self @-@ destruction . 
 For Rain or Shine ( 1930 ) , Milton Ager and Jack Yellin composed " Happy Days Are Here Again " . The song was repeated sarcastically by characters in several films such as Under 18 ( 1932 ) and 20 @,@ 000 Years in Sing Sing ( 1933 ) . Less comical was the picture of the United States ' future presented in Heroes for Sale that same year ( 1933 ) , in which a hobo looks into a depressing night and proclaims , " It 's the end of America " . 
 Heroes for Sale was directed by prolific pre @-@ Code director William Wellman and featured silent film star Richard Barthelmess as a World War I veteran cast onto the streets with a morphine addiction from his hospital stay . In Wild Boys of the Road ( 1933 ) , the young man played by Frankie Darrow leads a group of dispossessed juvenile drifters who frequently brawl with the police . Such gangs were common ; around 250 @,@ 000 youths traveled the country by hopping trains or hitchhiking in search of better economic circumstances in the early 1930s . 
 Complicating matters for the studios , the advent of sound film in 1927 required an immense expenditure in sound stages , recording booths , cameras , and movie @-@ theater sound systems , not to mention the new @-@ found artistic complications of producing in a radically altered medium . The studios were in a difficult financial position even before the market crash as the sound conversion process and some risky purchases of theater chains had pushed their finances near the breaking point . These economic circumstances led to a loss of nearly half of the weekly attendance numbers and closure of almost a third of the country 's theaters in the first few years of the depression . Even so , 60 million Americans went to the cinema weekly . 
 Apart from the economic realities of the conversion to sound , were the artistic considerations . Early sound films were often noted for being too verbose . In 1930 , Carl Laemmle criticized the wall @-@ to @-@ wall banter of sound pictures , and director Ernst Lubitsch wondered what the camera was intended for if characters were going to narrate all the onscreen action . The film industry also withstood competition from the home radio , and often characters in films went to great lengths to belittle the medium . The film industry was not above using the new medium to broadcast commercials for its projects however , and occasionally turned radio stars into short feature performers to take advantage of their built @-@ in following . 
 Seething beneath the surface of American life in the Depression was the fear of the angry mob , portrayed in panicked hysteria in films such as Gabriel Over the White House ( 1933 ) , The Mayor of Hell ( 1933 ) , and American Madness ( 1932 ) . Massive wide shots of angry hordes , comprising sometimes hundreds of men , rush into action in terrifyingly efficient uniformity . Groups of agitated men either standing in <unk> , loitering in hobo camps , or marching the streets in protest became a prevalent sight during the Great Depression . The Bonus Army protests of World War I veterans on the capital in Washington , D.C. , on which Hoover unleashed a brutal crackdown , prompted many of the Hollywood depictions . Although social issues were examined more directly in the pre @-@ Code era , Hollywood still largely ignored the Great Depression , as many films sought to ameliorate patrons , rather than incite them . 
 Hays remarked in 1932 : 
 The function of motion pictures is to <unk> . … This we must keep before us at all times and we must realize constantly the fatality of ever permitting our concern with social values to lead us into the realm of propaganda … the American motion picture … owes no civic obligation greater than the honest presentment of clean entertainment and maintains that in supplying effective entertainment , free of propaganda , we serve a high and self @-@ sufficing purpose . 
 = = Social problem films = = 
 Hays and others , such as Samuel Goldwyn , obviously felt that motion pictures presented a form of escapism that served a palliative effect on American moviegoers . Goldwyn had coined the famous dictum , " If you want to send a message , call Western Union " in the Pre @-@ Code era . However , the MPPDA took the opposite stance when questioned about certain so @-@ called " message " films before Congress in 1932 , claiming the audiences ' desire for realism led to certain unsavory social , legal , and political issues being portrayed in film . 
 The length of pre @-@ Code films was usually comparatively short , but that running time often required tighter material and did not affect the impact of message films . Employees ' Entrance ( 1933 ) received the following review from Jonathan Rosenbaum : " As an attack on ruthless capitalism , it goes a lot further than more recent efforts such as Wall Street , and it 's amazing how much plot and character are gracefully shoehorned into 75 minutes . " The film featured pre @-@ Code megastar Warren William ( later dubbed " the king of Pre @-@ Code " ) , " at his magnetic worst " , playing a particularly vile and heartless department store manager who , for example , terminates the jobs of two long @-@ standing male employees , one of whom commits suicide as a result . He also threatens to fire Loretta Young 's character , who pretends to be single to stay employed , unless she sleeps with him , then attempts to ruin her husband after learning she is married . 
 Films which stated a position about a social issue were usually labeled either " propaganda films " or " preachment yarns " . In contrast to Goldwyn and MGM 's definitively Republican stance on social issue films , Warner Brothers , led by New Deal advocate Jack L. Warner , was the most prominent maker of these types of pictures and preferred they be called " Americanism stories " . Pre @-@ Code historian Thomas Doherty has written that two recurring elements marked the so @-@ called preachment yarns . " The first is the exculpatory preface ; the second is the Jazz Age prelude . " The preface was essentially a softened version of a disclaimer that intended to calm any in the audience who disagreed with the film 's message . The Jazz Age prelude was almost singularly used to cast shame on the boisterous behavior of the 1920s . 
 Cabin in the Cotton ( 1932 ) is a Warner Bros. message film about the evils of capitalism . The film takes place in an unspecified southern state where workers are given barely enough to survive and taken advantage of by being charged exorbitant interest rates and high prices by unscrupulous landowners . The film is decidedly anti @-@ capitalist ; however , its preface claims otherwise : 
 In many parts of the South today , there exists an endless dispute between rich land @-@ owners , known as planters , and the poor cotton pickers , known as " <unk> " . The planters supply the tenants with the simple requirements of everyday life and ; in return , the tenants work the land year in and year out . A hundred volumes could be written on the rights and wrongs of both parties , but it is not the object of the producers of Cabin in the Cotton to take sides . We are only concerned with the effort to picture these conditions . 
 In the end , however , the planters admit their wrongdoing and agree to a more equitable distribution of capital . 
 The avaricious businessman remained a recurring character in pre @-@ Code cinema . In The Match King ( 1932 ) , Warren William played an industrialist based on real @-@ life Swedish entrepreneur Ivar Kreuger , himself nicknamed the " Match King " , who attempts to corner the global market on matches . William 's vile character , Paul Kroll , commits robbery , fraud , and murder on his way from a janitor to a captain of industry . When the market collapses in the 1929 crash , Kroll is ruined and commits suicide to avoid imprisonment . William played another unscrupulous businessman in Skyscraper Souls ( 1932 ) : David Dwight , a wealthy banker who owns a building named after himself that is larger than the Empire State Building . He tricks everyone he knows into poverty to appropriate others ' wealth . He is ultimately shot by his secretary ( <unk> Teasdale ) , who then ends the film and her own life by walking off the roof of the skyscraper . 
 Americans ' mistrust and dislike of lawyers was a frequent topic of dissection in social problem films such Lawyer Man ( 1933 ) , State 's Attorney , and The Mouthpiece ( 1932 ) . In films such as Paid ( 1930 ) , the legal system turns innocent characters into criminals . The life of Joan Crawford 's character is ruined and her romantic interest is executed so that she may live free , although she is innocent of the crime for which the district attorney wants to convict her . Religious hypocrisy was addressed in such films as The Miracle Woman ( 1931 ) , starring Barbara Stanwyck and directed by Frank Capra . Stanwyck also portrayed a nurse and initially reluctant heroine who manages to save , via unorthodox means , two young children in danger from nefarious characters ( including Clark Gable as a malevolent chauffeur ) in Night Nurse ( 1931 ) . 
 Countless films dealt with the economic realities of a country struggling to find its next meal . In Blonde Venus ( 1932 ) , Marlene Dietrich 's character resorts to prostitution to feed her child , and Claudette Colbert 's character in It Happened One Night ( 1934 ) gets her comeuppance for throwing a tray of food onto the floor by later finding herself without food or financial resources . Joan Blondell 's character in Big City Blues ( 1932 ) reflects that as a chorus girl she regularly received diamonds and pearls as gifts , but now must content herself with a corned beef sandwich . In Union Depot ( 1932 ) , Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. puts a luscious meal as the first order of business on his itinerary after coming into money . 
 = = = Political releases = = = 
 Unsurprisingly , given the social circumstances , politically oriented social problem films ridiculed politicians and portrayed them as incompetent <unk> , scoundrels , and liars . In The Dark Horse ( 1932 ) , Warren William is again enlisted , this time to get an imbecile , who is accidentally in the running for Governor , elected . The candidate wins the election despite his incessant , embarrassing mishaps . Washington Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round portrayed the state of a political system stuck in neutral . Columbia Pictures nearly released the film with a scene of the public execution of a politician as the climax before deciding to cut it . 
 Cecil B. DeMille released This Day and Age in 1933 , and it stands in stark contrast to his other films of the period . Filmed shortly after DeMille had completed a five @-@ month tour of the Soviet Union , This Day and Age takes place in America and features several children torturing a gangster who got away with the murder of a popular local shopkeeper . The youngsters are seen lowering the gangster into a vat of rats when the police arrive , and their response is to encourage the youths to continue this . The film ends with the youngsters taking the gangster to a local judge and forcing the magistrate to conduct a trial in which the outcome is never in doubt . 
 The need for strong leaders who could take charge and steer America out of its crisis is seen in Gabriel Over the White House ( 1933 ) , about a benevolent dictator who takes control of the United States . Walter Huston stars as a weak @-@ willed , ineffectual president ( likely modeled after Hoover ) who is inhabited by the archangel Gabriel upon being knocked unconscious . The spirit 's behavior is similar to that of Abraham Lincoln . The president solves the nation 's unemployment crisis and executes an Al Capone @-@ type criminal who has continually flouted the law . 
 Dictators were not just glorified in fiction . Columbia 's Mussolini Speaks ( 1933 ) was a 76 @-@ minute paean to the Fascist leader , narrated by NBC radio commentator Lowell Thomas . After showing some of the progress Italy has made during Il Duce 's 10 @-@ year reign , Thomas opines , " This is a time when a dictator comes in handy ! " The film was viewed by over 175 @,@ 000 jubilant people during its first two weeks at the cavernous Palace Theater in Albany , New York . 
 The election of Franklin Delano Roosevelt ( FDR ) in 1932 quelled the public affection for dictators . As the country became increasingly enthralled with FDR , who was featured in countless newsreels , it exhibited less desire for alternative forms of government . Many Hollywood films reflected this new optimism . Heroes for Sale , despite being a tremendously bleak and at times anti @-@ American film , ends on a positive note as the New Deal appears as a sign of optimism . When Wild Boys of the Road ( 1933 ) , directed by William Wellman , reaches its conclusion , a dispossessed juvenile delinquent is in court expecting a jail sentence . However the judge lets the boy go free , revealing to him the symbol of the New Deal behind his desk , and tells him " [ t ] hings are going to be better here now , not only here in New York , but all over the country . " A box @-@ office casualty of this hopefulness was Gabriel Over the White House , which entered production during the Hoover era malaise and sought to capitalize on it . By the time the film was released on March 31 , 1933 , FDR 's election had produced a level of hopefulness in America that rendered the film 's message obsolete . 
 Adolf Hitler 's rise to power in Germany and his regime 's anti @-@ Semitic policies significantly affected American pre @-@ Code filmmaking . Although Hitler had become unpopular in many parts of the United States , Germany was still a voluminous importer of American films and the studios wanted to appease the German government . The ban on Jews and negative portrayals of Germany in the Fatherland even led to a significant reduction in work for Jews in Hollywood until after the end of World War II . As a result , only two social problem films released by independent film companies addressed the mania in Germany during the pre @-@ Code era ( Are We Civilized ? and Hitler 's Reign of Terror ) . 
 In 1933 , Herman J. Mankiewicz and producer Sam Jaffe announced they were working on a picture , to be titled Mad Dog of Europe , which was intended to be a full @-@ scale attack on Hitler . Jaffe had quit his job at RKO Pictures to make the film . Hays summoned the pair to his office and told them to cease production as they were causing needless headaches for the studios . Germany had threatened to seize all the properties of the Hollywood producers in Germany and ban the import of any future American films . 
 = = Crime films = = 
 In the early 1900s , the United States was still primarily a rural country , especially in self @-@ identity . D. W. Griffith 's The Musketeers of Pig Alley ( 1912 ) is one of the earliest American films to feature urban organized crime . Prohibition 's arrival in 1920 created an environment where anyone who wanted to drink had to consort with criminals , especially in urban areas . Nonetheless , the urban @-@ crime genre was mostly ignored until 1927 when Underworld , which is recognized as the first gangster movie , became a surprise hit . According to the Encyclopedia of Hollywood entry on Underworld , " The film established the fundamental elements of the gangster movie : a hoodlum hero ; ominous , night @-@ shrouded city streets ; floozies ; and a blazing finale in which the cops cut down the protagonist . " Gangster films such as Thunderbolt ( 1929 ) , and Doorway to Hell were released to capitalize on Underworld 's popularity , with Thunderbolt being described as " a virtual remake " of the film . Other late 1920s crime films investigated the connection between mobsters and Broadway productions in movies such as Lights of New York ( 1928 ) , Tenderloin ( 1928 ) and Broadway ( 1929 ) . 
 The Hays Office had never officially recommended banning violence in any form in the 1920s — unlike profanity , the drug trade or prostitution — but advised that it be handled carefully . New York 's censor board was more thorough than that of any other state , missing only around 50 of the country 's 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 300 annual releases . In 1927 – 28 the violent scenes removed were all of those in which a gun was pointed at the camera , some instances in which guns were pointed " at or into the body of another character " , many shots where machine guns were featured , scenes where criminals shot at law enforcement officers , some scenes involving stabbing or knife brandishing ( audiences considered stabbings more disturbing than shootings ) , most whippings , several involving choking , torture , or electrocution , and any scenes which could be considered educational in their depiction of crime methods . Sadistic violence and reaction shots showing the faces of individuals on the receiving end of violence were considered especially sensitive areas . The Code later recommended against scenes showing robbery , theft , safe @-@ cracking , arson , " the use of firearms " , " dynamiting of trains , machines , and buildings " , and " brutal killings " , on the basis that they would be rejected by local censors . 
 = = = Birth of the Hollywood gangster = = = 
 No motion picture genre of the Pre @-@ Code era was more incendiary than the gangster film ; neither preachment yarns nor vice films so outraged the moral guardians or unnerved the city fathers as the high caliber scenarios that made screen heroes out of stone killers . 
 In the early 1930s , several real @-@ life criminals became celebrities . Two in particular captured the American imagination : Al Capone and John Dillinger . Gangsters like Capone had transformed the perception of entire cities . Capone gave Chicago its " reputation as the locus classicus of American <unk> , a cityscape where bullet @-@ proof roadsters with tommygun @-@ toting hoodlums on running boards careened around State Street spraying fusillades of slugs into flower shop windows and mowing down the competition in blood @-@ spattered garages " . Capone appeared on the cover of Time magazine in 1930 . He was even offered 7 @-@ figure sums by two major Hollywood studios to appear in a film but declined . Dillinger became a national celebrity as a bank robber who eluded arrest and escaped confinement several times . He had become the most celebrated public outlaw since Jesse James . His father appeared in a popular series of newsreels giving police homespun advice on how to catch his son . Dillinger 's popularity rose so quickly that Variety joked that " if Dillinger remains at large much longer and more such interviews are obtained , there may be some petitions circulated to make him our president . " Hays wrote a cablegram to all the studios in March 1934 mandating that Dillinger not be portrayed in any motion picture . 
 The genre entered a new level following the release of Little Caesar ( 1931 ) , which featured Edward G. Robinson as gangster Rico Bandello . Caesar , along with The Public Enemy starring James Cagney as Tom Powers and Scarface ( 1932 ) , featuring Paul Muni as Tony <unk> , were , by standards of the time , incredibly violent films that created a new type of anti @-@ hero . Nine gangster films were released in 1930 , 26 in 1931 , 28 in 1932 , and 15 in 1933 , when the genre 's popularity began to subside after the end of Prohibition . The backlash against gangster films was swift . In 1931 , Jack Warner announced that his studio would stop making them and that he himself had never allowed his 15 @-@ year @-@ old son to see them . 
 Generally considered the grandfather of gangster films , in Little Caesar , Robinson as Rico and his close friend Joe Massara ( Douglas Fairbanks , Jr . ) move to Chicago . Joe wants to go straight and meets a woman . Rico , however , seeks a life of crime and joins the gang of Sam Vettori . He rises to the rank of boss of the crime family . After becoming concerned his friend will betray him he threatens him , at which point Joe 's girlfriend goes to the police . Unable to bring himself to kill Joe and eliminate the witness against him , Rico goes into hiding . He is coaxed out by the police , who publish that he is a coward to the press . Rico is killed in a blaze of gunfire ; his last words are " Mother of mercy , is this the end of Rico ? " Robinson was initially cast in a small role but persuaded the film 's producer to let him play the lead . Wingate , who then headed New York 's censorship board , told Hays that he was flooded with complaints from people who saw kids in theaters nationwide " applaud the gang leader as a hero . " The success of Little Caesar inspired Fox 's The Secret Six ( 1931 ) and Quick Millions ( 1931 ) , and Paramount 's City Streets ( 1931 ) , but the next big Hollywood gangster would come from Warners . 
 William Wellman 's The Public Enemy ( 1931 ) , released by Warner Brothers , features another career @-@ defining performance , this time James Cagney as Tom Powers . The film is similar to the template set in Little Caesar in that it follows Powers from his rise to his eventual fall in the world of crime . The film was partially based on the real life of Chicago gangster Dion O 'Banion . Cagney 's character is contrasted with his puritanical brother who wants him to go straight ; their mother is at the center of the conflict . Tom Powers is egotistical , amoral , heartless , ruthless , and extremely violent . The best @-@ remembered scene in the picture is referred to as the " grapefruit scene " : when Cagney 's girlfriend ( Mae Clarke ) angers him during breakfast , he shoves half a grapefruit in her face . Instead of scenes from the film , its trailer contained a voiceover warning of the picture 's intensity and showed a gun being fired directly at the camera . 
 Cagney was even more violent towards women in the gangster film Picture Snatcher ( 1933 ) : in one scene , he knocks out an amorous woman whose feelings he does not reciprocate and violently throws her into the backseat of his car . In April 1931 , the same month as the release of The Public Enemy , Hays recruited former police chief August Vollmer to conduct a study on the effect gangster pictures had on children . After he had finished his work , Vollmer stated that gangster films were innocuous and even overly favorable in depicting the police . Although Hays used the results to defend the film industry , the New York State censorship board was not impressed , and from 1930 through 1932 , removed 2 @,@ 200 crime scenes from pictures . 
 Some critics have named Scarface ( 1932 ) as the most incendiary pre @-@ Code gangster film . Directed by Howard Hawks and starring Muni as Tony Camonte , the film is partially based on the life of Al Capone and incorporates details of Capone 's biography into the storyline . The film begins with Tony Camonte ( Paul Muni ) working for Johnny Lovo ( Osgood Perkins ) , but he 's dissatisfied with being a subordinate and he 's also attracted to Lovo 's girlfriend Poppy ( Karen Morley ) . He has an <unk> controlling relationship with his sister Francesca ( Ann Dvorak ) – whom he expects to remain chaste — that many critics have described as incestuous . Lovo warns Camonte to leave the North Side alone as it is controlled by a rival mob , but he ignores this warning and launches a series of executions and extortions that result in a war with the North Side gang . Camonte then forcefully takes the gang over from Lovo , who tries unsuccessfully to kill him for this . Camonte 's attempt to kill Lovo is more successful , and Poppy happily becomes his girl . When Camonte finds Francesca in a hotel room with his closest friend , coin @-@ flipping gangster <unk> Rinaldo ( George Raft ) , he kills Rinaldo in a rage . Afterward , he becomes despondent when he learns that the couple had wanted to surprise him with the news that they had gotten married . 
 The production of Scarface was troubled from the start . The Hays office warned producer Howard Hughes not to make the film ; when it was completed in late 1931 , the Hays office demanded numerous changes including a conclusion where <unk> was captured , tried , convicted , and hanged and that the film carry the subtitle Shame of a Nation . Hughes sent the film to numerous state censorship boards , saying that he hoped to show that the film was made to combat the " gangster menace " . After he was unable to get the film past the New York State censor board ( then headed by Wingate ) even after the changes , Hughes sued the New York board and won , allowing him to release the film in a version close to its intended form . When other local censors refused to release the edited version , the Hays Office sent Jason Joy around to them to assure them that the cycle of gangster films of this nature was ending . 
 Scarface provoked outrage mainly because of its unprecedented violence , but also for its shifts of tone from serious to comedic . Dave Kehr , writing in the Chicago Reader , stated that the film blends " comedy and horror in a manner that suggests Chico Marx let loose with a live machine gun . " In one scene , Camonte is inside a cafe while a torrent of machine @-@ gun fire from the car of a rival gang is headed his way ; when the barrage is over , Camonte picks up one of the newly released tommy guns the gangsters dropped and exhibits childlike wonder and unrestrained excitement over the new toy . Civic leaders became furious that gangsters like Capone ( who was also the blatant inspiration for Little Caesar ) were being applauded in movie houses all across America . The screenplay , adapted by Ben Hecht who was a journalist in Chicago , contained biographical details for Muni 's character in Scarface that were so obviously taken from Capone , and the detail so close , that it was impossible not to draw the parallels . 
 One of the factors that made gangster pictures so subversive was that , in the difficult economic times of the Depression , there already existed the viewpoint that the only way to get financial success was through crime . The Kansas City Times argued that although adults may not be particularly affected , these films were " misleading , contaminating , and often demoralizing to children and youth . " Exacerbating the problem , some cinema theater owners advertised gangster pictures with a singular irresponsibility . Real @-@ life murders were tied into promotions and " theater lobbies displayed tommy guns and <unk> " . The situation reached such a nexus that the studios had to ask exhibitors to tone down the gimmickry in their promotions . 
 = = = Prison films = = = 
 Prison films of the pre @-@ Code era often involved men and women who were unjustly incarcerated , and films set in prisons of the north tended to portray them as a bastion of solidarity against the crumbling social system of the Great Depression . Sparked by the real @-@ life Ohio penitentiary fire on April 21 , 1930 , in which guards refused to release prisoners from their cells , causing 300 deaths , the films depicted the inhumane conditions inside prisons in the early 1930s . The genre was composed of two archetypes : the prison film and the chain gang film . In the prison film , large hordes of men move about in identical uniforms , resigned to their fate , they live by a well defined code . In the chain gang film , Southern prisoners were subjected to a draconian system of discipline in the blazing outdoor heat , where they were treated terribly by their ruthless captors . 
 The prototype of the prison genre was The Big House ( 1930 ) . In The Big House , Robert Montgomery plays a squirmy inmate who is sentenced to six years after committing vehicular manslaughter while under the influence . His cell mates are a murderer played by Wallace Beery and a forger played by Chester Morris . The picture features future staples of the prison genre such as solitary confinement , informers , riots , visitations , an escape , and the codes of prison life . The protagonist , Montgomery , ends up being a loathsome character , a coward who will sell anyone in the prison out to get an early release . The film was banned in Ohio , the site of the deadly prison riots that inspired it . Numbered Men , The Criminal Code , Shadow of the Law , Convict 's Code , and others , from no less than seven studios , followed . However , prison films mainly appealed to men , and had weak box office performances as a result . 
 Studios also produced children 's prison films which addressed the juvenile delinquency problems of America in the Depression . The Mayor of Hell for instance , featured kids killing a murderously abusive reform school overseer without retribution . 
 = = = = Chain gang films = = = = 
 The most searing criticism of the American prison system was reserved for the depiction of Southern chain gangs , with I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang being by far the most influential . I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang , which is based on the true story of Robert . E. Burns , is by far the most famous of the early 1930s chain gang films . In the first half of 1931 , True Detective Mysteries magazine had published Burns ' work over six issues , and it was released as a book in January 1932 . Decorated veteran James Allen ( Paul Muni ) returns from World War I a changed man , and seeks an alternative to the tedious job that he left behind . He travels the country looking for construction work . His ultimate goal is to become involved in construction planning . Allen follows a hobo he met at a homeless shelter into a cafe , taking him up on his offer of a free meal . When the hobo attempts to rob the eatery , Allen is charged as an accessory , convicted of stealing a few dollars , and sentenced to ten years in a chain gang . The men are chained together and transported to a quarry to break rocks every day . Even when unchained from each other , shackles remain around their ankles at all times . Allen convinces a large black prisoner who has particularly good aim to hit the shackles on his ankles with a sledgehammer to bend them . He removes his feet from the bent shackles , and in a famous sequence , escapes through the woods while being chased by bloodhounds . On the outside he develops a new identity and becomes a respected developer in Chicago . He is blackmailed into marriage by a woman he does not love who finds out his secret . When he threatens to leave her for a young woman he has fallen in love with , she turns him in . His case becomes a cause célèbre , and he agrees to turn himself in under the agreement that he will serve 90 days and then be released . He is tricked however , and not freed at the agreed upon time . This forces him to escape again , and he seeks out the young woman , telling her that they cannot be together because he will always be hunted . The film ends with her asking him how he survives , and his ominous reply from the darkness : " I steal . " 
 Although based on reality , Chain Gang changes the facts slightly to appeal to Depression @-@ era audiences by making Allen 's return home one to a country that is struggling economically , even though Burns returned to the roaring twenties . The film 's bleak , anti @-@ establishment ending shocked audiences . Laughter in Hell , a 1933 film directed by Edward L. Cahn and starring Pat O 'Brien , was inspired in part by I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang . O 'Brien plays a railroad engineer who kills his wife and her lover in a jealous rage , and is sent to prison . The dead man 's brother ends up being the warden of the prison and torments O 'Brien 's character . O 'Brien and several others revolt , killing the warden and escaping with his new lover ( Gloria Stuart ) . The film , rediscovered in 2012 , drew controversy for its lynching scene in which several black men were hanged . Reports vary if the blacks were hanged alongside other white men , or by themselves . The New Age ( an African American weekly newspaper ) film critic praised the filmmakers for being courageous enough to depict the atrocities that were occurring in some Southern states . 
 = = Sex films = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 As films featuring prurient elements performed well at the box office , after the crackdown on crime films , Hollywood increased its production of pictures featuring the seven deadly sins . In 1932 , Warner Bros formed an official policy decreeing that " two out of five stories should be hot " , and that nearly all films could benefit by " adding something having to do with ginger . " Filmmakers began putting in overly suggestive material they knew would never reach theaters in hopes that lesser offenses would survive the cutting @-@ room floor . MGM screenwriter Donald Ogden Stewart said that " [ Joy and Wingate ] wouldn 't want to take out too much , so you would give them five things to take out to satisfy the Hays Office — and you would get away with murder with what they left in . " Films such as Laughing Sinners , Safe in Hell , The Devil is Driving , Merrily We Go to Hell , Laughter in Hell , and The Road to Ruin were provocative in their mere titles . Studios marketed their films , sometimes dishonestly , by inventing suggestive tag lines and lurid titles , even going so far as to hold in @-@ house contests for thinking up provocative titles for screenplays . Commonly labeled " sex films " by the censors , these pictures offended taste in more categories than just sexuality . According to a Variety analysis of 440 pictures produced in 1932 – 33 , 352 had " some sex slant " , with 145 possessing " questionable sequences " , and 44 being " critically sexual " . Variety summarized that " over 80 % of the world 's chief picture output was … flavored with bedroom essence . " Attempts to create films for adults only ( dubbed " <unk> " ) wound up bringing large audiences of all ages to cinemas . 
 Posters and publicity photos were often tantalizing . Women appeared in poses and garb not even glimpsed in the films themselves . In some cases actresses with small parts in films ( or in the case of Dolores Murray in her publicity still for The Common Law , no part at all ) appeared scantily clad . Hays became outraged at the steamy pictures circulating in newspapers around the country . The original Hays Code contained an often @-@ ignored note about advertising imagery , but he wrote an entirely new advertising screed in the style of the Ten Commandments that contained a set of twelve prohibitions . The first seven addressed imagery . They prohibited women in undergarments , women raising their skirts , suggestive poses , kissing , necking , and other suggestive material . The last five concerned advertising copy and prohibited misrepresentation of the film 's contents , " salacious copy " , and the word " courtesan " . Studios found their way around the restrictions and published increasingly racy imagery . Ultimately this backfired in 1934 when a billboard in Philadelphia was placed outside the home of Cardinal Dennis Dougherty . Severely offended , Dougherty took his revenge by helping to launch the motion @-@ picture boycott which would later facilitate enforcement of the Code . A commonly repeated theme by those supporting censorship , and one mentioned in the Code itself was the notion that the common people needed to be saved from themselves by the more refined cultural elite . 
 Despite the obvious attempts to appeal to red @-@ blooded American males , most of the patrons of sex pictures were female . Variety squarely blamed women for the increase in vice pictures : 
 Women are responsible for the ever @-@ increasing public taste in sensationalism and sexy stuff . Women who make up the bulk of the picture audiences are also the majority reader of the tabloids , scandal sheets , flashy magazines , and erotic books … the mind of the average man seems wholesome in comparison . … Women love dirt , nothing shocks ' em . 
 Pre @-@ Code female audiences liked to indulge in the carnal lifestyles of mistresses and <unk> while at the same time taking joy in their usually inevitable downfall in the closing scenes of the picture . While gangster films were claimed to corrupt the morals of young boys , vice films were blamed for threatening the purity of adolescent women . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 In pre @-@ Code Hollywood , the sex film became synonymous with women 's pictures — Darryl F. Zanuck once told Wingate that he was ordered by Warner Brothers ' New York corporate office to reserve 20 % of the studio 's output for " women 's pictures , which inevitably means sex pictures . " Vice films typically tacked on endings where the most sin @-@ filled characters were either punished or redeemed . Films explored Code @-@ defying subjects in an unapologetic manner with the premise that an end @-@ reel moment could redeem all that had gone before . The concept of marriage was often tested in films such as The Prodigal ( 1931 ) , in which a woman is having an affair with a seedy character , and later falls in love with her brother @-@ in @-@ law . When her mother @-@ in @-@ law steps in at the end of the film , it is to encourage one son to grant his wife a divorce so she can marry his brother , with whom she is obviously in love . The older woman proclaims the message of the film in a line near the end : " This the twentieth century . Go out into the world and get what happiness you can . " 
 In Madame Satan ( 1930 ) , adultery is explicitly condoned and used as a sign for a wife that she needs to act in a more enticing way to maintain her husband 's interest . In Secrets ( 1933 ) , a husband admits to serial adultery , only this time he repents and the marriage is saved . The films took aim at what was already a damaged institution . During the Great Depression , relations between spouses often deteriorated due to financial strain , marriages lessened , and husbands abandoned their families in increased numbers . Marriage rates continually declined in the early 1930s , finally rising in 1934 , the final year of the pre @-@ Code era , and although divorce rates lowered , this is likely because desertion was a more likely method of separation . Consequently , female characters , such as Ruth Chatterton 's in Female , live promiscuous bachelorette lifestyles , and control their own financial destiny ( Chatterton supervises an auto factory ) without regret . 
 One of the most prominent examples of punishment for immoral transgressions in vice film can be seen in The Story of Temple Drake , based on the William Faulkner novel Sanctuary . In Drake , the title character ( Miriam Hopkins ) , a cold , vapid " party girl " , the daughter of a judge , is raped and forced into prostitution by a backwoods character , and according to pre @-@ Code scholar Thomas Doherty , the film implies that the deeds done to her are in recompense for her immorality . Later , in court , she confesses that she killed the man who raped and kept her . She faints after this confession , upon which her lawyer carries her out , leading to a " happy ending " . In the RKO film Christopher Strong , Katharine Hepburn plays an aviator who becomes pregnant from an affair with a married man . She commits suicide by flying her plane directly upwards until she breaks the world altitude record , at which point she takes off her oxygen mask and plummets to earth . Strong female characters often ended films as " reformed " women , after experiencing situations in which their progressive outlook proved faulty . 
 Female protagonists in aggressively sexual vice films were usually of two general kinds : the bad girl or the fallen woman . In so @-@ called " bad girl " pictures , female characters profited from promiscuity and immoral behavior . Jean Harlow , an actress who was by all reports a lighthearted , kind person offscreen , frequently played bad girl characters and dubbed them " sex vultures " . Two of the most prominent examples of bad girl films , Red @-@ Headed Woman and Baby Face , featured Harlow and Stanwyck . In Red @-@ Headed Woman Harlow plays a secretary determined to sleep her way into a more luxurious lifestyle , and in Baby Face Stanwyck is an abused runaway determined to use sex to advance herself financially . 
 In Baby Face Stanwyck moves to New York and sleeps her way to the top of Gotham Trust . Her progress is illustrated in a recurring visual metaphor of the movie camera panning ever upward along the front of Gotham Trust 's skyscraper . Men are driven mad with lust over her and they commit murder , attempt suicide , and are ruined financially for associating with her before she mends her ways in the final reel . In another departure from post Code films , Stanwyck 's sole companion for the duration of the picture is a black woman named Chico ( Theresa Harris ) , whom she took with her when she ran away from home at age 14 . 
 Red @-@ Headed Woman begins with Harlow seducing her boss Bill <unk> and intentionally breaking up his marriage . During her seductions , he tries to resist and slaps her , at which point she looks at him deliriously and says " Do it again , I like it ! Do it again ! " They eventually marry but Harlow seduces a wealthy aged industrialist who is in business with her husband so that she can move to New York . Although this plan succeeds , she is cast aside when she is discovered having an affair with her chauffeur , in essence cheating on her paramour . Harlow shoots <unk> , nearly killing him . When she is last seen in the film , she is in France in the back seat of a limousine with an elderly wealthy gentleman being driven along by the same chauffeur . The film was a boon to Harlow 's career and has been described as a " trash masterpiece " . 
 Cinema classified as " fallen woman " films was often inspired by real @-@ life hardships women endured in the early Depression era workplace . The men in power in these pictures frequently sexually harassed the women working for them . Remaining employed often became a question of a woman 's virtue . In She Had to Say Yes ( 1933 ) , starring Loretta Young , a struggling department store offers dates with its female stenographers as an incentive to customers . Employees ' Entrance was marketed with the tag line " See what out of work girls are up against these days . " Joy complained in 1932 of another genre , the " kept woman " film , which presented adultery as an alternative to the tedium of an unhappy marriage . 
 Homosexuals were portrayed in such pre @-@ Code films as Our Betters ( 1933 ) , Footlight Parade ( 1933 ) , Only Yesterday ( 1933 ) , Sailor 's Luck ( 1933 ) , and Cavalcade ( 1933 ) . Although the topic was dealt with much more openly than in the decades that followed , the characterizations of gay and lesbian characters were usually derogatory . Gay male characters were portrayed as flighty with high voices , existing merely as buffoonish supporting characters . In films like Ladies They Talk About , lesbians were portrayed as rough , burly characters , but in DeMille 's The Sign of the Cross , a female Christian slave is brought to a Roman prefect and seduced in dance by a statuesque lesbian dancer . Fox nearly became the first American studio to use the word " gay " to refer to homosexuality , but the SRC made the studio muffle the word in the soundtrack of all <unk> that reached theaters . Bisexual actress Marlene Dietrich cultivated a cross @-@ gender fan base and started a trend when she began wearing men 's suits . She caused a commotion when she appeared at the premiere of The Sign of the Cross in 1932 in a tuxedo , complete with top hat and cane . The appearance of homosexual characters was at its height in 1933 ; in that year , Hays declared that all gay male characters would be removed from pictures . Paramount took advantage of the negative publicity Dietrich generated by signing a largely meaningless agreement stating that they would not portray women in male attire . 
 = = Comedy = = 
 In the harsh economic times of the early Depression , films and performers often featured an alienated , cynical , and socially dangerous comic style . As with political films , comedy softened with the election of FDR and the optimism of the New Deal . Characters in the pre @-@ Code era frequently engaged in comedic duels of escalating sexual innuendo . In Employee 's Entrance , a woman enters the office of a scoundrel boss who remarks , " Oh , it 's you — I didn 't recognize you with all your clothes on . " Racial stereotypes were usually employed when ethnic characters appeared . Blacks in particular were usually the butt of the wisecrack , never the author . The most acknowledged black comedian was <unk> <unk> , whose slow @-@ witted comedic character was only meant to be successful in an unintentional manner , with himself as the punchline . 
 The New York stage was filled with ribald humor and sexually offensive comedy ; when movie producers started to put wisecracks in their sound pictures , they sought New York performers . Popular comics such as the Marx Brothers got their start on Broadway in front of live audiences . Censors complained when they had to keep up with the deluge of jokes in pictures in the early 1930s , some of which were designed to go over their heads . The comic banter of some early sound films was rapid @-@ fire , non @-@ stop , and frequently exhausting for the audience by the final reel . 
 Mae West had already established herself as a comedic performer when her 1926 Broadway show Sex made national headlines . Tried and convicted of indecency by the New York City District Attorney , she served eight days in prison . West carefully constructed a stage persona and carried it over into her interviews and personal appearances . Despite her voluptuous physique , most of her appeal lay in her suggestive manner . She became a wordsmith in the art of the come @-@ on and the seductive line , and despite her obvious appeal to male audiences , was popular with women as well . Over the cries of the censors , West got her start in the film Night After Night ( 1932 ) , which starred George Raft and Constance Cummings , as a Texas Guinan @-@ esque supporting character . She agreed to appear in the film only after producers agreed to let her write her own lines . In West 's first line on film , after a hat check girl remarks " Goodness , what beautiful diamonds " , West replies , " Goodness had nothing to do with it , <unk> . " Raft , who had wanted Texas Guinan herself for the role that went to West , later wrote , " In this picture , Mae West stole everything but the cameras . " She went on to make She Done Him Wrong in 1933 , which became a huge box office hit , grossing $ 3 million against a $ 200 @,@ 000 budget , and then nine months later wrote and starred in I 'm No Angel . She became such a success that her career saved Paramount from financial ruin . 
 The arrival of sound film created a new job market for writers of screen dialogue . Many newspaper journalists moved to California and became studio @-@ employed screenwriters . This resulted in a series of fast @-@ talking comedy pictures featuring newsmen . The Front Page , later re @-@ made as the much less cynical and more sentimental post @-@ Code His Girl Friday ( 1940 ) , was adapted from the Broadway play by Chicago newsmen , and Hollywood screenwriters , Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur . It was based on Hecht 's experiences working as a reporter for the Chicago Daily Journal . 
 The Marx Brothers had been stage performers since the early 1900s . By the 1930s , their act consisted of wisecracking leader Groucho , the chronically silent Harpo , the overly ethnic Chico , and the strangely normal Zeppo . The plot of the seminal comedy Duck Soup ( 1933 ) is quite convoluted . Groucho 's plebeian character is named king of the fictional <unk> , and he is pursued by two bumbling spies played by Chico and Harpo . Zeppo plays a typically normal secretary . Groucho 's con artist character leads <unk> into war with neighboring Sylvania . The plot essentially exists to provide a framework for several comedic bits and long sketches . The film was unsuccessful at the box office and the anarchic zaniness and subversive nature of the comedy in the film would be unmatched in the brothers ' post @-@ Code work , which was more <unk> burlesque . 
 = = = Cartoons = = = 
 Theatrical cartoons were also covered by the Production Code . According to Leonard Maltin : " In early 1933 a Georgia theater owner wrote to Film Daily : ' The worst kicks we have are on smut in cartoons . They are primarily a kid draw , and parents frequently object to the filth that is put in them , incidentally without helping the comedy . The dirtiest ones are invariably the least funny . ' " Betty Boop thus underwent some of the most dramatic changes after the Code was imposed : " gone was the garter , the short skirt , the décolletage " . 
 = = Horror and science fiction = = 
 Unlike silent @-@ era sex and crime pictures , silent horror movies , despite being produced in the hundreds , were never a major concern for censors or civic leaders . When sound horror films were released however , they quickly caused controversy . Sound provided " atmospheric music and sound effects , creepy @-@ voiced macabre dialogue and a liberal dose of blood @-@ curdling screams " which intensified its effects on audiences , and consequently on moral crusaders . The Hays Code did not mention gruesomeness , and filmmakers took advantage of this oversight . However , state boards usually had no set guidelines and could object to any material they found indecent . Although films such as Frankenstein and Freaks caused controversy when they were released , they had already been re @-@ cut to comply with censors . 
 Comprising the nascent motion picture genres of horror and science fiction , the nightmare picture provoked individual psychological terror in its horror incarnations , while embodying group sociological terror in its science fiction manifestations . The two main types of pre @-@ Code horror pictures were the single monster movie , and films where masses of hideous beasts rose up and attacked their putative betters . Frankenstein and Freaks exemplified both genres . 
 The pre @-@ Code horror cycle was similar to other pre @-@ Code cycles in that its boom was motivated by financial necessity . Universal in particular buoyed itself with the production of horror hits such as Dracula ( 1931 ) and Frankenstein , then followed those successes up with Murders in the Rue Morgue ( 1932 ) , The Mummy ( 1932 ) , and The Old Dark House ( 1932 ) . Other major studios responded with their own productions . Much like the crime film cycle however , the intense boom of the horror cycle was ephemeral , and had fallen off at the box office by the end of the pre @-@ Code era . 
 While Joy declared Dracula " quite satisfactory from the standpoint of the Code " before it was released , and the film had little trouble reaching theaters , Frankenstein was a different story . New York , Pennsylvania , and Massachusetts removed the scene where the monster unintentionally drowns a little girl and lines that referenced Dr. Frankenstein 's God complex . Kansas , in particular , objected to the film . The state 's censor board requested the cutting of 32 scenes , which if removed , would have halved the length of the film . 
 Paramount 's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde ( 1931 ) played to the Freudian theories popular with the audience of its time . Fredric March played the split @-@ personality title character . Jekyll represented the composed super @-@ ego , and Hyde the lecherous id . Miriam Hopkins 's coquettish prostitute sexually teases Jekyll early in the film by displaying parts of her legs and bosom . Joy felt the scene had been " dragged in simply to titillate the audience . " Hyde coerces her with the threat of violence into becoming his paramour and beats her when she attempts to stop seeing him . She is contrasted with his wholesome fiancée ( Rose Hobart ) , whose chaste nature <unk> March 's baser alter ego . The film is considered the " most honored of the Pre @-@ Code horror films . " Many of the graphic scenes between Hyde and Ivy were cut by local censors because of their suggestiveness . Sex was intimately tied to horror in many pre @-@ Code horror movies . In Murders in the Rue Morgue , an adaptation of Edgar Allan Poe 's classic tale which has little in common with the source material , Bela Lugosi plays a mad scientist who tortures and kills women , trying to mix human blood with ape blood during his experiments . His prized experiment , an intelligent ape named Erik , breaks into a woman 's second @-@ floor apartment window and rapes her . 
 In Freaks , director Tod Browning of Dracula fame helms a picture that depicts a traveling circus populated by a group of deformed carnival freaks . Browning populated the movie with actual carnival sideshow performers including " midgets , dwarfs , hermaphrodites , Siamese twins , and , most awful , the armless and legless man billed as the ' living torso ' " . There is also a group of <unk> , who are depicted as fortunate in that they are not mentally capable enough to understand that they disgust people . But the truly unsavory characters here are the villains , the circus strongman Hercules and the beautiful high @-@ wire artist Cleopatra , who intends to marry and poison Hans , the midget heir who is enamored of her . At a dinner celebrating their union , one of the freaks dances on the table as they chant " <unk> @-@ gobble , gobble , gobble , one of us , one of us , we accept her , we accept her . " Disgusted , Cleopatra insults Hans and makes out with Hercules in front of him . When the freaks discover her plot , they exact revenge by mutilating Cleopatra into a freak . Although circus freaks were common in the early 1930s , the film was their first depiction on screen . Browning took care to linger over shots of the deformed , disabled performers with long takes of them including one of the " living torso " lighting a match and then a cigarette with his mouth . The film was accompanied by a sensational marketing campaign that asked sexual questions such as " Do the Siamese Twins make love ? " , " What sex is the half @-@ man half @-@ woman ? " , and " Can a full grown woman truly love a midget ? " Surprisingly , given its reaction to Frankenstein , the state of Kansas objected to nothing in Freaks . However , other states , such as Georgia , were repulsed by the film and it was not shown in many locales . The film later became a cult classic spurred by midnight movie showings , but it was a box @-@ office bomb in its original release . 
 In Island of Lost Souls ( 1932 ) , an adaptation of H. G. Wells ' science @-@ fiction novel , The Island of Doctor Moreau , Charles Laughton plays yet another mad scientist with a God complex . As Moreau , Laughton creates a mad scientist 's island paradise , an unmonitored haven where he is free to create a race of man @-@ beasts and Lota , a beast @-@ woman he wants to mate with a normal human male . A castaway lands on his island , providing him an opportunity to see how far his science experiment , the barely clothed , attractive Lota , has come . The castaway discovers Moreau <unk> one of the beast @-@ men and attempts to leave the island . He runs into the camp of the man @-@ beasts and Moreau beats them back with a whip . The film ends with Lota dead , the castaway rescued , and the man @-@ beasts chanting , " Are we not men ? " as they attack and then <unk> Moreau . The film has been described as " a rich man 's Freaks " due to its esteemed source material . Wells , however , despised the movie for its lurid excesses . It was rejected by 14 local censor boards in the United States , and considered " against nature " in Great Britain , where it was banned until 1958 . 
 = = Exotic adventure films = = 
 Pre @-@ Code films contained a continual , recurring theme of white racism . In the early 1930s , the studios filmed a series of pictures that aimed to provide viewers a sense of the exotic , an exploration of the unknown and the forbidden . These pictures often imbued themselves with the allure of interracial sex according to pre @-@ Code historian Thomas Doherty . " At the psychic core of the genre is the shiver of sexual attraction , the threat and promise of miscegenation . " Films such as Africa Speaks were directly marketed by referencing interracial sex ; moviegoers received small packets labeled " Secrets " which contained pictures of naked black women . As portrayals of historic conditions , these movies are of little educational value , but as artifacts that show Hollywood 's attitude towards race and foreign cultures they are enlightening . The central point of interest in The Blonde Captive ( 1931 ) , a film which depicted a blonde woman abducted by a savage tribe of Aboriginal Australians , was not that she was kidnapped , but that she enjoys living among the tribe . The lack of black characters in films highlights their status in Jim Crow America . 
 In Bird of Paradise , a white American man ( Joel McCrea ) enjoys a torrid affair with a Polynesian princess ( Dolores del Río ) . The film created a scandal when released due to a scene featuring Dolores del Río swimming naked . Orson Welles said del Río represented the highest erotic ideal with her performance in the film . 
 The white protagonist in Tarzan , the Ape Man ( 1932 ) is the " King of the [ African ] Jungle " . Tarzan ( Johnny Weissmuller ) is a monosyllabic half @-@ naked jungle creature whose attractiveness is derived from his physical prowess ; throughout the movie , he saves Jane ( Maureen O 'Sullivan ) from danger and she swoons in his arms . When Jane 's father warns her " [ h ] e 's not like us " , she responds , " [ h ] e 's white " as evidence to the contrary . In the racy 1934 sequel , Tarzan and His Mate ( the last word meaning both a status and a biological function ) , men come from the U.S. with fancy gowns and other accoutrements to woo and clothe the bra @-@ less , barely clothed Jane , again played by O 'Sullivan , hoping to lure her away from the savage Tarzan . He detests the fancier clothing and tears it off . The film included a skinny @-@ dipping scene with extensive nudity with a body double standing in for O 'Sullivan . Breen , then head of the SRC , objected to the scene , and MGM , the movie 's producer , decided to take their case to the appeals review board . The board consisted of the heads of Fox , RKO , and Universal . After watching the scene " several times " , the board sided with Breen and the MPPDA , and the scene was removed , but MGM still allowed some uncut trailers and a few reels to stay in circulation . MGM marketed the film primarily towards women using taglines such as : 
 Girls ! Would you live like Eve if you found the right Adam ? 
 Modern marriages could learn plenty from this drama of primitive jungle mating ! 
 If all marriages were based on the primitive mating instinct , it would be a better world . 
 Ethnic characters were portrayed against stereotype in Massacre ( 1934 ) . The protagonist ( Richard Barthelmess ) is a Native American who performs in a Wild West Show in full Indian garb , but then slips into a suit and speaks in American slang once the show is over . He has a black butler who is atypically intelligent ; his character merely plays dumb by slipping into a stereotypical slow @-@ witted " negro " character when it suits him , rather than being genuinely unintelligent . 
 Films such as The Mask of Fu Manchu ( 1932 ) and The Bitter Tea of General Yen ( 1933 ) , explored the exoticism of the Far East — by using white actors , not Asians , in the lead roles . The white actors frequently looked absurd in yellow @-@ face makeup next to genuine Asians , so the studios would cast all the Asian parts white . In Manchu , Karloff plays a mad scientist who wants to find the sword and mask of Genghis Khan as they will give him the power to control the " countless hordes " into battle versus the West . Manchu is a sexual deviant who engages in ritual torture and has occult powers . In a scene cut from the film due to its miscegenation , he shows a man the image of Manchu 's depraved daughter ( Myrna Loy ) violating one of the chaste good characters . He is eventually conquered , but not before he temporarily lays his hand on the sword and proclaims to his men : " Would you have maidens like this [ Karen Morley ] for your wives ? Then conquer and breed ! Kill the white man and take his women ! " 
 Frank Capra 's The Bitter Tea of General Yen was not quite the same type of film : Stanwyck plays a missionary who goes to civil @-@ war @-@ torn China and meets the titular general ( played by Nils <unk> ) after his car kills the driver of her rickshaw . When she is knocked unconscious in a riot , he takes her out of the rabble and onto a train car . She has lurid , horror @-@ themed , symbolic dreams about the General , in which she is both titillated and repulsed by him . The film breaks precedent by developing into an interracial love story , but his army ends in ruins . Yen kills himself at the film 's conclusion — by drinking poisoned tea — rather than be captured and killed . Capra adored the script and disregarded the risk of making a film that broke California 's ( and 29 other states ' ) laws concerning the portrayal of miscegenation . Cinematographer Joseph Walker tested a new technique he created , which he dubbed " Variable Diffusion " , in filming the picture . This rendered the entire picture in very soft focus . 
 = = Newsreels and documentaries = = 
 From 1904 until 1967 , when television finally killed them off , newsreels preceded films . In the early sound @-@ film era , they lasted around eight minutes and featured highlights and clips of the world 's biggest stories . Updated twice a week by the five major studios , they became a highly profitable enterprise : in 1933 , newsreels had a total box office take of almost $ 19 @.@ 5 million against an outlay of under $ 10 million . The sound @-@ film era created the narrator ; among the first was Graham McNamee , who provided voiceover during the clips , often delivering hackneyed jokes while delineating the on @-@ screen action . Sound newsreel interviews and monologues featured famous subjects unaccustomed to the new medium . These clips changed public perception of important historical figures depending on their elocution , the sound of their previously unheard voices , and their composure in front of the camera . Around 12 " newsreel theaters " were soon created around the United States , the most successful being the Embassy Newsreel Theater on Broadway . The Embassy was a 578 @-@ seat facility that presented fourteen 45 – 50 minute programs a day , running from 10 in the morning until midnight . It was noted for its discerning , intellectual audience , many of whom did not attend motion @-@ picture theaters . 
 The most gripping news story of the pre @-@ Code era was the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby on the evening of 1 March 1932 . As the child was already enormously famous before the kidnapping , the event created a media circus , with news coverage more intense than anything since World War I. Newsreels featuring family photos of the child ( the first time private pictures had been " conscripted for public service " ) asked spectators to report any sight of him . On May 12 , 1932 , the child 's body was found less than five miles from the Lindbergh home . Although newsreels covered the most important topics of the day , they also presented human @-@ interest stories ( such as the immensely popular coverage of the Dionne <unk> ) and entertainment news , at times in greater detail than more pressing political and social matters . 
 Some of the images ' impact belies their historical accuracy ; nearly all ceremonies and public events that were filmed for newsreels in the early sound era were staged , and in some cases even reenacted . For instance : when FDR signed an important bill , a member of his cabinet was called away before the staged reenactment began , so the video shows him absent at the time of the signing , although he had been present . The newsreels of FDR were staged to hide his hobbled gait caused by polio . Caught between the desire to present accurate hard @-@ hitting news stories and the need to keep an audience in the mood for the upcoming entertainment , newsreels often soft @-@ <unk> the difficulties Americans faced during the early years of the Great Depression . FDR in particular received favorable treatment from Hollywood , with all five of the major studios producing pro @-@ FDR shorts by late 1933 . These shorts featured some of the studios ' lesser contract talent extolling the virtues of FDR created government and social programs . Roosevelt himself was a natural before the camera . The newsreels were instrumental to the success of his initial campaign , and his enduring popularity while in office . He was described by Variety as the " Barrymore of the Capital " . 
 Taking advantage of the existence of 30 years of newsreels archives were filmmakers who made early sound era documentaries . World War I was a popular topic of these pictures and spawned the following documentaries ; The Big Drive ( 1933 ) , World in Revolt ( 1933 ) , This is America ( 1933 ) , and Hell 's Holiday ( 1933 ) . The most prescient pre @-@ Code World War I documentary was aptly called The First World War ( 1934 ) and was the most critically and commercially successful documentary of the era . 
 Filmmakers also made feature @-@ length documentaries that covered the dark recesses of the globe , including the Amazon Rainforest , Native American settlements , the Pacific islands , and everywhere in between . Taking advantage of audiences ' voyeuristic impulses , aided by the allowance of nudity in tribal documentaries , the filming of lands untouched by modernity , and the presentation of locales never before filmed , these movies placated Depression era American audiences by showing them lifestyles more difficult than their own . Also captured were Arctic expeditions in films such 90 ° South and With Byrd at the South Pole , and deepest Africa in the safari films of Martin and Osa Johnson , among others . Some exploitation style documentaries purported to show actual events but were instead staged , elaborate ruses . The most prominent of which was <unk> ( 1931 ) , a film which claimed to show a ritual where African women were given over to gorillas as sex slaves , but instead was mostly filmed in Los Angeles using local blacks in place of natives . Douglas Fairbanks mocked the phoniness of many pre @-@ Code documentaries in his parody Around the World in 80 Minutes with Douglas Fairbanks , in one scene of which he filmed himself wrestling a stuffed tiger doll , then a tiger @-@ skin rug . Opposing these films was the travelogue which was shown before features and served as a short saccharine form of cinematic tourism . 
 = = End of an era = = 
 Pre @-@ Code films began to draw the ire of various religious groups , some Protestant but mostly a contingent of Roman Catholic crusaders . <unk> Giovanni <unk> , apostolic delegate to the Catholic Church in the United States , called upon Roman Catholics in the United States to unite against the surging immorality of films . As a result , in 1933 the Catholic Legion of Decency , headed by the Reverend John T. McNicholas ( later renamed the National Legion of Decency ) , was established to control and enforce decency standards and boycott films they deemed offensive . They created a rating system for films that started at " harmless " and ended at " condemned " , with the latter denoting a film that was a sin to watch . 
 “ I wish to join the Legion of Decency , which condemns vile and unwholesome moving pictures . I unite with all who protest against them as a grave menace to youth , to home life , to country and to religion . I condemn absolutely those salacious motion pictures which , with other degrading agencies , are corrupting public morals and promoting a sex mania in our land … Considering these evils , I hereby promise to remain away from all motion pictures except those which do not offend decency and Christian morality . " ( Catholic Legion of Decency Pledge ) 
 The Legion spurred several million Roman Catholics across the U.S. to sign up for the boycott , allowing local religious leaders to determine which films to protest . Conservative Protestants tended to support much of the crackdown , particularly in the South , where anything relating to the state of race relations or miscegenation could not be portrayed . Although the Central Conference of American Rabbis joined in the protest , it was an uneasy alliance as there had always been whispers that at least some of the vitriol from the Christian groups occurred because many studio executives were Jewish . 
 Hays opposed direct censorship , considering it " Un @-@ American " . He had stated that although there were some tasteless films in his estimation , working with filmmakers was better than direct oversight , and that , overall , films were not harmful to children . Hays blamed some of the more prurient films on the difficult economic times which exerted " tremendous commercial pressure " on the studios more than a flouting of the code . Catholic groups became enraged with Hays and as early as July 1934 were demanding that he resign from his position , which he did not , although his influence waned and Breen took control , with Hays becoming a functionary . 
 The Payne Study and Experiment Fund was created in 1927 by Frances Payne Bolton to support a study of the influence of fiction on children . The Payne Fund Studies , a series of eight books published from 1933 to 1935 which detailed five ( 5 ) years of research aimed specifically at the cinema 's effects on children , were also gaining publicity at this time , and became a great concern to Hays . Hays had said certain pictures might alter " ... that sacred thing , the mind of a child … that clean , virgin thing , that unmarked state " and have " the same responsibility , the same care about the thing put on it that the best clergyman or the most inspired teacher would have . " Despite its initial reception , the main findings of the study were largely innocuous . It found that cinema 's effect on individuals varied with age and social position , and that pictures reinforced audiences ' existing beliefs . The Motion Picture Research Council ( <unk> , led by honorary vice president Sara Delano Roosevelt — FDR 's mother – and executive director the Rev. William H. Short ) , which funded the study , was not pleased . An " alarmist summary " of the study 's results written by Henry James Forman appeared in McCall 's , a leading women 's magazine of the time , and Forman 's book , Our Movie Made Children , which became a best @-@ seller , publicized the Payne Fund 's results , emphasizing its more negative aspects . 
 The social environment created by the publicity of the Payne Fund Studies and religious protests reached such a fever pitch that a member of the Hays Office described it as a " state of war " . However , newspapers including The Plain Dealer ( Cleveland ) , New Orleans Times Picayune , Chicago Daily News , Atlanta Journal , Saint Paul Dispatch , the Philadelphia Record and Public Ledger , the Boston American and New York 's Daily News , Daily Mirror , and Evening Post all lambasted the studies . When discussing the Supreme Court 's 1915 decision , film historian Gregory Black argues that the efforts of reformers might have been lessened had " filmmakers been willing to produce films for specialized audiences ( adults only , family , no children ) … but the movers and shakers of the industry wanted or needed the largest possible market . " The most provocative pictures were the most profitable , with the 25 % of the motion picture industry 's output that was the most sensational supporting the cleaner 75 % . 
 By 1932 , there was an increasing movement for government control . By mid @-@ 1934 when Cardinal Dougherty of Philadelphia called for a Catholic boycott of all films , and Raymond Cannon was privately preparing a congressional bill supported by both Democrats and Republicans which would introduce Government oversight , the studios decided they had had enough . They re @-@ organized the enforcement procedures giving Hays and the recently appointed Joseph I. Breen , a devout Roman Catholic , head of the new Production Code Administration ( PCA ) , greater control over censorship . The studios agreed to disband their appeals committee and to impose a $ 25 @,@ 000 fine for producing , distributing , or exhibiting any film without PCA approval . Hays had originally hired Breen , who had worked in public relations , in 1930 to handle Production Code publicity , and the latter was popular among Catholics . Joy began working solely for Fox Studios , and Wingate had been bypassed in favor of Breen in December 1933 . Hays became a functionary , while Breen handled the business of censoring films . 
 Breen was a rabid anti @-@ Semite , who was quoted as stating that Jews " are , probably , the scum of the earth . " When Breen died in 1965 , the trade magazine Variety stated , " More than any single individual , he shaped the moral stature of the American motion picture . " Although the Legion 's impact on the more effective enforcement of the Code is unquestionable , its influence on the general populace is harder to gauge . A study done by Hays after the Code was finally fully implemented found that audiences were doing the exact opposite of what the Legion had recommended . Each time the Legion protested a film it meant increased ticket sales ; unsurprisingly , Hays kept these results to himself and they were not revealed until many years later . In contrast to big cities , boycotts in smaller towns were more effective and theater owners complained of the harassment they received when they exhibited salacious films . 
 Many actors and actresses , such as Edward G. Robinson , Barbara Stanwyck , and Clark Gable , continued their careers apace after the Code was enforced . However , others , such as Ruth Chatterton and Warren William , who excelled during this period , are mostly forgotten today . 
 = = After the pre @-@ Code era = = 
 Censors like Martin Quigley and Joseph Breen understood that : 
 a private industry code , strictly enforced , is more effective than government censorship as a means of imposing religious dogma . It is secret , for one thing , operating at the pre @-@ production stage . The audience never knows what has been trimmed , cut , revised , or never written . For another , it is uniform — not subject to hundreds of different licensing standards . Finally and most important , private censorship can be more sweeping in its demands , because it is not bound by constitutional due process or free @-@ expression rules — in general , these apply to only the government — or by the command of church @-@ state separation … there is no question that American cinema today is far freer than in the heyday of the Code , when Joe Breen 's blue pencil and the Legion of Decency 's ever @-@ present boycott threat combined to assure that films adhered to Catholic Church doctrine . 
 Termed by Breen as " Compensating moral value " , the maxim was that " any theme must contain at least sufficient good in the story to compensate for , and to counteract , any evil which relates . " Hollywood could present evil behavior , but only if it were eradicated by the end of the film , " with the guilty punished , and the sinner redeemed " . 
 Pre @-@ Code scholar Thomas Doherty summarized the practical effects : 
 Even for moral guardians of Breen 's dedication , however , film censorship can be a tricky business . Images must be cut , dialogue overdubbed or deleted , and explicit messages and subtle implications excised from what the argot of film criticism calls the " diegesis " . Put simply , the diegesis is the world of the film , the universe inhabited by the characters existing in the landscape of cinema . " <unk> " elements are experienced by the characters in the film and ( vicariously ) by the spectator ; " nondiegetic " elements are apprehended by the spectator alone .... The job of the motion picture censor is to patrol the diegesis , keeping an eye and ear out for images , languages , and meanings that should be banished from the world of film .... The easiest part of the assignment is to connect the dots and connect what is visually and verbally forbidden by name . … More challenging is the work of the textual analysis and narrative rehabilitation that discerns and redirects hidden lessons and moral meanings . 
 The censors thus expanded their jurisdiction from what was seen to what was implied in the spectator 's mind . In The Office Wife ( 1930 ) , several of Joan Blondell 's disrobing maneuvers were strictly forbidden and the implied image of the actress being naked just off @-@ screen was deemed too suggestive even though it relied upon the audience using their imaginations , so post @-@ Code releases of the film had scenes which were blurred or rendered indistinct , if allowed at all . 
 Following the July 1 , 1934 decision by the studios put the power over film censorship in Breen 's hands , he appeared in a series of newsreel clips promoting the new order of business , assuring Americans that the motion @-@ picture industry would be cleansed of " the vulgar , the cheap , and the tawdry " and that pictures would be made " vital and wholesome entertainment " . All scripts now went through PCA , and several films playing in theaters were ordered withdrawn . 
 The first film Breen censored in the production stage was the Joan Crawford film Forsaking All Others . Although Independent film producers vowed they would give " no thought to Mr. Joe Breen or anything he represents " , they caved on their stance within one month of making it . The major studios still owned most of the successful theaters in the country , and studio heads such as Harry Cohn of Columbia Pictures had already agreed to stop making indecent films . In several large cities audiences booed when the Production seal appeared before films . But the Catholic Church was pleased , and in 1936 Pope Pius XI stated that the U.S. film industry " has recognized and accepts its responsibility before society . " The Legion condemned zero films produced by the MPPDA between 1936 and 1943 . 
 A coincidental upswing in the fortunes of several studios was publicly explained by Code proponents such as the Motion Picture Herald as proof positive that the code was working . Another fortunate coincidence for Code supporters was the torrent of famous criminals such as John Dillinger , Baby Face Nelson , and Bonnie and Clyde that were killed by police shortly after the PCA took power . Corpses of the outlaws were shown in newsreels around the country , alongside clips of Al Capone and Machine Gun Kelly in Alcatraz . Among the unarguably positive aspects of the Code being enforced was the money it saved studios in having to edit , cut , and alter films to get approval from the various state boards and censors . The money saved was in the millions annually . A spate of more wholesome family films featuring performers such as Shirley Temple took off . 
 Stars such as James Cagney redefined their images . Cagney played a series of patriots , and his gangster in Angels with Dirty Faces ( 1937 ) purposefully acts like a coward when he is executed so children who had looked up to him would cease any such admiration . Breen in essence neutered Groucho Marx , removing most of his jokes which directly referenced sex , although some sexual references slipped through unnoticed in the Marx Brothers post @-@ Code pictures . In the political realm , films such Mr. Smith Goes to Washington in which James Stewart tries to change the American system from within while reaffirming its core values , stand in stark contrast to Gabriel Over the White House where a dictator is needed to cure America 's woes . 
 Some pre @-@ Code movies suffered irreparable damage from censorship after 1934 . When studios attempted to re @-@ issue films from the 1920s and early 1930s , they were forced to make extensive cuts . Films such as Animal Crackers ( 1930 ) , Mata Hari ( 1931 ) , Arrowsmith ( 1931 ) , and A Farewell to Arms ( 1932 ) exist only in their censored versions . Many other films survived intact because they were too controversial to be re @-@ released , such as The Maltese Falcon ( 1931 ) , which was remade a decade later with the same name , and thus never had their master negatives edited . In the case of Convention City ( 1933 ) , which Breen would not allow to be re @-@ released in any form , the entire film remains missing . Although it has been rumored that all prints and negatives were ordered destroyed by Jack Warner in the late thirties , further research shows the negative was in the vaults as late as 1948 when it was junked due to nitrate decomposition . 
 = = Home video and screenings = = 
 In the 1980s , New York City Film Forum programmer Bruce Goldstein held the first film festivals featuring pre @-@ Code films . Goldstein is also credited by San Francisco film critic Mick LaSalle as the person to bring the term " pre @-@ Code " into general use . 
 In the 1990s , MGM released several pre @-@ Code films on laserdisc and VHS . " The Forbidden Hollywood Collection " included : Baby Face ; Beauty and the Boss ; Big Business Girl ; Blessed Event ; Blonde Crazy ; Bombshell ; Dance , Fools , Dance ; Employees ' Entrance ; Ex @-@ Lady ; Female ; Havana Widows ; Heroes for Sale ; Illicit ; I 've Got Your Number ; Ladies They Talk About ; Lady Killer ; Madam Satan ; Night Nurse ; Our Dancing Daughters ; Our Modern Maidens ; The Purchase Price ; Red @-@ Headed Woman ; Scarlet Dawn ; Skyscraper Souls ; The Strange Love of Molly Louvain ; They Call It Sin ; and Three on a Match . 
 MGM / UA and Turner also released other pre @-@ Code films such as The Divorcee , Doctor X , A Free Soul , Little Caesar , Mystery of the Wax Museum , Possessed , The Public Enemy , Red Dust ( remade in the 1950s as <unk> ) , and Riptide under other labels . UCLA ran several series of pre @-@ Code films during the 2000s , showcasing films which had not been seen for decades , and not available on any home media . 
 In 1999 , the Roan Group / Troma Entertainment released two pre @-@ Code DVD collections : Pre @-@ Code Hollywood : The <unk> Years # 1 , featuring Of Human Bondage , Millie and Kept Husbands , and Pre @-@ Code Hollywood 2 , featuring Bird of Paradise and The Lady <unk> . 
 Warner Bros. Home Video has released a number of their pre @-@ Code films on DVD under the Forbidden Hollywood banner . To date , nine volumes have been released : 
 Volume 1 , released on December 5 , 2006 , includes Baby Face , Red @-@ Headed Woman , and Waterloo Bridge . 
 Volume 2 , released on March 4 , 2008 , includes The Divorcee , A Free Soul , Three on a Match , Female , and Night Nurse . 
 Volume 3 , released on March 24 , 2009 , featured six films from William Wellman : Other Men 's Women , The Purchase Price , Frisco Jenny , Midnight Mary , Heroes for Sale , and Wild Boys of the Road . 
 Volume 4 , released on August 9 , 2012 , includes Jewel Robbery , Lawyer Man , Man Wanted , and They Call It Sin . 
 Volume 5 , released on August 9 , 2012 , includes Hard to Handle , Ladies They Talk About , The Mind Reader , and Miss Pinkerton . 
 Volume 6 , released on April 2 , 2013 includes The Wet Parade , Downstairs , Mandalay , and Massacre . 
 Volume 7 , released on April 30 , 2013 , includes The Hatchet Man , Skyscraper Souls , Employees ' Entrance , Ex @-@ Lady 
 Volume 8 , released on October 28 , 2014 , includes Blonde Crazy , Strangers May Kiss , Hi , Nellie , Dark Hazard 
 Volume 9 , released on October 27 , 2015 , includes Big City Blues , Hell 's Highway , The Cabin in the Cotton , When Ladies Meet , I Sell Anything 
 Universal Home Video followed suit with Pre @-@ Code Hollywood Collection : Universal Backlot Series . Released on April 7 , 2009 , the box set includes The Cheat , Merrily We Go to Hell , Hot Saturday , Torch Singer , Murder at the Vanities , and Search for Beauty , together with a copy of the entire Hays Code . 
 = Erling Folkvord = 
 Erling Folkvord ( born 15 June 1949 ) is a Norwegian politician for the Red party , and a former member of the Parliament of Norway . A revolutionary socialist , he was one of the leading members of the Workers ' Communist Party and the Red Electoral Alliance before they merged to form Red . He sat as a member of the Parliament of Norway from 1993 to 1997 , becoming the first socialist to the left of the Socialist Left Party and the Labour Party in parliament since 1961 . He later lost his position in 1997 , and has been a candidate for parliament ever since . He has been a member of the Oslo City Council from 1983 to 1993 , and again since 1999 . Folkvord has become one of the best @-@ known Norwegian politicians on the left who is not connected with the Labour Party and the Socialist Left Party . 
 In the early part of his political career Folkvord was a member of the Red Electoral Alliance . Known for working on several corruption cases earned him the nickname the " watch dog " . Folkvord 's political views turned to communism and anti @-@ capitalism when he became a member of the Workers ' Communist Party . From 1990 to 1997 he was Deputy Leader of the Workers ' Communist Party and in 2001 he became Deputy Leader of the Red Electoral Alliance alongside Chris Hartmann . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Folkvord is the son of school principal Sverre Folkvord and housewife <unk> <unk> . He finished secondary school earning the examen artium degree in Trondheim and then started studies to become a social worker at the Social School of Trondheim . By 1976 he was the leader of the national Social Agencies Union serving until 1978 . In 1982 , along with fellow Red Electoral Alliance member Harald Stabell , Folkvord sued Oslo 's social @-@ office leading figures , Signe M. Stray Ryssdal and Marit Moe . They accused them of misconduct and of making a false accusation which led to an innocent man going to prison . These accusations eventually led to a police investigation into the matter . After finding no proof of their accusations , Moe sued Folkvord and Stabell for <unk> charges made against her , but she abstained from pursuing this in court . 
 Folkvord and Stabell reported to the police that the Norwegian newspaper Dagbladet breached the pimp paragraph of the criminal code . In an interview Folkvord stated that Dagbladet contributed to giving the Norwegian sex market more attention . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Council representative = = = 
 In 1983 Folkvord , along with Liv <unk> , was elected as Red Electoral Alliance representative for the Oslo City Council , taking office on 1 January 1984 . According to Aftenposten , the Red Electoral Alliance and the Christian Democratic Party had the most loyal voter base throughout the election . Folkvord was later highly vocal in his opposition towards the decentralisation of health and social services in Oslo where control was to be given to the boroughs . During his early years as member of the City Council Folkvord used most of his time in defending the then " current " social administration . 
 By the late 1980s Folkvord had earned the nickname " watch dog " , as he usually wanted an " independent investigation " into corruption matters . This eventually developed into one of his most well @-@ known public traits . When leading an investigation into a corruption case in 1989 , which involved several representatives of the Oslo City Council , he said " It is possible to sweep corruption and other non @-@ essential nonsense out of City Hall . People only need to persist where necessary " . Earlier that year , when finding more proof of a so @-@ called corruption scandal , Folkvord asked for assistance from the district attorney urging him to lead an investigation into the matter . 
 By 1990 there were talks within the Red Electoral Alliance towards replacing Folkvord and Athar Ali as City Council representatives in Oslo to make way for more women in the top positions within the party . Folkvord was kept since he was a well @-@ known face with the Norwegian media . By September 1990 Folkvord had demanded a police @-@ run investigation against Conservative Party member Michael <unk> , accusing him of corruption and hidden money . These charges were included in a broadcast by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation ( NRK ) . <unk> replied to this broadcast stating that " The news feature was completely dominated by false information . If the television provider does not make the corrections that are necessary , we 'll bring the case to the Complaints Board of the Broadcasting Corporation " . Folkvord is one of the co @-@ founders of the Oslo party cell , established in early 1991 , of the Red Electoral Alliance . While media speculated that he would become the chapter 's leader , he denied any such allegations , saying their existed " better suited people " then him for that post . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 Folkvord was elected the Red Electoral Alliance 's Oslo lead candidate in June 1992 . The decision was made based on party leader Aksel <unk> 's belief that Folkvord could easily win a seat since he had become a " national celebrity " of sorts and due to the support Folkvord enjoyed during the 1989 parliamentary election . Folkvord needed 14 @,@ 000 votes to earn a seat in parliament . In January 1993 , at the national convention , several long @-@ standing members discussed the best way to organise Folkvord 's Oslo electoral campaign . There was optimism among these members believed , along with <unk> , and they believed before hand that Folkvord would be elected to parliament . The Red Electoral Alliance used a total of NOK 600 @,@ 000 for their nationwide 1993 election campaign , two thirds of it being used to support Folkvords campaign in Oslo . When announcing the results the party managed to become the biggest party in six different constituencies : Grünerløkka , <unk> , Tøyen , Kampen , Vålerenga and Gamlebyen . Various <unk> , and Folkvord himself , believed the Red Electoral Alliance achieved good results in Oslo because of the Socialist Left Party 's bad election results in the municipality . 
 When asked what parliamentary committee he wanted to be a member of Folkvord replied that the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs would be an ideal choice because most of the " assaults " on the working man had their origins in that committee . He was then selected for that very committee in addition to a seat on the Election Committee . He later became elected as a member of the financial committee of parliament . 
 In 1994 Folkvord criticised the Labour Government for exporting weapons to Turkey , which at that time was engaged in a civil war against the Kurdish people . He claimed it violated a parliamentary decision made in 1959 which said that the government would not distribute , or export , weapons to countries involved in a civil war . Folkvord earned the support of the Socialist Left , the Centre Party and the Christian Democratic Party who all sought to end weapon exports to Turkey . The Conservative Party supported the Labour Party 's decision however , with the then party leader Jan Petersen claiming that the Kurdish liberators were " terrorists " . According to Arbeiderbladet the Norwegian Government had sold NOK 99 million worth of weapons to the Turkish Government in 1989 alone . Folkvord sent a letter to Bjørn Tore Godal , the then Minister of Foreign Affairs , and asked if the Norwegian Government had gotten the approval of the parliament 's Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence to sell weapons to Turkey . In a 1967 decree it became illegal to sell weapons to civil war <unk> countries , and Folkvord believed that Norway should <unk> selling weapons to a country which he considered to be <unk> by civil war . 
 In early 1995 Folkvord announced that he would not be a candidate for parliament when his term was over . He later claimed the job was " exhausting and stressful " . In an opinion poll , conducted in August 1997 , Folkvords popularity in Oslo had declined while his popularity outside Oslo had increased . During the election the party used NOK 500 @,@ 000 on Folkvord 's re @-@ election campaign , which was estimated to be around 70 % of party 's budget estimated to be around NOK 700 @,@ 000 . On 1 September 1995 Folkvord was arrested by Turkish law enforcement in the Kurdish city of Diyarbakir . The Turkish Government said the main reason was his visit to an illegal Kurdish peace festival . That very same day he was flown to Ankara , and later Istanbul and the following day he was delivered back to Norway . Nicolas Rea , a member of the British House of Lords , took a picture of Folkvord during the event . It was claimed that the picture showed Folkvord being beaten by Turkish officials and that the picture was in @-@ turn burnt by the Turkish police when they saw Rea had a camera . 
 On 12 September various opinion polls showed that Folkvords popularity had increased again in Oslo which gave rise to speculation that Folkvord would win Inger Lise <unk> 's seat in parliament because of this sudden rise in popularity . When 99 % of the vote in Oslo had been counted the party had managed to earn a disappointing 3 @.@ 9 % , losing its only seat . 
 = = = 1999 to the 2003 elections = = = 
 After losing his position in parliament , Folkvord went through a short @-@ period of obscurity . He once again earned media attention when he publicly denounced the Lund Commission . The commission revealed there had been extensive surveillance of Norwegian communists , socialists and other radicals by the Norwegian Police Security Service . Folkvord demanded to be shown his own documentation created during the surveillance . In 1999 Folkvord topped his party 's list of candidates running for a seat in the City Council . Folkvord was successful and earned a seat on the City Council while the party noted an increase of 1 @.@ 3 % . Folkvords main goal during the campaign was to earn a third seat for the Red Electoral Alliance , he failed to do so though the party held its two seats on the City Council . The party earned 2 % and 2 @.@ 1 % of the vote in the county and municipal elections of 1999 . 
 Before the 2001 parliamentary election both Aslak Sira Myhre , leader of the Red Electoral Alliance , and Folkvord stated their intentions of being top <unk> for the Red Electoral Alliance . Later , when hearing that Myhre sought to become the party 's lead candidate in Oslo , Folkvord told the media he would become third <unk> if he was not elected to become the party 's lead candidate . A vote was held at the party convention , which resulted in 50 votes for and 62 against Folkvord as lead candidate . Folkvord became third candidate , and Sigrid <unk> became second candidate . 
 By February 2001 the Workers ' Communist Party proposed making Folkvord the new leader of the Red Electoral Alliance , since Myhre would resign if he was elected to parliament . While the majority of the members wanted a female leader after the departure of Myhre , his supporters were perfectly aware that Folkvord could lose the nomination and a campaign was started to make him deputy leader . The main problem for Folkvord 's opposition was his close ties to the Workers ' Communist Party . At the convention Myhre was re @-@ elected the party 's party leader , with Folkvord and Chris Hartmann stepping in as the party 's new deputy leaders . Myhre did not become a member of parliament . 
 By March 2003 Myhre had resigned as leader and Torstein Dahle was elected as his successor . Dahle had been the leading figure of the Red Electoral Alliance in Hordaland since the 1990s . When commenting on his resignation , Myhre commented on his 2001 election in Oslo saying " it is sad to resign after a bad election " . During the 2003 local elections three different polls showed that the Red Electoral Alliance was close to earning three seats on the Oslo City Council . Folkvord stated that if the party managed to earn one extra seat , he would use try removing the right @-@ wing Conservative Party from power and replace them with a more left @-@ wing " leaning choice " — such as the Labour Party or the Socialist Left Party . The party increased its vote by 0 @.@ 1 % , earning the party 3 @.@ 1 % of the popular vote in Oslo . The party was not able to win a third seat , retaining the two they held . 
 = = = Later years : 2004 – present = = = 
 In February 2004 Folkvord was charged with violating the penal code as he had participated in a demonstration against the Invasion of Iraq in 2003 . Together with other demonstrators he effectively cut off the entrance to the office of Kristin Krohn , the Minister of Defence . Folkvord was accused in a statement saying " his refusal to walk away from the area where it was held an illegal demonstration , despite the fact that he was asked to leave the area " . After the incident he received a fine of NOK 2 @,@ 000 which he refused to pay . 
 At the Red Electoral Alliance 's city convention Folkvord was elected their lead candidate in Oslo for the 2005 election . Folkvord , along with Torstein Dahle , were the only representatives from the party who had a chance of gaining a seat in parliament . Jens Stoltenberg , leader of the Labour Party , was negative towards the idea of having any representatives from the Red Electoral Alliance in parliament , saying that the voters should do anything in their power to stop them from earning a seat in parliament . When the votes were counted Folkvord did not gain a seat in parliament . 
 Folkvord later accused many of the prominent members of the Oslo City Council of being involved , or having been involved , in corruption . André <unk> of the Conservative Party said Folkvord should stop accusing and instead go to the police with proof if he had any . 
 On 27 February 2007 Folkvord announced he would seek another term in the City Council . Folkvord was re @-@ elected lead candidate for the municipal election at the party convention . In March 2007 the Red Electoral Alliance and the Workers ' Communist Party merged and established Red . By 3 September , six days before the election day , Red earned its best showing ever in Oslo earning 4 @.@ 4 % in an opinion poll — an increase of 0 @.@ 3 % from the previous election . When the votes for the municipality of Oslo were counted the party had managed to gain three seats on the City Council , with Folkvord 's position secure . At national level Red had received 1 @.@ 9 % and 2 @.@ 1 % for the municipal and county elections respectively . 
 During the 2009 election several opinion polls showed that Folkvord and Dahle had enough support to earn two seats in parliament . Jens Stoltenberg and Kristin Halvorsen from the Red @-@ Green Coalition were both highly negative towards the idea of having Red in parliament . Folkvord stated several times that he would demand an immediate withdrawal of Norwegian troops from Afghanistan if elected to parliament . He said this decision involved both the " enthusiastic warriors of the Progress Party " and " the disillusioned skeptics of the Socialist Left " . Folkvord later felt he needed to set pressure on the Labour Party which would , according to him , move them further to the left . Labour Party member <unk> Steen had reacted positively towards the idea of having Folkvord in parliament saying , " I am a great admirer of Erling Folkvord . He has integrity and great courage . Besides I am overjoyed that Red supports the Red @-@ Green coalition " . When the votes were counted Red had an increase of 1 % from the 2005 election , but it was not enough to secure Folkvord a seat in parliament . When all the votes were counted the party had gained 1 @.@ 3 % of the national vote , an increase of 0 @.@ 1 % . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 During an interview in 1993 , Folkvord said his most important commitment if he gained a seat in parliament was giving the National trade union centers more power so that they could better defend the working class . When asked if it was exhausting to promote socialist reforms Folkvord said , " It is . But I think in some ways easier than before [ because many ] fake socialist regimes have collapsed " . Another opinion of his was that " capitalism destroys the natural environment around us making the bourgeois society planners understand that there must be something new in the future . This provides inspiration to win support for socialist beliefs in Norway " . Folkvord 's first contact with anti @-@ capitalist beliefs came when he joined the Workers ' Communist Party . The party told him about " capitalist barbarism " and how the wealthy controlled everything . Folkvord said he believed that " [ this ] can 't be the end of human development " , and that he believes humans are destined to create another more @-@ just system . 
 Folkvord has long supported the Kurdish independence movement , believing that Norway and other countries in Europe should stop treating the conflicts between Turkish military and the Kurds as an internal Turkish matter . Being an anti @-@ war activist he was highly vocal against Norwegian involvement in the War on Terror since the start of the American led invasion of Iraq . In 2009 Folkvord visited Norwegian soldiers in Afghanistan but claimed that Red was the only Norwegian party not allowed to visit the Afghan city of <unk> , the city were the Norwegian troops are stationed . He is also highly vocal against Norwegian membership in the European Union , claiming the organisation is spreading " German imperialism " . 
 = = Authorship = = 
 Since earning the position of Oslo City Council representative in 1984 , Folkvord has used much of his time writing books about his political experiences and beliefs . His books have earned much attention by the Norwegian media . He has also collaborated on several books , the most notable being Rapport fra <unk> – <unk> i Norge . In the book Folkvord claimed that Lise Harlem was involved in some sort of corruption in Norway , although to verify this he had only one source , Knut <unk> . Harlem later wrote an article in Aftenposten stating that the book was " dubiously " written and unreliable . The book also received support from Carl August Fleischer and Liberal Party politician Helge Seip who defended the book against the accusations . Folkvord wrote <unk> ! in 1998 , a book about his tenure as a parliamentary representative . Twelve pages were about Folkvords four @-@ year @-@ term as representative , the other pages contained information criticising fellow parliamentary representatives . When writing the book , he wanted it to have some sort of impact on Red Youth members and other left of center groups or activists . <unk> <unk> , published in 2007 , contained a large amount of criticism of the Socialist Left Party , the Labour Party and the Red @-@ Green Coalition in general . The book Vår <unk> <unk> ( English : Our Corrupt Capitol ) , was published in 2011 . In 2015 his book [ " the great Oslo robbery " ] Det store Oslo @-@ <unk> was published . 
 = = Family = = 
 Folkvord has a daughter named Jorunn Folkvord who works as a teacher and is a member of the Norwegian teachers union , Union of Education Norway . She was notable for her far @-@ left political activities in Norway , having membership status in the Workers ' Communist Party and the Red Electoral Alliance . She took part in several notable protests during the 1990s , in one case being arrested by the police . She was also the Leader of Red Youth during the early 1990s . 
 = Up All Night ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Up All Night " is the thirteenth episode of NBC 's first season of 30 Rock . It was written by the series ' creator and executive producer Tina Fey , and was directed by Michael Engler . It first aired on February 8 , 2007 in the United States . Guest stars in this episode include Katrina Bowden , Rachel Dratch , Rachel Hamilton , John Lutz , Maulik Pancholy , Keith Powell , Lonny Ross , Isabella Rossellini , Sherri Shepherd , Jason Sudeikis and Mark Zimmerman . Joy Behar appeared as herself in the episode . 
 This episode focuses on the events of Valentine 's Day for the cast and crew of TGS with Tracy Jordan , a fictional sketch comedy series . Liz Lemon ( played by Tina Fey ) receives a mysterious gift ; Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) comments that he hates Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) ; Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) forgets Valentine 's Day , which also happens to be his wife , Paula 's ( Paula Pell ) birthday ; Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) divorce from Bianca ( Isabella Rossellini ) is made official ; the writers believe that Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) has romantic feelings for Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) ; and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tries to spend a night with his wife , Angie Jordan ( Sherri Shephard ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack 's wife Bianca asks to finalize their divorce to which Jack agree , demanding various things in their settlement all to which she agrees , and the divorce is set for the next day . It is Valentine 's Day , although the TGS cast and crew still have to work all night . Frank reveals that he hates Jenna when he always chooses to " kill " Jenna in a game of " Marry , Boff , Kill " . Frank believes that Jenna is " phony " , and Jenna tries many times to redeem herself with Frank , with reasons such as her participation in Vagina Day : " a charity event founded by a group of celebrities who have for whatever reason never been asked to participate in The Vagina Monologues " . Eventually , in her final confrontation with Frank , she farts , but Frank is happy , telling her that that is the first real thing she has done , and the two reconcile . Another game of " Marry , Boff , Kill " leads some of the writers into believing that Cerie ( who has been having problems with her fiance Aris ) has feelings for Kenneth when she chooses to " <unk> " him . The writers send the pair off to get candy for the night . Kenneth and Cerie take a walk around Rockefeller Center , and Cerie reveals that she is not attracted to Kenneth but tells him that he can tell the others that the two made out . However , Kenneth fails to convince the writers that he has done so when he shows them a pair of male underpants , which he claims belong to Cerie . 
 Jack asks Tracy to have a drink with him to celebrate his impending divorce , but Tracy has to leave early to celebrate Valentine 's Day with his wife through " role @-@ play " . As Jack gets more and more drunk , he reveals that he still has various fantasies about his wife from grabbing one of her breasts to her getting various terminal diseases with him by her bedside . Eventually , he picks up a prostitute ( Rachel Dratch ) , and the two interrupt Tracy and Angie 's Valentine 's Day at the Soho Grand Hotel . Angie , upset that their Valentine 's Day is ruined , demands that Tracy get rid of Jack and the prostitute , so he calls Liz for help . Liz gets Jack and the drunk prostitute out of the hotel , and Liz tells Jack that his relationship with his wife is sick and presents him with a scenario of " Marry , Boff , Kill " , all with his wife , causing Jack to say that he wants to do all of the three but promises Liz that he will get over his wife , and the two leave the prostitute in the street . The next day , Jack and Bianca sign the divorce papers , and Bianca begs Jack not to sell the Arby 's that he had gotten in their settlement . He promises not to do so , but will let the place shut down and become desolate . The two argue , and the sexual tension between the two escalate , until Bianca tears herself away from Jack and leaves . 
 Pete has forgotten that it is Valentine 's Day , which also happens to be his wife Paula 's birthday . He spends the night running around the city to try to find Valentine 's Day and birthday presents for his wife , only to lose the balloons that he had bought for his wife . Liz has received a gift of chocolate @-@ covered cherries and flowers from a supposed secret admirer . The " admirer " turns out to be " a law stylist " , ( Jason Sudeikis ) and the gifts turn out to be for his girlfriend , Liz <unk> , who works in the accounting department at TGS . However , he tells Liz to keep the flowers but asks for a picture of her with the flowers and her ID to prove to his girlfriend that he did indeed get her something for Valentine 's Day . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jason Sudeikis , who played Floyd in this episode , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live . Tina Fey was the head writer on Saturday Night Live from 1999 until 2006 . Various other cast members of Saturday Night Live have appeared on 30 Rock . These cast members include : Rachel Dratch , Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Chris Parnell and Molly Shannon . Tina Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of Saturday Night Live . Alec Baldwin has also hosted Saturday Night Live thirteen times , the second highest amount of episodes of any host of the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Up All Night " brought in an average of 5 @.@ 2 million viewers . The episode also achieved a 2 @.@ 5 / 6 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The 2 @.@ 5 refers to 2 @.@ 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the U.S. , and the 6 refers to 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast in the U.S .. 
 Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide wrote that " it would be nearly impossible to measure up to last week 's utterly manic introduction of Prince Gerhardt [ Paul <unk> ] , so forgive 30 Rock if this week 's outing was ' merely ' very amusing at times . " He added that compared to Jack 's storyline , he " actually wore more grins watching the microscopic B @-@ story with the writers , playing Marry , Boff , Kill . " Robert Canning of IGN thought that " the Valentine 's Day episode of 30 Rock gave us a big surprise : a low @-@ key half hour from a show known for being over the top , " adding that this was " a pleasant surprise " . He said that this episode " proved that [ 30 Rock ] could make with the funny no matter what the tone " . Canning rated this episode 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . 
 = Turning Point ( 2004 wrestling ) = 
 Turning Point ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , which took place on December 5 , 2004 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first event under the Turning Point chronology . Eight matches were featured on the event 's card . 
 The main event was a Six Sides of Steel cage match with a pre @-@ match stipulation that the losing team would disband . America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) defeated Triple X ( Christopher Daniels and Elix Skipper ) in this match . A Six Man Tag Team match on the event 's card ended in Jeff Hardy , A.J. Styles , and Randy Savage defeating The Kings of Wrestling ( Jeff Jarrett , Kevin Nash and Scott Hall ) . The event 's undercard featured different varieties of matches . Petey Williams defeated Chris Sabin to retain the TNA X Division Championship in one match on the undercard . Diamond Dallas Page defeated Raven in another match . 
 Turning Point is remembered for the disbanding of Triple X and for Elix Skipper pulling Chris Harris off the top of a cage with his legs to perform a move he named the New School . The PPV was also the final televised match of Randy Savage 's career . The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the event a 7 out of 10 , which was the same as the 2005 event 's rating . 
 = = Background = = 
 Turning Point featured eight professional wrestling matches involving wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots , and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or heroes in scripted , tension @-@ filled events that culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event was contested inside a 16 foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high steel structure with six sides — known as Six Sides of Steel ; to win a wrestler must either gain a pinfall or submission , with the losing team disbanding . Participants in the main event included the tag team pairings of America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) and Triple X ( Christopher Daniels and Elix Skipper ) . The storyline build to this match on September 8 at TNA 's last weekly PPV event ( # 110 ) . During this event , Harris replaced an injured Daniels and teamed with Skipper to defeat The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) for the NWA World Tag Team Championship . Harris and Skipper then proceeded to lose the championship to Storm and Daniels on the September 24 episode of TNA 's primary television program , TNA Impact ! . After Storm and Daniels lost the championship to Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) on the October 15 episode of Impact ! , tensions between the teams during the respective title reigns gave way to an official rivalry between America 's Most Wanted and Triple X. The teams fought against each other in an Elimination Last Team Standing match at TNA 's previous and first monthly three @-@ hour PPV event , Victory Road . In an Elimination Last Man Standing match , a series of events must take place to eliminate a participant . First , a wrestler must be pinned , and then the pinned wrestler has until the referee 's count of ten to reach their feet before they are officially eliminated from the match . The first two members of a team to be eliminated lose the contest ; America 's Most Wanted was victorious in the Elimination Last Man Standing match at Victory Road . On the November 19 episode of Impact , Daniels insinuated that the two teams were scheduled for a Six Sides of Steel cage match at Turning Point . Later in the episode , newly appointed authority figure Dusty Rhodes announced that the match was indeed scheduled , with the added stipulation that the losing team would have to disband and never team together again in TNA under any circumstances . 
 A Six Man Tag Team match scheduled pitting the team of Jeff Hardy , A.J. Styles , and Randy Savage against The Kings of Wrestling ( Jeff Jarrett , Kevin Nash , and Scott Hall ) was another highly promoted match . At Victory Road during the main event for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between Jarrett and Hardy , Nash and Hall interfered and cost Hardy the match . Afterwards , Nash , Hall , and Jarrett joined forces and dubbed themselves " The Kings of Wrestling " ; they then proceeded to attack Hardy Following the encounter between Jarrett and Hardy , the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James , Ron Killings , and Konnan ) , and Styles came out to Hardy 's aid . Nash , Hall , and Jarrett quickly won the fight . Savage then made his debut in TNA aligning himself with Styles and Hardy . After multiple fights between the two teams , Savage challenged The Kings of Wrestling to a match at Turning Point on the November 19 episode of Impact . The match was later made official by TNA without The Kings of Wrestling agreeing to it . 
 A featured preliminary match on Turning Point 's card was for the TNA X Division Championship , in which the champion , Petey Williams , defended the championship against Chris Sabin . The match was promoted for Turning Point on the November 12 episode of Impact ! . In the weeks leading to the encounter , Sabin stated he had found a counter to Williams ' finishing maneuver the Canadian Destroyer , which was thought to be <unk> . The Canadian Destroyer involves Williams grabbing an opponent with his legs around their head , jumping over their back , causing them to perform a backflip , and forcing their head into the mat after they make the full rotation . Making true to his word , Sabin countered the move three times before Turning Point ; one on the November 12 , one of the November 19 , and the last on the November 30 episodes of Impact ! . 
 Another match announced for Turning Point was between Raven and Diamond Dallas Page . On the November 12 episode of Impact ! , Page cost Raven a match against Monty Brown , creating a rivalry between the two . On the November 19 episode of Impact ! , Page attacked Raven once again , costing him another match . TNA later scheduled a match between the two at Turning Point . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Before the event began , a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show aired with a match between The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) and Mikey Batts and Jerrelle Clark . The Naturals won the match by pinfall , after Stevens and Douglas lifted Batts up , placed Batts head and neck onto one of their shoulders , and fell to a seated position to perform a move they dubbed the Natural Disaster . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 In the first match , the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James and Ron Killings ) defending the NWA World Tag Team Championship against Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) , who were accompanied by Coach D 'Amore . Team Canada won the match and the championship after another Team Canada member , Johnny Devine , interfered and hit B.G. with a hockey stick . Roode followed up by pinning B.G. to win the match . 
 The next encounter pitted the team of Héctor Garza , Sonjay Dutt , and Sonny Siaki were pitted against the team of Kid Kash , Michael Shane , and Frankie Kazarian , who were accompanied by Traci , in a Six Man Tag Team match . Garza , Dutt , and Siaki won the match after Garza jumped off the top rope backwards and twisted in mid @-@ air to perform a corkscrew moonsault onto Kazarian for the pinfall victory . 
 The third match was a Serengeti Survival match between Monty Brown and Abyss . In this match , there were no disqualifications and the only way to win was by pinfall , submission , or by slamming the opponent into a pile of thumbtacks . Mid @-@ way through the match , Brown grabbed a bag of tacks and poured them on the ring @-@ mat . Afterwards , Brown and Abyss fought to slam each other into the tacks until Brown lifted Abyss up onto his shoulders and threw him forward down to the ring @-@ mat . Brown 's throw caused Abyss to fall on the tacks with his head and back , giving the win to Brown . 
 A tag team match followed in the fourth match , with Pat Kenney teaming with Johnny B. Badd to fight The New York Connection ( Johnny Swinger and Glenn <unk> ) . Jacqueline was the special guest referee for the bout . Badd won the encounter after he lifted Gilberti up onto his shoulders , spun him around , and fell to his back to perform a move known as a TKO . Badd followed by covering Gilberti for the pinfall . 
 Diamond Dallas Page ( DDP ) and Raven fought in the fifth match . The officiating referee was scripted to be knocked out in the beginning of the match and was later replaced . DDP claimed victory in the match with a move called the Diamond Cutter : DPP grabbed Raven 's head , jumped forward , and landed on his back , causing Raven 's head to impact with his shoulder . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Accompanied by Coach D 'Amore , Petey Williams defended the TNA X Division Championship against Chris Sabin . During the match , Sabin countered the Canadian Destroyer and attempted to perform his signature maneuver , the Cradle Shock . Williams countered the Cradle Shock into a submission maneuver known as the Sharpshooter . While the referee wasn 't looking , Williams hit Sabin with a pair of brass knuckles and gained the pinfall victory to end the match , retaining the TNA X Division Championship . 
 Next , the Kings of Wrestling ( Kevin Nash , Scott Hall , and Jeff Jarrett ) fought the team of Jeff Hardy , A.J. Styles , and Randy Savage in a Six Man Tag Team match . Earlier in the night , The Kings of Wrestling attacked Savage and stuffed him into the trunk of a limo , which spend off out of the arena 's parking lot . Without Savage , Styles and Hardy had to work the match by themselves . After several minutes of Hardy and Styles fighting off all the members of The Kings of Wrestling , Savage returned to the arena and walked down to the ring , where he was tagged into the match by Hardy . A few moments later , Savage pinned Jarrett after a punch to the jaw . 
 The main event was a Six Sides of Steel cage match contested between America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) and Triple X ( Christopher Daniels and Elix Skipper ) , with the losing team disbanding forever . Mid @-@ way through , Skipper handcuffed Harris to the ropes and kept the key away from the referee . Storm later took the key from Skipper and freed Harris from the cuffs . At one point in the match , Skipper and Daniels double teamed Harris and performed America 's Most Wanted signature finishing maneuver , the Death Sentence by holding Harris in place while the other member climbed to the top rope and performed a leg drop across Harris 's neck and head . Skipper followed by covering Harris for a pinfall , however , he kicked out before the count of three . Harris later climbed up to the top of the cage . While Harris sat on top of the cage , Skipper climbed up at another corner and walked across the top similar to walking a tightrope . Skipper then jumped and grabbed Harris 's head with his legs , falling backwards towards the ring in a move he dubbed the New School . This move caused Harris to fly off of the top of the cage and land on his back in the middle of the ring . A brief time later , all four men were positioned at certain points on one of the padded turnbuckles to perform what TNA calls the " Tower of Doom " . In a variation of the move , Daniels was being held upside @-@ down by Storm , until Skipper grabbed Storm and placed his head between Storm 's legs to lift him off of a padded turnbuckle . Harris then grabbed Skipper and placed Skipper on his shoulders while he held Storm , who remained holding Daniels . Harris then performed a powerbomb on Skipper , while Skipper pulled down Storm , who suplexed Daniels off of the top of the cage . The conclusion to the match saw America 's Most Wanted cuff Daniels to the ropes and perform Triple X 's signature maneuver , the <unk> by lifting Skipper up onto Storm 's shoulders while Harris held Skipper 's head . Storm and Harris then fell to the mat , forcing Skipper 's neck into Harris 's shoulder and mat while slamming his back into the mat as well . Storm then pinned Skipper for the pinfall victory . As a result of Triple X 's loss , the team had to disband forever . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Turning Point , America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) began a rivalry with Team Canada ( Bobby Roode and Eric Young ) over the NWA World Tag Team Championship . They defeated Team Canada on the December 24 episode of Impact ! to earn the chance to challenge them at TNA 's next PPV , Final Resolution . At the event , America 's Most Wanted defeated Team Canada to win the championship . 
 The rivalry between The Kings of Wrestling ( Jeff Jarrett , Scott Hall , and Kevin Nash ) and Randy Savage , Jeff Hardy , and A.J. Styles slowly died down after the event . Styles went on to Final Resolution to win the TNA X Division Championship in an Ultimate X match , which also involved Chris Sabin and Petey Williams . In an Ultimate X match , four pillars are set up at ringside with steel red ropes attached at the top , which are criss @-@ crossed to form an " X " over the center of the ring . The championship belt is hung on the center " X " with the objective being to remove it and fall to the mat below to win . Hardy defeated Hall at Final Resolution as a replacement for Hector Garza . Savage left the company after the event . The Kings of Wrestling later disbanded ( not official until after Final Resolution ) as a result of Nash being placed in a match where the winner would challenge Jarrett in the main event of Final Resolution for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship ; this match also took place at the event . 
 In 2007 , Triple X reformed at Victory Road ( which became a July PPV event in 2006 ) with all three members of the original alliance : Daniels , Skipper , and Senshi . Before the reunion in 2007 , Daniels had a successful career as a singles competitor . At TNA 's March PPV event , Destination X , Daniels won the TNA X Division Championship from Styles in an Ultimate X Challenge match involving Ron Killings and his former partner , <unk> Skipper . Afterward , Daniels went on to make successful defenses and winning the championship three times ; Skipper 's singles career was not as victorious . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writer Bob Kapur of the Canadian Online Explorer rated Turning Point a 7 out of 10 , which was the same as the rating for the 2005 event . The TNA X Division Championship bout was rated an 8 out of 10 . The Six Man Tag Team match between The Kings of Wrestling ( Kevin Nash , Scott Hall , and Jeff Jarrett ) and A.J. Styles , Jeff Hardy , and Randy Savage was rated a 3 out of 10 , while the Six Sides of Steel cage match main event was rated a 9 out of 10 . In his review , Kapur stated that he felt the Six Man Tag Team match was " an overbooked train wreck whose only saving grace was Styles 's performance , as he tried to wring out something decent out of the old @-@ timers " . The X Division Championship and main event bouts gained better reviews from Kapur . According to Kapur , the X Division Championship encounter was " a fantastic match which really showcases the talents of both men . " Regarding the main event , Kapur described it as " a fantastic match filled with exciting high spots from bell to bell " . TNA released a list of their top 50 moments in their history in 2006 in a DVD release titled " TNA : The 50 Greatest Moments " , with the main event between America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) and Triple X ( Christopher Daniels and Elix Skipper ) being ranked number 6 . On September 20 , 2005 , TNA Home Video released the event in a DVD boxset called " TNA Anthology : The Epic Set " , including TNA 's April 2005 PPV event , Lockdown , and the 2004 Victory Road event . 
 = = Results = = 
 = I Did It , Mama ! = 
 " I Did It , Mama ! " is a song recorded by Romanian singer @-@ songwriter Alexandra Stan for her eponymous and second studio album , Alesta ( 2016 ) . Released on 27 November 2015 through Global Records as a single , the track was produced by Play & Win members Sebastian Barac and Marcel Botezan , and David Ciente . The writing process was handled by the latter three in collaboration with Stan , Eric Turner and J @-@ Son . An europop , reggaeton , eurodance and dance @-@ pop song incorporating <unk> and ethnic influences into its sound , the record was described as resembling the lyrical message of Madonna 's " Papa Don 't Preach " ( 1986 ) . 
 " I Did It , Mama ! " was met with negative to positive reviews , with music critics calling it " an earworm " and " great " , while others named it " boring " and unfriendly for radio airplay . An official music video for " I Did It , Mama ! " was shot by Bogdan <unk> and uploaded in November 2015 onto YouTube in order to accompany the single 's release . The clip presents Stan being surrounded by different types of half @-@ naked men , and aroused controversy for cut scenes where she is shown miming the sexual intercourse and oral sex with one of her background dancers . Commercially , the track peaked at number nine in Stan 's native country . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 The song was written by Marcel Botezan , Sebastian Barac , J @-@ Son , Eric Turner , David Ciente and Stan , while production was handled by both Botezan and Barac under their alias Play & Win , and Ciente . Lyrically , " I Did It , Mama ! " is about the " conflict between different generations , more specific between children and their parents " . Throughout the lyrics , Stan urges her parents to accept her misunderstood new boyfriend . However , with the refrain of the song , she stands her ground , repeating the track 's title several times . <unk> Stern , writing for music website Pop Crush , compared the message of the song to that of Madonna 's " Papa Don 't Preach " ( 1986 ) , while Stan herself confessed that " [ the song ] is a more rebellious recording that parents may not understand from the first play " . She has , as well , named the tune a mixture between europop , reggaeton and <unk> music . Hitfire described " I Did , It Mama ! " as a " successful " dance @-@ pop track , and Gay Times named it an " eurodance banger " . Carlo <unk> of Italian portal Daring To Do pointed out ethnic influences featured into its composition . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon its release , the track was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Pop Crush was positive towards the song , calling it " an immediately infectious earworm , as with every Stan @-@ pop masterpiece " . The review concluded that " [ the track ] doesn 't make much sense at all , and it doesn 't have to — she ’ s Alexandra Stan , <unk> " . Hitfire praised the refrain and the strophes of the tune , but criticized its drop and main part , confessing that they " destroy the song a little bit " . Spanish music website Melty eventually named the recording " great " , foreseeing it successful in European clubs . Daring To Do provided a negative review for " I Did It , Mama ! " , saying that it was " boring " and confessing that its radio potential was " below zero " . Romanian magazine Libertatea compared the song 's title to that of Delia Matache 's " Da , Mama " . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 An accompanying music video shot by Bogdan <unk> for the song was released on 25 November 2015 onto Stan 's YouTube channel . Stan , particularly , confessed that " at the filming of the clip , [ she ] felt very good , like an absolute goddess , with a lot of males teeming around [ her ] for 24 hours " . For the video , several men were employed , such as models , motorcyclists and rugby players from CSA Steaua București . The clip commences with some motorcyclists arriving at an abandoned place , followed by Stan lying on a plastic horse in a neon @-@ lightened room and singing the first strophe in front of the rugby players . Subsequently , she is shown scattered on the ground of a dark room , with half @-@ naked men sporting white fishnet <unk> and boots appearing from her left and right . After she and the fellow males perform to the song , the clip ends with Stan being left alone on the horse from the beginning . Scenes interspersed through the main video portray her posing in front of a blue wall , sporting black sun glasses and cross @-@ styled earrings . 
 The clip received mostly positive reviews , with Pop Crush calling the dresses displayed in it " a campy European mixture of ’ 20s flapper style / old Hollywood glamour in fringe " . Hitfire recommended the video , which they called " a feast for both genders " . Romanian newspapers Cancan and Click ! pointed out cut scenes that portray Stan 's mime of the sexual intercourse and oral sex with a fellow dancer , which , according to them , would have been a reason for the clip to be banned in Romania . Melty named the video " <unk> " , while Daring To Do was negative towards it , commending " it presents scenes [ they 've ] already seen countless times , leaving the viewer annoyed with a feeling of déjà vu " . 
 Stan included " I Did It , Mama ! " on the tracklist for her Japanese one @-@ week concert tours that promoted the release of her studio album , Alesta , in that territory . She as well performed a stripped @-@ down version of the song on Romanian radio station Pro FM . Romania singer , dancer and moderator George <unk> impersonated Stan and covered the track on native interactive talent show Te <unk> de <unk> ! . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Alesta . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " I Did It Mama " - 3 : 25 
 Digital remix EP 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Jack Mazzoni Remix ) – 4 : 26 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Jack Mazzoni Radio Remix ) – 3 : 23 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Franques Remix ) – 4 : 20 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Franques Extended Mix ) – 5 : 08 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Fedo Mora & Oki Doro Remix ) – 4 : 30 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Fedo Mora & Oki Doro Radio Remix ) – 3 : 20 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Matthew Bee Radio Remix ) – 3 : 32 
 " I Did It Mama " ( Matthew Bee Remix ) – 4 : 41 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " I Did It , Mama " was released digitally worldwide on 27 November 2015 on iTunes through Global and Ego labels . Subsequently , a remixes EP was made available for purchase on 7 January 2016 and 15 January in European territories . The cover artwork for the Italian extended play featured the blue coloring from the original one being edited to green , while the sleeve for the other releases featured it changed to red . Italian radio stations began adding the track onto their playlist on 30 November 2015 . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Tiga Dara = 
 Tiga Dara ( Indonesian for Three Maidens ) is a 1957 Indonesian @-@ language musical comedy film starring Chitra Dewi , Mieke Wijaya , and Indriati Iskak . Directed by Usmar Ismail for Perfini , the film follows three sisters who live with their father and grandmother . When the eldest sister , Nunung , shows no interest in marrying , her family tries unsuccessfully to find a husband for her . Nunung initially rejects the advances of a young man named Toto , who instead dates her younger sister . However , when he becomes jealous and travels from Jakarta to Bandung to profess his love , she agrees to marry him . 
 Produced using government credit and written in an attempt to cover Perfini 's outstanding debts , Tiga Dara was intended to be commercial despite Ismail 's disapproval of such works . After it was released in August 1957 , the film was an immense popular success , launching the careers of its stars , earning the highest box office returns of any Perfini film , and being screened in first @-@ class cinemas . However , even though Tiga Dara was shown at the 1959 Venice Film Festival and received Best Musical Arrangement at the 1960 Indonesian Film Week , Ismail considered it a compromise of his initial vision for Perfini . 
 Since its release , Tiga Dara has been considered a classic of Indonesian cinema , with themes which remain relevant for modern Indonesian society . It was remade as Tiga Dara Mencari Cinta ( Three Maidens Seek Love ) in 1980 by Djun <unk> and influenced Teguh Karya 's Pacar Ketinggalan Kereta ( Lover Left by the Train , 1989 ) . A second remake , Ini Kisah Tiga Dara ( This is the Story of Three Maidens ) , has been produced by Nia Dinata and is scheduled for a September 2016 release . In 2015 Tiga Dara was restored and converted to 4K digital by L <unk> Ritrovata Laboratory . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Three sisters — Nunung ( Chitra Dewi ) , Nana ( Mieke Wijaya ) and Nenny ( Indriati Iskak ) — are being raised by their grandmother ( Fifi Young ) in Jakarta after their mother 's death . Though the sisters ' father Sukandar ( Hassan Sanusi ) lives with them , he is too involved in his own work to pay them heed . 
 While the sisters are out with Nana 's boyfriend Herman ( Bambang Irawan ) , their grandmother tells Sukandar than she will not live to see Nunung , already aged 29 , marry . He agrees to invite his colleagues to the house . When they come several days later , Nunung impresses all present with her piano @-@ playing and singing . However , the men are all too old , and Nunung 's grandmother insists that Sukandar find a younger man . Nenny , overhearing the conversation , suggests that they hold a party ; this too is a failure , as Nunung takes no interest in the festivities . 
 Nana is then asked to take Nunung out with her , in the hopes that the eldest sister will meet a marriageable young man . At a party , while Nana mingles with several men , Nunung sits out every dance and eventually leaves with Herman . Asked why she has returned home , Nunung tells her grandmother that she felt too old among the younger party @-@ goers and asks why she was told to go . Nenny , again eavesdropping , shouts out that their grandmother is hoping to find her a husband . Though Nunung is initially angered , she understands her grandmother 's good intentions . 
 The following day , Nunung is stricken by a scooter driven by Toto ( Rendra Karno ) . Despite an injured leg , Nunung insists on taking a pedicab home ; without her knowledge , Toto follows her . He later returns to apologize , and , though Nunung treats him harshly , is quickly accepted by Nana and her grandmother . Nana asks Toto to visit frequently , and over the next several days Nana pushes away Herman . Nenny , meanwhile , uses her sister 's interest in Toto to become closer to Herman . When Nana announces that she and Toto are engaged , her grandmother is furious ; if Nana marries before her sister , she says , Nunung will never marry . 
 After Nana and Nunung fight , their guardians decide that it is best for Nunung to go the home of her uncle Tamsil ( Usmar Ismail ) in Bandung and rest . While there , Nunung writes a letter to her father that Joni kisses her goodnight every day . This news sparks Nenny 's titillation and Toto 's jealousy . Nana insists that Toto choose between her and Nunung ; Toto decides to go to Bandung and protest Joni 's impropriety . He confronts Nunung and confesses his love for her . She spitefully tells him that she sleeps with Joni every night . 
 Herman , at the insistence of Nana , takes the remainder of the family to Bandung , where they meet up with Toto , Nunung , and Tamsil 's family . As Tamsil introduces his sons , Joni is revealed to be a young child . Nunung and Toto embrace , while Nana and Herman make up . 
 = = Production = = 
 Tiga Dara was directed and produced by Usmar Ismail for his National Film Company ( Perusahaan Film Nasional , better known as Perfini ) . Although Ismail had wanted to " not consider commercial aspects " of filmmaking when he established Perfini in 1950 , he was forced to recognise the need to make a profitable film as Perfini continued to lose money . Following the failures of Lagi @-@ Lagi Krisis ( More Crises , 1955 ) and Tamu Agung ( Exalted Guest , 1955 ) , the company 's financial situation was bleak , and Ismail fired a number of his staff . With only some leftover government credit to finance his next production , Ismail collaborated with M. Alwi Dahlan to write a film which would be popular with audiences . The resulting story , which may have been inspired by the 1936 musical comedy Three Smart Girls , was Tiga Dara . 
 Production of Tiga Dara began in 1956 . Chitra Dewi , Mieke Wijaya , and Indriati Iskak were cast as the titular maidens . Dewi had previously appeared in Tamu Agung , and Wijaya had made her debut in the Palembang Film Corporation 's <unk> ( Fail ) the previous year . Iskak , the 14 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of film director Raden Iskak , made her feature film debut with Tiga Dara . Supporting roles were filled by Fifi Young , Rendra Karno , Hassan Sanusi , Bambang Irawan , and <unk> . For the role of Joni , Ismail cast his real @-@ life son , <unk> Usmar Ismail . 
 As musical films were popular with Indonesian audiences , Tiga Dara was made in that genre . It featured seven songs by <unk> <unk> ( who also served as sound editor ) as well as one by Ismail Marzuki and two by <unk> <unk> . Only Wijaya provided her own vocals ; the other actors were dubbed by Sam <unk> , Elly Sri Kudus , Bing Slamet , <unk> , S. <unk> , and Sitti <unk> . Long @-@ time Perfini cameraman Max Tera handled cinematography for this black @-@ and @-@ white film , using the company 's outdated equipment , and Soemardjono was in charge of editing . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Tiga Dara premiered in August 1957 at the Capitol Theatre in Jakarta . Distributed by Perfini , it found popular success and was screened for eight consecutive weeks in cinemas throughout the archipelago . This included several first @-@ class cinemas which were affiliated with the American Motion Picture Association of Indonesia ( <unk> ) and mostly showed imported films . On 20 September 1957 President Sukarno arranged for a private screening of the film at the Presidential Palace in Bogor for the birthday of his wife , <unk> . " Tiga Dara " competitions between groups of three sisters were held in much of Java , and the term became widely used as the name of batik products , shops , and drinks . At the 1960 Indonesian Film Week , Tiga Dara received Best Musical Arrangement . 
 Negotiations to bring Tiga Dara to Malaya began soon after its release , and the film was exported , again to commercial success , in exchange for the import of the Malayan film Mega Mendung ( Cloudy Skies ) . In the late 1950s the film was shown in several Italian cities , including Rome , as well as in Yugoslavia . After Floris Ammannati saw the Rome screening , he invited Ismail to show Tiga Dara at the 1959 Venice Film Festival ; Ismail did so , though he considered the Venice screening to be unsuccessful . Tiga Dara was screening in Netherlands New Guinea by August 1960 and in Suriname by August 1963 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tiga Dara was Perfini 's most lucrative film , grossing almost Rp 10 million in ticket sales , or a profit of Rp 3 @,@ 080 @,@ 000 , during its theatrical run . However , despite this popular success Perfini 's financial situation saw little improvement . Furthermore , Ismail considered the Tiga Dara a disappointment which compromised the goals he had had when he established Perfini . According to fellow Perfini film director D. Djajakusuma : 
 Usmar [ Ismail ] was ashamed of the film . His intent to sell Tiga Dara when it was still in production showed how difficult it was for him to accept the fact that he had to make that kind of film . ... even though money was coming in , Perfini just was not making the kinds of films that Usmar had dreamed of initially . 
 In subsequent years Perfini released a number of commercially oriented films , such as <unk> <unk> Angin ( Eight Compass Directions , 1957 ) and Asrama Dara ( Dormitory for Girls , 1958 ) . Though none of these were commercial failures , none except for Asrama Dara approached the financial success of Tiga Dara . Ismail attempted to reassert himself as a director of quality not @-@ for @-@ profit films through Pedjuang ( Warriors for Freedom , 1960 ) , which was screened in competition at the 2nd Moscow International Film Festival in 1961 . However , as the years passed he became increasingly distanced from his early goals and had made attempts to enter banking , the nightclub industry , and parliament by the time of his death in 1971 . 
 Dewi and Wijaya both became popular following the success of Tiga Dara . Dewi continued acting for a further four decades , appearing in her final feature film , <unk> <unk> ( Grand Sword ) , in 1993 , fifteen years before her death . Wijaya 's most recent film role has been in Ayat @-@ Ayat Cinta ( Verses of Love , 2008 ) . Meanwhile , Iskak , who was praised for having a more naturalistic acting style than her stage @-@ trained fellow actors , soared to popularity . She formed a girl group , the Baby Dolls , together with Rima Melati , Gaby Mambo , and Baby <unk> , and acted in a further eight films before retiring from cinema in 1963 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Tiga Dara has been recognised as a classic of Indonesian cinema and often been shown on television . A 1989 retrospective on Perfini in Tempo argued that the film still showed the sense of honesty and realism common in Ismail 's earlier work , and in a 1991 memorial book for Ismail , Rosihan Anwar wrote that the themes of Tiga Dara remained relevant for the Indonesian people . Similar sentiments were voiced by the film director Nia Dinata in 2016 . 
 By 2015 the cellulose acetate negatives for Tiga Dara , held at Sinematek Indonesia , were heavily damaged . They were torn in places , and scenes were besmirched by fungus or lost altogether . To better preserve the film for future generations , SA Films arranged for Tiga Dara to be restored by the Bologna @-@ based L <unk> Ritrovata Laboratory ; the film was the second of Ismail 's oeuvre to be restored , following Lewat Djam Malam ( After the Curfew , 1954 ) in 2012 . Restoration work , which included the reinsertion of lost scenes using extant copies of the film and the removal of dust and fungus , began in early 2015 and was completed on 8 October 2015 . This restoration — converted to 4K digital — is to be screened in Indonesia beginning on 11 August 2016 , with a DVD and Blu @-@ ray release the following year . 
 Several films have been remade or influenced by Tiga Dara . A remake , Tiga Dara Mencari Cinta ( Three Maidens Seek Love ) , was directed by Djun <unk> and released in 1980 . This comedy starred Ingrid Fernandez , Nana <unk> , and <unk> Aditya Dewi as three sisters who live with their father and face the trials and tribulations of dating . Eight years later , when Teguh Karya was directing Pacar Ketinggalan Kereta ( Lover Left by the Train , 1989 ) , he insisted that the cast and crew watch Tiga Dara in an attempt to transcend it . In Tempo , the writer Putu Wijaya later described Pacar Ketinggalan Kereta as seemingly trying to recapture the family and musical dynamics of Ismail 's story . In 2004 a remake of Tiga Dara , to be directed by Rudi Soedjarwo and involve Dian Sastrowardoyo , Siti <unk> , and Krisdayanti , was announced , though this production has not been realized . 
 Another updated retelling of the Tiga Dara story , Ini Kisah Tiga Dara ( This is the Story of Three Maidens ) , was shot between 23 February and 27 March 2016 in <unk> , Flores . In a press conference , the film 's director , Nia Dinata , stated that she had enjoyed watching Tiga Dara as a child and that she remained awed by the film 's beauty . She also said that her retelling , though it maintained the spirit of Ismail 's original , would feature a new plot as well as new songs by Titiek Puspa . Ini Kisah Tiga Dara , which stars Shanty , Tara <unk> , and Tatyana <unk> , is scheduled for a September 2016 release . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Two Fathers = 
 " Two Fathers " is the eleventh episode of the sixth season and the 128th episode overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States and Canada on February 7 , 1999 , on the Fox Network and subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on Sky1 . It was written by executive producers Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz and directed by Kim Manners . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 5 and was viewed by a total of 18 @.@ 81 million viewers . The episode received mostly positive reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . " Two Fathers " follows a story which would lead to the destruction of the Syndicate : with the unexpected return of Cassandra Spender and the alien rebels , members of the Syndicate prepare themselves for the final invasion . 
 " Two Fathers " was written in order to eliminate the Syndicate and relaunch the series ' mythology . With the series being shot in Los Angeles , many members of The X @-@ Files crew had to adjust scenes and filming techniques in order to achieve the " dark and gray feel " that had been a result of filming in Vancouver . The episode is the first of a two @-@ part episode and continues with the episode " One Son " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a train car , doctors in chemical suits are making incisions on an unseen patient 's stomach ; green fluid seeps out of the wounds , which heal themselves . When Dr. Eugene Openshaw arrives , he is informed that their twenty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old project is finally completed . Moments later , rebel aliens begin to appear and start burning all the doctors , the only survivor being Dr. Openshaw . The patient , Cassandra Spender , had been missing for over a year . Walter Skinner takes her son , Jeffrey Spender , to the scene , where he meets with his mother . Cassandra refuses to talk with Jeffrey about what happened to her because she knows that he won 't believe her . She asks for Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . Spender asks Mulder to join him to meet his mother , but Mulder sees it as an attempt to entrap him . Later on , Dr. Openshaw informs the Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) about the completion of the project , saying he needs to kill his former wife since she is the first successful alien @-@ human hybrid . The Cigarette Smoking Man 's reaction leads to Dr. Openshaw 's death . Meanwhile one of the Syndicate elders is killed by an alien rebel , who takes on his form . 
 Mulder and partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) go over the crime scene photos from the train car incident and immediately recognize similarities to murders from a year earlier . Afterwards , Mulder and Scully visit Cassandra who informs them that the aliens are here to destroy all life on Earth , further stating that this alien threat moves through the Universe to colonize other planets . She claims that a rebel force of aliens are mutilating their faces to prevent infection by the black oil . 
 Alex Krycek reports to the Syndicate on the rebel 's recent attacks . The rebel , masquerading as the elder he killed , proposes that the Syndicate align themselves with the rebels . The Cigarette Smoking Man seems to recognize that the elder has opposed his own previous <unk> that siding with the rebels is suicide . 
 Mulder and Scully use the X @-@ Files office to find the Cigarette Smoking Man 's real identity , that he is Agent Spender 's father , C.G.B. Spender . Their unauthorized entry at the X @-@ Files office is discovered resulting in both agents ' immediate suspension from the FBI . Agent Spender reports to the Cigarette Smoking Man demanding the truth . Scully meets with Mulder , telling him that C.G.B. Spender is likely another alias and that the man is linked with Mulder 's father , William , who he had worked with on a secret state project . The Cigarette Smoking Man decides to give Agent Spender more responsibility by having him kill the alien rebel masquerading as a Syndicate elder . Spender fails in his task , but Krycek comes to his aid and finishes . Krycek reveals to Spender that his father was responsible for Cassandra 's abductions and that his role is to protect his father 's stake in the project , facts that upset Agent Spender . 
 The Cigarette Smoking Man reveals everything to Diana Fowley , who agrees to help him . Mulder tells Skinner that Cassandra is in danger because she is the first successful alien @-@ human hybrid ; Skinner goes to the hospital to check on Cassandra but finds her gone . Cassandra , having escaped from the hospital , arrives at Mulder 's apartment and demands that he shoot her because she is the embodiment of fifty years of work by the Syndicate — an alien @-@ human hybrid that will trigger colonization if the aliens learn of her existence . 
 = = Production = = 
 The plan to eliminate the Syndicate and relaunch the series ' mythology in a new direction was originally conceived in September 1998 . Director Kim Manners stated " I 've said for years that the show really resolved itself , if you will , by accident . The whole story line of the Syndicate and the bees and the aliens and the chips in the neck , they all seemed to just accidentally fall into place and create an intriguing , mysterious storyline that eventually got so mysterious and so intriguing that Chris had to blow it up , because he couldn 't deal with it anymore . " The original script featured various flashback sequences to the actors Peter Donat , William B. Davis and Veronica Cartwright , all from scenes around twenty @-@ to @-@ thirty years earlier in the show . They did various makeup jobs on the actors to make them look younger . However , the writers eventually came to the conclusion that it " just didn 't [ ... ] work " , so they cut out most of that storyline , which ultimately led to the creation of a whole new direction in which the Cigarette Smoking Man provided a monologue explaining the history of the project instead . The first scene was shot in Long Beach , California . 
 The scene in which Jeffrey Spender visited his mother , Cassandra Spender , was shot in Los Angeles . Those members of The X @-@ Files crew who had moved with the show from Vancouver to Los Angeles still had problems adjusting to the changes when filming an episode . They were forced to adjust to changes in the sunlight , since Vancouver had this " dark and gray feel " compared to California 's sunny atmosphere . Kim Manners said that it was difficult to get used to the new area of filming . This episode marks the first time new stock footage was used for the J. Edgar Hoover Building in over five years . 
 The Second Elder 's house was in a relatively expensive neighborhood in Los Angeles . Manners stated that he was " very nervous " when filming this scene because the crew needed to create a fire inside the house , which was done by Kelly Kerby and Bobby Calvert . When the faceless alien attacks the Second Elder , a special effects crew member can be seen behind a window " running with his rig " , according to Manners . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 5 , with a 16 share . It was viewed by a total of 18 @.@ 81 million viewers in the United States . The episode was the third highest rated episode of the sixth season . The episode debuted in the United States and Canada on February 7 , 1999 , at the Fox Network . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on May 16 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 72 million viewers , making it the third most watched episode that week . Veronica Cartwright was nominated for an Emmy for " Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series " for her role in this episode and " One Son " , and the make @-@ up department was nominated for an Emmy award in the category " Outstanding Makeup for a Series " and won . The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote positively of the episode , saying it " wonderfully " developed the show 's characters as " it unveiled many of the answers to the questions that have been dangling about for some time with out using Mulder or Scully as conduits for many of these answers . " The main reason behind creating a resolution to the Syndicate arc was that Chris Carter thought the series was going to be cancelled by early 2000 . While promoting the episode , Carter said it would give many long @-@ waited answers but at the same time create new ones . Earl Cressey from DVD Talk named " Two Fathers , " along with its follow @-@ up " One Son , " as one of the " highlights of season six . " Joyce Millman from Salon magazine said the episode ( along with " One Son " ) was one " of the most coherent , [ ... ] almost unbearably tense , hours in the series ' run " . The Michigan Daily reviewer Melissa Runstrom said " Two Fathers " along with " One Son " and season finale " Biogenesis " were the highlights of the sixth season . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " rating . He concluded that the episode is an example of " propulsive fun " and applauded its myriad of attention @-@ grabbing sequences . However , he was critical of its plot , noting that " the series pretty much just picks Cassandra to be the answer to a lot of questions " concerning the show 's mythology . Not all reviews were so glowing . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris wrote positively of the episode 's filming , writing , " visually , the episode looks good [ … ] but the scenes in the hangar are eye @-@ poppers , with doors slowly opening and aliens walking forward , obscured by bright light . " However , she criticized the episode 's plot , noting that " Two Fathers " was " heading straight down a path already trodden by dozens of books , short stories , movies , and other television shows . " 
 = Kepler @-@ 9c = 
 Kepler @-@ 9c is one of the first seven extrasolar planets , exoplanets , discovered by NASA 's Kepler Mission , and one of at least two planets orbiting the star Kepler @-@ 9 . Kepler @-@ 9c and Kepler @-@ 9b were the first exoplanets confirmed to be transiting their star . The planet 's discovery was announced by the Kepler Mission team on August 26 , 2010 after its initial discovery by Kepler . At the time , it was one of 700 planetary candidates noted by Kepler . 
 Observations of the planet have suggested that it is a hydrogen – helium gas giant that is slightly smaller than Saturn , and that it orbits nearby its star at .225 AU . Kepler @-@ 9c and b are notable in that the planets share a pattern of orbital resonance , in which the orbit of each planet stabilizes the orbit of the other . During the time it was observed by the spacecraft , the planet 's orbit , which lasts on average approximately 38 days , shortened by 39 minutes every orbital period because of this effect . Its orbit , over time , oscillates slightly above and below a 2 : 1 ratio with planet b . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 As with most exoplanets , the name " Kepler @-@ 9c " denotes that it is the second planet discovered in the orbit of the star Kepler @-@ 9 . Kepler @-@ 9 itself was named after the Kepler Mission , a NASA project oriented towards discovering planets that are transiting their home stars . 
 The planet was one of 700 planetary candidates considered by Kepler in its first 43 days of operation . It was highlighted as a part of one of five star systems that seemed to hold multiple transiting planets . Kepler @-@ 9c and Kepler @-@ 9b were confirmed as the first planets discovered to transit the same star . 
 Initial estimates concerning Kepler @-@ 9c 's mass were refined by follow @-@ up observations made by the Keck 1 Telescope at the W.M. Keck Observatory at Mauna Kea , Hawaii . Keck was able to confirm that Kepler @-@ 9c and Kepler @-@ 9b were planets that were slightly smaller than planet Saturn . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 9c is a gas giant that is smaller and slightly less massive than planet Saturn . It is approximately 0 @.@ 171 MJ , or 17 % the mass of planet Jupiter . It also has a radius of 0 @.@ 823 RJ , which makes it slightly smaller ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) than Saturn . The planet is , on average , situated 0 @.@ 225 AU from the star . 
 It is probable that the planet is composed of hydrogen and helium . The planet orbits on the same plane as Kepler @-@ 9b , a second and larger gas giant located in the Kepler @-@ 9 system . While observing the planet , the Kepler team noticed that Kepler @-@ 9b and c orbited in a 1 : 2 ratio , where Kepler @-@ 9b orbits its star every 19 days and Kepler @-@ 9c orbits every 38 days . The gravitational pull that each planet has on the other , known as orbital resonance , keeps the planets in a stable orbit . This phenomenon is the first of its kind seen outside the Solar System . Every time Kepler @-@ 9c completed an orbit during the observation period , its orbital period decreased by about 39 minutes . At some point , however , this trend will reverse and its orbit will increase . The lengths of its orbit will oscillate slightly above and below the 2 : 1 ratio . 
 = Richard of Dover = 
 Richard ( died 1184 ) was a medieval Benedictine monk and Archbishop of Canterbury . Employed by Thomas Becket immediately before Becket 's death , Richard arranged for Becket to be buried in Canterbury Cathedral and eventually succeeded Becket at Canterbury in a contentious election . Much of Richard 's time as archbishop was spent in a dispute with Roger de Pont L 'Evêque , the Archbishop of York over the primacy of England , and with St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury over the archbishop 's jurisdiction over the abbey . Richard had better relations with King Henry II of England than Becket had , and was employed by the king on diplomatic affairs . Richard also had the trust of the papacy , and served as a judge for the papacy . Several of his questions to Pope Alexander III were collected into the Decretals , a collection of ecclesiastical laws , and his patronage of canon lawyers did much to advance the study of canon law in England . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Richard was born in Normandy and became a monk at Canterbury , and a chaplain to Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury . At some point , he received an education , but it is not known where or who he studied with . The first notice of him in history is as a monk at Christ Church . He was a colleague of Thomas Becket while they both worked for Theobald . In 1157 he was appointed prior of St. Martin 's priory in Dover . St. Martin 's was a Benedictine priory and a dependent house of Christ Church Cathedral Priory in Canterbury , the cathedral chapter of the archbishops of Canterbury . Right before Becket 's death Richard was employed by Becket to meet with Henry the Young King , but was unsuccessful in the attempt . After Becket 's death , Richard took charge of Becket 's body , and arranged for an immediate burial in Canterbury Cathedral . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 In 1173 , more than two years after the murder of Becket , King Henry II of England decided to fill the vacant archbishopric of Canterbury ; there were two candidates : Richard , and Odo , prior of Canterbury . Previously , Roger , the abbot of Bec Abbey , had been elected , but refused the office . On 3 June 1173 , Richard was chosen , although the monks preferred Odo . Both sides appealed to Rome , and Richard journeyed to Rome with Reginald fitz Jocelin , who had recently been elected Bishop of Bath , to rebut the charges of simony , illegitimate birth , and swearing an oath to the king that had been raised . After hearing the charges , they were dismissed and the election was ratified on 2 April 1174 and on 7 April 1174 the new archbishop was consecrated at Anagni by Pope Alexander III . Richard returned to England at the close of the year bearing his pallium which he had received directly from the pope . He was also granted legatine powers by Alexander III . 
 Richard clashed with Roger de Pont L 'Evêque , the Archbishop of York , over the respective rights of the two sees throughout his time as archbishop . In 1175 , at a council held in London , there was a fight between their supporters . King Henry II managed to secure a truce for five years between the two archbishops but Richard was soon embroiled in another dispute . This one was with Roger , abbot of St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury and revolved around whether or not the abbey depended directly on the pope or if the archbishop had jurisdictional rights over the abbey . In the end , the papacy arranged a settlement that left the abbey dependent on the pope direct , but gave the archbishop spiritual authority over the churches of the Isle of Thanet , which had previously been held by the abbey . 
 Richard 's time as archbishop was much less stormy than Becket 's had been , and he seems to have had better relations with the king . Richard attended the royal councils , and more than once was with the king in Normandy . Richard was less dogmatic on the rights of the clergy than his great predecessor had been ; but his compromises were regarded by the monastic writers and the followers of Becket as a sign of weakness . Pope Alexander III took Richard to task when Richard acquiesced in the election of bishops taking place in the royal chapel . As part of his diplomatic efforts on the king 's behalf , Richard escorted Henry 's daughter Joan to Provence on her journey in 1176 to marry King William II of Sicily . Richard also spent part of 1177 in Flanders on diplomatic business for King Henry . 
 = = Patronage , death and legacy = = 
 Richard attracted canon lawyers to his household , including Gerard la Pucelle , Peter of Blois , and Henry <unk> of Northampton , all of whom advised him on legal matters . At the Council of Westminster that Richard convened in May 1175 , nineteen canons were put forth , dealing with clerical marriage , the oversupply of ordained clergy , the behaviour of the clergy and their dress and tonsure , and simony . Another canon dealt with clandestine marriages and regulated child marriages . He was also heavily involved with trying judicial cases , both in the actual judgment as well as in the execution of judgments made by others . Four of his questions to Alexander III entered the Decretals and the other collections of canon law of the 13th century . 
 Richard died at Halling , Kent on 16 February 1184 of colic and was buried in his cathedral . A. L. Poole , the historian , felt that Richard was a " feeble and ineffective person . " Frank Barlow , another historian , calls him a " blameless mediocrity " . Richard of Ilchester , a fellow bishop , held that it was Richard of Dover 's defects that prevented the English Church from profiting more from Becket 's martyrdom . However , Richard did much to promote the use of canon law throughout England . Richard was also active in using his legatine powers to interfere in monastic affairs , deposing the abbot of Peterborough Abbey in 1175 and threatening to visit other monastic houses that were exempt from episcopal interference to regulate the monastic affairs . On a more domestic note , Richard was held to have been an able steward of the estates of Canterbury , very much interested in increasing production . He was held to be a pious and gentle man . 
 = Cryolophosaurus = 
 Cryolophosaurus ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; " <unk> @-@ oh @-@ loaf @-@ oh @-@ SAWR @-@ us " ) is a genus of large theropods known from only a single species Cryolophosaurus ellioti , known from the early Jurassic period of Antarctica . It was about 6 @.@ 5 metres ( 21 @.@ 3 ft ) long and 465 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 025 lb ) in weight , making it one of the largest theropods of its time . Individuals of this species may have grown even larger , because the only known specimen probably represents a sub @-@ adult . Cryolophosaurus is known from a skull , a femur and other material , the skull and femur of which have caused its classification to vary greatly . The femur possesses many primitive characteristics that have classified Cryolophosaurus as a <unk> or a <unk> outside of <unk> and <unk> , where as the skull has many advanced features , leading the genus to be considered a tetanuran , an abelisaurid , a ceratosaur and even an allosaurid . Since its original description , the consensus is that Cryolophosaurus is either a primitive member of the Tetanurae or a close relative of that group . 
 Cryolophosaurus possessed a distinctive crest on its head that spanned the head from side to side , similar to a Spanish comb . Based on evidence from related species and studies of bone texture , it is thought that this bizarre crest was used for intra @-@ species recognition . The brain of Cryolophosaurus was also more primitive than those of other theropods . 
 Cryolophosaurus was first excavated from Antarctica 's Early Jurassic , Sinemurian to Pliensbachian aged Hanson Formation , formerly the upper Falla Formation , by paleontologist Dr. William Hammer in 1991 . It was the first carnivorous dinosaur to be discovered in Antarctica and the first non @-@ avian dinosaur from the continent to be officially named . The sediments in which its fossils were found have been dated at ~ 194 to 188 million years ago , representing the Early Jurassic Period . 
 = = Description = = 
 The holotype FMNH <unk> is the only fully described specimen of Cryolophosaurus . The specimen consists of an incomplete skull and mandibles lacking most of their front half ; nine maxillary teeth ; a fragmentary sixth cervical centrum ; cervical vertebrae 7 @-@ 10 ; several posterior cervical ribs ; several anterior dorsal vertebrae ; most mid and posterior dorsal vertebrae ; several dorsal ribs ; the fifth sacral vertebrae ; three chevrons ; many partial and complete caudal vertebrae and centra ; two partial humeri ; a proximal radius ; a proximal ulna ; a partial ilium ; a proximal pubis ; both ischia , but only one distal ; two incomplete femora ; the distal end of a tibia ; the distal end of a fibula , and the astragalus and calcaneum . In 2013 , new material of Cryolophosaurus was unearthed in Antarctica . The description of this material has not yet been published in a non @-@ abstract form . 
 Cryolophosaurus was a large , well @-@ built theropod , one of the largest of its time . The genus has been described by Roger Benson and colleagues ( 2012 ) as a top predator in Antarctica . It had slender proportions . Cryolophosaurus was estimated as being 6 to 7 m ( 19 @.@ 7 to 23 @.@ 0 ft ) in length by William R. Hammer & William J. Hickerson ( 1999 ) . A 2007 study by Nathan Smith et al. revised the length to 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 @.@ 3 ft ) . Its weight estimated at 465 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 025 lb ) . Based on these length and weight estimates , Cryolophosaurus is currently the largest known Early Jurassic theropod . Smith et al . ( 2007b ) and Benson et al . ( 2012 ) noted that the holotype individual probably represents a sub @-@ adult , so adults could have been larger . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The holotype of Cryolophosaurus consists of a high , narrow skull , which was discovered articulated with the rest of the skeleton . The skull is an estimated 65 centimetres ( 26 in ) long . It has a peculiar nasal crest that runs just over the eyes , where it rises up perpendicular to the skull and fans out . It is thin and highly furrowed , giving it a Spanish comb @-@ like appearance . The crest is an extension of the skull bones , near the tear ducts , fused on either side to orbital horns which rise from the eye sockets . While other theropods like the <unk> have crests , they usually run along the skull instead of across it . 
 An unpublished study conducted by Vernon <unk> @-@ Chin in 2013 suggested that previous studies lacked focus on endocranial details . The study found that the Cryolophosaurus fossil has a nearly complete , undistorted cranial cavity which is complete enough to give an approximate shape and size of the living brain . The endocast features clarified the dissimilarity of the skull with those of <unk> and <unk> giving Cryolophosaurus a basal position in Theropoda . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Classification of Cryolophosaurus is difficult because it has a mix of primitive and advanced characteristics . The femur has traits of early theropods , while the skull resembles much later species of the clade Tetanurae , like China 's Sinraptor and Yangchuanosaurus . This led Paul Sereno et al . ( 1994 ) to place Cryolophosaurus in the taxon Allosauridae . Originally , Hammer and colleagues suspected that Cryolophosaurus might be a ceratosaur or even an early abelisaur , with some traits convergent with those of more advanced <unk> , but ultimately concluded that it was itself the earliest known member of the tetanuran group . While a subsequent study by Hammer ( along with Smith and Currie ) again recovered Cryolophosaurus as a tetanuran , a later ( 2007 ) study by the same authors found that it was more closely related to Dilophosaurus and <unk> . Sterling Nesbitt et al . ( 2009 ) , using the characters of Tawa found Cryolophosaurus to be a neither <unk> nor <unk> <unk> but instead the sister group of a clade composed of <unk> and <unk> . However , in 2012 , Matthew Carrano found that Cryolophosaurus was a tetanuran , related to <unk> , but unrelated to Dilophosaurus . 
 The following family tree illustrates a synthesis of the relationships of the early theropod groups compiled by Hendrickx et al. in 2015 . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Cryolophosaurus originally was collected during the 1990 – 91 austral summer on Mount Kirkpatrick in the Beardmore Glacier region of the Transantarctic Mountains . The discovery was made by Hammer , a professor at Augustana College , and his team . The fossils were found in the siliceous siltstone of the Hanson Formation , formerly the upper Falla Formation , and dated to the Pliensbachian stage of the early Jurassic . Cryolophosaurus was the second dinosaur , and first theropod , to be discovered in Antarctica . It was discovered after Antarctopelta , but named earlier . 
 In 1991 , both Hammer and the Ohio State University geologist David Elliot excavated separate outcroppings near Beardmore Glacier , sharing logistical expenses . Elliot 's team first came across the remains of Cryolophosaurus in a rock formation around the altitude of 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) high and about 640 km ( 400 mi ) from the South Pole . When the discovery was made , they soon notified Hammer . Over the next three weeks , Hammer excavated 2 @,@ 300 kg ( 5 @,@ 100 lb ) of fossil @-@ bearing rock . The team recovered over 100 fossil bones , including those of Cryolophosaurus . The specimens were formally named and described in 1994 by Hammer and Hickerson , in the journal Science . 
 During the 2003 season , a field team returned and collected more material from the original site . A second locality was discovered about 30 metres ( 98 ft ) higher in the section on Mt . Kirkpatrick . 
 The name Cryolophosaurus ellioti is derived from the Greek words <unk> ( meaning ' cold ' or ' frozen ' , in reference to its discovery in Antarctica ) , <unk> ( meaning ' crest ' ) and σαυρος ( meaning ' lizard ' ) , thus " cold crest lizard " . Hammer and Hickerson named the species C. ellioti , after David Elliot , who had made the initial discovery of the fossils . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Cranial ornamentation = = = 
 Cranial display features , such as the one possessed by Cryolophosaurus , make sense in social , gregarious animals , where other members of the species are available to observe and interpret messages of sexual status . Kevin Padian et al . ( 2004 ) challenged conventional hypotheses that that the purpose of bizarre cranial structures and post @-@ cranial armor in dinosaurs , was either for attracting mates , intimidating / fighting rivals in the group , or intimidating potential predators of other species . Padian et al. noted that based on phylogenetic , histological , and functional evidence these bizarre structures can be explained by the phenomenon of intra @-@ species recognition , which is supported by the fossil evidence . Thomas R. Holtz Jr . ( 2010 ) found that the bizarre crest of Cryolophosaurus was primarily for intra @-@ species recognition , based on evidence from related species and studies of bone texture . According to Thomas Rich and his colleagues , the crest would have been ineffective as a weapon and may have possibly functioned as a display feature during certain types of social behavior such as mating . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 When the type specimen was discovered , several long cervical ribs , of a supposed prosauropod dinosaur were found in the mouth of Cryolophosaurus , which led Hammer ( 1998 ) to conclude that it was feeding on the prosauropod when it died . Hammer further noted that since the ribs were found extending all the way back to the theropod 's neck region , this individual may have choked to death on these ribs . However , Smith et al. concluded that these remains belonged to the Cryolophosaurus specimen itself , and not to Hammer 's " prosauropod " . Hammer also concluded that a post @-@ canine tooth belonging to a <unk> ( an early mammal relative ) , found with the remains , was part of its stomach contents when it died . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 Some Cryolophosaurus bones have pathologies that show evidence of scavenging . Broken teeth from at least two different theropods have also been found nearby . Another possible pathology is found in the astragalus ( ankle bone ) of Cryolophosaurus . This bone was preserved with a small splint from the fibula located just above the ankle . The splint , however , may also be just a unique morphological feature of Cryolophosaurus . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 All known specimens of Cryolophosaurus have been recovered in the Hanson Formation , which is one of only two major dinosaur @-@ bearing rock formations found on the continent of Antarctica . It was discovered in " <unk> " siltstone deposited in the Sinemurian to Pliensbachian stage of the Early Jurassic , approximately 194 to 188 million years ago . This geological formation is part of the Victoria Group of the Transantarctic Mountains , which is approximately 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level . The high altitude of this site supports the idea that early Jurassic Antarctica had forests populated by a diverse range of species , at least along the coast . The Hanson Formation was deposited in an active volcano − tectonic rift system formed during the breakup of Gondwana . 
 In the Early Jurassic , Antarctica was closer to the equator and the world was considerably warmer than today , but the climate was still cool temperate . Models of Jurassic air flow indicate that coastal areas probably never dropped much below freezing , although more extreme conditions existed inland . Cryolophosaurus was found about 650 kilometres ( 400 mi ) from the South Pole but , at the time it lived , this was about 1 @,@ 000 km ( 621 mi ) or so farther north . This formation has produced the remains of Glacialisaurus ( a large basal sauropodomorph ) , a crow @-@ sized pterosaur ( a <unk> ) , a synapsid ( a <unk> , which is a type of synapsid about the size of a rat ) , herbivorous synapsid , and another unknown theropod . In 2004 , paleontologists Judd Case and James Martin informally recovered the partial remains of a large sauropod dinosaur that has not been formally described as of 2004 . There are also the remains of many plant genera recovered from the Early Jurassic Camp Hill Formation , around the same age as fossils of Cryolophosaurus , proving that dense plant matter had once grown on Antarctica 's surface before it drifted southward . 
 = Don 't Starve = 
 Don 't Starve is a 2013 action @-@ adventure video game with survival and roguelike elements , developed and published by the Canadian indie company Klei Entertainment . The game was initially released via Valve Corporation 's Steam software for Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux on April 23 , 2013 . A PlayStation 4 port , renamed Don 't Starve : Giant Edition , became available the following year ( with PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 3 versions released on September 2014 and June 2015 respectively , and an Xbox One version released in August 2015 ) . Don 't Starve for iOS , renamed Don 't Starve : Pocket Edition was released on July 9 , 2015 . Downloadable content titled Reign of Giants was released on April 30 , 2014 , and a multiplayer expansion called Don 't Starve Together became free for existing users on June 3 , 2015 . 
 The game follows a scientist named Wilson who finds himself in a dark , dreary world and must survive as long as possible . Toward this end , the player must keep Wilson healthy , fed , and mentally stable as he avoids a variety of surreal and supernatural enemies that will try to kill and devour him . The game 's " Adventure " mode adds depth to the sparse plot and pits Wilson against the game 's antagonist , Maxwell . 
 Don 't Starve was Klei 's first foray into the survival genre . Conceived during the height of a game industry trend of dropping players into a world with few instructions and a goal of survival , the game was influenced by Minecraft , which spearheaded this trend , as well as by filmmaker Tim Burton . The game received positive reviews from critics ; commended for its original art style , music , and variety of ways for the player to die , although its high level of difficulty and implementation of permanent death were less warmly received . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Don 't Starve is an action @-@ adventure game with a randomly generated open world and elements of survival and roguelike gameplay . Combat is handled by pointing and clicking with the mouse , while other activities are controlled by the keyboard , or using the inbuilt gamepad support to play using a controller , giving it a console @-@ like gameplay feel . The goal is to survive as long as possible , with a count of the number of days the player has survived shown onscreen . The game keeps few records of player progress besides the total number of experience points and the playable characters unlocked . Wilson is the main playable character , but the first character , Willow , can be unlocked with 160 experience points — the player earns 20 each in @-@ game day and receives them after dying — while Woodie , the last , requires the game 's limit of 1 @,@ 600 . As is common among roguelikes , death is permanent , barring the use of several rare and difficult to acquire items , like the Meat Effigy , Touch Stone , and Life Giving Amulet . 
 The game relies on a day / night cycle that causes meaningful fluctuations in gameplay style . During the day , the player spends most of their time exploring the world ; gathering food , firewood , and other items ; discovering " recipes " to combine available items ; and avoiding enemies . With nightfall comes dangerous monsters as well as an invisible menace ( Charlie ) which attacks the player when the screen is dark . A player must either have a nearby light source or must have some sort of night vision to prevent the night monster from attacking . Crafting , which uses recipes , allows the player to create shelters and weapons like axes . The characters are able to gather and farm plants as well as hunt animals for sustenance , with several characters having dietary perks or restrictions . Food can spoil , however , so the player cannot keep it for too long . Eating spoiled food results in loss of health , sanity , and an increase in hunger . Each in @-@ game day takes 8 minutes of real time . 
 Death can occur in a variety of ways . The player has three gauges displayed on the game 's heads @-@ up display , which respectively track hunger , health , and sanity . Hunger worsens by default , being replenished with food . Sanity decreases during the dusk and night , or as a result of certain unpleasant actions , such as robbing graves or being in complete darkness ; it can be replenished through mentally stimulating activities , such as sleeping , picking flowers , and wearing " dapper " clothing . When hunger gets too low , it begins to chip away at health , which will eventually result in the player 's death . A large variety of creatures can attack the player , including giant one @-@ eyed birds , tree monsters , tentacles whose owners are not shown , and even small , weak frogs that will nonetheless try to accost the player and steal from them . Additionally , at low enough sanity , figments of the character 's imagination become corporeal and able to attack the player . Some creatures , such as pig @-@ like creatures often found in tribes , begin as neutral to the player ( Excluding the Reign of Giants character Webber ) , but the player 's actions may lead them to be allies or hostile foes . 
 The game 's bulk occurs in Sandbox Mode , but there is a second mode , Adventure , which the player can access by finding a landmark called " Maxwell 's Door . " Adventure serves as the game 's campaign , and consists of five levels that pit the player against Maxwell , the antagonist of Don 't Starve . The player loses all items and recipes upon entering , and can only pick four to keep upon completion of each chapter . Death or completion of all five chapters results in being returned intact to Sandbox Mode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Wilson , a gentleman scientist , is the protagonist of Don 't Starve . While Wilson has no special abilities beyond growth of " a magnificent beard " , which slows the speed of freezing in winter , and accelerates overheating in summer , other playable characters do ; a few examples follow . Willow , a firestarter , is immune to fire damage and will start a small fire on the ground , which can set fire to nearby objects , when she has a low sanity level . A girl named Wendy receives visits from her deceased twin sister Abigail when summoned . A strongman named Wolfgang has higher health , offensive capabilities that grow the more his hunger meter is full , but starves faster and loses more sanity when near danger . <unk> is an android who nonetheless needs to eat , sleep , and stay mentally stimulated , but does not become ill from spoiled food , can increase its maximum health , hunger , and sanity with gears ( which are reset to the original maximum after dying and respawning , but the corpse leaves behind a portion of the used ones ) , and takes damage from rain . <unk> @-@ 78 also attracts lightning , being made of <unk> material , that makes it surrounded by a glow , which gradually decreases with time as the charge wears off , refills health , and lowers sanity while continuing to speed the loss of it . 
 The game 's antagonist is named Maxwell . Maxwell is described as a puppet master who is " dapper " and " frail " in stature . He is part @-@ demon and transforms incrementally as his anger at the player increases over the five chapters of Adventure . He is the final unlockable character , obtained after completion of the story rather than with experience points . The character version of Maxwell starts with a Dark Sword , Night Armor , Purple Gem , 4 Nightmare Fuel and the Codex Umbra , a book that when activated , costing 2 Nightmare Fuel , depletes 15 health , lowers maximum sanity by 55 , and spawns a shadow clone of himself that aids him in battle , mining and wood chopping . The Shadow Puppet has 75 health and deals 40 damage with each attack . When it dies , it disappears and returns Maxwell 's lost maximum of sanity . A maximum of 3 puppets can be spawned at once , and each will disappear 2 @.@ 5 days after it is spawned . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 As the game itself opens with Maxwell <unk> informing the player of their gaunt appearance and includes little further story , the game 's setup is told through its trailer . On a dark and stormy night , Wilson appears to be getting nowhere in a chemistry experiment until he is startled by his radio speaking to him . It reveals that it has noticed his trouble and has " secret knowledge " for him . When he eagerly agrees , a flurry of equations and diagrams encircle him and fill his head with this information . Using white rats , a typewriter , and his own blood , among other tools and materials , Wilson creates a giant machine . The radio commends his work and tells him to pull the machine 's switch . He hesitates , but at the radio 's insistence , he does it ; the machine rattles violently and a pair of ghostly arms whisk him into a different world while an apparition of Maxwell cackles . 
 As the player wakes up each morning during the Adventure mode , Maxwell appears over them and comments . At first he seems impressed at the player 's hardiness ; he then becomes irritated and urges the player to turn back . He offers the player a truce but then becomes completely enraged . 
 At the end of Adventure , the player reaches an island called Maxwell 's Island with a hall belonging to Maxwell on it . The player finds Maxwell trapped in a throne encircled by short stone pillars . The player is at first unable to free him , but finds a keyhole , as well as a key nearby . The player sets Maxwell free , but he turns into a skeleton and disintegrates as soon as he stands up . The ghostly arms from the trailer then grab the player and ensnare them in the throne . An epilogue implies that the player will take on a villainous role similar to Maxwell 's using newfound powers given by the throne , but will nonetheless be trapped forever . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and design = = = 
 Don 't Starve was developed and published by indie studio Klei Entertainment . The game began development as part of a 48 @-@ hour game jam in 2010 . The team liked the idea but shelved it until two years later , when they had the time to flesh it out . Full development commenced in 2012 , while Klei was nearing the end of the development process of Mark of the Ninja . This was during the heat of an industry trend of creating games in which players are dropped into a world with few instructions and a goal of survival . The torch of this movement was held by the 2011 sandbox game Minecraft . Member Kevin Forbes stated in an interview that Minecraft was one of the team 's biggest influences , particularly its exploration elements . However , as the game was conceived as a " weird experiment " , the team 's main goal was to innovate in terms of gameplay and aesthetics , specifically by adding a layer of emphasis on characterization and themes . Another influence was the 2005 Nintendo DS title Lost in Blue , which contains similar supernatural elements and a day / night cycle . 
 The game 's dark and supernatural yet cartoonish art style was influenced by the work of filmmaker Tim Burton , to which it has been frequently compared , and by writers Edward Gorey and H.P. Lovecraft . Forbes noted the team 's ambition of creating something " dark and creepy . " After conception of the basic game setup , Forbes penned a backstory influenced by steampunk and horror , and lead creative director Jeff <unk> added comic strip @-@ like art elements . To further the game 's atmosphere of loneliness and <unk> , Klei decided firmly against multiplayer gameplay . However , in December of 2014 , after numerous requests , Klei finally released the multiplayer version of the game titled " Don 't Starve Together " on steam early access after an initial closed beta release . The game is still in beta . 
 Development was marked by a few changes to the game 's formula that would be reverted . Most notably , at one point during development , Klei wanted to add quests to the existing open gameplay . Klei shelved this idea when they realized that " having external goals is extremely counter to what is fun about the game . " Nevertheless , Klei co @-@ founder Jamie Cheng has emphasized that Klei values the freedom to try different approaches that being tied to a major publisher would not afford them . 
 Cheng related in an interview that Don 't Starve 's development taught Klei a considerable amount about the nature of the emergent gameplay that was endemic to its open and random world ; Klei tries to experiment with a new genre with each project and prefers not to create sequels to any of its games . These lessons would later be used to balance the mechanics of Klei 's upcoming project Invisible , Inc . 
 = = = Releases and updates = = = 
 Klei employees argued at length about whether to release Don 't Starve as a free @-@ to @-@ play game . Forbes stated that he " wouldn 't rule it out as a business model " but that the team was not ready to make such a decision . It was , however , free in the early days of beta testing . 
 Don 't Starve was released in beta form in 2012 , a move that Klei decided on to find out " what aspects of the game players are really responding to , and [ nip ] usability issues in the bud . " Klei 's Cory Rollins has stated that he finds that most developers ' beta periods simply serve as an early release of the game and result in few glitches being fixed , and wanted to make more use of the strategy . Added benefits the team discovered during beta testing were that it forced them to make important decisions about the game 's upcoming release well in advance , and that it solidified a player base . In addition , Klei added the ability for food to spoil during this time , inspired by a forum thread about such possibilities . Cheng found Don 't Starve to have " ended up a way better game because of the community . " It spent a few months in beta testing , and Klei continued to give updates for months after its release . 
 In June 2013 , shortly after the game 's main release , a PlayStation 4 version was announced ; it would not be released until January of the following year . In a January 2014 interview , Rollins mentioned internal discussions of creating a PlayStation Vita version of Don 't Starve , citing massive community interest in playing it on the PlayStation 4 remotely . An iOS edition was released in July 2014 . The company is also considering other mobile phone adaptations , as well as a potential sequel , but is not prioritizing them . 
 = = = = Don 't Starve : Reign of Giants = = = = 
 Don 't Starve : Reign of Giants , the game 's first paid downloadable content expansion , was announced on February 18 , 2014 . Three cryptic teasers were released , each named after a season of the year . The first , " Fall " , shows a badger @-@ like creature , while " Winter " adds an unlockable arachnid character named Webber and " Spring " a furry leg accompanied by a hatching egg . The expansion was made available as early access at the beginning of April and was released on April 30 . It contains new items , characters , and environments . 
 = = = = Don 't Starve Together = = = = 
 On May 7 , 2014 , Klei announced that a free multiplayer expansion , Don 't Starve Together , would be coming later that year . As they had initially decided not to create multiplayer , Klei clarified on their official forums that they originally had not been " confident that it would actually work both in concept and implementation " but had changed their minds in response to popular demand and bringing in new help . 
 Don 't Starve Together made its debut on Steam 's Early Access program on December 15 , 2014 . It supports up to six players at a time , who can be either existing friends or strangers and can play in public or private games . The expansion contains most , if not all , features of the single @-@ player game , but with ongoing balance patches being made for multiplayer . The game was officially released out of early access on April 21 , 2016 . 
 = = = = Don 't Starve : Giant Edition = = = = 
 A PlayStation Vita port of Don 't Starve titled Don 't Starve : Giant Edition was announced on August 25 , 2014 and was released on September 2 , 2014 in North America , and September 3 , 2014 in Europe . This was also announced to be released for the Wii U via the Nintendo eShop on March 4 , 2015 . Wii U Specific Features : Enjoy Off @-@ TV Mode ! Use companion map via the Wii U GamePad to navigate around the world “ Reign of Giants ” DLC available at launch . Giant Edition was released in North America on May 28 , 2015 and in Europe on June 4 , 2015 . A PlayStation 3 port was developed by Abstraction Games and released in North America on June 23 , 2015 , as well as in Europe on June 24 , 2015 . An Xbox One version was released on August 26 , 2015 . 
 = = = = Don 't Starve : Shipwrecked = = = = 
 Don 't Starve : Shipwrecked , co @-@ developed by Super Time Force studio Capybara Games , was released on PC on the first day of December 2015 in early access . This expansion includes new characters , biomes , creatures , and seasonal effects . 
 Don 't Starve : Pocket Edition 
 Don 't Starve : Pocket Edition was released on July 9 , 2015 , for iOS and includes the Reign of Giants DLC . An Android version is planned to be released in September 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Don 't Starve received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . The game sold one million copies by the end of 2013 . Don 't Starve was a finalist for the grand prize and " Excellence in Design " subcategory at the 2014 Independent Games Festival awards ceremony . It also received honorable mentions for " Excellence in Visual Art " and " Excellence in Audio . " 
 The game 's art style was critically acclaimed . Summarizing that the " distinct art style and atmosphere set a cool vibe , " GameSpot 's Nathan Meunier commended the atmosphere and visual design . Marty Sliva of IGN claimed an " immense appreciation for the paper @-@ cutout graphical style and whimsical presentation " , going on to praise the threatening qualities bestowed upon mundane objects by the " gothic @-@ inspired look . " Game Informer writer Jeff Marchiafava stated that " the cartoony art style makes exploring your massive , randomized world a joy . " Writing for the newspaper Toronto Sun , Steve Tilley called the art " whimsical and wonderful " and the presentation in general " captivating . " Reviewing the PlayStation 4 version specifically , Jordan Devore of Destructoid said that it looked and played very well on the console , though he did note some pixelation effects when the screen zooms in on the inventory . He also found that the gamepad controls , while less efficient than a keyboard , were similarly enjoyable . 
 The music was generally well received . Sliva compared it to carnival music and called it " immediately catchy " though lacking in variation . Giancarlo Saldana of GamesRadar called it " eerie [ yet ] calming " and praised its role in complementing the simultaneously lonesome and dangerous world . 
 Critics universally acknowledged , but gave mixed opinions on , the game 's high level of difficulty . This sentiment was epitomized by Sliva 's comment that " Don 't Starve will never , ever hold your hand , and I both love it and hate it for that . " For example , he felt some of his deaths were unfairly caused by the game 's camera system obscuring needed objects . Meunier stated that " survival doesn 't come easy , but there 's an undeniable thrill to the challenge , " but also placed the high difficulty in his list of the game 's cons . Leon Hurley of Official PlayStation Magazine claimed that " learning is half the fun and even the smallest victory makes you feel like you ’ re winning with a capital FU . " Reviewers also felt that players ' levels of satisfaction would depend heavily on their levels of commitment to survival . 
 The lack of a permanent saving mechanic and permanence of death were criticized . Marchiafava , while normally a fan of permadeath in games , found it problematic in Don 't Starve because , unlike other games such as The Binding of Isaac and Spelunky , Don 't Starve is much longer and so death felt like more of a loss . Meunier noted that the novelty and thrills of each new run wear off somewhat " when you 're stuck tackling the same menial tasks over and over again to regain lost ground . " Sliva expressed disappointment at being given " nearly no recognition from Don 't Starve itself " upon being killed by a frog , and reported being bored for roughly 30 minutes at the overly familiar starts of later playthroughs . Brown thought similarly , also calling the early game in particular " a bit dull . " Saldana , however , reasoned that " you at least gain some knowledge of how things work " and would thus make incremental , enjoyable progress . 
 The variety of unusual , numerous , and frequently placed ways for the player to die were singled out for praise . Focusing on the harm caused by subzero temperatures during winter , Meunier found that " these interesting wrinkles add depth and additional difficulty to the already challenging survival mechanics at play . " Jessica <unk> of Joystiq praised the high number of possible causes of death as well as the game 's efficient and easy @-@ to @-@ understand display of the player 's health , hunger , and mental stability . Saldana noted that the unfamiliarity of some monster designs would help to keep the player wary . 
 = Amenemhat IV = 
 See Amenemhat , for other individuals with this name . 
 Amenemhat IV ( also Amenemhet IV ) was the seventh and penultimate pharaoh of the 12th Dynasty of Egypt ( c . 1990 – 1800 BC ) during the late Middle Kingdom period ( c . 2050 – 1710 BC ) , ruling for over nine years in the late 19th century BC or the early 18th century BC . 
 Amenemhat IV may have been the son , grandson or step @-@ son of his predecessor , the powerful Amenemhat III . His reign started with a two @-@ year coregency with Amenemhat III and was seemingly peaceful . He undertook expeditions in the Sinai for turquoise , in Upper Egypt for amethyst and to the Land of Punt . He also maintained trade relations with Byblos as well as the Egyptian presence in Nubia . Amenemhat IV built some parts of the temple of Hathor at Serabit el @-@ Khadim in the Sinai and constructed the well @-@ preserved temple of Renenutet in Medinet Madi . 
 Amenemhat IV 's tomb has not been identified , although the Southern <unk> pyramid is a possibility . He was succeeded by Sobekneferu , possibly his sister or step @-@ sister , whose short reign marked the end of the 12th Dynasty and the beginning of the Middle Kingdom 's decline into the Second Intermediate Period . 
 = = Family = = 
 Amenemhat IV was the son of a woman named <unk> . <unk> 's only known attestation is an inscription on the wall of the temple of Renenutet at Medinet Madi where she is given the title of " King 's Mother " but not those of " King 's Wife " , " King 's Daughter " or " King 's Sister " . Consequently , her relation to Amenemhat III is unknown and she may have been non @-@ royal . The relation of Amenemhat IV to Amenemhat III is similarly uncertain ; the former could have been the son or grandson of the latter . Similarly , while Manetho states that he married his half @-@ sister Sobekneferu , this claim is not yet supported by archaeological evidence . In particular , Sobekneferu is not known to have borne the title of " King 's Wife " . Instead , the egyptologist Kim Ryholt proposes that Amenemhat IV was adopted by Amenemhat III and thus became Sobekneferu 's step @-@ brother , thereby explaining the <unk> tradition . 
 Amenemhat may have died without a male heir , which could explain why he was succeeded by Sobekneferu . However , some egyptologists , such as Aidan Dodson and Kim Ryholt , have proposed that the first two rulers of the 13th Dynasty , Sobekhotep I and Amenemhat <unk> , were his sons . <unk> IV may have been <unk> 's spouse , but no evidence currently substantiates this hypothesis . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Amenemhat IV first came to power as a junior coregent of his predecessor Amenemhat III , whose reign marks the apex of the Middle Kingdom period . The coregency is well attested by numerous monuments and artefacts where the names of the two kings parallel each other . The length of this coregency is uncertain ; it could have lasted from one to seven years , although most scholars believe it was only two years long . The Turin Canon , a king list redacted during the early Ramesside period , records Amenemhat IV on Column 6 , Row 1 , and credits him with a reign of 9 years , 3 months and 27 days . Amenemhat IV is also recorded on Entry 65 of the Abydos King List and Entry 38 of the Saqqara Tablet , both of which date to the New Kingdom . 
 In spite of the Turin canon , the duration of Amenemhat 's reign is uncertain . It was given as eight years under the name <unk> in Manetho 's Aegyptiaca . In any case , Amenemhat 's rule seems to have been peaceful and uneventful . Amenemhat IV is well attested by contemporary artefacts , including a number of <unk> and cylinder @-@ seals . 
 = = = Expeditions and foreign relations = = = 
 Four expeditions to the turquoise mines of Serabit el @-@ Khadim in the Sinai are dated to his reign by in @-@ situ inscriptions . The latest took place in his ninth year on the throne and could be the last expedition of the Middle Kingdom , since the next inscription dates to Ahmose I 's reign , some 200 years later . In his Year 2 , Amenemhat IV sent another expedition to mine amethyst in the Wadi el @-@ <unk> in the south of Egypt . The leader of the expedition was the assistant treasurer <unk> . Farther south , three Nile @-@ records are known from <unk> in Nubia that are explicitly dated to his Years 5 , 6 and 7 on the throne , showing that the Egyptian presence in the region was maintained during his lifetime . 
 Important trade relations must have existed during his reign with the city of Byblos , on the coast of modern @-@ day Lebanon , where an obsidian and gold chest as well as a jar lid bearing Amenemhat IV 's name have been found . A gold plaque showing Amenemhat IV offering to a god may also originate there . 
 Recently , continuing excavations at Wadi <unk> on the Red Sea coast have produced two wooden chests and an ostracon inscribed with a hieratic text mentioning an expedition to the fabled Land of Punt in Year 8 of Amenemhat IV , under the direction of the royal scribe <unk> . Two fragments of a stela depicting him and dating to his Year 7 were found at Berenice on the Red Sea . 
 = = = Building activities = = = 
 Amenemhat IV completed the temple of Renenutet and Sobek at Medinet Madi started by Amenemhat III , which is " the only intact temple still existing from the Middle Kingdom " according to Zahi Hawass , a former Secretary @-@ General of Egypt 's Supreme Council of Antiquities ( SCA ) . The foundations of the temple , administrative buildings , granaries and residences were uncovered by an Egyptian archaeological expedition in early 2006 . Amenemhat IV possibly also built a temple in the northeastern Fayum at Qasr el @-@ <unk> . 
 Amenemhat IV is responsible for the completion of a shrine at the temple of Hathor in the Sinai and may also have undertaken works in Karnak where a pedestal for a sacred barque inscribed with Amenemhat III and IV names was found in 1924 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Less than 10 years after Amenemhat IV 's death , the 12th Dynasty came to an end and was replaced by the much weaker 13th Dynasty . Although the first two rulers of this dynasty may have been sons of Amenemhat IV , political instability quickly became prevalent and kings rarely ruled beyond a couple of years . The influx of Asiatic immigrants in the Nile Delta which had started during the reigns of Amenemhat IV 's predecessor accelerated under his own reign , becoming completely unchecked . Under the 13th Dynasty , the Asiatic population of the Delta founded an independent kingdom ruled by kings of Canaanite descent forming the 14th Dynasty and reigning from Avaris . Around 80 years after the reign of Amenemhat IV , " the administration [ of the Egyptian state ] seems to have completely collapsed " , marking the start of the Second Intermediate Period . 
 = = Tomb = = 
 The tomb of Amenemhat IV has not been identified . He is nonetheless often associated with the ruined Southern <unk> pyramid . No inscriptions have been found within the pyramid to ascertain the identity of its owner , but its architectural similarity with the second pyramid of Amenemhat III at Hawara led egyptologists to date the pyramid to the late 12th or early 13th Dynasty . Less likely , Amenemhat IV could have been interred in Amenemhat III 's first pyramid in <unk> , since his name has been found on an inscription in the mortuary temple . 
 At Dahshur , next to the pyramid of Amenemhat II , the remains of another pyramid dating to the Middle Kingdom were discovered during building works . The pyramid has not yet been excavated , but a fragment inscribed with the royal name " Amenemhat " has been unearthed . It is therefore possible that this pyramid belongs to Amenemhat IV , although there are also kings of the 13th Dynasty who bore the name Amenemhat and who could have built the pyramid . Alternatively , the relief fragment may originate ( come ) from the nearby pyramid of Amenemhat II . 
 = Rudolph Cartier = 
 Rudolph Cartier ( born Rudolph <unk> , renamed himself in Germany to Rudolph <unk> ; 17 April 1904 – 7 June 1994 ) was an Austrian television director , filmmaker , screenwriter and producer who worked predominantly in British television , exclusively for the BBC . He is best known for his 1950s collaborations with screenwriter Nigel Kneale , most notably the Quatermass serials and their 1954 adaptation of George Orwell 's dystopian novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four . 
 After studying architecture and then drama , Cartier began his career as a screenwriter and then film director in Berlin , working for UFA Studios . After a brief spell in the United States he moved to the United Kingdom in the 1930s , and began working for BBC Television in 1952 . He went on to produce and direct over 120 productions in the next 24 years , ending his television career with the play Loyalties in 1976 . 
 Active in both dramatic programming and opera , Cartier won the equivalent of a BAFTA in 1957 for his work in the former , and one of his operatic productions was given an award at the 1962 Salzburg Festival . The British Film Institute 's " Screenonline " website describes him as " a true pioneer of television " , while the critic Peter Black once wrote that : " Nobody was within a mile of Rudolph Cartier in the trick of making a picture on a TV screen seem as wide and as deep as CinemaScope . " 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born in Vienna , Austria @-@ Hungary ( now Austria ) , Cartier initially studied to become an architect , before changing career paths and enrolling to study drama at the Vienna Academy of Music and Dramatic Art . There he was taught by Max Reinhardt , who proved a major influence on Cartier . Reinhardt thought of a script as being similar to a musical score , which should be interpreted by a director in the same way as a musician interpreting a piece of music — an approach with which Cartier agreed . 
 Cartier became involved in the film industry in 1929 , when he successfully submitted a script to a company based in Berlin , Germany . He then became a staff scriptwriter for UFA Studios , the primary German film company of the era , for which he worked on crime films and thrillers . While at UFA , he worked with noted writers , directors and producers including Ewald André Dupont and Erich Pommer . In 1933 he became a film director , overseeing the thriller <unk> <unk> for producer Sam Spiegel . 
 The same year as <unk> <unk> was released , the Nazis came to power in Germany , and the Jewish Cartier left the country . Several members of Cartier 's family who had remained in Europe , including his mother , later died in the Holocaust . Encouraged by a UFA colleague , Billy Wilder , to come to Hollywood , Cartier changed his surname and moved to the United States . However , unlike Wilder , Cartier did not find success in America , and in 1935 he moved again , to the United Kingdom . 
 Little further is recorded of Cartier 's career until after the Second World War , when he began writing storylines for several minor British films . He also worked as a film producer , overseeing a 1951 short film adaptation of the Sherlock Holmes story The Man with the Twisted Lip . Cartier returned for a time to the United States , where he studied production methods in the new medium of television . 
 In 1952 , Michael Barry , with whom Cartier had worked on an aborted project in 1948 , became the new Head of Drama at BBC Television and interviewed Cartier for a post as a staff television producer in the drama department , a job which also involved directing . At his interview , Cartier told Barry that he thought his department 's output was " dreadful " , and that television drama needed " new scripts and a new approach " . In a 1990 interview about his career , he told BBC Two 's The Late Show that the BBC drama department had " needed me like water in the desert " . Barry shared many of Cartier 's views on the need to improve television drama , and he hired him for the producer 's job . 
 = = BBC television = = 
 Cartier 's first BBC television production was a play entitled Arrow to the Heart , transmitted on the evening of 20 July 1952 . It was initially adapted by Cartier from Albrecht Goes ' novel <unk> Nacht , but Barry felt that the dialogue was " too Germanic " and assigned drama department staff scriptwriter Nigel Kneale to edit the script . Arrow to the Heart was the first of many collaborations between the pair , who enjoyed during the next few years a highly productive working relationship , despite profound creative disagreements on occasion . Cartier and Kneale were an important presence in the British television drama of the era and were , according to television historian Lez Cooke , " responsible for introducing a completely new dimension to television drama in the early to mid @-@ 1950s " . 
 = = = Collaborations with Nigel Kneale = = = 
 Cartier and Kneale 's first major production was the six @-@ part serial The Quatermass Experiment , broadcast in the summer of 1953 . A science @-@ fiction story , it relates the sending of the first humans into space by Professor Bernard Quatermass and the consequences when an alien presence invades the crew 's rocket during its flight and returns to Earth in the body of the one remaining crewmember , having absorbed the consciousnesses and shredded the bodies of the other two . A critical and popular success , The Quatermass Experiment has been described by the British Film Institute 's Screenonline website as " one of the most influential series of the 1950s " . Cartier 's contribution to the serial 's success was highlighted in his 1994 obituary in The Times newspaper , which also called the serial " a landmark in British television drama as much for its visual imagination as for its ability to shock and disturb " . 
 The success of The Quatermass Experiment led to two sequels , Quatermass II ( 1955 ) and Quatermass and the Pit ( 1958 – 59 ) , both produced and directed by Cartier and written by Kneale . Both were successful and critically acclaimed , and Cartier 's production work on them became increasingly ambitious . For Quatermass II , he pre @-@ filmed a significant amount of material on location , using 35 mm film , opening the drama out from a confined studio setting with the most ambitious location shooting yet attempted in British television . Cartier , with his previous experience as a film director , particularly enjoyed working on these cinema @-@ style filmed scenes . 
 The appeal of the Quatermass serials has been attributed by the Museum of Broadcast Communications to the depiction of " A new range of gendered fears about Britain 's postwar and post @-@ colonial security . As a result , or perhaps simply because of Kneale and Cartier 's effective combination of science fiction and poignant melodrama , audiences were captivated . " The Screenonline website suggests that the visual impact of Cartier 's interpretation of Kneale 's scripts was a major factor in their success , which it attributes to their " originality , mass appeal and dynamism ... The Quatermass Experiment became a landmark of science fiction and the cornerstone of the genre on British television . " 
 Aside from the Quatermass serials , Cartier and Kneale collaborated on several one @-@ off dramas , including literary and theatrical adaptations of Wuthering Heights ( 6 December 1953 ) and The Moment of Truth ( 10 March 1955 ) , as well as Kneale 's own The Creature ( 30 January 1955 ) . Of particular note was their collaboration on an adaptation of George Orwell 's novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , originally broadcast on 12 December 1954 , regarded as Cartier 's most famous work . The Times 's review the day after its broadcast noted its " vividness ... the two minutes ' hate was , for instance , a wonderfully <unk> orgy of vindictiveness . " The production also attracted considerable controversy . There were questions asked in the House of Commons concerning some of the graphic scenes of horror in the play , and the BBC received several telephone calls threatening Cartier 's life if the second live performance , scheduled for 16 December , went ahead . The BBC took these threats seriously enough to assign him bodyguards . Cartier appeared live on television himself to defend the production in a studio debate , and eventually the Board of Governors of the BBC voted that the second performance should go ahead as planned . The production had by this time received the backing of the Duke of Edinburgh , who commented during a speech to the Royal Society of Arts that he and the Queen had watched and enjoyed the first performance . 
 Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four had been a success , but it was also one of the most expensive television dramas ever made in the UK . Cartier often spent large amounts of money on his productions . Earlier in 1954 , Michael Barry had heavily criticised him for the money and resources he had expended in an adaptation of Rebecca . In a memo written after that production 's transmission , Barry admonished Cartier for his over @-@ ambitious production : 
 The performance of Rebecca seems to me to have taken us further into the danger area instead of showing any improvement . I am unable to defend at a time when departmental costs and scene loads are in an acute state the load imposed by Rebecca on Design and Supply and the expenditure upon extras and costumes ... the vast area of the hall and the stairway never justified the great expenditure of effort required in building and one is left with a very clear impression of reaching a point where the department must be accused of not knowing what it is doing . 
 = = = Later life and work = = = 
 Despite Barry 's concerns , Cartier continued to work successfully in television , and at the 1957 Guild of Television Producers and Directors Awards ( later known as the British Academy Television Awards , or BAFTAs ) he was the winner of the Drama category . He made a brief return to filmmaking in 1958 when he directed the feature Passionate Summer , but he saw himself primarily as a television director , and it remained his favourite medium . " The essence of television is that you can control the viewer 's response to a much greater extent than other media permit , " he told The Times in 1958 . 
 Cartier also directed several operas for the BBC , a genre for which he had a great passion . He oversaw adaptations of established operas such as Salome ( 1957 ) and Carmen ( 1962 ) as well as original productions written especially for television . Tobias and the Angel , written for the BBC by Sir Arthur Bliss and Christopher Hassall and produced by Cartier in 1960 , won the Merit Award in the Salzburg Opera Prize at the 1962 Salzburg Festival . 
 Cartier continued to direct television dramas during the 1960s , although after Barry stepped down as Head of Drama in 1961 , he lost much of his creative independence . Barry 's successor , Sydney Newman , abolished the BBC 's traditional producer @-@ director role and split the responsibilities into separate posts , leaving directors such as Cartier with less control over their productions . Cartier also found himself assigned to direct episodes of regular drama series , as such as Maigret and Z @-@ Cars . 
 Cartier was still able to direct several notable productions during the decade , including a number which explored the Nazi era in Germany from which he had escaped in 1933 . These included the World War II dramas Cross of Iron ( 1961 , dealing with the court martial of a U @-@ Boat captain in a British prisoner of war camp ) and The July Plot ( 1964 , about the 1944 plot to assassinate Hitler ) , as well as Firebrand ( 1967 , about the 1933 Reichstag fire , an event Cartier had personally witnessed ) . He also began , for the first time , to direct pieces which dealt with the Holocaust , such as Doctor Korczak and the Children ( 1962 , concerning the Warsaw Ghetto orphanage ) and The Joel Brand Story ( 1965 , about Adolf Eichmann 's 1944 offer to the Allies of the lives of 1 million Jews in exchange for 10 @,@ 000 trucks ) . Other notable 1960s productions included adaptations of Anna Karenina ( 1961 , starring Sean Connery and Claire Bloom ) and Wuthering Heights ( 1962 , a new version of Kneale 's 1953 script , starring Bloom and Keith Michell ) . Lee Oswald — Assassin ( 1966 ) was a drama @-@ documentary telling the story of Lee Harvey Oswald , based on the Warren Commission 's findings , while Conversation at Night ( 1969 ) saw the first television acting appearance of Alec Guinness . 
 Cartier 's career continued into the 1970s . In 1974 , he directed episodes of Fall of Eagles ; and his final credit came with the play Loyalties , screened in 1976 . By this time , he had worked on over 120 productions for the BBC . Subsequently , he worked for a time for the BBC 's " purchased drama " department , advising on which plays and series might be bought @-@ in from European broadcasters . Throughout his career , Cartier refused to work for commercial television : " I hate the idea of my creative work being constantly interrupted for commercial reasons , " he once commented . " I am an artist , not a salesman . " 
 Cartier was married three times , lastly to Margaret Pepper from 1949 until his death . He had one daughter , Corinne , with Pepper , and another from a previous marriage . Cartier died on 7 June 1994 , at the age of 90 ; his death was overshadowed in the media by that of Dennis Potter , another important figure in the history of British television drama , who died on the same day . 
 = = Legacy = = 
