 In the distant future , thousands of years after a great war between humans and their biologically engineered weapons , humans live in everything from small tribes to large nations . One nation , the Empire , has discovered a black tower in the middle of a lake near their capital , which gave them access to large amounts of ancient weapons which they used to beat back and control the ever present monsters in the world . The Imperials were corrupted by this power and became conquerors of others as opposed to liberators from a violent world . 
 The introduction movie opens with the protagonist , Keil Fluge ( unnamed in the North American version ) , hunting in a canyon . After seeing an Imperial flying battleship in the sky , he is attacked by two creatures and chases one of them to a large , ancient complex built directly into the rock . He explores the ruin , and sees relics of old technology still hanging from the ceilings . Another gigantic creature suddenly attacks him , and though his weapon is useless against the armored creature , a rumbling triggers a cave in , which crushes the monster and saves Keil . From the newly created hole , an armored , blue dragon flies down the cavern with a rider across its shoulders , being chased by an even bigger black dragon as the cavern is destroyed in an explosion . Regaining consciousness outside , Keil sees the two dragons locked in combat in the air before him . Dodging a blast from the black dragon , the blue dragon 's rider is then hit by single shot to the chest , and the black dragon flies away . The blue dragon flies towards Keil . A psychic connection is made between the rider and Keil , who is told not to let the black dragon reach the black tower . The rider then dies and Keil picks up his fallen gun , climbs atop the dragon and flies away , determined to finish the rider 's quest . 
 During the first level of the game , Keil and his dragon fly through a drowned city , where they encounter a small Imperial patrol ship . That ship sends a report to a large fleet of ships flying above the clouds . It is revealed that the Imperial forces are specifically searching for the blue dragon . The second level is a desert , where Keil and the dragon encounter gigantic worm @-@ like creatures . At the stormy edge of the desert , they are confronted by the Black Dragon , which is defeated and speeds away . The third level is a mountainous landscape at night @-@ time where Keil and the dragon get reacquainted with the Imperial forces , which were exploring ancient ruins . These encounters illustrate the ongoing conflict between the Imperial forces and the ancient machines and creatures . The fourth level is an ancient facility in which Keil and the dragon are pursued by both Imperial airships and cybernetic sentinels left behind by the ancient civilization . During the fifth level , they defeat a large armada of the most powerful Imperial ships over a forested area . A cutscene then shows a fleet of dragon @-@ like creatures coming out of the tower to attack the Imperial forces . The sixth level features the black dragon and Keil racing through the battle @-@ scarred Imperial capital . During this , they are both waylaid by the creatures and machines seen attacking the Imperial fleet around the tower while also being fired on by Imperial defenses . The black dragon then reaches the Tower and is mutated into a gigantic super @-@ dragon and begins a climactic battle with Keil and the blue dragon , after which the black dragon is defeated and falls into the ocean . 
 In the ending cutscene , Keil and the dragon enter the tower . While traveling down a long corridor , the dragon surrounds Keil in a force field , lifting him from the saddle and suspending him in the hallway . Keil watches as the dragon continues on to the core of the tower , then a blinding light is seen and the tower explodes . Keil wakes up some time later in a desert area abutting the ocean . Looking down , he sees the foot prints of the blue dragon around him , indicating that after the explosion , the dragon carried him to safety and flew away . 
 = = Development = = 
 Panzer Dragoon was created in the early 1990s as the Japanese video game company Sega was getting ready to release its Saturn console . At the time , the Saturn lacked third @-@ party games ; because of this , Sega had to internally develop games in every genre , including shoot ' em up . In 1993 , Sega asked its developers for new game ideas , and it was then that Yukio Futatsugi , a young developer who had joined Sega only two years before , proposed several new concepts . One of these concepts was accepted and became Panzer Dragoon . Futatsugi , then 23 years old , was put in charge of the project and became the head of Team Andromeda , a development team that Sega assembled for the occasion in early 1994 and was built around the duo formed by Futatsugi and Manabu Kusunoki , art designer on the project . Overall , development lasted almost a year , and 15 people worked on the game . 
 The project was designed as arcade @-@ style from the start , as core members of the team like Kusunoki came from Sega 's arcade department . Team Andromeda wanted to create a fully 3D arcade game , having worked on similar games such as Out Run which were not truly 3D . With influences like Space Harrier , <unk> , Star Fox , and <unk> , the project became a 3D rail shooter . Usually , in 3D shooters , the player rides a 3D object like a jet fighter or a tank . Futatsugi and Kusunoki decided , however , that it would be more original for the player to ride an armored dragon , a living creature which would also allow for richer animations . The game 's name originates from its original concept , referred to as " armored dragon " ( <unk> @-@ ryu in Japanese ) , but Futatsugi , feeling that this was too bland , decided to translate it to German . 
 With this basic concept in mind , the creators had 3 months to define a visual identity and a setting for their game , prior to development . The game would be set in a post @-@ apocalyptic science fantasy world , featuring ruins and relics of a fallen civilization and mankind struggling for survival , something typical in anime at that time . Futatsugi was particularly influenced by one of his childhood readings , The Long Afternoon of Earth , a science @-@ fiction novel by Brian Aldiss , in which one side of the earth became perpetually hot , the other perpetually cold . The first presentation video featured a green dragon , in line with traditional European / medieval depictions , however the team quickly decided to change it and make it " more sci @-@ fi " . In order for the dragon to be more original , it was made blue and covered in a white , bone @-@ like armor . The dragon was supposed to come from the ancient times , so ruins and ancient flying technology also featured this white , shell @-@ like material . 
 The overall fantasy look of the game 's world , which mixed natural and technological elements , was also chosen in order to set it apart from classic science @-@ fiction 3D games of the time . This world , as well as dragon and character designs , were mainly the work of Manabu Kusunoki , who took inspiration from various sources , including anime and manga , and who pushed the art direction toward a more Turkish / Ottoman style to avoid the European aesthetics of the early presentation video . Critics have noted similarities with the works of French artist Moebius ( notably his comic book <unk> , ) of whom Kusunoki was a fan , as well as with Hayao Miyazaki 's Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind , and David Lynch 's Dune movie . However , Kusunoki was adamant not to include big robots from popular Gundam @-@ like anime , and unrealistic designs like the spiky and colorful @-@ haired characters wielding impossibly large swords from the Final Fantasy series . Kentaro Yoshida , texturing and modeling artist , described the creation process as similar in style to Star Wars , in that it " made an unearthly world appear so real " . Takashi <unk> , in charge of the opening cutscene and character models , designed the enemies using a lot of various influences : " I got inspiration from antique clocks and various industrial products from the era of the industrial revolution for mechanics , and myriapods , marine mollusks , ammonite , and a rusty fishing boat for creatures when I started thinking of the original battleship " . The team wanted a famous artist to make the game 's cover art . Manabu Kusunoki suggested Moebius , who accepted , and the team sent him designs that he was to interpret . The resulting illustration was used as the cover art for the Japanese release of the game . 
 The Saturn 's hardware was new to the team , and it was their first attempt at creating an original environment . It was also Futatsugi 's first year working as a full developer at Sega , so he was only able to do simple things while having a clear vision of what he wanted , which helped him to keep the overall style pure , with stark and minimalist cutscenes . Similarly , <unk> kept the enemies easy to understand visually , with simple shapes , and this overall simple style ended up fitting well with the Saturn 's hardware . Then , Team Andromeda set to work on elaborating an extensive back story , and Futatsugi , to be original and to avoid using Japanese or English , went so far as to create a new language for the game : a mix of Ancient Greek , Latin and Russian . This was apparently inspired by the anime The Wings of <unk> , of which team members were fans and which also features an invented language . 
 After the story and art were established , the team set to work on the graphics . Working on new hardware proved difficult for the young team , and the game ended up missing the initial deadline given by Sega , which was the Saturn Japanese launch on November 1994 . One of the problems was that the Saturn hardware was only finalized in mid @-@ 1994 , and without actual Saturn prototype to test their progress , the programmers initially had to work with hypothetical hardware performance . Team Andromeda created its own graphics library and mapping tools instead of using Sega 's , in order to make the most of their first game on the new system . The game 's graphics and cutscenes were done with Softimage , and the 3D elements were programmed on SGI workstations using OpenGL . The programmers were eventually able to transition to the debug Saturn they had received , but the process was difficult and the game had a very low frame rate at first , before it could be locked at 20 FPS . The six levels of Panzer Dragoon are barren landscapes with ancient ruins , which is consistent with the " simple " style appropriate for the Saturn . The first two levels that the team programmed , a desert ( level 2 ) and a forest ( level 5 ) , did not have any objects or anything besides sand and forest effects , again because the team was unsure how far the hardware could be pushed . Keeping CPU limitations in mind , simple tornado effects were added to level 2 , so that it did not look too bland . 
 Work on the soundtrack began after completion of the game , similar to the way movie soundtracks are made . The idea was to create musics that would specifically reflect each level art @-@ style and events . As the game had an " on rail " progression system , the developers knew exactly where the player would be at any given time , so they showed videos to the composer and asked him to write specifically timed pieces that would match the player 's progression in each level . The soundtrack was outsourced to Yoshitaka Azuma , who was composing musics for NHK TV programs at that time . The music of Panzer Dragoon is a mix between orchestral and synthesizer tracks . 
 Sega of America made several alterations to the game in order to make the North American release more challenging than the Japanese version . These alterations were retained in the PAL version . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The game was first released in Japan on March 10 , 1995 , then in North America on May 11 , 1995 and in Europe on August 30 , 1995 , on the Sega Saturn console . The next year , Panzer Dragoon was ported on PC . Identical to the Saturn version except with a higher resolution , this PC port was also included as an unlockable bonus in the Xbox game Panzer Dragoon Orta , released in 2002 . Aside from providing the source code , Team Andromeda had no involvement in the development of the PC version . The PlayStation 2 console saw the release of an updated version of the game in 2006 in Japan , as part of the Sega Ages 2500 collection . The port was handled by development studio Land Ho , and features both the original Saturn game and an " arrange " version with anti @-@ aliasing filter , better texturing , and improved 3D models for the dragon and some enemies . The " arrange " version also includes new unlockable extras such as level selection and artworks , in the form of a " Pandora 's Box " option menu ( similar to Panzer Dragoon II Zwei ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Panzer Dragoon received positive reviews , both in 1995 and in retrospective coverage . Though sales were not as high as Sega expected , possibly due to the success of Sony 's PlayStation console over the Saturn , they were substantial enough for Sega to allow the series to continue with the 1996 prequel Panzer Dragoon II Zwei , also released on the Saturn . 
 As one of the first Saturn titles , the game was highly anticipated by journalists after its appearance in promotional material . Ed Semrad and Danyon Carpenter from Electronic Gaming Monthly praised the game for its " innovative game play " and its " awe @-@ inspiring visuals " from the opening cinematic to the backgrounds and the dragon 's animations . Al Manuel and Ken Williams criticized the game 's lack of diversity in weapons and its predetermined progression ; but the four EGM reviewers agreed that it was a must @-@ have game for Saturn owners . Similarly , The Unknown Gamer from GamePro called the game a " masterpiece " , highlighted its high @-@ quality graphics and musics , and described the story as " <unk> [ ing ] " . However , the journalist noted the game 's overall difficulty " will single out all but advanced players " with its lack of power @-@ ups or extra lives of any kind . Nevertheless , the game was seen as a good example of the Saturn 's capabilities . In contrast , a reviewer from Maximum said that the game was much too easy even on the highest difficulty setting , greatly reducing its already low longevity . He also said the gameplay would be too simplistic for many players , with its on @-@ rails shooting and selection of only two weapons , but was overall very positive in his assessment of the game , highly praising the 360 degrees of rotation and most especially the textured 3D graphics of the enemies , settings , and bosses . 
 Patrick <unk> from Game Players stated that while the game may come off as " just a simple shooter " , it is at least a " very good one " that " puts a twist on the tired formula " , again praising the game play and the variety in camera angles . Chris Gore from VideoGames & Computer Entertainment named the game " the best shooter since Star Fox " , and a must @-@ have for fantasy and sci @-@ fi fans , with its " eerie " atmosphere noted by editor Betty Hallock . While the story itself was said to be " somewhat typical " and editor Chris Bieniek criticized the on @-@ rail aspect , Gore noted the game 's " spectacular visuals " , and presented it as one of the Saturn 's system sellers . Famitsu magazine 's Reader Cross Review gave the game a 9 out of 10 in April 1995 , and it was named " Best Saturn Game of 1995 " by Electronic Gaming Monthly in their 1996 Buyers ' Guide . The game 's universe itself was deemed " coolly surreal " by Entertainment Weekly reviewer Albert Kim , who thought the game 's seven @-@ minute " movie @-@ quality " introduction was " gorgeous " and " nearly overshadowed the game itself " . Kim argued that Panzer Dragoon could be seen as a " lyrical and exhilarating epic " , a " story , not just a game " which could pave the way for a " transformation " of the videogame industry . Film director Steven Spielberg approached Team Andromeda to say he was impressed by the game 's presentation at the 1995 E3 show . 
 James Mielke from online game magazine 1UP.com gave Panzer Dragoon a retroactive review of 8 / 10 for what the game offered in 1995 , but gave it a modern score of 6 / 10 . Mielke highlighted the music as " one of the finest game soundtracks ever produced , " but said that the game itself " staggers a bit under the glaring light of a critical <unk> [ sic ] " , arguing it is " little more than Space Harrier with a 3D camera and cut @-@ scenes . " By contrast , Levi Buchanan from IGN gave the game a retrospective score of 9 / 10 , opining that " the fact that Panzer Dragoon holds up as well in 2008 as it did in 1995 is a just testament to the staying power of good art and tight gameplay . " Kurt Kalata , in a Gamasutra retrospective , also praised its art and universe , but said the actual game looked " a bit cut and dried " compared to its sequels . Panzer Dragoon ranked 140th in EGM ′ s " The Greatest 200 Videogames of their time " feature published in 2006 . 
 = The Converted Deacon = 
 The Converted Deacon is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows the daughter who disobeys her father by associated with the theater and becomes a star on the stage . She keeps it a secret , but he father arrives in town and takes her home because her mother is ill . John <unk> follows her home and disguises himself to secure a position on the farm . A newspaper reveals the daughter 's fame and only after a song and dance does the father 's anger abate and allows the two lovers to marry . Little is known about the production of the film , but the Thanhouser films were distinguished as being the best of the Independent companies in a The New York Dramatic Mirror editorial . The film was released on July 15 , 1910 , and met with mixed reception . The film is presumed lost 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 16 , 1910 . It states : " May Sanders is the daughter of a farmer , Deacon Sanders , who is nearly as poor as he is religious . May goes to the city to seek employment , and her father warns her to shun theatres and bad company . Her first job is a maid in the home of Mrs. Carr , wife of a theatrical manager . Mrs. Carr discovers that May can sing and dance exceptionally well , and her husband places May on the stage . She makes a hit right from the start . Also she annexes the affections of John <unk> , a wealthy young man . But she does not dare tell her parents about her new vocation . Matters drag along until the Deacon unexpectedly arrives in town . May has still pretended to be the maid of Mrs. Carr , and the father finds her in the house when she calls . He tells her that her mother is ill , and she is needed at home . She goes and is promptly put to work on the farm . John follows his sweetheart to the country , and to be near her , pretends to be poor and secures a job on the farm . The newspaper gives the Deacon a clue to the mystery , and he prepares to disown his daughter . But when she sings and dances , his anger melts , he forgives May and John , who later marry with a paternal blessing . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director and the cameraman are unknown and no known credits for the cast are cited by film historian , Q. David Bowers . Members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . 
 Despite the lack of production details , the quality of the Thanhouser films in general stood out amongst the Independent producers . An editorial by " The Spectator " in The New York Dramatic Mirror contained specific praise for Thanhouser productions by stating , " ... practically all other Independent American companies , excepting Thanhouser , show haste and lack of thought in their production . Crude stories are crudely handled , giving the impression that they are rushed through in a hurry - anything to get a thousand feet of negative ready for the market . Such pictures , of course , do not cost much to produce , but they are not of a class to make reputation . The Thanhouser company , alone of the Independents , shows a consistent effort to do things worthwhile ... " The editorial warned that American audiences were not subject to be entertained by the novelty of moving images and cautioned the Independents that there was distinct danger in quantity over quality . The editorial was written by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company , a Licensed company , and like the publication itself had a considerable slant to the Licensed companies . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on July 15 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release in the United States , theaters showing advertisements include those in Kansas , North Carolina , Maryland , Indiana , Pennsylvania , Arizona , and Missouri . One of the last advertisements for the film was in Neosho , Missouri on May 14 , 1913 . 
 The film received mixed reception in trade publications , but some advertisements would boast the power of the film or go so far as to call it a great American drama . The The Moving Picture News stated , " As a sketch of country folk , admirable because it is true . The situations are well worked out . The conversion ! Could it be ? A New England church meeting would be a good place to exhibit and - ask questions . " Though the reviewer in the The New York Dramatic Mirror however disagreed that the premise was plausible , " A [ straight @-@ laced ] old deacon forms the complicating element in this rather conventional and rather improbable story . That a girl could become a comic opera star without the knowledge of her parents is a strain for the imagination . That a simple little dance like the one in the picture could effect such a conversion is another tax on belief . The acting is good , especially in the heroine 's role . The deacon displays an unnatural tendency in such a stern character when he rapturously kisses the photograph of his daughter . " It is unknown if the character of Deacon Sanders is really a church deacon because the synopsis states Deacon Sanders is a farmer who is " nearly as poor as he is religious " . 
 = Christian metal = 
 Christian metal , also known as white metal or heavenly metal , is a form of heavy metal music usually defined by its message using song lyrics as well as the dedication of the band members to Christianity . Christian metal is typically performed by professed Christians sometimes principally for Christians who listen to heavy metal music and often produced and distributed through various Christian networks . 
 Christian metal bands exist in all the subgenres of heavy metal music , and the only common link among most Christian metal bands are the lyrics . The Christian themes are often melded with the subjects of the genre the band is rooted in , regularly providing a Christian take on the subject matter . It has been argued that the marginal yet transnational Christian metal subculture provides its core members an alternative religious expression and Christian identity , and that the music serves the purpose of offering a positive message through lyrical content . This may not necessarily show a direct connection or reference to the Christian faith but often it does . 
 Christian metal emerged in the late 1970s as a means of evangelization to the wider heavy metal music scene and was pioneered by the American Resurrection Band and Barnabas , the Swedish Jerusalem , and Canadian Daniel Band . Los Angeles ' Stryper achieved wide success in the 1980s . In the mid to late 1980s , extreme metal genres were popularized by bands such as Vengeance Rising , Deliverance , Believer and Tourniquet . In the early 1990 , the Australian death metal band Mortification rose to prominence within its country 's underground metal scene . At the turn of the 21st century , the nu metal band P.O.D , with two platinum @-@ selling albums , achieved a mainstream commercial success rivaling that of Stryper . The metalcore groups Underoath , Demon Hunter , As I Lay Dying and Norma Jean ( dubbed by Revolver Magazine as " The Holy Alliance " ) also brought some mainstream attention to the movement in the first decade of the 2000s , achieving ranks in the Billboard 200 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Christian metal is not a solitary style of music , but rather an ideological umbrella term that comprises almost every subgenre of heavy metal music . The musicians within Christian metal bands typically base their lyrics on Judeo @-@ Christian traditions . The lyrical approach of Christian metal bands is somewhat varied , as some emphasize the positive aspects of faith matters while others iterate the teachings of Christ . Some bands keep their message hidden in metaphors . Only a minority take an aggressive attitude towards those who speak against Christianity , " preaching full @-@ on fire and brimstone and Old Testament style God 's wrath back at extreme Satanists " . References to eschatology and apocalyptic themes , particularly the ongoing spiritual warfare between good and evil as well as the Last Judgment and fall from grace are typical . 
 The lyrical style varies depending on culture , denomination , and country . For example , in Northern Europe the bands with Lutheran members usually prefer a personal lyrical approach , which is seldom meant to " convert " in an aggressive manner , since evangelism has been more typical among American bands . Christian bands never deny their conviction but typically avoid preaching , and sometimes the matter is left unexpressed , leaving religion as a private issue of the listener . Certain bands choose to deal with every day life experiences from a Christian perspective in order to draw both Christian and non @-@ Christian listeners . In such cases , identifying a " Christian band " can be difficult . Secular bands that occasionally deal with Christian topics are a different matter altogether . Defining a Christian band is a much debated issue on Christian metal forums . A Christian band is expected to have either professed Christian members or a Christian message , preferably both . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background : Heavy metal music and Christianity = = = 
 The term ' heavy metal ' , as it was used by Lester Bangs and Dave Marsh at Creem , referred to a sound best exemplified by albums such as Led Zeppelin 's Led Zeppelin II , Deep Purple 's Deep Purple in Rock , and Black Sabbath 's Paranoid . 
 An examination of some of the lyrics from bands such as these show a lack of any explicitly negative themes . Led Zeppelin 's " Whole Lotta Love " could just as well be a conversation between husband and wife , as not . Black Sabbath 's " Electric Funeral " exactly parallels the blood red moon of St. John 's Revelation , while their " Hand of Doom " describes the ravages of drug abuse . Ozzy Osbourne could be heard preaching to his audience in the earlier song , " Children of the Grave " : " Tell the world that love is still alive you must be brave ; or the children of today are children of the grave . " Later , in the song " In My Time Of Dying " , Robert Plant even pleaded to Jesus : " Meet me Jesus , meet me ; Meet me in the middle of the air ; if my wings should fail me Lord , please meet me with another pair . " Perhaps not overtly Christian , but songs such as these exhibited similar themes . 
 Early heavy metal fans were viewed by the populace as a counter @-@ culture , just as the fans of rock and roll , in general , were . Early heavy metal lyrics and themes were often accused of challenging Christian values , and as the genre grew , some bands actually did . 
 Among the early bands who were accused of adding negative connotations to the term was Black Sabbath , combining heavy metal music with " occult symbols and odes to the Devil " . The early bands ' use of <unk> , a " dissonant sound of the medieval ' Devil 's chord ' " , led to heavy metal being " cast as dumb , crass , and , on occasions , satanic ; music hardly fit for intelligent debate , let alone theological reflection . Despite such accusations , more serious examinations of Black Sabbath lyrics find several songs actually advocate Christianity and specifically warn audiences about the Devil . 
 Bands such as Mötley Crüe , Ratt , and Twisted Sister took " themes of generalized rage , sexual abandon , drug abuse , violence , and despair into the homes of millions of young record buyers . " In the 1980s , with the growing appeal of metal , the National Coalition on Television Violence " called attention to the destructive potential of music videos , many of which graphically depict violence and rebellion . " A British cleric and metal fan analysed that because of distorted guitar sounds , " intense " beats and " muscular " vocals , heavy metal music songs are " unafraid to deal with death , violence and destruction " and that " much of metal 's fascination with Satan or evil is play @-@ acting , driven by a desire to shock . " The Italian Capuchin friar and former metal vocalist Cesare <unk> ( " Fratello <unk> " ) stated that there are " maybe " some Satanic metal bands " but I think it 's an act so that they sell more , " and went to add that " metal is the most energetic , vital , deep and true musical language that I know . " 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Christian metal has its origins in the late 1960s and early 1970s in the Jesus movement , a hippie movement with Christian ideology consisting of hippies that converted to Christianity . The Christian hippies within this movement , known as " Jesus People " , developed a musical movement called Jesus music , which primarily began in southern California , ex . Los Angeles when hippie street musicians converted to Christianity . These musicians continued playing the same styles of music they had played before converting , among them heavy metal music , though they infused their lyrics with a Christian message . Larry Norman was one of the earliest Christian rock musicians who released his first album titled Upon This Rock in 1969 which is arguably the first Christian rock album produced . Norman 's song " Why Should the Devil Have All the Good Music ? " summarised the ideas of these musicians . 
 The first Christian hard rock group was possibly the California @-@ based band Agape , formed in the late 1960s . Known for their psychedelic rock and blues influences , the band released an album titled Gospel Hard Rock in 1971 , followed by Victims of Tradition in 1972 . After Agape , the Resurrection Band was formed in 1972 in Milwaukee 's Jesus People community and released the hard rock album Music to Raise the Dead in 1974 . The Swedish group Jerusalem was formed in 1975 and is cited as another early Christian hard rock group . In 1978 , Resurrection Band released its album Awaiting Your Reply and Jerusalem released Jerusalem ( Volume 1 ) . Both albums had a notable impact on Christian music culture . During that time , heavy metal was a new style of music for the Christian music industry , and many Christian labels did not expect it to sell well . However , Awaiting Your Reply hit big in the Christian market , and reached No. 6 on the Gospel album sales charts . Jerusalem also became an instant hit among listeners , and within the first six months the record sold 20 @,@ 000 copies , unheard of within the genre of Christian rock in Europe . The Canadian Daniel Band is cited among the first bands , as is Barnabas . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 In the early 1980s , there were four notable Christian heavy metal groups : Messiah Prophet , Leviticus , Saint , and Stryper . Although it is debatable as to which band was formed first , the Orange County native glam metal group Stryper was the most popular one . Stryper was also the first band to identify as Christian metal . Stryper gained attention with their way of throwing Bibles to the audience at their concerts . In the beginning , mostly Christians went to Stryper 's concerts but soon they reached non @-@ Christian audience . In the 1980s , Christian metal bands closely followed the trends of mainstream metal bands . 
 During the mid @-@ 1980s , heavy metal music divided into autonomous subgenres . Weinstein ( 2000 ) described the thematic diversity that cross @-@ cuts musical styles : " In the 1980s , white metal and black metal emerged . Their lyrical themes are at polar opposites to each other , one of them bringing the ' good news ' and the other the ' bad news . ' Both include bands whose sounds span the full spectrum of metal . White metal is commonly called Christian metal . In part a response to the popularity of the heavy metal genre , it transforms the code of heavy metal to serve purposes of Evangelical Christian sects and other denominations . In part , also , Christian metal is a well @-@ crafted missionary effort to recruit members and save souls . [ ... ] Black metal stands in the thematic opposition to Christianity , not looking upward to heaven but setting its sights on the underworld . Satanic symbols and imagery have been a staple of heavy metal since its beginnings with Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin . In the West , there is no better symbol for rebellion . But groups such as Mercyful Fate claimed that they were not playing . Their claims to be true believers , followers of the lord of the underworld , were seen by many to be a commercial ploy . " Chicago doom metal group Trouble was known to be the first band that was publicly marketed as " white metal " since their early albums Psalm 9 and The Skull feature Biblical references . The origin of the " white metal " term remains unclear ; it is merely known that the non @-@ Christian label Metal Blade Records used " white metal " as a marketing term , in contrast to black metal . 
 Soon the Christian metal bands became controversial for their beliefs and often evangelistic goals in the metal music scene , which typically holds individualism in particularly high esteem . Stryper , for instance , although a commercial success at that time , received a hostile reception when they played at a Dutch metal festival in 1985 . Regardless of this , Stryper helped to popularize the genre . They were the first Christian band to reach platinum status on an album . The 1986 album To Hell with the Devil sold 2 million copies and achieved a Grammy nomination . The music videos for " Free " , " Calling on You " , and the power ballad " Honestly " all spent many weeks on Music Television 's Top 10 , and " Free " was in the No. 1 position for 12 weeks ( 60 days ) , May 4 – July 24 , 1987 . 
 Not only was Christian metal criticized by non @-@ Christian metal fans , but soon the movement was also criticized by fundamentalists ; Allmusic wrote that " when church leaders were accusing heavy metal of encouraging Satanism , Stryper set out to prove that metal and hard rock could be used to promote Christianity . The southern California band was viewed with suspicion by both ministers ( who refused to believe that Christianity and metal were compatible ) and fellow headbangers — and yet , Stryper managed to sell millions of albums to both Christian and secular audiences . " For example , the televangelist Jimmy <unk> wrote a book titled Religious Rock n ' Roll – A Wolf in Sheep 's Clothing in 1987 and criticized the scene , particularly Stryper , for using heavy metal music to preach the gospel of Christianity . Many new bands began to arise , eventually drawing the attention of record labels that specialized in Christian music . 
 In contrast , however , many Christian evangelists and church organizations took a more supportive role . For example , televangelist Jim Bakker expressed public support for the group Stryper , watching them perform and becoming personal friends with the band 's members . Many new bands began to arise , eventually drawing the attention of record labels that specialized in Christian music . 
 = = = = Emergence of fanzines , record labels , and Sanctuary International = = = = 
 Christian metal soon developed into its own independent record labels and networks . The first Christian metal label was Pure Metal Records , a sublabel of Refuge Records . Soon there appeared other labels such as <unk> Records and Intense Records . Fanzines were published in several countries , with Heaven 's Metal as the first one in the US in 1985 . During that time almost every Christian record label became interested in Christian metal , and they advertised the newly signed metal bands on their roster on Heaven 's Metal since it was the only publication exclusively covering the movement . Soon Heaven 's Metal achieved more popularity and became an official , professional publication . Heaven 's Metal achieved a dedicated flock of 15 @,@ 000 readers . Bands ' sales usually rose when the ensembles were covered on the magazine . During the 1980s and early 1990s , the more underground Christian metal releases were typically distributed in Christian bookstores , and those as well as the fanzines also traded Christian metal cassette copies with the music fans . 
 Many rock and metal fans that became Christians through the ministry of Christian metal bands were rejected from churches in the 1980s . In 1984 , California pastor Bob Beeman saw this problem and soon started the ministry called Sanctuary - The Rock and Roll Refuge . This fellowship brought many musicians together and formed groups such as Tourniquet , Deliverance , Vengeance and Mortal that would soon become ground breaking acts in Christian music culture . Sanctuary 's first worship leader was Stryper 's vocalist Michael Sweet and later Barren Cross ' bass player Jim <unk> . Sanctuary sponsored the first Christian metal festival , The Metal Mardi Gras , held in 1987 in Los Angeles . This proved influential and soon Christian metal festivals were organized elsewhere as well . Sanctuary 's activities began spreading , and it had 36 parishes all over the United States at its peak by the 1990s . The Sanctuary parishes had a significant impact on the Christian metal movement : groups that would later become notable such as P.O.D. performed their first concerts in Sanctuary . 
 By the late 1990s , the parish 's workers felt that regular churches ' attitudes towards metalheads , rockers and punks had become more permissive , and therefore did not feel the need to keep Sanctuary going on any longer , hence , most of the parishes of Sanctuary were closed . Sanctuary became Sanctuary International , and it currently gives international studies and lessons on Christianity . Sanctuary also runs an internet radio station called " Intense Radio " which , in 2003 , reached approximately 150 @,@ 000 listeners . 
 = = = Late 1980s and 1990s = = = 
 Doug Van Pelt of HM Magazine stated that Christian metal had its " heyday " in the late 1980s and early 1990s . By 1987 , there were more than a hundred Christian metal bands , and their records were sold at both Christian bookstores and non @-@ Christian retails . By 1988 , the four largest Christian metal bands ( excluding the mainstream success Stryper ) were Bloodgood , Barren Cross , Whitecross , and Leviticus . The Kentucky @-@ based band Bride initially played speed metal , particularly on Live to Die , and reached a wider audience when they released Snakes in the Playground ( 1992 ) . Despite being criticized for their abrupt changes in style in favor of what 's " hot " , are still considered " a primeval force at the centre of Christian heavy metal . " 
 In 1989 , the Orange County group X @-@ Sinner released its debut album Get It , and was one of the most talked about bands within the white metal scene at the time . Noted for a classic metal sound similar to AC / DC , X @-@ Sinner has managed to stay at the head of the Christian classic metal scene . 
 Glam metal band Holy Soldier , another group hailing from California , released its self @-@ titled debut on Word and A & M Records ( Myrrh imprint ) in 1990 to critical and commercial acclaim . Two years later , the band followed up their debut with Last Train , another critical success , leading to 60 city world tour . The band Guardian achieved some mainstream attention for its album Fire and Love , and one of the videos was included in the MTV 's Headbangers Ball rotation . The heavy metal band Angelica introduced vocalist Rob Rock , who also achieved initial fame as the vocalist for guitar virtuoso Chris <unk> 's band <unk> during the 1980s and 1990s and then went solo with his Rage of Creation album . 
 In the early 1990s , the rising musical styles , especially grunge , began to take their places as the dominant styles in the mainstream , which resulted in heavy metal music losing popularity and going underground for a decade . Many Christian metal musicians began to play extreme metal , and soon death metal replaced thrash metal in popularity . Audiences in many underground metal scenes began favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular styles . As with other glam metal acts of the time , Stryper lost popularity and split up in 1993 . 
 Bruce Moore writes in the e @-@ book Metal Missionaries that during mid @-@ 1990s Christian metal " ceased to play catch up ( replicating secular bands ) and began to assimilate into its rightful place in the Extreme music scene and the artists who played became influential in helping to define this relatively new , but growing genre . " With risen musical quality and more street @-@ credibility , Christian metal and hardcore bands were signed to record labels such as Tooth and Nail , Solid State , <unk> Records as well as secular labels Metal Blade and Victory Records . Christian metal was available through non @-@ Christian outlets ; " For the first time Extreme Christian music moved from the dusty back bin of the Christian book stores to the front racks at super retailers like Best Buy , Circuit City , <unk> and even giant retailers like Wal @-@ Mart , Target and Hot Topic . " The German secular metal label Nuclear Blast Records also released Christian metal . <unk> <unk> of Norway 's Arctic Serenades Records has claimed : " The owner of Nuclear Blast was a committed Christian and he was pushing everything with that religious agenda through Nuclear Blast . Mortification and Horde were pushed like mad by Nuclear Blast when other labels were pushing pure satanic stuff . " 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In the first decade of the 21st century some groups reached mainstream popularity . There are Christian metal bands that perform virtually every subgenre of metal . The Christian metal movement has spread worldwide since it emerged in the early 1980s , and there are now hundreds of active Christian metal bands . Inspired by the metal revival , many 1980s bands have made comebacks including Saint , Bloodgood and Stryper . In October 2004 , Doug Van Pelt brought Heaven 's Metal back as its own fanzine . The Internet has had a significant role on the revival of Christian metal as well . Many websites and online communities are dedicated to discussions about Christian metal 's music , events , and bands . 
 For the first time since Stryper 's success in the 1980s , certain Christian metal artists found mainstream acceptance selling millions of albums to both Christian and non @-@ Christian fans , including Underoath and P.O.D. The latter became the most successful Christian metal band when their 2001 album Satellite went multi @-@ platinum , while the former 's 2006 album , Define the Great Line , ranked No. 2 on the Billboard 200 . Metalcore features many popular Christian bands , including such crossover bands such as Underoath , As I Lay Dying , August Burns Red , Blessthefall , Norma Jean , Haste the Day , The Devil Wears Prada , Disciple and Demon Hunter . As I Lay Dying have entered the Billboard 200 charts ( No. 8 ) for its record sales and were nominated for the " Best Metal Performance " Grammy for the single " Nothing Left " from the 2007 album An Ocean Between Us . The album made its debut on Metal Blade Records , charting at No. 19 in Canada . In the United States , nearly 40 @,@ 000 units were sold in its first week . The second week after it was released , it charted at No. 39 in both the United States and Canada . Other Top 200 debuts around the world include a No. 117 in the United Kingdom and No. 154 in Japan . In 2015 , August Burns Red was given " Best Metal Performance " at the Grammys for their song " Identity " , off their Found in Far Away Places album . 
 In its 2006 in Review issue ( February 2007 ) , Revolver magazine dubbed Christian metal the phenomenon of the year . Editor in Chief Tom <unk> interviewed the lead vocalists of As I Lay Dying , Demon Hunter , Norma Jean , and Underoath ( Tim Lambesis , Ryan Clark , Cory Brandan Putman , and Spencer Chamberlain , respectively ) as the front @-@ page article for the issue . Tooth and Nail Records , P.O.D. , Zao , War of Ages , Still Remains , and He Is Legend were also mentioned . 
 = = Christian bands in metal subgenres = = 
 = = = Thrash metal = = = 
 Some notable American Christian thrash metal groups include Deliverance , Believer , Vengeance ( frontman , vocalist and last remaining member Roger Martinez currently against Christianity ) and Tourniquet . Allmusic states that Vengeance Rising 's first two albums " were huge successes in the world of Christian music , making them one of the few bands in the genre to cross over into the secular music scene . " Tourniquet was called " arguably the greatest Christian metal band in history " by Cross Rhythms in 1996 . Tourniquet 's Psycho Surgery was ranked as the second most influential Christian metal album of all time by HM Magazine . Deliverance 's 1990 music video for the title track of Weapons of Our Warfare album received some airplay on MTV . Allmusic wrote about Believer 's Sanity Obscure album : " Before 1990 , the Christian heavy metal genre rarely strayed from generic riffing and poor lyrics . Bands like Petra and Sacred Warrior never broke through to the mainstream for this very reason . With low expectations , Believer released this massive slab of molten metal . Although it never really became popular , several mainstream magazines praised the album . " 
 The British bands Seventh Angel and <unk> introduced Christian thrash metal to Europe . Seventh Angel were considered to be thrash metal pioneers , and their albums achieved mainstream distribution through the Music for Nations label . Cross Rhythms states that for a long time Seventh Angel were considered to be the best metal act in the UK . Seventh Angel also has included aspects of doom metal on some recordings . In the 1990s , New Mexico based Ultimatum and Oklahoman group called Eternal Decision gained some attention , the latter with its thrash and groove metal style . The 1997 album Eternal Decision hit the record stores in the U.S. and 16 other countries , achieving considerable acclaim and providing the band with even more notice . 
 = = = Death metal = = = 
 In 1990 , the Australian group Mortification became the first widely recognized Christian death metal band . Their 1992 album Scrolls of the <unk> garnered the band some attention from the heavy metal underground , according to Allmusic . 
 At roughly the same time , the band Living Sacrifice was creating thrash and death metal , particularly on the albums <unk> ( 1992 ) and <unk> ( 1994 ) , with Allmusic commenting that " the term Christian death metal seems like one of music 's most comical <unk> . " Later they " evolved from their early death metal @-@ inspired rumblings into a crushing , staccato @-@ driven , heavily percussive metallic behemoth that pummels listeners with intense riffage and a decidedly personal , though nevertheless , often evangelical lyrical viewpoint . " The Minneapolis @-@ based Crimson Thorn is described by Allmusic as " one of the world 's most extreme @-@ sounding Christian metal bands . " Norwegian band Extol 's 1998 album Burial was called " Revolutionary . This release may have single @-@ handedly been responsible for the revival of the Christ @-@ centered extreme metal . " The band was popular among both Christian and general metal fans , mostly touring with well @-@ known non @-@ Christian bands . 
 = = = <unk> metal = = = 
 Horde is widely considered to be the first unblack metal ( also called Christian black metal ) band . As a one @-@ man band with only one release ( in 1994 ) , Horde initiated controversy within the extreme metal community , opposing the more common lyrical themes of Satanism and evil . The title of Horde 's only release – Hellig Usvart – means " Holy <unk> " , which is now often used by Christians to refer to Christian black metal , in order to avoid the negative connotations of the term " black metal " . 
 Antestor ( then called Crush Evil ) existed prior to the release of Hellig Usvart but their music was a death / doom style , and was not yet musically considered black metal . During the early 1990s when the band was known as Crush Evil , Euronymous , guitarist for the seminal black metal band Mayhem , was planning to stop Crush Evil from continuing . However , this never took place . 
 The release of Antestor 's The Return of the Black Death on the British black metal label Cacophonous Records in 1998 " set the standard for Christian black metal " . Swedish Crimson Moonlight 's The Covenant Progress , HM Magazine stated , " rivals the best any other band ( Christian or secular ) in this subgenre can offer . " While the unblack scene is not part of the traditional black metal scene , several musicians from both have co @-@ operated : <unk> <unk> of Dimmu Borgir produced Vaakevandring 's eponymous EP , and Jan Axel Blomberg of Mayhem played drums for Antestor 's The Forsaken ( 2005 ) album . 
 = = = Power metal and progressive metal = = = 
 Sacred Warrior preceded Christian power metal in the United States . The German group Seventh Avenue , formed in 1989 , was one of more notable Christian power metal bands in the 1990s . They released <unk> in 1995 , and after that the band was signed to Treasure Hunt Records . Their first release on this label , Tales of Tales , topped at 18 on the Japanese Heavy Metal Charts . 
 Later in the 1990s , the Swedish group Narnia made contributions to Christian power metal history , having signed with Nuclear Blast Records , Germany , and Pony Canyon Records , Japan . Later there appeared more notable European groups such as the German bands <unk> and <unk> , and the Swedish groups XT , <unk> , Harmony , and <unk> . 
 Among the progressive metal representatives were Balance of Power , whose album When the World Falls Down was picked by Japanese label Pony Canyon . Jacobs Dream was signed to Metal Blade Records . HM wrote of the Athens , Georgia based Theocracy 's self @-@ titled debut album that " Not only did this release gain [ the then @-@ sole member ] Matt a lot of notoriety in the small Christian power / prog scene but the much larger secular power / prog <unk> embraced this as well . " Later turned to a full band , their sophomore 2008 album Mirror of Souls " defines excellence in current Christian metal . " 
 = = = Other = = = 
 In 1987 , the Swedish group Veni Domine started playing progressive and symphonic doom metal and released its first album Fall Babylon Fall in 1992 , ranked as the 38th most influential Christian metal album of all time by HM . HM Magazine wrote that <unk> , with its 1993 album Exhumed of the Earth , " essentially delivered the most powerful and moving death / doom recording in the history of Christian metal . " Saviour Machine 's Saviour Machine I was called " amazing accomplishment " by HM and that " their gothic @-@ tinged , progressive metal was quite unique to the scene when it was released in 1993 . " 
 The alternative metal style 's leading groups included the nu metal bands P.O.D. , Thousand Foot Krutch , Disciple , and Pillar . Zao was a pioneer of metalcore , paving way for bands such as Underoath and Norma Jean . The California @-@ based group Mortal is cited as one of the first Christian bands that represented the industrial metal style . Cross Rhythms wrote that when Mortal 's second album Fathom hit the scene in 1993 " there was nothing else quite like it " and that it is " truly a musical milestone . " 
 Another 1990s <unk> Christian industrial metal band was Circle of Dust . The band received MTV exposure with a music video for " Telltale Crime " , and a part of the song " <unk> " was used as the intro @-@ song for a long time in the now defunct MTV Sports show . 
 Argyle Park , an underground supergroup of Christian industrial metal , received some success with the album Misguided ( 1995 ) as did , to some extent , <unk> and <unk> with Still Suffering in 1997 . <unk> 's second album Numb was somewhat successful because the song " Blind " became a hit single . The Australian industrial metal band called Screams of Chaos was known for its bizarre style that combined several extreme metal influences with industrial . The late 1990s and early first decade of the 21st century popular American shock rock group Rackets & <unk> was known to have elements of industrial metal , and received a following . 
 = = Christianity in mainstream metal = = 
 There are notable mainstream acts that feature or have featured Christian members . While these bands may or may not have had lyrics using Christian themes or symbolism , some have caused controversy in their claims to Christianity , such as Tom Araya of Slayer . Others , such as Alice Cooper Killswitch Engage , Linkin Park , Iron Maiden and Megadeth also have members who are Christian and often use spiritual themes . 
 = = Evangelistic subculture = = 
 While not uncommon in predominantly Catholic cultures , Christian metal is rooted in evangelical Protestantism , beginning as a means of evangelism among the non @-@ Christian metal scene . Over the years the focus changed because of the increased secularization of Christianity in the West during the 1990s . Moberg ( 2008 ) notes that the current scene seems to have very little interest in evangelism , especially in Northern Europe . Instead , it is argued that the current Christian metal music scene ultimately provides its core members with important resources for the shaping of an alternative and complementary form of religious expression and practice and an alternative Christian identity . Thus , Moberg states that Christian metal serves four main purposes : an alternative form of religious expression and identity ; as a legitimate form of religious expression ; as an effective means of evangelism and fighting and standing up for the Christian faith ; as a positive alternative to non @-@ Christian metal . 
 In a 2006 interview with HM Magazine , Steve Rowe of Mortification , one of the best known figures in the scene , implies that evangelism is of secondary importance and that Christian metal should first and foremost bring " spiritual encouragement " for its Christian listeners . Moberg ( 2006 ) suspects that Christian metal music may suggest dissatisfaction with traditional forms of worship among today 's young Christians : " They may not feel comfortable with just going to church and singing hymns , they need an alternative means to express the same faith . " Apart from evangelism , Christian metal may also provide a means " to get away from the image of Christianity as something rigid and boring " . 
 <unk> ( 2009 ) states that Christian metal expresses feeling of isolation and rebellion just like non @-@ Christian metal - but in a completely different way . Christian metal 's rebellion is about " Christian opposition to the perceived sinfulness and immorality of a late modern society and culture in which traditional family values have been eroded through such things as the legalization and increasing acceptability of abortion and pornography and the rise of gay rights and feminist movements . " Causes for the feeling of isolation can be explained with the fundamental Christian struggle of being in the world but not of it . Bloodgood and Barren Cross inverted the meaning of rebellion by declaring that in Western society and culture the Christian faith is true rebellion . As in non @-@ Christian metal , fans are encouraged to stand up for their faith , think for themselves and not blindly follow authorities , including religious ones . 
 According to Moberg ( 2008 ) , Christian metal has developed scenes in countries with long @-@ standing metal subcultures : United States , Brazil , Mexico , Germany , Netherlands , Norway , Sweden and Finland . Despite its seemingly marginal niche audience , as Christian metal fans are counted in the thousands and the non @-@ Christian metal fans in the millions , the Christian metal scene is one of the few transnational Christian communities that do not have any leaders or creed - only music connects its attendees . Just like non @-@ Christian metal , the Christian metal scene has developed its own infrastructure of record labels , promotion and distribution channels , specialized media , discussion forums , attitude , rhetorics , slogans such as " Turn or Burn ! " , " Faster for the Master ! " and " Support the War against Satan ! " , <unk> and festivals . Brazil and Mexico have tiny parishes of Christian metal fans . Finland in particular , with metal being more mainstream there than anywhere in the world , has held popular Metal Masses picked up by the Lutheran former state church since 2006 . 
 Most Christian metalheads also listen to non @-@ Christian metal ; Christian metal merely offers counterbalance for the dark message of non @-@ Christian metal , and most Christian metalheads only avoid the most satanic bands , if even them , since some ignore the issue altogether . Some differences in concert gestures have been noticed : Los Angeles Times reported in 1985 that in Stryper shows the audience were seen " poking stubby ' one way ' fingers heavenward — a refutation of the double @-@ fingered devil horns salute of many metal groups " . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Certain Christian groups , most notably those in some King James Only denominations , consider all types of rock and metal music to be opposition to their faith , regardless of lyrical content or the lifestyles of the band members . However , fans and artists see metal as another genre of music , parallel to such genres as blues , classical , jazz , punk , and hip @-@ hop . Bands such as Showbread and Antestor believe that the instrumentation of the music is simply a medium of art , while the person creating the music as well as the lyrics being presented provide the message . Therefore , Christian metal is created when Christians compose metal music in a way that reflects their faith in Christ . 
 Keith Kahn @-@ Harris states in the book Extreme Metal that sometimes fans of metal consider Christian faith and adherence in Church a membership of an established authority , and therefore Christian metal bands are seen as " <unk> " and the use of Christian lyrics to be opposed to the " true " purpose of metal , which values individualism and ignoring the opinions or rejection of religion . 
 Christian metal groups such as Barnabas and Extol have criticized bands within the industry for a lack of innovation and for isolating bands within the industry . Pastor Bob Beeman of Sanctuary International stated that this is a compliment to secular music , as it lets people to listen to the music they enjoyed without feeling like they are giving up on the style they love and allows bands to crossover into mainstream success . 
 Some groups within the Christian metal movement have criticized bands within the industry for isolating the genre from general industry too avidly . For example , Christer <unk> of Extol stated in 2003 : " I wish the scenes were more together . For a long time there has been a huge – and still growing – distance between Christian and secular music industries . This is the situation peculiarly in the US but also in Scandinavia . In my opinion this kind of polarization is not a good thing . Music is first and foremost about music so why should every band or artist that represents a religion or lack of it have its own industry ? Music has no religious borders . " However , most Christian bands today oppose to being isolated in the Christian music industry and have become mainstream successes , such as Virgin Black . 
 = = Christian metal radio = = 
 Since Christian metal is very much a counterculture of the Christian music scene , it has never had any major corporate radio outlets , as opposed to the more accepted CCM @-@ associated Christian music formats . Nevertheless , it has remained culturally significant in the genre , primarily enduring the test of time through word of mouth and through the help of pioneering Christian rock and metal broadcasters . Despite the lack of commercial radio support , Christian metal broadcasters have managed to hit the airwaves on public radio , campus radio , Internet radio , and in recent years through podcasting via the Internet . As digital broadcasting technology becomes more accessible , the number of Christian metal broadcasters has steadily increased . Some of today 's largest non @-@ commercial Christian alternative radio stations such as <unk> , Call FM , and Effect Radio have some Christian metal programing late nights and on weekends . However , as a whole these larger stations generally maintain a GMA @-@ prescribed format . Other stations such as Almighty Metal Radio , Savage Rock Radio , Reign Radio , Metal Blessing Radio , The Cross Stream , The Refinery Rock Radio , <unk> , and <unk> have been able to maintain twenty @-@ four @-@ hour Christian metal formats through Internet radio . Some notable Christian metal radio DJs , shows and podcasts include : " Jesus Solid Rock " Show ( ' 74 - ' 80 ) hosted by Pastor Bob Beeman , " Intense Radio " ( ' 95 - present ) founded by Pastor Bob Beeman and Sanctuary International , " HM Podcast " with HM Magazine founder & publisher Doug Van Pelt , " The Full Armor of God Broadcast " ( ' 97 - present ) hosted by Bro Scotland <unk> ( Kuba " The Demon Slayer " ) , " Radio U Hardcore " and ( ' 02 - present ) hosted by <unk> Dempsey ( A.K.A. " Jad " ) , and " The Nation of Rockwell " . 
 = = Record labels = = 
 Blood and Ink Records 
 <unk> Records 
 Flicker Records 
 Intense Records 
 Nightmare Records 
 Pluto Records 
 <unk> Records 
 Retroactive Records 
 <unk> Records 
 Rottweiler Records 
 Rowe Productions 
 Rugged Records 
 Solid State Records 
 Tooth & Nail Records 
 = = Christian metal festival = = 
 Cornerstone Festival 1984 – 2012 ( U.S. ) 
 Elements of Rock 2004 – present ( Switzerland ) 
 Nordic Fest 2002 – 2011 ( Norway ) 
 Blast of Eternity 2008 – present ( Germany ) 
 Bobfest 
 <unk> Fest ( Ecuador ) 
 Call for Eternity / Call for Eternity Extreme 2009 – present ( Slovakia ) 
 <unk> ( New Zealand ) 
 Rock Alive ( the Netherlands ) 
 = Fifteen ( song ) = 
 " Fifteen " is a country pop song performed by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift . Swift self @-@ penned the song and co @-@ produced it along with Nathan Chapman . " Fifteen " was released on August 30 , 2009 by Big Machine Records , as the fourth single from Swift 's second studio album , Fearless ( 2008 ) . The song was inspired by Swift 's freshman year of high school at Hendersonville High School , where she first encountered heartbreak , along with her best friend Abigail Anderson . After writing it , Swift asked Anderson for authorization to record the song ( due to personal references in the song ) ; Anderson affirmed and it was ultimately included on Fearless . " Fifteen " is a ballad , which has Swift reminiscing on events that occurred to her and her best friend at the age of 15 and cautioning young girls to not fall in love easily . 
 " Fifteen " peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100 and sold over a million digital downloads in the United States . The music video for " Fifteen " was directed by Roman White . It was filmed using a green screen and is heavily accentuated with special effects . The video features Swift walking through a garden , where she relives many memories with Anderson . It received a nomination for the Best Female Video category at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , but lost to Lady Gaga 's " Bad Romance " . " Fifteen " was promoted with live performances , including many that were part of Swift 's first and second headlining tours , the Fearless Tour ( 2009 — 10 ) and the Speak Now World Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) . Swift partnered with electronics retailer Best Buy for @ 15 , a program that allowed teens to help decide how funds would be distributed among various charities . 
 = = Background = = 
 Swift began writing " Fifteen " with the lyric " And Abigail gave everything she had to a boy / Who changed his mind / We both cried " , which eventually became the song 's bridge , and continued writing everything else in a backwards manner . The song was written about Swift 's freshman year of high school at Hendersonville High School , where she met her best friend Abigail Anderson . " I just decided I really wanted to tell that story about our first year of high school because I felt in my freshman year , I grew up more than any year in my life so far " , Swift stated . The events it focused on were how both Swift and Anderson fell in love for the first time , but both suffered of heartbreaks . Aside from reminiscing on the events she and Anderson experienced , Swift wrote cautionary lyrics , intended to target teenage girls entering or already in their freshman year of high school . She described it as incorporating things she wished someone would have told her in a song when she was younger . " The thing about high school , you don 't know anything . You don 't know anything , but you think you know everything " , Swift said . 
 After the completion of composing " Fifteen " , Swift became very nervous to show Anderson the song , for she did not know how her friend would respond . " It was a really personal song , especially from her angle of it . " However , when Swift performed the song for Anderson and asked whether she was comfortable with the song , Anderson confirmed : " She said , ' Does it bother you that your name is in a song that 's so personal ? ' And it really doesn 't just because of the way Taylor and I feel about it . If one girl can kind of learn from it or connect to a song like that , it 's totally worth it . " With Anderson 's consent , Swift recorded " Fifteen " with producer Nathan Chapman , who produced all but one track on Swift 's 2006 eponymous debut album , Taylor Swift . Recording the highly personal track caused Swift to cry . Swift attributed the event to the fact that she is most likely to cry over when her loved ones undergo pain , as she witnesses it , rather than her own experiences . She went to say " Fifteen " usually gets her every time . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fifteen " is a country pop song with a length of four minutes and 55 seconds . It is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . The track is categorized as a ballad . It is written in the key of G major and Swift 's vocals spans a little over two octaves , from G3 to C5 . It follows the chord progression Gsus2 – Csus2 – Em – Csus2 . It concludes with an outro that consists of Swift singing " la la la " and rephrasing the song 's opening lines . 
 The lyrics of " Fifteen " have Swift narrating about multiple events . In the first verse , Swift details first entering high school with intentions of merely staying out of her peers ' way . The second verse bears Swift meeting Anderson and gossiping about the school 's queen bees with her . Successively , Swift describes first dates and falling in love for the first time . However , Swift and Anderson become heartbroken , revealing that Anderson " gave everything she had " to someone who later changed his mind . The song 's refrains have Swift cautioning young girls to not fall in love easily and acknowledging that she came to the realization of being able to accomplish more than dating a football team member . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone believed " Fifteen " was exemplary in that " Swift is a songwriting savant with an intuitive gift for verse @-@ chorus @-@ bridge architecture " . Rosen compared her songwriting in the track to that of producers Dr. Luke and Max Martin , who he referred to as " Swedish pop gods " . He continued , " Her music mixes an almost impersonal professionalism — it 's so rigorously crafted it sounds like it has been scientifically engineered in a hit factory — with confessions that are <unk> intimate and true . " Jonathon Keefe of Slant Magazine considered the bridge one of the nicer moments of Fearless , but was unimpressed with Swift 's singing , particularly in the outro . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic found " Fifteen " , in which Swift portrayed the role of a big sister instead of a big star , to be one of the best and the most personal song on Fearless . Ken Tucker of Billboard magazine believed " Fifteen " could appeal with teenagers looking for hope and adult women reminiscing the past . Leah Greenbelt of Entertainment Weekly stated , " When she sings about sexuality , she sounds like a real teen , not some manufactured vixen @-@ Lolita " . 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said " Fifteen " was one of Swift 's best @-@ written songs . James Reed of The Boston Globe believed " Fifteen " was one of Fearless 's most interesting songs and stated he could visualize the lyrics of the song scribbled in a diary that chronicled Swift 's freshman year in high school . Sean Dooley of About.com named it the best track on Fearless and said it showcased Swift 's growth as a songwriter . Josh Love of The Village Voice called the song a " standout " on the album and found it a refreshing contradiction to typical , idealistic country songs . Prior to its single release , Kate Kiefer of Paste magazine suggested for the song be released as a single from Fearless , adding that she loved it . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called the track a fantastically good song that broadened " her potential market from teenage girls to anyone who used to be a teenage girl " . Petridis continued , " You applaud her skill , while feeling slightly unsettled by the thought of a teenager pontificating away like Yoda . " Aidan Vaziri of San Francisco Chronicle ranked it twelfth on his top 12 singles of 2009 list , commenting , " Damn it if this song isn 't too sweet , too vulnerable and just too real to ignore . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following the release of Fearless , on the week ending November 29 , 2008 , " Fifteen " debuted at number seventy @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 Its appearance , along with six other songs , on the chart tied Swift with Hannah Montana ( Miley Cyrus ) for the female act to have the most songs charting on the Billboard Hot 100 in the same week , a record later surpassed by Swift herself when she charted eleven songs at once in 2010 . It re @-@ entered at number ninety @-@ four on the week ending October 3 , 2009 , after its single release . On the week ending December 19 , 2009 , " Fifteen " reached its peak at number twenty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 , and , on the week ending February 6 , 2010 , spent its last week at number forty , after twenty @-@ one weeks on the chart . The song is one of thirteen songs from Fearless charted within the top forty of the Billboard Hot 100 , breaking the record for the most top forty entries from a single album . The single was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . As of November 2014 , " Fifteen " has sold over 1 @,@ 323 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 " Fifteen " debuted at number forty @-@ one on Billboard Hot Country Songs . It jumped at number thirty @-@ one on its second week and on the week @-@ ending November 7 , 2009 , it entered the top ten at number ten . Six weeks later , it reached its peak at number seven on the week @-@ ending December 12 , 2009 . The single became her second single that did not reach the top three of Billboard Hot Country Songs since her debut single " Tim McGraw " . " Fifteen " also peak at number ten on Billboard Pop Songs , number twelve on Billboard Adult Contemporary , and at number fourteen at Billboard Adult Pop Songs . 
 On the week ending January 23 , 2010 , the song peaked at number nineteen in Canada . It was certified gold by Music Canada for sales of 40 @,@ 000 digital downloads . " Fifteen " peaked at number forty @-@ eight in Australia on the week ending December 13 , 2009 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Fifteen " was directed by Roman White , who previously directed Swift 's music video " You Belong with Me " . White began with the intention of creating a video different than others Swift did in the past . To do so , he believed he needed to set the video outside of high school . White explained , " Well , I think I really wanted this video to kind of be an evolution for Taylor [ ... ] I actually said to her , ' I don 't think we should shoot in a high school . ' And I don 't think she wanted to either . " White conceptualized the video 's setting by taking into account the literal meaning of the song and transforming into something new . He conceptualized the setting to be new world where Swift could revisit her memories , as they manifest around her . " Let 's take the literal meaning of this song and watch it evolve in front of us ... almost as a memory in your head . And create this world , somewhere you walk in on this desolate desert and you start to sing about all these great memories you have ... of everything you love blooming around you , and so we literally grew this garden around her " , White said . The world moved from one situation to the next . White decided to annex surreal elements to create a cross between a garden and the heart of the memories . He intertwined Swift 's emotions with the growth of the garden . The garden grew when Swift felt happy , but at the sight of pain and negative emotions , clouds appear and the garden dies , which also symbolized Anderson 's broken heart . 
 Swift 's friend , Anderson , portrayed herself in the video . The love interests of both Swift and Anderson were cast by Swift after she received images of them via e @-@ mail . The video was filmed in two days . The first day consisted of actors , including Swift and Anderson , filming before a green screen . On the set , White presented Swift with caricature drawings depicting the music video , in order to guide herself . Swift was impressed by Anderson 's acting skills , considering her lack of experience , and called it " prolific " . On the second day , scenes at a high school were filmed ; artificial rain was made . Afterward , White and a team of visual effect artists created the setting . " If you watch just the offline edit of this video , it 's just green . It 's just Taylor walking around a giant green screen . And to think that every single thing in that video was created is amazing , ' cause a lot of people worked really hard on it " , White said . The visual effects team were at work for the video for some time , sometimes staying overnight in the office to produce the video . The direction was to make the video seem " magical " . Some of the props used when filming were recreated using digital animation , such as the door and the desks . Because extras were filmed separately , White was meticulous to find the right shots to make the scene more cohesive . White believed the finished product had a sense of innocence . 
 The video begins with Swift , barefoot and clad in a white sundress , approaching a tall , arched doorway which materializes in the middle of a barren landscape . Swift looks at a photograph of herself and her friend tucked into the arch and , then , passes through the doors . On the other side of the arch , animated flowers and vines grow across the scenes . People and objects from a high school fade in and out of view . Swift walks through the memories and begins to play an acoustic guitar beneath a tree . Afterward , Anderson appears , sitting at a desk before a chalkboard in the field of flowers . Swift sits down beside her and two begin to whisper and laugh to each other . In the next scene , Swift plays guitar while Anderson goes on her first date ; she kisses her date , but pushes him away when he tries to go further . Her love interest and all surroundings dissolve to show Anderson sitting alone on a stone bench . Swift approaches her and hugs her tightly as the field around them turns dark and stormy . The video then alternates between Swift singing in the rain and hugging her friend . After the landscape deteriorates , the video transitions to reality , where Swift , wearing a black trench coat , stands in the rain , across the street from a high school . Swift then sees a student at the entrance ; the two make eye contact and the video concludes . To date , the video has over 108 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Video reception = = = 
 The music video premiered on October 9 , 2009 on CMT . Peter Gicas of E ! thought the video was " sweet " and said , " And while the visuals here — Taylor walking in and out of various animated scenes — are certainly nice to look at , they nevertheless take a back seat to the country star 's cuteness . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly graded the video a B. Greenblatt believed the video was reverential and painterly , but criticized it by saying " Fifteen " ' s most powerful lyrics were outdone by the dreamy design . Jocelyn Vena of MTV wrote , " Taylor Swift is ' Fifteen ' all over again in the new music video for her song of the same name . " At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , the video was nominated for the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video , but lost to Lady Gaga 's video for " Bad Romance " ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Swift first performed " Fifteen " , as a duet with pop singer Miley Cyrus , at the 51st Grammy Awards . The duo sat on wooden stools for the acoustic performance , with Swift wearing a baggy beige dress layered over a tight black outfit and playing an acoustic guitar . Swift has also performed the song at We 're All for the Hall , a benefit concert organized by Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum , the 2009 CMA Music Festival , the 2009 V Festival , the Australian charity concert Sydney Sound Relief , and the Country Music Association Awards . In the United Kingdom , Swift performed " Fifteen " on Later ... with Jools Holland and The Paul O 'Grady Show . Swift performed the song on all venues in 2009 and 2010 of her first headlining concert tour , the Fearless Tour . The performances of " Fifteen " set on a small platform located at the opposite end , parallel to the stage in the arena . Swift , dressed in a pastel sundress , sat on a wooden stool while performing with wooden 12 @-@ string acoustic guitar strapped to her shoulder . Nicole Frehsee of Rolling Stone favored Swift 's performance of " Tim McGraw " at the August 27 , 2009 concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City . Frehsee described the entire concert as an " elaborate spectacle that doesn 't slow down , even when the singer hauls her acoustic guitar into the audience to play a sweet , stripped down set of tunes including ' Fifteen ' . " " Fifteen " served as a performance on the setlist of Swift 's second concert tour , the Speak Now World Tour ( 2011 ) ; the performances featured Swift sitting and playing an acoustic guitar , wearing a blue cocktail dress . 
 = = @ 15 = = 
 Swift partnered with electronics retailer Best Buy for @ 15 , a program that allowed teens to help decide how Best Buy 's " @ 15 Fund " would be distributed among various charities . Swift taped a Public Service Announcement ( PSA ) , called a " Teen Service Announcement " by Best Buy , for @ 15 . Within the PSA , which was released on February 9 , 2009 , scenes of Swift reminiscing on high school and encouraging originality and uniqueness were inter @-@ cut with scenes of her singing " Fifteen " . In June 2009 , @ 15 became a partner for Swift 's Fearless Tour . The announcement was shown at each stop during the North American leg of the tour . In fifteen tour stops , @ 15 donated forty concert tickets and a guitar autographed by Swift to local teen @-@ oriented charity groups , such as chapters of Boys & Girls Clubs of America and Big Brothers Big Sisters . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD single / Digital download 
 " Fifteen " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 54 
 " You Belong with Me " ( Radio Mix ) – 3 : 50 
 Australia Pop Mix Edit Digital Download 
 " Fifteen " ( Pop Mix Edit ) – 4 : 01 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Wario World = 
 Wario World ( <unk> , Wario Wārudo ) is a platform beat ' em up game developed by Treasure and published by Nintendo for the GameCube . It was released in Europe on June 20 , 2003 , in North America on June 23 , 2003 , in Australia on July 10 , 2003 , and in Japan on May 27 , 2004 . The game 's plot centers on Wario and his quest to regain his treasure and his castle from Black Jewel , an evil gem . 
 The game was fairly well received by reviewers . They praised the gameplay but criticized the game for being too short . Wario World has sold over 142 @,@ 000 copies in Japan and over 256 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In 2004 , the game was re @-@ released as a Player 's Choice title . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wario World 's gameplay centers mainly on combating enemies , although it requires some platform navigation similar to Super Mario 64 and Super Mario Sunshine . The controls are simple , and are only used to jump , run , dash , perform fighting moves , and use the " Hyper Suction " ability to collect nearby coins . The level designs are platform @-@ based with combat elements , and have an overall linear design . The levels contain trapdoors , which lead to special platforming or puzzle @-@ oriented challenges . Throughout the game , small forest sprites known as " <unk> " give Wario advice if they are rescued from imprisonment . 
 During combat , Wario can grab enemies and either spin them around , throw them , or <unk> them into the ground . Enemies drop coins when defeated , and tend to regenerate if the area is left and returned to later . The coins are used to purchase items , such as life @-@ restoring garlic , and to return to life . If Wario does not have enough money to return to life , the game is over . A new feature in Wario World are the spherical " glue globes " , in which Wario is stuck to if he touches it , allowing the player to reach otherwise inaccessible areas . Along the way , Wario can re @-@ collect his lost treasures , which are hidden in treasure chests , and collect pieces of golden Wario statues , which increases Wario 's life meter by one half . In order to advance in the game , the player must collect a certain amount of red diamonds in each level . If the player collects all the treasure in the various levels , minigames from the Game Boy Advance title WarioWare , Inc . : Mega Microgames ! are unlocked , and they can be played by using the Nintendo GameCube – Game Boy Advance link cable . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins with Wario enjoying his newly built castle , which is filled with treasures that he has collected from earlier adventures . An evil gem called Black Jewel , hidden amongst Wario 's treasure collection , suddenly awakens and takes over Wario 's castle . Black Jewel turns Wario 's treasure into monsters , and transforms the castle into four worlds called Excitement Central , <unk> World , <unk> and Sparkle Land , each consisting of two levels and a boss fight . A central area allows access to the different worlds , as well as to the Treasure Square , where the Huge Treasure Box inside of which Black Jewel is hiding can be found . Wario proceeds through the areas controlled by Black Jewel , recovering his treasure and rescuing <unk> ( the creatures had sealed Black Jewel away in the past ) , then obtains the key to the Huge Treasure Box and engages Black Jewel in a battle . Wario 's subsequent victory allows him to regain control of his castle . 
 During the game 's ending , Wario 's new castle quality depends on the number of <unk> rescued . The worst @-@ case scenario sees Wario with nothing but a campsite with his throne in a dark jungle , but if all 40 <unk> were rescued , Wario is given a palace even grander than his previous one . 
 = = Development = = 
 Wario World was first shown at E3 2002 as a technical demo . At the next E3 in 2003 , it was shown with new levels of gameplay polish and tweaking , which the previous E3 demo was lacking . On August 22 , 2002 , at Nintendo 's Gamer 's Summit , Wario World 's North American release date was set to November 11 , 2002 . The game was later going to be released on May 26 , 2003 , but was further delayed by one month till June 23 . 
 It was uncertain who was developing Wario World , until April 22 , 2003 , when Nintendo of America officially revealed that Treasure , the company behind the successful titles Gunstar Heroes and Ikaruga , was developing the game . After the successful development collaboration Treasure and Nintendo shared with the Nintendo 64 title , Sin and Punishment , the two companies wanted to work together again . The R & D1 team wanted to continue their co @-@ development juncture with a 3D installment of the Wario franchise . Wario World 's music was composed by Norio <unk> and Minako Hamano . Wario was voiced by Charles Martinet , who also voices Mario and Luigi in the Mario series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wario World was a commercial success , selling over 142 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . In 2004 , the game was re @-@ released alongside Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour and F @-@ Zero GX as part of the Player 's Choice line , a selection of games with high sales sold for a reduced price . 
 Wario World received fairly positive reviews . The US version of Play magazine gave the game a perfect score , and the reviewer commented that Wario World " pays off every second [ he is ] holding the controller , and that , to [ him ] , is greatness " . Nintendo Power said that the game was " tons of fun " . GamePro stated that Wario World " stays addictive by weight of sheer design innovation " . The American @-@ based publication Game Informer praised the game for including " droves of awesome boss battles " . Matt Casamassina of IGN declared that Wario World had " some great control mechanics and inventive level work " . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Greg Ford said , " Wario [ World ] delivers a great time while it lasts and is well worth checking out . Just don 't expect a Mario @-@ quality adventure " . Worthplaying gave the game 9 out 10 , stating that " Treasure has done itself proud with this title , and Wario himself can lift his head up high . At least in my book , he 's got at least one game that 's better than Mario 's . " 
 Wario World received criticism for its length , with some reviewers stating that the game was shorter than the average console title . Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer compared Wario World to Luigi 's Mansion , a game also criticized for its length , and said that the game was like Luigi 's Mansion " all over again " . GameSpy stated that Wario World " offers little above and beyond the standard 3D platform romp , and what is offered turns out to be very short and repetitive " . GameSpot commented that " the final product is too short and simplistic to hold your attention for more than a day " . 
 = Middlesex ( novel ) = 
 Middlesex is a Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novel by Jeffrey Eugenides published in 2002 . The book is a bestseller , with more than three million copies sold by May 2011 . Its characters and events are loosely based on aspects of Eugenides ' life and observations of his Greek heritage . It is not an autobiography ; unlike the protagonist , Eugenides is not intersex . The author decided to write Middlesex after he read the 1980 memoir <unk> Barbin and was dissatisfied with its discussion of intersex anatomy and emotions . 
 Primarily a coming @-@ of @-@ age story ( Bildungsroman ) and family saga , the novel chronicles the effect of a mutated gene on three generations of a Greek family , causing momentous changes in the protagonist 's life . According to scholars , the novel 's main themes are nature versus nurture , rebirth , and the differing experiences of what society constructs as polar opposites — such as those found between men and women . It discusses the pursuit of the American Dream and explores gender identity . The novel contains many allusions to Greek mythology , including creatures such as the Minotaur , half @-@ man and half @-@ bull , and the Chimera , a monster composed of various animal parts . 
 Narrator and protagonist Cal Stephanides ( initially called " Callie " ) is an intersex man of Greek descent with a condition known as 5 @-@ alpha @-@ reductase deficiency , which causes him to have certain feminine traits . The first half of the novel is about Cal 's family and depicts his grandparents ' migration from Bursa , a city in Asia Minor , to the United States in 1922 . It follows their assimilation into American society in Detroit , Michigan , then a booming industrial city . The latter half of the novel , set in the late 20th century , focuses on Cal 's experiences in his hometown of Detroit and his escape to San Francisco , where he comes to terms with his modified gender identity . 
 Entertainment Weekly , the Los Angeles Times , and The New York Times Book Review considered Middlesex one of the best books of 2002 , and some scholars believed the novel should be considered for the title of Great American Novel . Generally , reviewers felt that the novel succeeded in portraying its Greek immigrant drama and were also impressed with Eugenides ' depiction of his hometown of Detroit — praising him for his social commentary . Reviewers from the medical , gay , and intersex communities mostly praised Middlesex , though some intersex commentators have been more critical . In 2007 , the book was featured in Oprah 's Book Club . 
 = = Conception , research , and publication = = 
 After publishing his first novel , The Virgin Suicides , in 1993 , Jeffrey Eugenides started on his next project Middlesex . He was inspired by having read <unk> Barbin , the diary of a 19th @-@ century French convent schoolgirl who was intersex . Eugenides had first read the memoir a decade earlier and believed it evaded discussion about the anatomy and emotions of intersex people . He intended Middlesex to be " the story [ he ] wasn 't getting from the memoir " . 
 Eugenides worked on Middlesex for nine years . He started writing during his short @-@ term residence at MacDowell Colony in New Hampshire , United States , and finished the novel in Berlin , Germany ; he had accepted a grant from the German Academic Exchange Service in 1999 . Eugenides spent the first few years trying to establish the narrative voice for his novel . He wanted to " [ tell ] epic events in the third person and psychosexual events in the first person " . According to Eugenides , the voice " had to render the experience of a teenage girl and an adult man , or an adult male @-@ identified hermaphrodite " . 
 Although Eugenides sought expert advice about intersex , sexology , and the formation of gender identity , he refrained from meeting with intersex people , saying , " [ I ] decided not to work in that <unk> mode . Instead of trying to create a separate person , I tried to pretend that I had this [ physical feature ] and that I had lived through this as much as I could " . Eugenides read books , sifted through many sheets of microfiche , and combed through videotapes and newsletters that dealt with the subject . He visited the New York Public Library 's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture to search for the sole copy of a book about an " elusive historical figure " . He discovered details of what he considered a vivid intersex condition while browsing Columbia University 's medical library . 
 After discovering in his library research 5 @-@ alpha @-@ reductase deficiency , an autosomal recessive condition manifested primarily in inbred , isolated population groups , his perception of the novel significantly changed . Rather than a " slim fictional autobiography " of an intersex individual , the novel would be epic in scope , tracing the lives of three generations of Greek Americans . Eugenides lived in Brooklyn when he began his first draft of the novel . He went through a lengthy brainstorming process . He would write 50 pages in one voice , restart in a different voice with 75 pages , and then pursue a different narrative angle . He wanted the novel to be an " intimate " portrayal of protagonist Cal 's transformation , so he wrote a draft in the first @-@ person narrative in Cal 's voice . He could not , however , portray Cal 's grandparents intimately , so he completely abandoned his preceding year 's draft in favor of writing the book in the third @-@ person . He gradually violated his narrative convention by restoring the first @-@ person voice amid the third @-@ person narration to depict the mindsets of both Cal and Cal 's grandparents . During the writing process , Eugenides moved from Brooklyn to Manhattan and later returned to Brooklyn . Worried about the narrative 's sounding forced , he added instances of " self @-@ reflexivity " to Cal 's voice . After several years of struggling with the narrative voice , Eugenides finally seated himself at his desk and wrote Middlesex 's initial page , " 500 words that contained the DNA for the protein synthesis of the entire book " . 
 Middlesex was published for the North American market in September 2002 by Farrar , Straus and Giroux in the United States and Vintage Canada for Canada . A month later , it was released in the United Kingdom by Bloomsbury Publishing . The novel has been translated into 34 languages ; the Spanish @-@ language edition was translated by Benito Gómez Ibáñez and released in 2003 after the publisher , Jorge <unk> , had acquired the rights in a " tough auction " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel starts with a narration by its protagonist , Cal ( his masculine identity ) , also known as Calliope ( feminine ) : He recounts how 5 @-@ alpha @-@ reductase deficiency , a recessive condition , caused him to be born with female characteristics . The book continues with accounts of his family 's history , starting with his paternal grandparents in their home village and ending with his father 's funeral . These accounts cover the conception of Cal , his teenage years , and the discovery of his intersex condition . Throughout the book , Cal weaves his opinion of the events in hindsight and of his life after his father 's funeral . Eugenides sets Middlesex in the 20th century and interjects historical elements , such as the Balkan Wars , the Nation of Islam , the 1967 Detroit riot , and the Watergate scandal in the story . 
 The accounts of Cal 's family history start in 1922 . His grandfather , <unk> " Lefty " Stephanides , lives in Bithynios , a village in Asia Minor . Eugenides places the village high on the slope of Mount Olympos , above the city of Bursa , and describes incestuous marriages between cousins as a quietly accepted custom among the villagers . Lefty makes a living selling silkworm cocoons harvested by his sister , Desdemona . The siblings are orphans ; their parents are victims of the ongoing Greco @-@ Turkish War . As the war progresses , Lefty and Desdemona develop a romantic relationship . Fleeing the chaos brought by the war , they board a ship amid the Great Fire of Smyrna and set sail for the United States . Their histories unknown to the other passengers , they marry each other on board the vessel . 
 After arriving in New York , they locate their cousin , <unk> " Lina " Zizmo , in Detroit , Michigan , and go to stay with her . Lina is a closeted lesbian and the only person there to know of the siblings ' incestuous relationship . Starting a new life , Lefty takes on a job at Ford Motor Company , but is later retrenched . He unknowingly joins Lina 's husband , Jimmy , in bootlegging . Desdemona gives birth to a son , Milton , and later a daughter , Zoe . Lina gives birth to a daughter , Theodora or " Tessie " . The relationship between Lefty and Desdemona declines after she learns that there is an increased chance of genetic disease for children born from incest . In 1924 , after Milton 's birth , Lefty opens a bar and gambling room , calling it the Zebra Room . 
 Milton and Tessie marry in 1946 . They have two children , Chapter Eleven and Calliope ( " Callie " ) . Prior to Callie 's birth , Desdemona predicts the child to be a boy , although the parents prepare for a girl . Chapter Eleven is a biologically " normal " boy ; however , Callie is intersex . Her family members are unaware of her situation for many years , so they raise Callie as a girl . Elements of family life are portrayed against the rise and fall of industrial Detroit , where so many struggled . The family gets caught up in the 1967 Detroit riot resulting from racial tensions , after President Johnson authorizes the use of federal troops . The family home is raided during this period , to the shock of the parents . After this harrowing experience , the family moves to a house on Middlesex Boulevard , Grosse Pointe . 
 When she is 14 years old , Callie falls in love with her female best friend , whom Callie refers to as the " Obscure Object " . In separate encounters , Callie has her first sexual experiences with a woman , the Obscure Object , and with a man , the Obscure Object 's brother . After Callie is injured by a tractor , a doctor discovers that she is intersex . She is taken to a clinic in New York and undergoes a series of tests and examinations . After learning about the syndrome and facing the prospect of sex reassignment surgery , Callie runs away and assumes a male identity as Cal . He hitchhikes cross @-@ country and reaches San Francisco , where he joins a burlesque show as Hermaphroditus . 
 Cal is arrested by the police during a raid on his workplace . He is released into Chapter Eleven 's custody and learns of their father 's death . The siblings return to their family home on Middlesex . In a private moment , Desdemona recognizes Cal 's condition , associating it with stories from her old village about children born of incest . She confesses to Cal that her husband , Lefty , is also her brother . As Milton 's funeral takes place at the church , Cal stands in the doorway of his family home , assuming the male @-@ only role in Greek traditions to keep his father 's spirit from re @-@ entering the family home . 
 Several years later , Cal becomes a diplomat stationed in Berlin . He meets Julie Kikuchi , a Japanese @-@ American woman , and tentatively starts a relationship with her . 
 = = Autobiographical elements = = 
 Reporters and critics noted that many characters and events in Middlesex parallel those in Eugenides ' life . The author denied writing the novel as an autobiography . In an interview by National Public Radio in 2002 , he commented on the similarities : 
 Because the story is so far from my own experience , I had to use a lot of details from my own life to ground it in reality , to make it believable for me and then hopefully for the reader , as well . So I would use my own physical appearance . I would use details from my grandparents ' life , the streets they lived on , the kinds of places they lived . And all this made it real for me because it was a tall order to write such a story . 
 Eugenides blended fact and fiction in his book . Like Cal , the author was born in 1960 ; unlike his creation , he is not intersex . His family moved to a house on Middlesex Road in Grosse Pointe after the Detroit riot in 1967 . Eugenides studied at University Liggett School , a private institution that served as a model for Callie 's Baker and Inglis School for Girls . He tapped into his own " locker room trauma " , an adolescent experience of being naked among many other nude bodies , and used it to develop Callie 's self @-@ discovery of her body during puberty . He based the name of the character the " Obscure Object " on a Brown University classmate whom he found alluring and to whom he gave that nickname . Eugenides married a Japanese @-@ American artist , Karen Yamauchi , and moved to Berlin . 
 Eugenides is of Greek heritage , albeit only through his father 's side . Although his paternal grandparents were not siblings like the Stephanides , they were silk farmers like their fictional counterparts . Cal 's learning of Greek customs to better understand his grandparents mirrored Eugenides ' own actions to do likewise . The Zebra Room and the bartender profession are other items shared by their grandfathers ; Eugenides said the inclusion of the bar was a deliberate " secret code of paying homage to my grandparents and my parents " . Several aspects of Chapter Eleven were based on Eugenides ' elder brother , who withdrew from society during a " hippie phase " in his life . While revising and editing the book , the author removed information that could be offensive to his relatives . Not all such material was excised , Eugenides said , " There may still be things in there that will sting . " 
 = = Style = = 
 Several reviewers considered Middlesex to be overly verbose . The Economist described the novel as " ponderous " and said that the main story ( that of Cal ) does not " get off the ground until halfway through " the book . Time 's Richard Lacayo concurred ; he considered the hundreds of pages about Cal 's grandparents and several historical events to be trite , making Middlesex 's focus " footloose " in some spots . Several passages in the novel exhibit Eugenides ' obsession with " verbose voluptuousness " . An example noted by Thea Hillman in her review is an incident in which Cal says , " I sat in my seat , in a state of voluptuous agitation , of agitated voluptuousness , until my stop . Then I staggered out . " A contrary opinion is given by Daniel Soar in his article for London Review of Books . According to Soar , Eugenides did " both background and foreground in all the necessary detail " , seamlessly shifting from past to present . Despite the implausible tone of the novel 's events , the author successfully makes them " elaborately justified and motivated " . The quality of Middlesex 's writing was uneven in the opinions of Hillman and another reviewer , Sebastian Smee . The latter pointed out that Eugenides occasionally moves from the heartfelt ( " I remember the first time we took off our clothes in front of each other . It was like unwinding bandages " ) to the " <unk> journalistic " ( " You 've heard of installation artists ? Well , the Object [ a heavy smoker ] was an exhalation artist " ) on several occasions . 
 Humor and irony are frequently used in the book . Mark Lawson of The Guardian considered the narrator 's tone to be " sardonic [ ally ] empath [ etic ] " , and other critics have characterized the beginning of the novel as comical . When Cal is baptized as an infant by Father Mike , a Greek Orthodox clergyman , the priest receives a surprise : " From between my cherubic legs a stream of crystalline liquid shot into the air ... Propelled by a full bladder , it cleared the lip of the font ... [ and ] struck Father Mike right in the middle of the face . " Derek Weiler of the Toronto Star noted that Eugenides has witty commentary about German compound words and the " horrific qualities of public men 's rooms " . The author employed another writing device — abrupt incongruity — in describing Desdemona 's physical appearances to suggest that her incestuous acts should be taken lightly when judging her . In describing her hair , he wrote that her " braids were not delicate like a little girl 's but heavy and womanly , possessing a natural power , like a beaver 's tail " . According to Penelope Music of Book Magazine , the mismatch in tone of the final two words compared with the rest of the sentence was such that the reading experience was changed from " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill magical realism to true , subversive comedy " . An instance of irony is illustrated by Cal 's grandparents and parents : His grandparents assimilate into American culture through hard work and struggles while retaining certain old customs . His parents , however , abandon their roots for a more comfortable lifestyle . In another incident , the diner owned by the Stephanides is engulfed in flames during the 1967 Detroit riot . Cal notes that " [ s ] <unk> as it is to say , the riots were the best thing that ever happened to us . " The diner was insured and the Stephanides gain a windfall payout . 
 = = = Narrative modes = = = 
 Middlesex is written in the form of a memoir , and switches between the first and the third person in several spots . Used as a comedic device , the third person narratives illustrate Cal 's estrangement from Calliope : When he refers to her in the third person , he is identifying her as someone other than him . Patricia Chu , a scholar of English literature , noted the effectiveness of this style in the chapter in which the adolescent Callie searches for information on hermaphroditism . As the teenager reads Webster 's Dictionary , following the trail of definitions related to her condition , she reaches the entry for hermaphrodite . The narration switches from personal to external , lending poignancy to the character 's final discovery as she confronts the word " monster " . 
 Although the protagonist switches gender throughout the book , Cal 's manners of speech and thought are identical to Callie 's . Believing that males and females have no inherent disparities in their writing styles , Eugenides treated Cal and Callie as the same person , in terms of narrative voice . He also fixed the narrative voice in terms of age by setting up Cal to relate the entire story at one time . Eugenides gave his protagonist a mostly male outlook , justifying his treatment with the reasoning that Cal or Callie was a man in terms of appearance , sexual desires , and the brain . He asked his wife and other women to review his approaches on Cal 's feminine views . The " emotional stuff " was accurate but Eugenides had to refine certain details , such as those about toenail polish . 
 At the beginning of the book when Cal discusses his family 's history and actions prior to his birth , he speaks in an androgynous voice , with limited omniscience ; he acknowledges that he is fabricating some of the details . John Mullan , University College London 's professor of English and a contributor to The Guardian , wrote that by permitting Cal to be unrealistically aware of fellow characters ' thoughts , Eugenides intentionally contravenes an elementary standard in storytelling fiction . In the novel 's closing pages , Cal provides minute details about his father 's dying moments and thoughts in a nonsensical car accident even though he is several thousand miles from the scene and only learns of the tragedy from his brother . Cal has the ability to dwell in the minds of others because as a female who has become a male , his identity is not confined by his own body . According to Mullan , this " mobility of identification becomes a narrative principle " and is thoroughly exploited in Middlesex . The novel follows the principle that people are molded by events prior to their birth , and Eugenides explores a character 's prenatal life in terms of his or her genes ; the narrator is , however , subject to the principle that whatever he does not know is of his imagination . As such , contradictory statements highlight the unreliable nature of Cal 's narration . While narrating the story that pre @-@ dates his birth , he remarks , " Of course , a narrator in my position ( <unk> at the time ) can 't be entirely sure about any of this . " However , he later says , " I alone , from the private box of my primordial egg , saw what was going on . " Cal 's dubious omniscience , doubtful narration , and parodies combine to show that his unreliability is an act of mischief . 
 Mullan remarked that Eugenides ' narrator has a proclivity to reveal events that will happen in the future . Cal is a narrator who is absorbed in how his fate has been shaped . Cal eschews a chronological telling of the story , where he shares the characters ' <unk> . He chooses instead to relate the story beginning with his future knowledge . Cal 's genes reflect an anticipation of the future : the disclosure of his actual sex identity . Cal mimics this " genetic inevitability " by enjoining the readers to know the future prior to its occurring . Mullan observed that " [ f ] or the reader , apprehension predominates over surprise " as a result of this narrative style . 
 = = = Genres = = = 
 The Kirkus Reviews described Middlesex as a " virtuosic combination of elegy , <unk> study , and picaresque adventure " , and Adam Begley in The New York Observer called it " a hybrid form , epic crossed with history , romance , comedy , tragedy . " Other reviews also categorized the book under various genres . Covering the lives of three generations of the Stephanides family , Middlesex is considered a family saga by novelist Geraldine Bedell . The book is more than a mere family saga , according to Samuel Cohen in his paper for Twentieth Century Literature ; it depicts the Stephanides ' trials and tribulations through historical events . Cohen is not convinced by Eugenides ' declaration that Middlesex was not conceived as a historical novel ; he said the novel satisfied much of the criterion for the genre . Cal , narrating his story in 2002 , describes events from the early 1920s to the mid @-@ 1970s . According to Cohen , the difference in timeframes , at least 25 years apart , " establishes that the novel is set safely in the past " . 
 According to Stewart O 'Nan of The Atlantic , Cal 's narration evokes the style of the picaresque novel , retelling events that have already occurred and foreshadowing the future through " portentous glimpses " . Francisco Collado @-@ Rodríguez , a professor of American Literature , classified the beginning of Middlesex as a historiographical and metafictional chronicle for its discussion of events such as the Greco @-@ Turkish war and the Great Fire of Smyrna . He also considered the first section of the novel as a tragicomedy about the Stephanides ' migration from Greece and assimilation into America . Soar posited Desdemona and Lefty 's passage as a romantic comedy : the lovers , brother and sister , pretend to be strangers who meet for the first time , attempting " to <unk> themselves , to <unk> themselves by developing a past they could live with , unfamiliar and therefore permissible " . As the story progresses , Middlesex becomes a social novel about Detroit , discussing the seclusion of living in a 1970s suburb . At the end of the novel , the story adopts the tone of the detective genre . 
 The novel is characterized as a " dramatic " Bildungsroman with a " big twist " because the coming @-@ of @-@ age story is revealed to be the incorrect one : after being nurtured as a woman , Cal must instead learn to become a man . The book has " two distinct and occasionally warring halves " . Whereas the first part is about hermaphrodites , the second is about Greeks . The latter half , " full of incest , violence , and terrible family secrets " , was considered by Daniel Mendelsohn , an author and critic , to be more effective because Middlesex is largely about how Callie inherited the momentous gene that " ends up defining her indefinable life " . 
 Writing for The New Republic , James Wood classified Middlesex as a story written in the vein of hysterical realism . He said the novel is influenced by its own recounting of " excitements , <unk> , and implausibilities that lie on the soft side of magical realism " . Such moments in the book include how two cousins conceive " on the same night and at the same moment " and how years later , those children marry each other . Woods also pointed out the seeming coincidences that involved locales . Smyrna is the burning city from which she flees to start a new life ; New Smyrna Beach is where she spends her retirement . Effectively serving as a double entendre , the title of the book refers to the name of the street where Cal stays at and describes his situation : a hermaphrodite brought up as a girl but who decides to become a boy . Cal 's condition is also reflected in his choice of locale to narrate the novel : Berlin is a city formerly of " two halves or sexes " ( East and West ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Rebirth = = = 
 Following the Great Fire of Smyrna , Lefty and Desdemona must start life anew . When she is 14 years old , Callie experiences a second birth to become Cal . To become a male , Callie <unk> across the United States and becomes a midwife of her new life by teaching herself to forget what she has learned as a female . Likewise , Cal 's grandparents undergo a transformation , becoming husband and wife instead of brother and sister . Middlesex delves into the concept of identity , including how it is formed and how it is administered . The immigrant predicament is a metaphor and synecdoche for Calliope 's hermaphroditic condition ; Callie 's paternal grandparents become Americanized through the amalgamation of the elements of heredity , cultural metamorphoses , and probability . Callie 's maternal grandfather , Jimmy Zizmo , undergoes a rebirth when he transforms from a bootlegger into <unk> Mohammad , a Muslim minister . 
 = = = American Dream = = = 
 Middlesex traces the trials and adversity faced by the Stephanides family as they pursue the American Dream . Beginning with Lefty and Desdemona , Cal 's grandparents , fleeing from their homeland to Ellis Island and the United States , the novel later depicts the family living in a suburban vista at Grosse Pointe , Michigan . After they immigrate to the United States , Lefty and Desdemona find themselves in a blissful America on the brink of economic collapse . They dream about a perfect America where effort and morals will lead to good fortune . However , they must seek to attain this perfection during a period characterized by Prohibition and xenophobic anti @-@ immigration legislation . Middlesex depicts the tribulations of attaining an identity , especially while dealing with the revelation that the American Dream is a delusion that has already disappeared . 
 = = = Race relations = = = 
 Middlesex portrays the race relations between people of different cultures ; Mendelsohn considered the handling of this theme " preachy and nervous " . In the United States , a strongly nativist country in the 1920s , Greek immigrants must suffer numerous humiliations at the hands of prejudiced whites . When Cal 's grandfather Lefty , a recent Greek immigrant , is working at one of Henry Ford 's automobile factories , Ford investigators attempt to Americanize him . They visit his house to ascertain that he has been living as a typical American . For example , during his first English @-@ language lesson , Lefty is taught that " [ e ] <unk> should use plenty of soap and water in the home " . The narrow @-@ minded nativists believe that immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe are unaware of the value of soap and water . 
 According to scholar Robert Zecker , the novel depicts African @-@ American poverty but does not illustrate its causes . None of the characters think about how 500 @,@ 000 African @-@ Americans were placed in cramped living areas of only 25 square blocks and the bitterness and rage that stems from such conditions . The African Americans do not forget the years of oppression they have endured . However , the Greek Americans , like other whites , fail to remember that the African Americans were assaulted by whites in 1943 and faced over two decades of oppression after that . Instead , Zecker noted that the characters in the novel believe that the 1967 Detroit riots are " inexplicable cataclysms that came out of nowhere " . 
 The novel skims over the brutal attacks , lasting a week , on blacks in Detroit during World War II . Years later , in 1967 , Lefty is incorrectly told that that year 's Detroit riots were started by a black man raping a white woman ; this falsehood is never rectified . However , despite this misinformation , Lefty denies service to a number of white customers who partook in the riots . One dismissed customer even yells at him , " [ w ] hy don 't you go back to your own country ? " , returning the spotlight of racial prejudice on him . 
 The relationship between the Greek Americans and the African Americans is fraught with prejudice . For example , during the Depression , Desdemona is shocked and humiliated that she will have to work in the Black Bottom , a predominantly black neighborhood . When African Americans are beaten or taken advantage of by whites , the characters in Middlesex " suddenly are nearsighted " to the racial prejudice . Despite being in the United States for only 10 years and having experienced racism herself , she can , Zecker noted , " recite at heart the slights at blacks as lazy , dirty , sexually promiscuous , and incapable of self @-@ help " . She and other whites , including immigrants whites , feel rage because they are " convinced they were somehow forced out of Detroit following 1967 " . While walking through the neighborhood , a group of African @-@ American men loafing in front of a barbershop wolf @-@ whistle to Desdemona and make lascivious comments , thus confirming the racial stereotype . 
 Zecker remarked that in an ironic twist , immediately after the riots , Desdemona 's family is shamed by a white realtor who " doubts their fitness ( whiteness ) " to live in the rich city Grosse Point . In the 1970s , African Americans , instead of <unk> , were discriminated against through redlining . Zecker opined that by framing African Americans as the " eternal destroyers " and white ethnics as " yet again the oppressed innocents " , Eugenides " captures perfectly the dominant narrative of urban decline in the early twenty @-@ first century American Zeitgeist " . Insurance settlement from the damage caused at the riots allows the Stephanides to purchase a home away from the African Americans . The family participates in the white flight from the city to avoid the racial desegregation in the public schools , sends Cal to a private school . 
 = = = Ethnic identity = = = 
 When Lefty and Desdemona are forced to immigrate to the United States , they have different mindsets . Whereas Lefty embraces his new country 's customs , Desdemona is adamant that she will follow her old country 's ways . For example , she is angered that her " immigrant hair " is chopped off because she does not want to " look like an <unk> " and decides to regrow her hair immediately . Lefty attempts to assimilate into American culture by zealously learning English . Lina , the cousin of Lefty and Desdemona , is the paragon of immigrant integration . Cal noted : " In the five years since leaving Turkey , <unk> had managed to erase just about everything identifiably Greek about her . " 
 Cal 's father , Milton , and his friends and family cherish their Sunday gatherings . They debate and tell stories to each other , attempting to regain their ethnic roots . A " contrarian " , Milton enjoys debating Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger and lamenting the steep cost of church candles . Eugenides repeatedly returns the gathering prior to Cal 's conception to " manufacture a psychology that drives his narration " . As the immigrants attempt to maintain their identity , the stage is set for Cal 's writing even before he is conceived . 
 Middlesex delves into the schism and reconciling of two opposites by contrasting the experiences and opinions of males and females ; Greek Americans and White Anglo @-@ Saxon Protestants ; Greeks and Turks ; and , African Americans and White Americans . Critic Raoul <unk> noted that despite these conflicts , the narrator is able to achieve " ethnic reconciliation " when he moves to Berlin and lives with the Turks , people who had murdered his forebears in the early 20th century and who had indirectly allowed his grandparents to consummate their incestuous relationship . <unk> <unk> opined on BBC Television 's current affairs broadcast Newsnight that " [ o ] nly a child of the Diaspora can do that , because we stand on the threshold of two rooms . " The novel also demonstrates that love and family are vital not only to people with unambiguous genders , but also hermaphrodites . 
 The Greek immigrant family experiences a three @-@ phase acculturation that occurs to immigrant families , according to scholar Merton Lee 's research about sociologist George A. <unk> ' work . Each generation identifies with different nationalities and cultures . In the first generation , the family members classify themselves as having a Greek nationality . In the second generation , the children classify themselves with an American nationality and Greek Orthodox religion . In the third generation , the grandchildren , who comprise the most acculturated group , characterize themselves with " Greek @-@ immigration status as a class " . 
 The Stephanides lineage is from Bithynios , a village in Asia Minor where the Greek middleman minority is inclined to be in uneasy relations with the Turkish majority . The people of the middleman minority do not assimilate because of their small mercantile businesses and because their host country is antagonistic towards them . Desdemona , a first @-@ generation Greek immigrant , reflects a fixation with not assimilating . She tells her husband Lefty that she does not want to become an " <unk> " and is frightened that her cousin Lina 's husband , Jimmy Zizmo , is a Pontian Greek . Desdemona considers <unk> to be adulterated Greeks because <unk> inhabited Turkey , where some became Muslims and did not follow the Greek Orthodox religion . 
 Daniel Soar opined that Olympus , a parallel to Bithynios , served well as the starting point of a debacle ( the eventual birth of an intersex person ) that is the " story 's catalyst " . In Mount Olympus during Justinian 's days , silkworm eggs were contraband transported from China to Byzantium by missionaries . A parallel is drawn when Desdemona , a raiser of silk cocoons , attempts to bring them to Detroit . Because the silkworm eggs are considered parasites by the immigration officials , Desdemona must dispose of them . Soar noted that " for the three generations of Greek Americans who people Middlesex , the mulberry trees of Mount Olympus are an appropriately antique beginning : they are the egg inside which everything began " . 
 = = = Greek mythical allusions = = = 
 Middlesex has several allusions to Greek classical myths ; for example , the protagonist is named after Calliope , the muse of heroic poetry . Eugenides was partly inspired by the explorations of <unk> in Greek myths to write the novel about an intersex man . In Middlesex , Cal acts out the story of Hermaphroditus , the Greek deity of bisexuality and effeminacy , while eking out a living in San Francisco . While narrating , Cal enters his ancestors ' thoughts and empathizes with them , an ability possessed by Hermaphroditus . The protagonist compared himself to another mythical figure — Tiresias , the blind prophet of Thebes ; the omniscient seer lived seven years as woman because of a curse . 
 Eugenides and several critics compared Cal 's condition to mythical creatures described by the ancient Greeks . The author alluded his protagonist 's nature and heritage to the Minotaur , the half @-@ man and half @-@ bull creature . Cal 's father is conceived after his grandparents ' attendance of a <unk> play entitled The Minotaur . The puzzle of Cal 's genetic identity is akin to the creature 's labyrinth and the thread that leads out of the maze is held here by his paternal grandmother , a former silk farmer . Frances <unk> , a scholar of English , named Callie in her puberty as a chimera . The mythical monster is an analogy for a complex personality , a mixture of body parts from various animals that each represents a human aspect or characteristic . Similarly , adolescent Callie is an amalgamation of her genes , neither male nor female , neither adult nor child , and yet all of them at the same time . 
 In her book column for Detroit Free Press , Marta <unk> said that Cal 's identity crisis resembles Odysseus 's fate . Whereas the mythical hero is troubled by Poseidon and succored by Athena , the intersex protagonist is affected by his chromosomes in a similar manner . John Sykes , Professor of English and Religion Education , noted another Greek @-@ hero reference . In a manner similar to Oedipus 's fulfillment of Pythia 's prophecy to slay his father and marry his mother , Callie validates the prediction her grandmother made before her birth by adopting a male identity . Eugenides also used the allusions to Greek mythology and modern pop music to show the passing of familial traits and idiosyncrasies from one generation to the next . 
 = = = Nature versus nurture = = = 
 The novel examines the nature versus nurture debate in detail . At the beginning of the novel , Cal writes , " Sing now , O Muse , of the recessive mutation on my fifth chromosome . " He then apologizes , saying , " Sorry if I get a little Homeric at times . That 's genetic , too . " This is an allusion to the poet Homer , who was also captivated with the nature versus nurture debate . In fact , Cal himself confesses , " If you were going to devise an experiment to measure the relative influences of nature versus nurture , you couldn 't come up with anything better than my life . " 
 Callie inherited the mutation for a gene that causes 5 @-@ alpha @-@ reductase deficiency , which impedes the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone . While the former hormone causes the brain to become masculine , it is the latter that molds male genitals . When Callie reaches puberty , her testosterone levels increase significantly , resulting in the formation of a larger Adam 's apple , the broadening of her muscles , the deepening of her voice , and the augmentation of her clitoris to resemble a penis . Doctors determine that Callie has the XY chromosomes of a male after inspecting Callie 's genitalia . Callie 's parents bring her to New York City to see Dr. Peter Luce , a foremost expert on hermaphroditism , who believes she should retain her female identity . Luce plans a gender reassignment surgery to make her a female . However , Callie knows that she is sexually attracted to females , and decides to run away to pursue a male identity . When Cal has a sexual relationship with the Japanese @-@ American photographer Julie at the end of the book , he is able to love " without the need to penetrate the object of his desire " . 
 Mark Lawson of The Guardian noted that the cause of Cal 's hermaphroditic condition is an inherited recessive gene . According to UC Riverside psychology professor Sonja <unk> , the novel examines how an individual 's traits are due neither solely to nature nor solely to nurture . Similarly , Cal 's gender cannot be defined solely as male or female . Rather , it is both male and female . Addressing how genetic determinism may have renewed the antediluvian beliefs about destiny , Eugenides refutes the post @-@ Freudian beliefs that a person 's traits are mainly due to nurture . Thus , the novel pits evolutionary biology against free will . Eugenides sought to find a compromise between these two views . Explaining that gender is a " very American concept " , he believes that " humans are freer than we realize . Less genetically encumbered " . 
 = = = Gender identity and intersex status = = = 
 Raised as a girl , Cal views himself as a girl who likes other girls . His ability to have a " feminine gender schema " despite his having male genes , substantiates the constructionist position that gender identity is fully dependent on outer influences . However , when Callie discovers that he could have been raised as a boy , he renounces his female gender , recognizing his chosen gender identity as a male . <unk> the female gender before he learned about masculine traits bolsters the argument for the " essentialist ideology of identity " . Cal 's embrace of his inherent male identity and renunciation of his childhood female gender identity is articulated when he reflects , " I never felt out of place being a girl , I still don 't feel entirely at home among men . " 
 Cal exhibits many masculine characteristics when he is a child . He writes , " I began to exude some kind of masculinity , in the way I tossed up and caught my eraser , for instance . " In another incident , Cal discusses how his penchants were masculine . While his female classmates are turned off by the blood in The Iliad , Cal is " thrilled to [ read about ] the stabbings and beheadings , the gouging out of eyes , the juicy eviscerations " . Cal ponders his gender identity and how males and females associate with each other , reflecting , " Did I see through the male tricks because I was destined to scheme that way myself ? Or do girls see through the tricks , too , and just pretend not to notice ? " 
 Cal also exhibits feminine characteristics , which allows Dr. Luce to classify her as possessing a female gender identity . In a home video taken when Cal was a child , his mother gives him a doll and he nurses it with a milk bottle . Luce carefully observes Callie 's actions and diagnoses them as feminine , which causes him to determine that Callie has a feminine gender identity . Luce then concludes that gender identity is nurtured and etched into children at their young ages . 
 Determining sex is paradoxical because the characters believe that the outward view of genitalia identifies one 's sex ; Cal 's transformation into a male shatters this belief and the methodology behind determining gender . Eugenides addresses how difficult it was for humans to devise a " universal classification for sex " . Through Cal , scholar Angela <unk> Aragon stated , Eugenides opines that the 1876 system devised by Edwin <unk> that used gonad tissue to determine sex provides the most accurate answer . 
 According to intersex activist and academic Morgan Holmes , Eugenides posits that a person 's sexual attraction determines his or her gender . Cal 's wish to become male because he desires females demonstrates a link between gender identity and sexuality . While Callie is not permitted to love the Obscure Object openly , Cal can freely love Julie . Holmes believed that the depiction of Callie " denies the legitimate place of lesbian desire and rewrites it as male heterosexuality " . Book reviewer Georgia Warnke has a similar view . She wrote that by making these choices in the novel , Eugenides agrees with the belief that being attracted to females is " masculine " and thus it is " more natural " for a male to be attracted to a female than a female be attracted to a female . Daniel Mendelsohn of The New York Review of Books argued that Callie does not have to be a male in order to be drawn towards females ; she could be gay . As an adult , Cal brags , " Breasts have the same effect on me as on anyone with my testosterone level . " Mendelsohn noted that this assertion will astonish " Eugenides 's ( presumably testosterone @-@ rich ) gay male readership " . Scholar Rachel Carroll agreed , writing that teenage Callie 's erotic interest in girls is " retroactively explained and legitimized , by the discovery of his ' true biological nature ' " . Cal 's gender identity postdates rather than predates his sexual interests . Carroll posited that Cal 's inability to form heterosexual relationships as an adult is founded not upon his being intersex , but on his rejection of the sexual ambiguities that form his sexual interests as a youth . 
 When Callie is in New York , she goes to the New York Public Library and searches for the meaning of the word " hermaphrodite " ; she is shocked when the dictionary entry concludes with " See synonyms at <unk> " . Callie is not a Frankenstein ; she is more like Bigfoot or the Loch Ness Monster . <unk> stated that Eugenides ' message is " we must let our monsters out — they demand and deserve recognition — they are us : our same , self , others . " Morgan Holmes , formerly of <unk> , describes how the book constructs an intersex character whose life reproduces " social fascination with the monstrous and the deviant . " 
 Sarah Graham wrote in Ariel , a journal published by University of Calgary , that Eugenides ' " <unk> [ t ] " use of the word " hermaphrodite " , instead of " intersex " , alludes to Hermaphroditus . Hermaphroditus , a young man , is chased by the nymph <unk> . She begs the Gods to bind her and Hermaphroditus together , and the Gods literally fulfill her wish . Hermaphroditus ' name is a compound of his parent 's names — Hermes and Aphrodite . He instantaneously turns into someone of both sexes . Devastated because he is no longer fully male , he " curses " the location where he first met <unk> . Graham stated that the use of " hermaphrodite " carries negative connotations : 
 Based on this origin story , the hermaphrodite 's lot is miserable , associated with disempowerment , the theft of identity and an unhappy dual existence . In addition , the term " hermaphrodite " may be deemed problematic because it alludes to an impossible state of being : no @-@ one can be equally male and female and the preferred term " intersex " indicates a blended rather than divided state . While the modern term might indicate the possibility of redefining sexual ambivalence , Cal is associated in the novel with the mythic term and all it connotes . His connection to this tragic figure is confirmed by his performance as " Hermaphroditus " in a sex show at the age of fourteen , just as he is beginning his female to male transition . 
 Writing that he belongs to the Intersex Society of America , Cal notes that he has not participated in any of the group 's rallies because he is not a " political person " . While discussing political activism , Cal uses the word " intersex " , though in other parts of the novel , he uses the word " hermaphrodite " . In the 1920s , Bernice L. <unk> described " intersexuality " as a " continuum of physiological and anatomical sex differences " , contesting the notion of a " true sex " concealed in the tissues of the body . Though " hermaphrodite " is burdened by the implications of the anomaly , " intersexuality " is a neologism that tries to " naturalize various sexes , which themselves are naturally occurring " . Because Cal uses " hermaphrodite " , he indicates that the sole normal genders are the classifications of male and female . Eugenides was asked by an Oprah 's Book Club member why he used the term " hermaphrodite " despite its usage being " either terribly ignorant or unforgivably callous " . Eugenides replied that he reserved " hermaphrodite " for a literary character : Hermaphroditus . He further stated : " When speaking about real people , I should — and I do my best to — use the term ' intersex ' . " Noting that one of the initial sources he consulted was the journal Hermaphrodites with Attitude published by the Intersex Society of North America , he said that those writers have " co @-@ opted " the term " hermaphrodite " . Their action is reminiscent , Eugenides wrote , of how some members of the gay community have " reclaimed " the term " queer " . Eugenides stated that it is no surprise that Cal uses " hermaphrodite " and further elaborated : " It 's paradoxical : Cal can say ' <unk> ' but I can 't . Or shouldn 't . " 
 = = = Incest and intersex = = = 
 Incest and intersex is another theme in Middlesex . Eugenides examines the passionate feelings that siblings living in seclusion experience for each other . Milton and Tessie , second cousins , are conceived during the same night , hinting to the incest of Desdemona and Lefty . Desdemona and Lefty 's incestuous relationship is a transgression of a powerful taboo , indicating that someone will suffer for their wrongs ; in a way , Cal 's intersex condition symbolizes this Greek hubris . In another incestuous relationship , Milton makes love to Tessie using a clarinet which he lovingly rubs against her ; their incestuous relationship enables them to contribute mutated genes to their child Cal . Cal 's mother interferes with fate by attempting to make her second child a daughter . Cal believes this interference was a factor in his being a hermaphrodite . Conversely , Cal 's relationship with his brother , Chapter Eleven , is indicative of the possible dissimilarities that are products of the <unk> . 
 Thea Hillman , an intersex activist and board member for ( the now defunct ) Intersex Society of North America ( <unk> ) , wrote in the Lambda Book Report , 2002 , that the combination of incest and intersex is " inaccurate and misleading " . Noting that incest is a loathed social taboo that has " shameful , pathological and criminal repercussions " , she criticized Eugenides for underscoring that Cal 's intersex condition is due to incest . Hillman stated that this adds to the fallacious belief that intersex people are " shameful and sick " and a danger to society 's wellbeing . 
 Sarah Graham agrees with Hillman and Holmes , writing that Cal is paralleled with the tragic Greek mythological characters Hermaphroditus , Tiresias , and the Minotaur . She opined that other " deviant " characters in the novel such as Lefty and Desdemona are spared the " tragic or monstrous " allusions even though there are numerous examples of incest in Greek mythology . She listed the marriage of Oedipus and his mother Jocasta , as well as the son Adonis produced by the incest between Theias and his daughter Smyrna as examples . Therefore , Graham stated that comparing Cal , a hermaphrodite , to people who were " mythological monsters " is " complicit with [ the ] exploitation " of intersex people . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Honors and adaptation = = = 
 In 2003 , Middlesex was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction . The Pulitzer Board wrote in their report that Middlesex is a " vastly realized , multi @-@ generational novel as <unk> as it is intelligent . . . Like the masks of Greek drama , Middlesex is equal parts comedy and tragedy , but its real triumph is its emotional abundance , delivered with consummate authority and grace . " Eugenides was attending the Prague Writers ' Festival when Middlesex won the Pulitzer Prize . When a young Associated Press photographer notified him about winning the award , Eugenides was dubious , noting that " [ i ] t seemed very unlikely that he would be the messenger of such news . " At the time , Eugenides was with the Canadian author Yann Martel who confirmed the photographer 's words after checking on the hotel 's computer . A waiter brought champagne to Eugenides , and Greek women started kissing him . When journalists called Eugenides , he declined to take their calls , saying in an interview later that he wanted to " celebrate the moment instead of leaping immediately into the media maelstrom " . 
 The novel received the Ambassador Book Award , Spain 's Santiago de Compostela Literary Prize , and the Great Lakes Book Award . In 2003 , it was a finalist in the fictional category of the National Book Critics Circle Award . Middlesex was also a <unk> for the Lambda Literary Award , which is given to LGBT literature . In 2003 , the novel was shortlisted for but did not win the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award . Entertainment Weekly , the Los Angeles Times , and The New York Times Book Review considered Middlesex to be one of the best books in 2002 . In 2007 , Oprah Winfrey chose Middlesex to be discussed in her book club . Eugenides was a guest on Oprah 's show with several intersex individuals who told stories about their lives . In 2011 , Eugenides was interviewed by University College London English professor John Mullan in The Guardian Book Club . 
 The audiobook version of Middlesex was released by Macmillan Audio in September 2002 . Read by Kristoffer Tabori , the audiobook has 28 sides , each side having a unique style of introductory music that complements the atmosphere and plot of the saga . In 2003 , the audiobook received an Audie Award in the " unabridged fiction " category . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Some critics were dissatisfied with the scope of the novel . Daniel Mendelsohn of The New York Times Book Review wrote that thematically , there was no reason that a Greek should be an intersex or vice versa and that Eugenides had two disconnected stories to tell . <unk> Risen of Flak Magazine believed that the immigrant experience was the " heart of the novel " , lamenting that it minimized the story of Callie / Cal who is such a " fascinating character that the reader feels short @-@ changed by his failure to take her / him further " . Risen wished to read more about the events between Cal 's adolescence and adulthood , such as Cal 's experience in college as an intersex person as well as the relationships he had . The Washington Post 's Lisa Zeidner opined that Eugenides purposefully devised this asymmetry . Stewart O 'Nan of The Atlantic also felt that the brief description of Callie 's childhood was lacking ; the book " gloss [ es ] over " how her mother did not recognize that Callie had male genitalia when she was washing or clothing Callie . Further , O 'Nan characterized Cal 's relationship with the Japanese @-@ American photographer Julie as " underdeveloped " , causing the reader not to experience its entirety . Michelle <unk> of People had the same view about the novel 's end , writing that the conclusion felt " rushed " . 
 Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly called the novel a " big @-@ hearted , restless story " and rated it an A minus . Lisa Zeidner of the Washington Post opined that Middlesex " provides not only incest à la Ada and a Lolita @-@ style road trip , but enough dense detail to keep fans of close reading manically busy . " Tami Hoag of People concurred , writing that " this feast of a novel is thrilling in the scope of its imagination and surprising in its tenderness " . Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon agreed , praising Middlesex as an " epic and wondrous " novel filled with numerous characters and historical occurrences . Mendelsohn praised Middlesex for its " dense narrative , interwoven with sardonic , fashionably postmodern commentary " . However , he criticized the novel as a disjointed hybrid . He wrote Eugenides was successful with the story of the Greek immigrants , which he described as " <unk> [ c ] " , but mishandled the hermaphrodite material , which Mendelsohn characterized as " <unk> [ e ] " . The Economist review stated that a more concise , concentrated depiction of hermaphroditism would have made the book more " fun to read " . Jeff Zaleski of Publishers Weekly praised Eugenides ' portrayal of the girl , Callie , and the man Cal . Zaleski wrote that " [ i ] t 's difficult to imagine any serious male writer of earlier eras so effortlessly transcending the stereotypes of gender . " Paul Quinn of Contemporary Literary Criticism commended the novel , writing : " That Eugenides manages to move us without sinking into sentiment shows how successfully he has avoided the tentacles of irony which grip so many writers of his generation . " Christina McCarroll of The Christian Science Monitor wrote that " Eugenides wrangles with a destiny that mutates and recombines like restless chromosomes , in a novel of extraordinary flexibility , scope , and emotional depth . " 
 Marta <unk> of the Detroit Free Press was impressed with the book 's depiction of Detroit , writing " [ a ] t last Detroit has its novel . What Dublin got from James Joyce — a sprawling , ambitious , loving , exasperated and playful chronicle of all its good and bad parts — Detroit has from native son Eugenides in these 500 pages . " David Kipen of the San Francisco Chronicle agreed , opining " [ a ] mong so many other things , this praiseworthy , prize @-@ worthy yarn succeeds as a heartbroken mash note to the Detroit of Eugenides ' birth , a city whose neighborhoods he sometimes appears to love — as he loves his characters — less for their virtues than for their defects . Any book that can make a reader actively want to visit Detroit must have one honey of a tiger in its tank . " . 
 Several critics have nominated the book for the title of " Great American Novel " . Tim Morris , a professor at the University of Texas at Arlington , wrote that the novel was " the latest in a long line of contenders for the status of Great American Novel " , and compared Cal to Huckleberry Finn , the narrator of Invisible Man , and J. Sutter in John Henry Days . Alexander Linklater of the Evening Standard commented that American publishers chose Middlesex as the next Great American Novel to generate progress for American fiction and that Eugenides is considered the " next stepping stone along from Jonathan Franzen " . Dan Cryer of Newsday wrote that with the publication of Middlesex , " [ f ] <unk> , Detroit has its very own great American novel " . 
 David Gates of Newsweek contrasted Eugenides ' debut novel The Virgin Suicides with Middlesex , writing that the first novel was " ingenious " , " entertaining " , and " oddly moving " , but that Middlesex is " ingenious " , " entertaining " , and " ultimately not @-@ so @-@ moving " . Despite this criticism , Gates considered Middlesex to be the novel where Eugenides " finally plays his metafictional ace " . Commenting that Middlesex is " more discursive and funnier " than The Virgin Suicides , Laura Miller of Salon wrote that the two novels deal with disunity . Max <unk> of The New Criterion concurred , noting that Middlesex is " funny , big , embracing , and wonderful " , unlike Eugenides ' first novel . Mark Lawson of The Guardian praised Middlesex for having the same unique qualities as The Virgin Suicides , commenting that Middlesex had " an ability to describe the horrible in a comic voice , an unusual form of narration and an eye for bizarre detail " . Lawson noted that whereas Middlesex deals with the " links " among gender , life , and genes , The Virgin Suicides deals with the " connections " between gender and death . 
 According to Olivia Banner of Signs , medical journals generally had positive reviews of the novel for its depiction of the inner lives of intersex people . Writing in Archives of Disease in Childhood , Simon Fountain @-@ Polley praised the novel , writing : " All clinicians , and families who have faced gender crises or <unk> life @-@ changing decision [ s ] on identity should read this book ; delve into an emotional trip of discovery — where the slightest direction change could lead to myriad different lives " . Abraham Bergman wrote in the Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine : " Yes , it is fiction , but I cannot imagine a more authentic and sensitive voice . Because our interactions usually take place in limited and structured setting such as offices and hospitals , pediatricians have scant opportunity to learn how our young patients think . One way to sharpen our awareness is to listen to children 's voices as they are expressed in books . In Middlesex , the voice is loud and clear . " Banner noted that most of the reviews in intersex and queer publications praised Middlesex . She posited that the problematic issues of a " <unk> @-@ identified narrator " and the " fact that it was authored by a heterosexual man " may have been outweighed by the necessity for an appropriate reading that " <unk> ambiguous sex " . 
 Eugenides ' third novel , The Marriage Plot , was published in 2011 . Reviewer William Deresiewicz contrasted The Marriage Plot and Middlesex , writing that the former was " far more intimate in tone and scale " . The Marriage Plot follows two years in the lives of three characters , fourth @-@ year Brown University students in 1982 , whereas Middlesex follows the lives of three generations of characters . Deresiewicz preferred the 2011 novel , writing that " [ t ] he books are far apart in quality " . He criticized Middlesex for its " [ c ] <unk> prose , clunky exposition , transparent devices , telegraphed moves " , " a hash of narrative contrivances with very little on its mind " . On a more positive note , Deresiewicz lauded Eugenides ' colorful depiction of " young love " across his three novels . In The Virgin Suicides , Eugenides <unk> portrayed the intense fear during virginal sex , as well as Gabriel García Márquez , the 1982 Nobel Prize in Literature laureate ; in Middlesex , the single event in which the novel " comes to life " is Eugenides ' depiction of Callie 's liaison with her adolescent lover ; and in The Marriage Plot , the novel was exceptional in its " sweet banter of courtship " and the " doormat nice @-@ boy role " the character Mitchell assumes in his interplay with his darling , Madeleine . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 From the book 's publication until the early months of 2003 , its sales were unsatisfactory , according to Bill Goldstein of The New York Times . In the week following April 7 , 2003 , the day Middlesex won the Pulitzer Prize , the book sold 2 @,@ 700 copies . The book later made the best @-@ selling fiction list and kept its position for five weeks . In June 2007 , the novel ranked seventh on USA Today 's Best @-@ Selling Books list . In the same month , after Eugenides appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to discuss the novel , Middlesex placed second on The New York Times best @-@ selling paperback fiction list . The Pulitzer award nearly propelled Middlesex to The New York Times Best Seller list , which in 2003 published only the top 15 bestsellers ; in the week after Middlesex was announced the winner of the Pulitzer Prize , the novel placed 17th on the " expanded list " . In 2007 , 1 @.@ 3 million copies of the book had been sold . The same year , the book placed ninth on the Library Journal bestsellers list , which ranks " the books most borrowed in U.S. libraries " . By May 2011 , over three million copies of Middlesex had been sold . 
 = Utah State Route 202 = 
 State Route 202 ( SR @-@ 202 ) is a 1 @.@ 907 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 069 km ) long state highway in the U.S. state of Utah that serves as a connector , linking SR @-@ 201 to Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) in rural Salt Lake County . The road has existed since at least 1937 , when it connected U.S. Route 40 ( US @-@ 40 ) and US @-@ 50 via the Garfield Cut @-@ Off Road . It also serves as the eastbound on @-@ ramp for I @-@ 80 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Located entirely in Salt Lake County , Utah , SR @-@ 202 begins at an intersection with SR @-@ 201 and <unk> West northwest of Magna , Utah . The road travels northwesterly , bordered on the east by a large tailing pond owned by Kennecott Utah Copper and part of the former Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad rail line , which is now owned by the Union Pacific Railroad ( UP ) . The parallel rail line intersects a pair of east – west rail lines , the southern line being UP main line , and the northern line being the Feather River Route of the former Western Pacific Railroad , which is now owned by UP . After crossing the rail lines , SR @-@ 202 intersects with I @-@ 80 near the Great Salt Lake State Park and comes to a terminus at the I @-@ 80 frontage road , which provides access to the Great Salt Lake State Park and to the Saltair resort . Kennecott Utah Copper owns all of the land surrounding SR @-@ 202 , except for the right @-@ of @-@ way for the railroad , and the highway itself . 
 SR @-@ 202 serves as the eastbound ramp from SR @-@ 201 onto Interstate I @-@ 80 , because at its intersection with I @-@ 80 , the SR @-@ 201 ( which is the southern terminus of SR @-@ 202 ) traffic only has the option to continue on I @-@ 80 westbound , and does not have an offramp to eastbound I @-@ 80 . Traffic on SR @-@ 202 has increased 12 % between 2002 and 2007 , with a daily average of 735 cars per day using SR @-@ 202 in 2007 , compared to 475 cars per day in 2002 . Half of the traffic on SR @-@ 202 consists of buses and trucks . 
 = = History = = 
 Two other roads have been designated Utah State Route 202 in the past . From 1939 to 1953 , the name was used by the road that formed the eastern approach to <unk> , Utah and later became part of SR @-@ 73 . From 1961 to 1967 , the name was used by Main Street between SR @-@ 201 ( 2100 South ) and SR @-@ 171 in downtown Salt Lake City , which is now part of Utah State Route 186 . 
 The road that currently carries the SR @-@ 202 designation has existed since 1937 , when it connected US @-@ 40 and US @-@ 50 along the Garfield Cut @-@ Off Road . The Utah State Legislature designated the road SR @-@ 202 in 1969 , thus taking responsibility of maintaining the road from the county . No changes or alterations have been made to SR @-@ 202 , except for the legal definition of the road , which has changed twice since it was formed . 
 On September 26 , 2008 , a sulfuric acid spill occurred , reported by people in vehicles traveling on Interstate 80 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Salt Lake County . 
 = Lifesong = 
 Lifesong is the second studio album by American Christian rock band Casting Crowns , released on August 30 , 2005 by Beach Street Records and Reunion Records . Produced by Mark A. Miller , Lifesong was the follow @-@ up to the band 's self @-@ titled debut album . Although the unexpected success of the first album led to tremendous demand for new music from Casting Crowns , lead vocalist Mark Hall was advised by Steven Curtis Chapman ( a co @-@ producer of the debut album ) and Mac Powell not to worry about commercial expectations . Lifesong , which has a pop rock and adult contemporary sound , focuses on challenging believers and indicting piousness and hypocrisy in the Christian church . Worship themes are also prominent in the album . 
 Lifesong was received positively by music critics . Many critics praised the album 's songwriting , although others felt the album 's sound was derivative . The album and its singles were nominated for many awards , with the album winning the Grammy Award for Best Pop / Contemporary Gospel Album at the 48th Grammy Awards and the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . It debuted and peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200 and number on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , selling 71 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The 15th best @-@ selling Christian album of the 2000s in the United States , Lifesong has been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and has sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies in the United States . All of the album 's singles topped the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the unexpected success of their first album , there was tremendous demand for new music from Casting Crowns . Although lead vocalist Mark Hall , who either wrote or co @-@ wrote all the songs on the album , felt " a little worried " about the band 's follow @-@ up album , fellow recording artists Steven Curtis Chapman ( who co @-@ produced the band 's first album ) and Mac Powell of Christian rock band Third Day encouraged Hall to " say what God wants you to say " . They also advised him to not worry about commercial expectations or whether " people are going to like it " . Ultimately , Hall " absorbed " the feedback their first record had received , using it as inspiration . Lifesong focuses mainly on the " truth @-@ can @-@ be @-@ a @-@ tough @-@ pill @-@ to @-@ swallow message " that " there are broken people within arm ’ s reach of the church , and if there is any hope of healing , it begins with people who will be the hands and feet of Jesus " . Hall responded to critics who felt the band 's material was " preaching to the choir " by saying " How can writing songs that challenge the church , songs that ask Christians to consider their actions , be a bad thing ? After all , it ’ s the message that matters ... Everybody is passionate about what they do , about what they feel called to , so for one to say the other ’ s ministry is more or less meaningful or spiritual or anything is ridiculous " . Hall also felt that there were " too many walls in Christian music " and said " I think people listen to you if you ’ re transparent ... People want to hear the truth . You just hang around church for a while , and you ’ ll see . People don ’ t want you to talk around it . They want you to tell it like it is , even if it hurts " . Hall ultimately wrote songs such as " Does Anybody Hear Her " and " Stained Glass Masquerade " , which " challenge believers " . According to Hall , he was trying to say that he didn 't think it bothers the world if people in the church sin . Rather , he felt that the world is bothered when Christians act like they don 't sin . 
 Lifesong was produced by Mark A. Miller , with recording and mixing done by Sam Hewitt at Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee . Additional recording was done at Lifesong Studio in McDonough , Georgia . The album was mastered by Richard Dodd and engineered by Dale Oliver and John Lewis Lee III . The strings on the album were arranged by Bobby Huff and were recorded at Little Big Studio by Boeho Shin and Daewoo Kim . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , Lifesong is influenced by adult contemporary and pop rock music . The album also has influence from worship music in the vein of U2 , with songs building into " sweeping choruses and dramatic climaxes " . Much of the album 's lyrical content is devoted to challenging the Christian church and indicting hypocrisy and piousness within the church . Songs such as the title track and " Father , Spirit , Jesus " have worshipful lyrics while others such as " Stained Glass Masquerade " note the inability of church congregations to share their burdens openly . " Does Anybody Hear Her " condemns the church 's focus on judging rather than realizing pain and gives the message than condemning other people is wrong . " Set Me Free " is set from the perspective of " the demon @-@ possessed man " , who is calling to Jesus for relief . It also incorporates more of a rock sound than Casting Crowns normally uses . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Lifesong received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Kim Jones of About.com gave it five out of five stars , saying " Bottom line - my hat goes off to Casting Crowns for a job well done , once again . This is one band that doesn 't soft @-@ pedal their message , even if it is one that people enjoying a " comfort @-@ zone " may not want to hear " . Jared Johnson of AllMusic gave the album four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , opining " One of the brightest spots on the CCM map in 2005 , Lifesong was powered by a second dose of Mark Hall 's earnestly challenging worship themes and a penchant for reflective pop ... From start to finish , the album showcases songwriting that is consistent , polished , and potent , furthering the septet 's reputation as one of Christian music 's most popular acts of the 21st century " . Deborah Evans Price of Billboard said that " there is no sophomore letdown here for Casting Crowns ... This is intelligent , soulful music that goes beyond mere entertainment to something deeper " . David McCreary of CCM Magazine gave Lifesong an A- , opining " staying true to their approach of assimilating crisp melodies , forthright lyrics and stout vocals , the Crowns effectively blend uptempo worship anthems and emotive ballads for another well @-@ balanced set " . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today gave the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , calling the music " derivative " , said that " [ Casting Crowns ] fans will find much to love , while others continue to ponder the secret of this band 's success . All can probably agree that Lifesong is a sequel in the truest sense , offering more of the same to the delight of those so touched and inspired by the music of Casting Crowns the first time " . 
 Simon Eden of Cross Rhythms gave the album ten out of ten squares , saying " With ' Lifesong ' being officially [ Casting Crowns ' ] second release , the pressure is on to see if they can deliver . The simple answer is quite probably yes as the band use a refreshing formula that challenges the Church instead of serving up milk and cookies " . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout gave it three out of five stars , opining " Overall , Lifesong is musically an assortment of experimentation and familiarity , as the band continues to offer songs with relatable messages to the church body . Frontman and chief songwriter Mark Hall 's strained , shouting @-@ style vocals is [ sic ] still an acquired taste , along with his straightforward and often simplistic lyrics , but Lifesong is a noteworthy second chapter in an already impressive career for this young band " . Brian Mansfield of USA Today gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , commenting " [ Casting Crowns ] comes from the school of U2 @-@ influenced modern @-@ worship music , so its songs predictably build to sweeping choruses and dramatic climaxes . The band 's message is more distinctive , calling out the " happy plastic people under shiny plastic steeples " to offer themselves to the lonely , the grieving , the desperate " . 
 Lifesong and its singles received various awards and nominations . At the 48th Grammy Awards , it received the Grammy Award for Best Pop / Contemporary Gospel Album . It received the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year award at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . The album 's title track won the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year and was nominated for the Dove Award for Song of the Year at the 37th GMA Dove Awards . " Praise You In This Storm " won the Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 38th GMA Dove Awards and was nominated for the Dove Award for Worship Song of the Year at the 39th GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Lifesong was released on August 30 , 2005 . It sold 71 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuting at number nine on the Billboard 200 and Billboard Christian Albums chart . It spent a total of two weeks atop the Christian Albums chart and later appeared on the Billboard Catalog Albums chart in 2007 , peaking at number thirty @-@ four . By April 1 , 2006 , Lifesong had sold 503 @,@ 000 copies . It had sold 950 @,@ 000 copies by August 25 , 2007 and , as of December 5 , 2009 , it has sold a total of 1 @.@ 2 million copies . As of March 2014 , the album has sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies . 
 Three official singles ( " Lifesong " , " Praise You In This Storm " , " Does Anybody Hear Her " ) were released in promotion of Lifesong . All of the singles topped the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . An additional song , " Set Me Free " , was released to Christian CHR radio , and peaked at number 23 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hall except where noted . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits lifted from the album liner notes of Lifesong . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Barry Bonds = 
 Barry Lamar Bonds ( born July 24 , 1964 ) is an American former professional baseball left fielder who played 22 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) with the Pittsburgh Pirates and San Francisco Giants . Bonds received seven NL MVP awards and 14 All @-@ Star selections , and is considered to be one of the greatest baseball players of all time . Bonds is currently the co @-@ hitting coach for the Miami Marlins along with Frank <unk> . 
 Bonds was regarded as an exceptional hitter , and finished his regular season career with a very high on @-@ base percentage ( .444 ) and isolated power ( .309 ) . He holds many MLB hitting records , including most career home runs , most home runs in a single season ( 73 , set in 2001 ) and most career walks . He also received eight Gold Gloves for his defense in the outfield . He is ranked second in career Wins Above Replacement among all major league position players by both Fangraphs and Baseball @-@ Reference.com , behind only Babe Ruth . 
 Bonds led a controversial career , notably as a central figure in baseball 's steroids scandal . In 2007 , he was indicted on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice for allegedly lying to the grand jury during the federal government 's investigation of BALCO . The perjury charges against Bonds were dropped , and he was also initially convicted of obstruction of justice , but that was overturned in 2015 . 
 Bonds has not been elected into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in his first four years of eligibility . 
 Before the 2016 MLB Season , it was announced that Bonds would become the hitting coach for the Miami Marlins . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Riverside , California to former major leaguer Bobby Bonds and the former Patricia Howard , Bonds grew up in San Carlos , California and attended Junípero Serra High School in San Mateo , California and excelled in baseball , basketball and football . He played on the junior varsity team during his freshman year and the remainder of his high school career on the varsity team . He batted for a <unk> batting average his senior year , and was named prep All @-@ American . The Giants drafted Bonds in the second round of the 1982 MLB draft as a high school senior , but the Giants and Bonds were unable to agree on contract terms when Tom Haller 's maximum offer was $ 70 @,@ 000 ( $ 171 @,@ 645 today ) and Bond 's minimum to go pro was $ 75 @,@ 000 , so Bonds instead decided to attend college . 
 = = College career = = 
 Bonds attended Arizona State University , hitting .347 with 45 home runs and 175 runs batted in ( RBI ) . In 1984 he batted .360 and had 30 stolen bases . In 1985 he hit 23 home runs with 66 RBIs and a .368 batting average . He was a Sporting News All @-@ American selection that year . He tied the NCAA record with seven consecutive hits in the College World Series as sophomore and was named to All @-@ Time College World Series Team in 1996 . He graduated from Arizona State in 1986 with a degree in criminology . He was named ASU On Deck Circle Most Valuable Player ; other winners include Dustin Pedroia , Willie Bloomquist , Paul Lo Duca , and Ike Davis . During college , he played part of one summer in the amateur Alaska Baseball League with the Alaska Goldpanners . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft and minor leagues = = = 
 The Pittsburgh Pirates drafted Bonds as the sixth overall pick of the 1985 Major League Baseball draft . He joined the Prince William Pirates of the Carolina League and was named July 1985 Player of the Month for the league . In 1986 , he hit .311 in 44 games for the Hawaii Islanders of the Pacific Coast League . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1986 – 92 ) = = = 
 Before Bonds made it to the major leagues in Pittsburgh , Pirate fan attendance was low , with 1984 and 1985 attendance below 10 @,@ 000 per game for the 81 @-@ game home schedule . Bonds made his major league debut on May 30 , 1986 . In 1986 , Bonds led National League ( NL ) rookies with 16 home runs , 48 RBI , 36 stolen bases and 65 walks , but he finished 6th in Rookie of the Year voting . He played center field in 1986 , but switched to left field with the arrival of centerfielder Andy Van Slyke in 1987 . 
 In his early years , Bonds batted as the leadoff hitter . With Van Slyke also in the outfield , the Pirates had a venerable defensive tandem that worked together to cover a lot of ground on the field although they were not close off the field . The Pirates experienced a surge in fan enthusiasm with Bonds on the team and set the club attendance record of 52 @,@ 119 in the 1987 home opener . That year , he hit 25 home runs in his second season , along with 32 stolen bases and 59 RBIs . 
 Bonds improved in 1988 , hitting .283 with 24 home runs . The Pirates broke the record set the previous year with 54 @,@ 089 attending the home opener . Bonds now fit into a highly respected lineup featuring Bobby Bonilla , Van Slyke and Jay Bell . He finished with 19 homers , 58 RBIs , and 14 outfield assists in 1989 , which was second in the NL . Following the season , rumors that he would be traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Jeff Hamilton and John Wetteland , but the team denied the rumors and no such trade occurred . 
 Bonds won his first MVP Award in 1990 , hitting .301 with 33 home runs and 114 RBIs . He also stole 52 bases , which were third in the league , to become a first @-@ time member of the 30 – 30 club . He won his first Gold Glove Award and Silver Slugger Award . That year , the Pirates won the National League East title for their first postseason berth since winning the 1979 World Series . However , the Cincinnati Reds ( whose last post @-@ season berth had also been in 1979 ; they lost to the Pirates in that year 's NLCS ) defeated the Pirates in the NLCS en route to winning the World Championship . 
 In 1991 , Bonds also put up great numbers , hitting 25 homers and driving in 116 runs , and obtained another Gold Glove and Silver Slugger . He finished second to the Atlanta Braves ' Terry Pendleton ( the NL batting champion ) in the MVP voting . The Pirates slugging outfield of Bonds , Bonilla and Van Slyke performed miserably in the 1990 and 1991 playoffs hitting .190 in 1990 ( 12 for 63 ) and .200 in 1991 ( 15 for 75 ) . 
 In March 1992 , Pirates general manager Ted Simmons agreed to a deal with Atlanta Braves counterpart John Schuerholz to trade Bonds , in exchange for Alejandro Peña , Keith Mitchell , and a player to be named later . Pirates manager Jim Leyland opposed the trade vehemently , and the proposal was rescinded . Bonds stayed with Pittsburgh and won his second MVP award that season . While hitting .311 with 34 homers and 103 RBIs , he propelled the Pirates to their third straight National League East division title . However , Pittsburgh was defeated by the Braves in a seven @-@ game National League Championship Series . Bonds participated in the final play of Game 7 of the NLCS , whereby he fielded a base hit by Francisco Cabrera and attempted to throw out Sid Bream at home plate . But the throw to Pirates catcher Mike LaValliere was late and Bream scored the winning run . For the third consecutive season , the NL East Champion Pirates were denied a trip to the World Series . Following the loss , Bonds and star teammate Doug Drabek were expected to command salaries too high for Pittsburgh to again sign them . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( 1993 – 2007 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1993 season = = = = 
 In 1993 , Bonds left the Pirates to sign a lucrative free agent contract worth a then @-@ record $ 43 @.@ 75 million ( $ 71 @.@ 7 million today ) over six years with the Giants , with whom his father had spent the first seven years of his career , and with whom his godfather Willie Mays played 22 of his 24 Major League seasons . The deal was at that time the largest in baseball history , in terms of both total value and average annual salary . 
 Once he signed with the Giants , Bonds had intended to wear 24 , his number during most of his stay with the Pirates , and after receiving Mays ' blessing the Giants were willing to <unk> it until the public commotion from fans and media became too much . To honor his father , Bonds switched his jersey number to 25 , as it had been Bobby 's number in San Francisco . 
 Bonds hit .336 in 1993 , leading the league with 46 home runs and 123 RBI en route to his second consecutive MVP award , and third overall . As good as the Giants were ( winning 103 games ) , the Atlanta Braves won 104 in what some call the last great pennant race ( due to the Wild Card being instituted shortly after ) . 
 = = = = 1994 season = = = = 
 In the lockout @-@ shortened season of 1994 , Bonds hit .312 with 37 home runs and a league @-@ leading 74 walks , and he finished 4th in MVP voting . 
 = = = = 1995 season = = = = 
 In 1995 , Bonds hit 33 homers and drove in 104 runs , hitting .294 but finished only 12th in MVP voting . In 1994 , he appeared in a small role as himself in the television film Jane 's House , starring James Woods and Anne Archer . 
 = = = = 1996 season = = = = 
 In 1996 , Bonds became the first National League player and second ( of the current list of four ) major league player ( s ) to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in the same season . The other members of the 40 – 40 club are José Canseco – 1988 , Alex Rodriguez – 1998 , and Alfonso Soriano – 2006 ; his father Bobby Bonds was one home run short in 1973 when he hit 39 home runs and stole 43 bases . 
 Bonds hit his 300th and 301st home runs off the Florida Marlins ' John Burkett on April 27 . He became the fourth player in history to join the 300 – 300 club with 300 stolen bases and 300 home runs for a career , joining Willie Mays , Andre Dawson , and his father . Bonds ' totals for the season included 129 runs driven in , a .308 average and a then @-@ National League record 151 walks . He finished fifth in the MVP balloting . 
 = = = = 1997 season = = = = 
 In 1997 Bonds hit .291 , his lowest average since 1989 . He hit 40 home runs for the second straight year and drove in 101 runs , leading the league in walks again with 145 . He tied his father in 1997 for having the most 30 / 30 seasons , and he again placed fifth in the MVP balloting . 
 = = = = 1998 season = = = = 
 With two outs in the 9th inning of a game against the Arizona Diamondbacks on May 28 , 1998 , Bonds became only the fifth player in baseball history to be given an intentional walk with the bases loaded . Nap Lajoie ( 1901 ) , Del Bissonette ( 1928 ) and Bill Nicholson ( 1944 ) were three others in the 20th century who received that rare honor . The first to receive one was Abner Dalrymple in 1881 . During a game against the Philadelphia Phillies on August 2 , Bonds was hit by a pitch thrown by Ricky <unk> , leading to Bonds charging the mound and triggering a bench @-@ clearing brawl . 
 On August 23 , Bonds hit his 400th career home run . By doing so , he became the first player ever to enter the 400 – 400 club by having career totals of 400 home runs and 400 stolen bases . The milestone home run came off Kirt <unk> , who , like Burkett , was pitching for the Marlins . For the season , he hit .303 with 37 home runs and drove in 122 runs , winning his eighth Gold Glove , He finished 8th in the MVP voting . 
 = = = = 1999 season = = = = 
 Bill James ranked Bonds as the best player of the 1990s . He added that the decade 's second @-@ best player , Craig Biggio , had been closer in production to the decade 's 10th @-@ best player than to Bonds . In 1999 , with statistics through 1997 being considered , Bonds ranked Number 34 on The Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , making him the highest @-@ ranking active player . 
 When the Sporting News list was redone in 2005 , Bonds was ranked 6th behind Babe Ruth , Willie Mays , Ty Cobb , Walter Johnson , and Hank Aaron . Bonds was omitted from 1999 's Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team , to which Ken Griffey , Jr. was elected . James wrote of Bonds , " Certainly the most unappreciated superstar of my lifetime . ... Griffey has always been more popular , but Bonds has been a far , far greater player . " In 1999 , he rated Bonds as the 16th @-@ best player of all time . " When people begin to take in all of his accomplishments " , he predicted , " Bonds may well be rated among the five greatest players in the history of the game . " 
 = = = = 2000 season = = = = 
 In 2000 , the following year , Bonds hit .306 with career bests through that time in both slugging percentage ( <unk> ) and home runs ( 49 ) in just 143 games . He also drew a league @-@ leading 117 walks . 
 = = = = 2001 season = = = = 
 The next year , Bonds ' offensive production reached even higher levels , breaking not only his own personal records but several major league records . In the Giants ' first 50 games in 2001 , he hit 28 home runs , including 17 in May — a career high . This early stretch included his 500th home run hit on April 17 against Terry Adams of the Los Angeles Dodgers . He also hit 39 home runs by the All @-@ star break ( a major league record ) , drew a major league record 177 walks , and had a <unk> on @-@ base average , a feat not seen since Mickey Mantle and Ted Williams over forty years earlier . Bonds ' slugging percentage was a major league record .863 ( 411 total bases in 476 at @-@ bats ) , and , most impressively , he ended the season with a major league record 73 home runs . 
 On October 4 , Bonds tied the previous record of 70 set by Mark McGwire – which McGwire set in the 162nd game in 1998 – by homering off Wilfredo Rodríguez in the 159th game of the season . He then hit numbers 71 and 72 the following night off Chan Ho Park . Bonds added his 73rd off Dennis Springer on October 7 . The ball was later sold to toy manufacturer Todd McFarlane for $ 450 @,@ 000 . He previously bought Mark McGwire 's 70th home run ball from 1998 . Bonds received the Babe Ruth Home Run Award for leading MLB in homers that season . 
 = = = = 2002 season = = = = 
 Bonds re @-@ signed with the Giants for a five @-@ year , $ 90 million contract in January 2002 . He hit five home runs in the Giants ' first four games of the season , tying Lou Brock 's 35 @-@ year record for most home runs after four games . He won the NL batting title with a career @-@ high .370 average and struck out only 47 times . He hit 46 home runs in 403 at @-@ bats . 
 Despite playing in nine fewer games than the previous season , he drew 198 walks , a major @-@ league record ; 68 of them were intentional walks , surpassing Willie McCovey 's 45 in 1969 for another Major League record . He slugged <unk> , then the fourth @-@ highest total all time . Bonds broke Ted Williams ' major league record for on @-@ base average with <unk> . Bonds also hit his 600th home run , less than a year and a half after hitting his 500th . The home run came on August 9 at home against Kip Wells of the Pirates . 
 = = = = 2002 postseason = = = = 
 Bonds batted .322 with 8 home runs , 16 RBI , and 27 walks in the postseason en route to the 2002 World Series where the Giants lost the series 4 – 3 to the Anaheim Angels . 
 = = = = 2003 season = = = = 
 In 2003 , Bonds played in just 130 games . He hit 45 home runs in just 390 at @-@ bats , along with a .341 batting average . He slugged <unk> , walked 148 times , and had an on @-@ base average well over .500 ( .529 ) for the third straight year . He also became the only member of the career 500 home run / 500 stolen base club by stealing second base on June 23 off of pitcher Éric Gagné in the 11th inning of a tied ball game against the Los Angeles Dodgers ( against whom Bonds had tallied his 500th home run ) . Bonds scored the game @-@ winning run later that inning . 
 = = = = 2004 season = = = = 
 In 2004 , Bonds had perhaps his best season . He hit .362 en route to his second National League batting title , and broke his own record by walking 232 times . He slugged <unk> , which was fourth @-@ highest of all time , and broke his on @-@ base percentage record with a .609 average . Bonds passed Mays on the career home run list by hitting his <unk> off of Ben Ford on April 13 , He then hit his 700th off of Jake Peavy on September 17 . Bonds hit 45 home runs in 373 at @-@ bats , and struck out just 41 times , putting himself in elite company , as few major leaguers have ever had more home runs than strikeouts in a season . Bonds would win his fourth consecutive MVP award and his seventh overall . His seven MVP awards are four more than any other player in history . In addition , no other player from either league has been awarded the MVP four times in a row . ( The MVP award was first given in 1931 ) . The 40 @-@ year @-@ old Bonds also broke Willie Stargell 's 25 @-@ year record as the oldest player to win a Most Valuable Player Award ( Stargell , at 39 years , 8 months , was National League co @-@ MVP with Keith Hernandez in 1979 ) . On July 4 , he tied and passed Rickey Henderson 's career bases on balls record with his <unk> and <unk> career walks . 
 As Bonds neared Aaron 's record , Aaron was called on for his opinion of Bonds . He clarified that he was a fan and admirer of Bonds and avoided the controversy regarding whether the record should be denoted with an asterisk due to Bonds ' alleged steroid usage . He felt recognition and respect for the award was something to be determined by the fans . As the steroid controversy received greater media attention during the offseason before the 2005 season , Aaron expressed some reservations about the statements Bonds made on the issue . Aaron expressed that he felt drug and steroid use to boost athletic performance was inappropriate . Aaron was frustrated that the media could not focus on events that occurred in the field of play and wished drugs or gambling allegations such as those associated with Pete Rose could be emphasized less . In 2007 , Aaron felt the whole steroid use issue was very controversial and decided that he would not attend any possible record @-@ breaking games . Aaron congratulated Bonds through the media when Bonds broke Aaron 's record . 
 = = = = 2005 season = = = = 
 Bonds ' salary for the 2005 season was $ 22 million , the second @-@ highest salary in Major League Baseball ( the Yankees ' Alex Rodriguez earned the highest , $ 25 @.@ 2 million ) . Bonds endured a knee injury , multiple surgeries , and rehabilitation . He was activated on September 12 and started in left field . In his return against the San Diego Padres , he nearly hit a home run in his first at @-@ bat . Bonds finished the night 1 @-@ for @-@ 4 . Upon his return , Bonds resumed his high @-@ caliber performance at the plate , hitting home runs in four consecutive games from September 18 to September 21 and finishing with five homers in only 14 games . 
 = = = = 2006 season = = = = 
 In 2006 , Bonds earned $ 20 million ( not including bonuses ) , the fourth highest salary in baseball . Through the 2006 season he had earned approximately $ 172 million during his then 21 @-@ year career , making him baseball 's all @-@ time highest paid player . Bonds hit under .200 for his first 10 games of the season and did not hit a home run until April 22 . This 10 @-@ game stretch was his longest home run slump since the 1998 season . On May 7 , Bonds drew within one home run of tying Babe Ruth for second place on the all @-@ time list , hitting his <unk> career home run into the second level of Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia , off pitcher Jon Lieber in a game in which the Giants lost to the Philadelphia Phillies . The towering home run — one of the longest in Citizens Bank Park 's two @-@ season history , traveling an estimated 450 feet ( 140 m ) — hit off the facade of the third deck in right field . 
 On May 20 , Bonds tied Ruth , hitting his 714th career home run to deep right field to lead off the top of the 2nd inning . The home run came off left @-@ handed pitcher Brad Halsey of the Oakland A 's , in an interleague game played in Oakland , California . Since this was an interleague game at an American League stadium , Bonds was batting as the designated hitter in the lineup for the Giants . Bonds was quoted after the game as being " glad it 's over with " and stated that more attention could be focused on Albert Pujols , who was on a very rapid home run pace in early 2006 . 
 On May 28 , Bonds passed Ruth , hitting his 715th career home run to center field off Colorado Rockies pitcher Byung @-@ Hyun Kim . The ball was hit an estimated 445 feet ( 140 m ) into center field where it went through the hands of several fans but then fell onto an elevated platform in center field . Then it rolled off the platform where Andrew <unk> , a 38 @-@ year @-@ old San Francisco resident , caught the ball while he was in line at a concession stand . <unk> , radio broadcaster Dave Flemming 's radio play @-@ by @-@ play of the home run went silent just as the ball was hit , apparently from a microphone failure . But the televised version , called by Giants broadcaster Duane Kuiper , was not affected . 
 On September 22 , Bonds tied Henry Aaron 's National League career home run record of 733 . The home run came in the top of the 6th inning of a high @-@ scoring game against the Milwaukee Brewers , at Miller Park in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . The achievement was notable for its occurrence in the very city where Aaron began ( with the Milwaukee Braves ) and concluded ( with the Brewers , then in the American League ) his career . With the Giants trailing 10 – 8 , Bonds hit a blast to deep center field on a 2 – 0 pitch off the Brewers ' Chris Spurling with runners on first and second and one out . Though the Giants were at the time clinging to only a slim chance of making the playoffs , Bonds ' home run provided the additional drama of giving the Giants an 11 – 10 lead late in a critical game in the final days of a pennant race . The Brewers eventually won the game , 13 – 12 , despite Bonds ' going 3 for 5 , with 2 doubles , the record @-@ tying home run , and 6 runs batted in . 
 On September 23 , Bonds surpassed Aaron for the NL career home run record . Hit in Milwaukee like the previous one , this was a solo home run off Chris Capuano of the Brewers . This was the last home run Bonds hit in 2006 . In 2006 , Bonds recorded his lowest slugging percentage ( a statistic that he has historically ranked among league leaders season after season ) since 1991 with the Pittsburgh Pirates . 
 In January 2007 , the New York Daily News reported that Bonds had tested positive for amphetamines . Under baseball 's amphetamine policy , which had been in effect for one season , players testing positive were to submit to six additional tests and undergo treatment and counseling . The policy also stated that players were not to be identified for a first positive test , but the New York Daily News leaked the test 's results . When the Players Association informed Bonds of the test results , he initially attributed it to a substance he had taken from the locker of Giants teammate Mark Sweeney , but would later retract this claim and publicly apologize to Sweeney . 
 = = = = 2007 season = = = = 
 On January 29 , 2007 , the Giants finalized a contract with Bonds for the 2007 season . After the commissioner 's office rejected Bonds ' one @-@ year , $ 15 @.@ 8 million deal because it contained a personal @-@ appearance provision , the team sent revised documents to his agent , Jeff Borris , who stated that " At this time , Barry is not signing the new documents . " Bonds signed a revised one @-@ year , $ 15 @.@ 8 million contract on February 15 and reported to the Giants ' Spring training camp on time . 
 Bonds resumed his march to the all @-@ time record early in the 2007 season . After an opening game in which all he had was a first @-@ inning single past third base against a right @-@ shifted infield ( immediately followed by a stolen base and then a base @-@ running misjudgment that got him thrown out at home ) and a deep out to left field late in the game , Bonds returned the next day , April 4 , with another mission . In his first at @-@ bat of the season 's second game at the Giants ' AT & T Park , Bonds hit a Chris Young ( of the San Diego Padres ) pitch just over the wall to the left of straightaway center field for career home run 735 . This home run put Bonds past the midway point between Ruth and Aaron . 
 Bonds did not homer again until April 13 , when he hit two ( 736 and 737 ) in a 3 for 3 night that included 4 RBI against the Pittsburgh Pirates . Bonds splashed a pitch by St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Ryan Franklin into McCovey Cove on April 18 for home run 738 . Home runs number 739 and 740 came in back to back games on April 21 and April 22 against the Arizona Diamondbacks . 
 The hype surrounding Bonds ' pursuit of the home run record escalated on May 14 . On this day , Sports Auction for Heritage ( a Dallas @-@ based auction house ) offered US $ 1 million to the fan that caught Bonds ' record @-@ breaking 756th @-@ career home run . The million dollar offer was rescinded on June 11 out of concern of fan safety . Home run 748 came on Father 's Day , June 17 , in the final game of a 3 @-@ game road series against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park , where Bonds had never previously played . With this homer , Fenway Park became the 36th major league ballpark in which Bonds had hit a home run . He hit a Tim Wakefield knuckleball just over the low fence into the Giant 's bullpen in right field . It was his first home run off his former Pittsburgh Pirate teammate , who became the 441st different pitcher to surrender a four @-@ bagger to Bonds . The 750th career home run , hit on June 29 , also came off a former teammate : Liván Hernández . The blast came in the 8th inning and at that point tied the game at 3 – 3 . 
 On July 19 , after a 21 at @-@ bat hitless streak , Bonds hit 2 home runs , numbers 752 and 753 , against the Chicago Cubs . He went 3 – 3 with 2 home runs , 6 RBIs , and a walk on that day . The struggling last place Giants still lost the game , 9 – 8 . On July 27 , Bonds hit home run 754 against Florida Marlins pitcher Rick <unk> . Bonds was then walked his next 4 at @-@ bats in the game , but a 2 @-@ run shot helped the Giants win the game 12 – 10 . It marked the first time since he had hit # 747 that Bonds had homered in a game the Giants won . On August 4 , Bonds hit a 382 foot ( 116 m ) home run against Clay Hensley of the San Diego Padres for home run number 755 , tying Hank Aaron 's all @-@ time record . Bonds greeted his son , Nikolai , with an extended bear hug after crossing home plate . Bonds greeted his teammates and then his wife , Liz Watson , and daughter Aisha Lynn behind the backstop . Hensley was the 445th different pitcher to give up a home run to Bonds . Ironically , given the cloud of suspicion that surrounded Bonds , the tying home run was hit off a pitcher who 'd been suspended by baseball in 2005 for steroid use . He was walked in his next at bat and eventually scored on a fielder 's choice . 
 On August 7 at 8 : 51 PM PDT , Bonds hit a 435 foot ( 133 m ) home run , his 756th , off a pitch from Mike Bacsik of the Washington Nationals , breaking the all @-@ time career home run record , formerly held by Hank Aaron . Coincidentally , Bacsik 's father had faced Aaron ( as a pitcher for the Texas Rangers ) after Aaron had hit his 755th home run . On August 23 , 1976 , Michael J. Bacsik held Aaron to a single and a fly out to right field . The younger Bacsik commented later , " If my dad had been gracious enough to let Hank Aaron hit a home run , we both would have given up 756 . " After hitting the home run , Bonds gave Bacsik an autographed bat . 
 The pitch , the seventh of the at @-@ bat , was a 3 – 2 pitch which Bonds hit into the right @-@ center field bleachers . The fan who ended up with the ball , 22 @-@ year @-@ old Matt Murphy from Queens , New York ( and a Mets fan ) , was promptly protected and escorted away from the mayhem by a group of San Francisco police officers . After Bonds finished his home run trot , a ten @-@ minute delay followed , including a brief video by Aaron congratulating Bonds on breaking the record Aaron had held for 33 years , and expressing the hope that " the achievement of this record will inspire others to chase their own dreams . " Bonds made an impromptu emotional statement on the field , with Willie Mays , his godfather , at his side and thanked his teammates , family and his late father . Bonds sat out the rest of the game . 
 The commissioner , Bud Selig , was not in attendance in this game but was represented by the Executive Vice President of Baseball Operations , Jimmie Lee Solomon . Selig called Bonds later that night to congratulate him on breaking the record . President George W. Bush also called Bonds the next day to congratulate him . On August 24 , San Francisco honored and celebrated Bonds ' career accomplishments and breaking the home run record with a large rally in Justin Herman Plaza . The rally included video messages from Lou Brock , Ernie Banks , Ozzie Smith , Joe Montana , Wayne Gretzky and Michael Jordan . Speeches were made by Willie Mays , Giants teammates Omar Vizquel and Rich <unk> , and Giants owner Peter <unk> . Mayor Gavin Newsom presented Bonds the key to the City and County of San Francisco and Giants vice president Larry Baer gave Bonds the home plate he touched after hitting his 756th career home run . 
 The record @-@ setting ball was consigned to an auction house on August 21 . Bidding began on August 28 and closed with a winning bid of US $ 752 @,@ 467 on September 15 after a three phase online auction . The high bidder , fashion designer Marc Ecko , created a website to let fans decide its fate . Subsequently , Ben Padnos , who submitted the ( US ) $ 186 @,@ 750 winning bid on Bonds ' record @-@ tying 755th home run ball also set up a website to let fans decide its fate . Of Ecko 's plans , Bonds said " He spent $ 750 @,@ 000 on the ball and that 's what he 's doing with it ? What he 's doing is stupid . " 10 million voters helped Ecko decide to brand the ball with an asterisk and send it to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . Padnos sold 5 @-@ year ads on a website , <unk> , where people voted by a two to one margin to smash the ball . 
 Bonds concluded the 2007 season with a .276 batting average , 28 home runs , and 66 RBIs in 126 games and 340 at bats . At the age of 43 , he led both leagues in walks with 132 . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 On September 21 , 2007 , the San Francisco Giants confirmed that they would not re @-@ sign Bonds for the 2008 season . The story was first announced on Bonds ' own web site earlier that day . Bonds officially filed for free agency on October 29 , 2007 . His agent Jeff Borris said : " I 'm anticipating widespread interest from every Major League team . " 
 There was much speculation before the 2008 season about where Bonds might play . However , no one signed him during the 2008 or 2009 seasons . If he had returned to Major League Baseball , Bonds would have been within close range of several significant hitting milestones : needing just 65 hits to reach 3 @,@ 000 , 4 runs batted in to reach 2 @,@ 000 , and 38 home runs to reach 800 . He would have needed 69 more runs scored to move past Rickey Henderson as the all @-@ time runs champion , and 37 extra base hits to move past Hank Aaron as the all @-@ time extra base hits champion . 
 As of November 13 , 2009 , Borris maintained that Bonds was still not retired . On December 9 , however , Borris told the San Francisco Chronicle that Bonds has played his last major league game . Bonds announced on April 11 , 2010 that he was proud of McGwire for admitting his use of steroids . Bonds said that it was not the time to retire , but he noted that he was not in shape to play immediately if an interested club called him . 
 Bonds has not had a jersey number retired by either the Pirates or Giants , although there have been calls by fans of both teams to retire their respective uniform numbers held by Bonds . However , his number 24 with the Pirates remains in circulation , most prominently worn by Brian Giles from 1999 to 2003 and by Pedro Alvarez from 2011 to 2015 . The Giants have not reissued Bonds ' number 25 . 
 On December 15 , 2011 , Bonds was sentenced to 30 days of house arrest , two years of probation and 250 hours of community service , for an obstruction of justice conviction stemming from a grand jury appearance in 2003 . However , U.S. District Judge Susan Illston then delayed the sentence pending an appeal . In 2013 his conviction was upheld on appeal by a three judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . However , the full court later granted Bonds an en banc rehearing , and on April 22 , 2015 , an 11 @-@ judge panel of the Ninth Circuit voted 10 @-@ 1 to overturn his conviction . 
 On March 10 , 2014 , Bonds began a seven @-@ day stint as a roving Spring training instructor for the Giants . 
 On December 4 , 2015 , he was announced as the new hitting coach for the Miami Marlins . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = BALCO scandal = = = 
 Since 2003 , Bonds has been a key figure in the Bay Area Laboratory Co @-@ operative ( BALCO ) scandal . He was under investigation by a federal grand jury regarding his testimony in the BALCO case , and was indicted on perjury and obstruction of justice charges on November 15 , 2007 . The indictment alleges that Bonds lied while under oath about his alleged use of steroids . 
 In 2003 , Bonds first became embroiled in a scandal when Greg Anderson of the Bay Area Laboratory Co @-@ operative ( BALCO ) , Bonds ' trainer since 2000 , was indicted by a federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and charged with supplying anabolic steroids to athletes , including a number of baseball players . This led to speculation that Bonds had used performance @-@ enhancing drugs during a time when there was no mandatory testing in Major League Baseball . Bonds declared his innocence , attributing his changed physique and increased power to a strict regimen of bodybuilding , diet and legitimate supplements . 
 During grand jury testimony on December 4 , 2003 , Bonds said that he used a clear substance and a cream that he received from his personal strength trainer , Greg Anderson , who told him they were the nutritional supplement <unk> oil and a rubbing balm for arthritis . This testimony , as reported by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru @-@ Wada , has frequently been misrepresented . Later reports on Bonds ' leaked grand @-@ jury testimony contend that he admitted to unknowingly using " the cream " and " the clear " . 
 In July 2005 , all four defendants in the BALCO steroid scandal trial , including Anderson , struck deals with federal prosecutors that did not require them to reveal names of athletes who may have used banned drugs . 
 = = = = Perjury case = = = = 
 On November 15 , 2007 , Bonds was indicted on four counts of perjury and one count of obstruction of justice as it relates to the government investigation of BALCO . 
 On February 14 , 2008 a typo in court papers filed by Federal prosecutors erroneously alleged that Bonds tested positive for steroids in November 2001 , a month after hitting his record 73rd home run . The reference was meant instead to refer to a November 2000 test that had already been disclosed and previously reported . The typo sparked a brief media frenzy . 
 His trial for obstruction of justice was to have begun on March 2 , 2009 , but jury selection was postponed due to 11th @-@ hour appeals by the prosecution . The trial commenced on March 21 , 2011 , in U. S. District Court , Northern District of California , with Judge Susan Illston presiding . He was convicted on April 13 , 2011 on the obstruction of justice charge , for giving an evasive answer to a question under oath . His sentence did not include prison . The conviction was initially upheld by a three judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in 2013 , but a larger panel of the court voted 10 @-@ 1 to overturn the conviction on April 22 , 2015 . 
 = = = Players ' Union = = = 
 Bonds withdrew from the MLB Players Association 's ( MLBPA ) licensing agreement because he felt independent marketing deals would be more lucrative for him . Bonds is the first player in the thirty @-@ year history of the licensing program not to sign . Because of this withdrawal , his name and likeness are not usable in any merchandise licensed by the MLBPA . In order to use his name or likeness , a company must deal directly with Bonds . For this reason he does not appear in some baseball video games , forcing game @-@ makers to create generic athletes to replace him . For example , Bonds is replaced by " Jon Dowd " in MVP Baseball 2005 . 
 = = = Game of Shadows = = = 
 In March 2006 the book Game of Shadows , written by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru @-@ Wada , was released amid a storm of media publicity including the cover of Sports Illustrated . Initially small excerpts of the book were released by the authors in the issue of Sports Illustrated . The book alleges Bonds used stanozolol and a host of other steroids , and is perhaps most responsible for the change in public opinion regarding Bonds ' steroid use . 
 The book contained excerpts of grand jury testimony that is supposed to be sealed and confidential by law . The authors have been steadfast in their refusal to divulge their sources and at one point faced jail time . On February 14 , 2007 , Troy Ellerman , one of Victor Conte 's lawyers , pleaded guilty to leaking grand jury testimony . Through the plea agreement , he will spend two and a half years in jail . 
 = = = Love Me , Hate Me = = = 
 In May 2006 , former Sports Illustrated writer Jeff Pearlman released a revealing biography of Bonds entitled Love Me , Hate Me : Barry Bonds and the Making of an Anti @-@ Hero . The book also contained many allegations against Bonds . The book , which describes Bonds as a polarizing insufferable braggart with a legendary ego and staggering ability , relied on over five hundred interviews , except with Bonds himself . 
 = = = Bonds on Bonds = = = 
 In April 2006 and May 2006 , ESPN aired a few episodes of a 10 @-@ part reality TV ( unscripted , documentary @-@ style ) series starring Bonds . The show , titled Bonds on Bonds , focused on Bonds ' chase of Babe Ruth 's and Hank Aaron 's home run records . Some felt the show should be put on hiatus until baseball investigated Bonds ' steroid use allegations . The series was canceled in June 2006 , ESPN and producer Tollin / Robbins Productions citing " creative control " issues with Bonds and his representatives . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bonds met Susann ( " Sun " ) <unk> Branco , the mother of his first two children ( Nikolai and Shikari ) , in Montreal , Quebec in August 1987 . They eloped to Las Vegas February 5 , 1988 . The couple separated in June 1994 , divorced in December 1994 , and had their marriage annulled in 1997 by the Catholic Church . The divorce was a media affair because Bonds had his Swedish spouse sign a prenuptial agreement in which she " waived her right to a share of his present and future earnings " and which was upheld . Bonds had been providing his wife $ 20 @,@ 000 / month in child support and $ 10 @,@ 000 in spousal support at the time of the ruling . During the hearings to set permanent support levels , allegations of abuse came from both parties . The trial dragged on for months , but Bonds was awarded both houses and reduced support . On August 21 , 2000 , the Supreme Court of California , in an opinion signed by Chief Justice Ronald M. George , unanimously held that " substantial evidence supports the determination of the trial court that the [ prenuptial ] agreement in the present case was entered into voluntarily . " 
 In 2010 , Bonds ' son Nikolai , who served as a Giants batboy during his father 's years playing in San Francisco and always sat next to his dad in the dugout during games , was charged with five misdemeanors resulting from a confrontation with his mother , Sun . Barry accompanied him to San Mateo County Superior Court . 
 After the end of his first marriage , Bonds had an extensive intimate relationship with Kimberly Bell from 1994 through May 2003 . Bonds purchased a home in Scottsdale , Arizona for Kimberly . 
 On January 10 , 1998 , Bonds married his second wife , Liz Watson , at the San Francisco Ritz @-@ Carlton Hotel in front of 240 guests . The couple lived in Los Altos Hills , California , with their daughter Aisha during their ten and a half years of marriage before Watson filed for Legal Separation on June 9 , 2009 , citing irreconcilable differences . On July 21 , 2009 , just six weeks later , Watson announced that she was withdrawing her Legal Separation action . The couple were reconciled for seven months before Watson formally filed for divorce in Los Angeles on February 26 , 2010 . On June 6 , 2011 , Bonds and Watson filed a legal agreement not to take the divorce to trial and instead settle it in an " uncontested manner " , effectively agreeing to take the proceedings out of the public eye and end the marriage privately at an unspecified later date without further court involvement . 
 Several of Bonds ' family and extended family members have been involved in athletics as either a career or a notable pastime . Bonds has a younger brother , Bobby , Jr . , who was also a professional baseball player . His paternal aunt , Rosie Bonds , is a former American record holder in the 80 meter hurdles , and competed in the 1964 Olympics . In addition , he is a distant cousin of Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson . 
 Among Bonds ' many real estate properties is a home he owns in the exclusive gated community of Beverly Park in Beverly Hills , California . 
 = = Career distinctions = = 
 Besides holding Major League career records in home runs ( 762 ) , walks ( 2 @,@ 558 ) , and intentional walks ( 688 ) , at the time of his retirement , Bonds also led all active players in RBI ( 1 @,@ 996 ) , on @-@ base percentage ( .444 ) , runs ( 2 @,@ 227 ) , games ( 2 @,@ 986 ) , extra @-@ base hits ( 1 @,@ 440 ) , at @-@ bats per home run ( 12 @.@ 92 ) , and total bases ( 5 @,@ 976 ) . He is 2nd in doubles ( 601 ) , slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , stolen bases ( 514 ) , at @-@ bats ( 9 @,@ 847 ) , and hits ( 2 @,@ 935 ) , 6th in triples ( 77 ) , 8th in sacrifice flies ( 91 ) , and 9th in strikeouts ( 1 @,@ 539 ) , through September 26 , 2007 . 
 Bonds is the lone member of the 500 – 500 club , which means he has hit at least 500 home runs ( 762 ) and stolen 500 bases ( 514 ) . He is also one of only four baseball players all @-@ time to be in the 40 – 40 club ( 1996 ) , which means he hit 40 home runs ( 42 ) and stole 40 bases ( 40 ) in the same season ; the other members are José Canseco , Alex Rodriguez and Alfonso Soriano . 
 = = = Records held = = = 
 Home runs in a single season ( 73 ) , 2001 
 Home runs ( career ) ( 762 ) 
 Home runs against different pitchers ( 449 ) 
 Home runs since turning 40 years old ( 74 ) 
 Home runs in the year he turned 43 years old ( 28 ) 
 Consecutive seasons with 30 or more home runs ( 13 ) , 1992 – 2004 
 Slugging percentage in a single season ( .863 ) , 2001 
 Slugging percentage in a World Series ( 1 @.@ 294 ) , 2002 
 Consecutive seasons with .600 slugging percentage or higher ( 8 ) , 1998 – 2005 
 On @-@ base percentage in a single season ( .609 ) , 2004 
 Walks in a single season ( 232 ) , 2004 
 Intentional walks in a single season ( 120 ) , 2004 
 Consecutive games with a walk ( 18 ) 
 MVP awards ( 7 — closest competitors trail with 3 ) , 1990 , 1992 – 93 , 2001 – 04 
 Consecutive MVP awards ( 4 ) , 2001 – 04 
 National League Player of the Month selections ( 13 — 2nd place : 8 – Frank Thomas ; 2nd place ( <unk> ) – George Foster , Pete Rose and Dale Murphy ) 
 Oldest player ( age 38 ) to win the National League batting title ( .370 ) for the first time , 2002 
 = = = Records shared = = = 
 Consecutive plate appearances with a walk ( 7 ) 
 Consecutive plate appearances reaching base ( 15 ) 
 Tied with his father , Bobby , for most seasons with 30 home runs and 30 stolen bases ( 5 ) and are the only father @-@ son members of the 30 – 30 club 
 Home runs in a single post @-@ season ( 8 ) , 2002 
 = = = Other accomplishments = = = 
 5 @-@ time SF Giants Player of the Year ( 1998 , 2001 – 04 ) 
 7 @-@ time Baseball America NL All @-@ Star ( 1993 , 1998 , 2000 – 04 ) 
 3 @-@ Time Major League Player of the Year ( 1990 , 2001 , 2004 ) 
 3 @-@ Time Baseball America MLB Player of the Year ( 2001 , 2003 – 04 ) 
 8 @-@ Time Gold Glove winner for NL Outfielder ( 1990 – 94 , 1996 – 98 ) . 
 12 @-@ Time Silver Slugger winner for NL Outfielder ( 1990 – 94 , 1996 – 97 , 2000 – 04 ) 
 14 @-@ time All @-@ Star ( 1990 , 1992 – 98 , 2000 – 04 , 2007 ) 
 3 @-@ Time NL Hank Aaron Award winner ( 2001 – 02 , 2004 ) 
 Babe Ruth Home Run Award ( 2001 ) 
 Listed at # 6 on The Sporting News ' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , the highest @-@ ranked active player , i n 2005 . 
 Named a finalist to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 , but not elected to the team in the fan balloting . 
 Rating of 352 on Baseball @-@ Reference.com 's Hall of Fame monitor ( 100 is a good HOF candidate ) ; 9th among all hitters , highest among hitters not in HOF yet . 
 Only the second player to twice have a single @-@ season slugging percentage over .800 , with his record .863 in 2001 and <unk> in 2004 . Babe Ruth was the other , with <unk> in 1920 and .846 in 1921 . 
 Became the first player in history with more times on base ( 376 ) than official times at bats ( 373 ) in 2004 . This was due to the record number of walks , which count as a time on base but not a time at @-@ bat . He had 135 hits , 232 walks , and 9 hit @-@ by @-@ pitches for the 376 number . 
 With his father Bobby ( 332 , 461 ) , leads all father @-@ son combinations in combined home runs ( 1 @,@ 094 ) and stolen bases ( 975 ) , respectively through September 26 , 2007 . 
 Played minor league baseball in both Alaska and Hawaii . In 1983 , he played for the Alaska Goldpanners of Fairbanks in the Alaska Baseball League , and in 1986 , he played for the Hawaii Islanders in the Pacific Coast League . 
 Featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated . He has appeared as the main subject on the cover eight times in total ; seven with the Giants and once with the Pirates . He has also appeared in an inset on the cover twice . He was the most recent Pirate player to appear on the cover , until Jason Grilli was featured in <unk> July 22 , 2013 edition . 
 = Interactions ( The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man ) = 
 " Interactions " is the second episode of the animated television series The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , based on the comic book character Spider @-@ Man created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . The episode sees Spider @-@ Man confronting the supervillain Electro , whose body was corrupted with electricity after a freak lab accident . 
 Directed by Troy Adomitis , " Interactions " was written by Kevin Hopps , who researched all the available comic books he had that featured Electro . The character 's appearance in the episode draws on his traditional comic book style , though designer Victor Cook emphasized the color green and removed the character 's customary star @-@ shaped mask . His voice actor , Crispin Freeman , sought to reflect the character 's declining sanity in his vocal style . 
 " Interactions " first aired March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids ' WB block of The CW network , following the first episode . Its 1 @.@ 4 / 4 Nielsen rating was higher than that of the pilot , " Survival of the Fittest " . The episode received mixed reviews ; IGN commented that " [ w ] hile not as strong as the pilot , the episode had some notable moments " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The episode opens in Dr. Connors 's laboratory , where Connors demonstrates to his interns Peter , Gwen , and Eddie a new potential source of clean energy : genetically modified eels . After Gwen and Peter leave , an electrician , Max Dillon , attempts to upgrade the lab 's electrical filters , but gets <unk> and is sent to the hospital . There , he is found to be emitting strong electrical fields and is placed in quarantine . Max is further angered when a doctor explains that , although he is stable , he must wear a special suit to contain this emitted bioelectricity . 
 Peter , meanwhile , is assigned to tutor a popular girl named Liz Allan . He is attempting to teach her science in a café when an angry Max enters and accidentally short circuits the power . Max leaves ; Peter , believing him to be dangerous , pursues him as Spider @-@ Man . Peter manages to photograph Max and remove his mask ; Max , enraged , attacks , but flees while Peter is distracted by a phone call from Aunt May . 
 The following day Peter discovers that his photographs have not developed properly , but is still able to identify the man he fought as Max . He meets with Dr. Connors , Eddie , and Gwen to seek a way to contain Max , who has meanwhile been attacked by the police and has decided to seek help from the lab . On arrival , though , Max becomes aggressive and threatens Connors 's wife , Martha . Eddie distracts him long enough for Peter to lead the girls to safety and return as Spider @-@ Man : Max , declaring himself " Electro , " begins to fight with Spider @-@ Man . The battle leads the pair out from the lab into the rain , where Spider @-@ Man spots a radio tower beside a pool : he knocks Electro into the water , causing him to short circuit into unconsciousness . 
 At school the next day Peter talks to Liz in the hall ; she is complimenting his tutoring when the popular students approach , making her change her attitude , act rudely , and walk away . In the lab , Dr. Connors picks up a vial of lizard DNA that Electro had electrified , and leaves with his wife . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Interactions " was written by Kevin Hopps and directed by Troy Adomitis . Hopps , who had previously written for animated series such as Buzz Lightyear of Star Command , Justice League , and Darkwing Duck , researched for the episode by re @-@ reading every available comic book that featured Electro . Hopps notes that he " like [ s ] the humanity " of Electro : " Here 's a person who didn 't ask to be a villain , but found himself thrust into that role . " 
 The radio tower scene initially called for Electro to climb to the very top of the structure , a concept the crew found " clunky " throughout the storyboarding and directing process . Victor Cook , a producer and developer for The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , observed " He 's gonna climb the whole tower ? It just seems kind of weird . " Before release , the scene was altered to have Electro gradually propel himself up the tower with several electrical blasts . 
 Cook retained the " classic silhouette " of Electro 's suit from the original comics , but removed his star @-@ shaped mask . Cook made green the key color in the Electro design , noting that " In the 1960s it seems like the majority of Spider @-@ man 's rogues gallery had green as part of their costumes . " In Cook 's broader color scheme for the cartoon green is used to symbolize negative situations in Peter 's life , while positive settings and occurrences , such as Peter 's biology class , feature other key colors like yellow . 
 Electro was voiced by Crispin Freeman , who sought to reflect in his vocal style the psychological decline brought on by the character 's new powers : " It never occurred to me before how that would have an effect on his character – to be dealing with that curse and blessing . And when you think about it , that 's also Peter Parker 's core issue . " The episode 's title , " Interactions , " expands the series theme " The Education of Peter Parker " chosen by developer Greg Weisman . Episodes in the early season one arc all shared a naming scheme based on the biological sciences . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Interactions " originally aired on March 8 , 2008 , on the Kids ' WB block of The CW Network , following the show 's pilot , " Survival of the Fittest . " Disney XD aired the episode on March 23 , 2009 , between " Survival of the Fittest " and " Natural Selection " . The episode 's initial broadcast garnered a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 4 / 4 , which is considered high for American television and was the network 's 2007 – 08 highest rating for the 10 : 30 a.m. timeslot . It beat the previous episode 's rating of 1 @.@ 2 / 3 ( the highest for the 10 : 00 a.m. timeslot for the same season ) and represented a 75 % increase in the share of viewers aged 2 to 11 and a 200 % increase in viewers aged 2 to 5 . " Interactions " rated the highest of the season for kids and boys aged 9 to 14 . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN thought the episode " wasn 't as strong as the pilot " and rated it at 7 @.@ 4 ( " Decent " ) . Goldman wrote that Electro 's redesigned costume retained " some nice visual nods to the Electro many of us grew up with . " Liz Allan 's characterization , though , he found confusing , with the character 's accent and background unclear , and the scene where Peter fought Electro while conducting a <unk> with Aunt May " just a bit too much " : " Come on , Aunt May isn 't freaking out hearing [ that ] ? " Nonetheless , Goldman praised the episode 's humorous scenes and the introduction of Dr. Conner 's limb regeneration experiments . 
 Rob M. Worley of the entertainment website Mania said that Freeman " charges up " the series with his role , writing that he " steps away from his luminary status in the world of anime and video game voiceovers . " Ultimate Disney reviewer Luke Bonanno did not include the episode among his top five episodes of The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man 's first season , but " feel [ s ] obligated to point out that the uniform excellence of the lot [ makes ] this a challenging task . " DVD Talk reviewer Todd Douglass Jr. described Electro 's design as " [ incorporating ] some sharp edges and dynamic plays " to an " old " character . 
 = Phillips ' Sound Recording Services = 
 Phillips ' Sound Recording Services was a studio in the house of Percy Francis Phillips ( 1896 – 1984 ) and his family at 38 Kensington , Kensington , Liverpool , England . Between the years of 1955 and 1969 , Phillips recorded numerous tapes and acetate discs for Liverpool acts , people and businesses in a small room behind the shop his family owned . 
 Phillips first sold bicycles and motorbikes , but later started selling and recharging batteries in a shop in the front room of his house in 1925 . After a decline in demand for batteries in the early 1950s , he started selling electrical goods and popular records . In 1955 , Phillips set up a recording studio called Phillips ' Sound Recording Services . 
 In 1958 , The Quarrymen ( John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison , John ' Duff ' Lowe and Colin Hanton ) recorded " That 'll Be The Day " , and " In Spite of All the Danger " in the studio . Other clients included Billy Fury , Ken Dodd , and Marty Wilde . Phillips died in 1984 . The Quarrymen recording and the site of the studio was commemorated in 2005 , when a Blue Plaque was unveiled by two of The Quarrymen ( Lowe and Hanton ) on the front of the house . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Percy Phillips was born in March 1896 , in Warrington , Lancashire . He was a veteran of the First World War , and left the British Army ( Loyal North Lancashire Regiment ) at the rank of Corporal in 1918 , since he was wounded before the war ended . 
 After the war , he started selling bicycles and motorbikes in a small shop in Brunswick Street , in the Kensington Fields area of Liverpool . He began selling and recharging batteries in 1925 , opening a shop in the front room of his family 's three @-@ storey Georgian terraced house , called Phillips ’ Battery Charging Depot , and had to install large accumulators in the cellar . Phillips ran the business for 30 years , even during WWII , but due to a decline in demand for batteries in the early 1950s ( most people having electricity by then ) he started selling household electrical goods . By late 1954 , the shop was only selling records and record players ; customers would buy recordings of American Country and Western , and Big Band music . As Phillips had supplied batteries to the Burtonwood air base during the war , he could buy and sell the latest records from America via his contacts there . 
 = = Studio = = 
 In 1955 , several customers asked if Phillips could make demo discs , so he bought a 1 / 4 inch tape recorder ( replaced in 1963 with a <unk> portable ) , an MSS ( Marguerite Sound Studios - after the owner 's wife ) disc cutting machine , an amplifier , a 4 @-@ track mixer , three microphones ( a <unk> , an HMV ribbon microphone , and an AKG ) , and three pairs of headphones for £ 400 , while on a trip to London to visit his son Frank , who was there for a sound recording course at EMI Electronics . 
 Phillips set up the equipment behind his shop in the ( 12 square feet ) middle living room , with a piano and an overturned tin bath in the cellar as a reverb chamber , with a speaker and microphone linked to the studio above . The recordings would normally be on tape , and then transferred to disc , although the tape was recorded over again during the next session . Because of trams , trucks , and horses going up and down Kensington , Phillips had to hang heavy blankets over the studio door and a rear window to minimise the noise . Phillips ' first recording was of himself singing " Bonnie Marie of Argyle " , ( unaccompanied ) and a few days later he recorded " Unchained Melody " , with local dance band singer Betty Roy . The first disc he cut in the studio was on 7 August 1955 , with his eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Carol , singing , " Mr Sandman " . All the discs had " Play with a light @-@ weight pick @-@ up " on the label , as this would increase the life of the disc , which would eventually wear out . 
 Phillips advertised the studio as Phillips ' Sound Recording Services ( also advertised as P. F. Phillips ' Professional Tape & Disc Recording Service ) , and his business cards read : " PF Phillips , 38 Kensington , Liverpool , 7 . Television and Battery Service . Gramophone Record Dealer . Professional Tape and Disc Recording Studio . " He started cutting discs for members of the public , as well as for actors from the Liverpool Playhouse , who often stayed in the first @-@ floor boarding rooms above the studio , who were sometimes asked by Phillips to record monologues and poems . These included the actors John Thaw , Richard Briers , and the ventriloquist Ray Alan . 
 For the first couple of years , Phillips made music compilation discs for local businesses such as the local ice rink or cinema , men singing songs for loved ones , children playing an instrument , or even a neighbour ’ s dog howling along to piano accompaniment . As the record shop and studio took over the business , he had a brass plate made which he put on the wall just outside the front door , and had labels made for the discs , but changed the design of the disc label every year . By 1957 , Phillips was recording more and more groups of young men with guitars , basses , <unk> and drums , who played skiffle . 
 Ron Wycherly ( a.k.a. Billy Fury ) recorded several songs onto disc in the studio , including , " I 'm Left You 're Right She 's Gone " , " <unk> ' For Keeps " , " Paralyzed " and " Come Go With Me " ( all previously released by Elvis Presley ) as well as , " Have I Told You Lately That I Love You " ( Lulu Belle and Scotty ) and his own composition , " <unk> Song " . Fury 's mother sent the songs to impresario Larry Parnes , which started her son 's singing career . The songs were released on DVD / CD in 2008 . 
 = = The Quarrymen recording = = 
 Johnny ' Guitar ' Byrne ( from Rory Storm and The Hurricanes ) and singer Paul Murphy recorded a version of " Butterfly " and " She ’ s Got it " in the studio on 22 June 1957 , and Byrne later played the recording to Harrison . On 12 July 1958 , a local skiffle group , The Quarrymen ( Lennon , McCartney , Harrison , Lowe and Hanton ) visited Phillips ' studio to record two songs , although the date has been disputed , as Lowe remembered that the recording was during cold weather ( October or November , 1957 ) with the band wearing scarves . Hanton also mentioned the cold weather in interviews , and before recording , Lennon suggested that Hanton put his scarf over the snare drum to lower the volume , which supports the earlier date . 
 The group were surprised to see how small and technically basic the studio was , with only one microphone in the centre of the room . Phillips demanded that they pay for the recording before they set up the equipment , so each member paid 3 shillings and 6 pence , but he then asked for an extra surcharge ( £ 1 ) to cover the cost of transferring the tape recording to acetate disc . As this was too expensive , Phillips said that for a cut @-@ rate price they would not be taped first , but record directly to vinyl . 
 The first song they recorded was " That ‘ ll Be The Day " ( sung by Lennon with harmonies by McCartney ) . Phillips wanted them to immediately record the next song , but Lennon and McCartney could not decide on a song for the B @-@ side of the disc . McCartney suggested the doo @-@ wop ballad , " In Spite of All the Danger " ( by McCartney and Harrison , but sung by Lennon ) even though Lowe and Hanton had never heard it before . They asked for some time to rehearse , but Phillips refused , saying , " For seventeen and six 17 / 6d you 're not here all day " . 
 Lowe and Hanton busked through the song , which was cut short by Phillips waving his hands to indicate that the cutting needle was getting close to the centre of the acetate . He then handed the band a fragile 78rpm 10 @-@ inch acetate record . It was later lost until Lowe rediscovered it in 1981 , and planned to put it up for auction at Sotheby 's , but sold it to McCartney for an undisclosed amount . McCartney later had the two songs digitally re @-@ mastered and pressed 50 copies , giving them to friends as a Christmas present , although the two songs were released on 21 November 1995 , as part of The Beatles Anthology ( Anthology 1 ) . McCartney later said , " The strangest thing for me , listening to it , is that it 's like drowning , it 's like your life flashing by in front of you . From the earliest things by me and John when we used to sag off school and the earliest demo tape we ever made , to the first little record we made which was a version of John singing " That 'll Be The Day " , and a little song of mine [ and Harrison ] on the other side that 's never been released before . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 Other customers of Phillips ' studio included The Swinging Blue Jeans , Brian Epstein , Freddie Starr , Willy Russell , Liverpool F.C. supporters club , and players from Everton F.C .. Denny <unk> and The Sabres recorded " Little Latin Lupe Lu " ( Bill Medley ) in the studio in 1963 . Phillips closed the studio in 1969 , the record shop in 1974 , and died in 1984 , at the Royal Liverpool Hospital . The recording of The Quarrymen acetate and the site of Phillips ' Sound Recording Services was commemorated on 26 August 2005 , when a Blue Plaque was unveiled by two of The Quarrymen ( Lowe and Hanton ) on the front of the house . 
 = Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock = 
 The Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock ( Rupicola rupicola ) is a species of South American passerine . It is about 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) in length and weighs about 200 to 220 grams ( 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 8 oz ) . They are found in tropical rainforests , near its preferred habitat of rocky outcrops . The males plumage is bright orange and the males have a prominent half @-@ moon crest . The females are brownish in colour , and are generally much duller coloured than the males . It is one of two species of the genus Rupicola , the other being the Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock . The Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock lives across the forested region of northeastern South America . Its diet consists mostly of fruit , but sometimes includes small snakes and lizards . 
 The Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock breeds in the early months of the year and , on average , lays its eggs around March . During the height of the mating season , males engage in competitive displays in lek , which is a complex courting behaviour that is done to attract females . Males and females live separately except when the females choose a mate . The mating success varies based on multiple factors , ranging from the plumage exhibited by a male to the composition of the lek itself . The females choose a male by flying down to the ground and pecking the male on his rump . The male then turns around and the mating takes place almost immediately . There is speculation that the male @-@ to @-@ male competition is an important factor in lek formation and breeding . The main predators of the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock are harpy eagles and black @-@ and @-@ white hawk @-@ eagles . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is a stout @-@ bodied bird with a prominent half @-@ moon crest . It is a sexually dimorphic bird . The male 's crest is more pronounced than the female 's and is bright orange . The males also have an orange @-@ tipped black tail , black , orange and white wings , a bright orange bill , an orange iris yellowing as it nears its outer edge , and silky @-@ orange filamentous feathers of the inner remiges . Both sexes also have orange legs and skin . The less conspicuous female is dark brownish @-@ grey overall and has a yellow @-@ tipped black bill , a duller orange iris , and a smaller crest . One @-@ year @-@ old juvenile males look similar to an adult female , but has orange speckles over their bodies . After two years , the juvenile males become mostly orange with brown and grey spots . Males attain their definitive plumage at around three years . Juvenile females look almost identical to their adult counterparts . Guianan cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock have a total length of approximately 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) and a total weight of around 200 to 220 grams ( 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 8 oz ) . The two species of cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock are allopatric , and therefore do not meet with one another . The plumage of male Andean is redder and its wings are mostly black , lacking the orange colouration seen on the male Guianan . The female Andean is reddish brown rather than the brownish @-@ gray of the Guianan . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The <unk> cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is one of two species of genus Rupicola . It was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1766 as the type species of its genus . The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock ( Rupicola peruvianus ) is similar in body shape and colouration . 
 The generic and specific names are derived from the Latin words rupes " rock " or " cliff " , and cola " inhabiting " , which express its habit of nesting on rock walls . 
 = = Range and habitat = = 
 As suggested by its name , the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is found in the Guianan Shield , occurring in French Guiana , Suriname , Guyana , southern Venezuela , eastern Colombia and northern Amazonian Brazil . Its preferred habitats are humid forests near rocky outcrops . They are normally found at an altitude of 300 to 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 980 to 6 @,@ 560 ft ) . 
 The Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock has distinctive territorial markings . Males usually take dominance of an area on the ground , although they sometimes they occupy middle strata in forests . They make their characteristic marking by clearing out debris from the ground , including twigs , leaves , and pellets . This area is called a “ court ” . Quality of courts are known to have some influence on mate choice . The court quality is determined by the territory density and location to the center of activity in the lek . The reason for the focus on the center of activity in the lek is that successful males tended to own courts in the most densely clustered lek areas . Guianan courts are commonly found in the Guianan Shield , a forested region in northeastern South America . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The diet of the adult Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock consists mainly of fruits meaning they are frugivorous . Up to 65 species of fruit have been reported in their diet , primarily from canopy trees or lianas . Three quarters ( 75 % ) of the fruit eaten by the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock at one study site were either black- or red @-@ coloured fruit . In the British Guiana , Thomas E. Gilliard found papayas growing at the base of a huge rock . On top of the rock were perched females that were nesting . He found that no other papayas were growing in that part of the forest and speculated that the perched females ate papayas in the forest where they are native and dropped the seeds below where they were nesting . Small snakes , lizards , insects and frogs are occasionally found in its diet . 
 By selectively feeding on nearby fruit trees and then defecating or regurgitating the seeds within the leks , these birds can actively influence the regeneration and succession of the forest habitat where they breed . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Guianan cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock breed early in the year , and the females lay their eggs around March . During the height of mating season , males gather in leks with multiple males defending a social display arena of much greater area than that of a lone male . The males each have their own area on the forest floor where they make their courts . The size of each court is about 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter , and the next bird is often about 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) away . The females and males live separately ; only when it is time to mate do females fly over to observe and choose a male . When this occurs , the females tap the males from behind and insemination quickly follows . When females approach a lek , the males stand firmly and present themselves rigidly . 
 Mating success is dependent on a variety of factors that range from the plumage exhibited by a male to the composition of the lek itself . In one study , the female Guianan cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock displayed sexual selection based off sequential comparisons or threshold standards . The hens engaged in a “ pool – comparison ” tactic , meaning that females chose males of higher rank in courtship . Males of higher rank were those with more matings received from other females ; the lower @-@ ranking single males were ignored . The rankings were determined by where the courts were positioned in the lek : courts that were more centrally placed indicated more successful and higher @-@ ranking males . The females in the study were individually observed to aggregate towards larger , more centrally concentrated leks , demonstrating active female choice . 
 = = = = Male mating behaviour = = = = 
 The smaller of the two cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock , the male Guianan takes the lesser part in breeding . It is polygynous and has nothing to do with nesting once mating is done . The male 's energy instead is devoted to very elaborate display rituals that show off its magnificent plumage . These displays take place in communal leks , where 40 or more males may gather to challenge rivals and beckon to the females . 
 The displaying male purposely contrasts itself from the forest , shows its crest and plumage so much that the bill and tail become obscured ; almost making it difficult to recognize as a bird , to attract females . Within the lek , each female has its own perch on a low branch , while the males own a " court " on the ground below that is cleared of dead leaves by the draughts of each male taking off and landing . The males have a variety of calls and movements , showing off the crest , elongated filaments on the rump , secondary feathers , and the snapping of their bills . Males display on branches about 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) from the ground until a female approaches , when the males display and call from individual plots on the ground . Most males copulate with only a few females . However , some are very successful and may copulate with many . Unlike many other bird species , the male does not use resources nor parental care to entice females . 
 Males often engage in courtship disruption practices . In a study conducted by Pepper W. Trail , the interactions between adult males , females , and yearlings were observed and linked to mate choice and male dispersion patterns within leks . Adult males produced this disruptive behaviour with varying intensity , which depended on the situation . In lower @-@ intensity disruptions , males usually directed their aggression or threats towards neighboring males , in attempts to improve or maintain breeding status and success . The males that were hassled tended to be more successful and often were disrupted with much greater frequency than males with lower mating success . Higher @-@ intensity disruptions were used by less successful males and directed towards females that wandered by . This behaviour is suggested to have the effect of redirecting females towards the <unk> male . Yearlings often disrupted courtships of the more mature adults on the basis of practice for future courtships , since the yearlings do not possess any territory within the lek . Female disruption was an uncommon event that had little , if any , effect on the accessibility of a male . Young males of highly promiscuous species such as the Cock @-@ of @-@ the rock often failed to mate in their first year , probably because older , more experienced males will enjoy the majority of matings . In this strong system of sexual selection , the successive breeding of dominant and aggressive males leads to high sex drives and the endurance of polygyny . A theory suggests that the selection of these aggressive males also puts a premium , or value , on female characteristics . Hence , there is a less likely occurrence of female – elicited aggression . 
 = = = = Ecological consequences = = = = 
 One possible advantage to lek formation in Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is severe selection and consequent rapid evolutionary advancement , all of which is possible due to the high <unk> of males . Only a few males are needed to fertilize the next generation . The courtship behaviour is similarly theorized to have arisen from differences in division of labour between the two sexes . Females expend their energy on building nests and rearing young , while males spend most of their time and energy of finding mates and caring for their plumage . 
 Because Guianan cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock form large leks , averaging 55 adult males , the males in these display leks were especially vulnerable to attacks and predation by large snakes and other natural predators . In manipulated groups of smaller size , around 6 , predation was less likely to occur , giving rise to an inverse relationship between the number and frequency of attacks and the size of leks . Thus , with a smaller frequency of attacks on the smaller group , the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock males was less likely to spook or disperse completely as compared to a large group where a false alarm could trigger a complete flush out 90 % of the time . It was found that these birds have relatively ineffective methods of anti @-@ predation and that only social anti @-@ predation and the infrequency of encounters with predators were keeping these lekking males alive . 
 There is speculation that the simulation of male @-@ male competition is important in lek formation and breeding . 
 = = = Nesting = = = 
 Unlike other species of the family Cotingidae , the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock makes its nest on rocky cliff faces and caves rather than in the trees . The female lays one or two eggs in the nest of mud and plant material , which is attached by saliva to a vertical rock . The male does not participate in the building of the nest or the incubation of the eggs . Eggs typically incubate for 27 – 28 days . The ideal nesting sites for this species are usually located in a cave or vertical rock face with crevices that provide some shelter and protection from the elements . The nests themselves are solid moldings formed from mud and plant material deposited into the crevices . Due to the solid nature of these nests , they typically persist from one breeding season to the next . Females will make repairs to their nests as a breeding season begins . 
 = = = Impact of natural and sexual selection on trait development = = = 
 The colouration of the males allows them to visibly stand out from the brown forest floor . This bright colouration provides a sexual advantage for the adult males , increasing their likelihood of successfully mating . The result is rapid evolutionary selection within the species for brighter plumage and more conspicuous behaviour patterns in the males . The bright colouration also makes the males more susceptible to predation . Males are more expendable for this reason ; only a small number of males are needed within any generation in order to perpetuate the species . While sexual selection leads to bright plumage , natural selection in turn favors defensive colouration in the birds . There is higher fitness in birds monitoring nests whose colouration acts as camouflage @-@ protection from predation . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Fairly common in its large range , and with its population stable , the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is considered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature to be a Least Concern on its red list of threatened species . 
 The main predators of the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock are harpy eagles , black @-@ and @-@ white hawk @-@ eagles , black hawk @-@ eagles , and slaty @-@ backed forest falcons . Although these are the main predators , two species of owls , crested owls and spectacled owls , are also predators . Felines such as the jaguar , puma , and ocelot can also be predators , along with snakes such as the bird snake , tree boas , boa constrictor , tiger rat snake , and fer @-@ de @-@ lance . 
 The species is rare in captivity , but breeding has been achieved at a small number of facilities . The world 's first successful captive breeding was at Dallas World Aquarium ( USA ) in 2008 . 
 = = = Predation response = = = 
 In larger lek groups there is less risk of predation . In a group there are more individuals to alert the group about an approaching predator . All the birds in the groups will be vigilant in looking for a predator because there is an advantage to seeing the predator first . There is also the risk that in a bigger group there will more false alarm signals . The common signal is vocalization , after which the birds will fly up into the trees . It was found the birds did not however give this signal when there was a snake . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by Stephen Hillenburg , aired on Nickelodeon from October 26 , 2000 , to July 26 , 2003 , and consists of 20 episodes . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg , who also acted as the showrunner . 
 During the season 's run , SpongeBob SquarePants became Nickelodeon 's No. 2 children 's program , behind Rugrats . Nearly 40 percent of SpongeBob 's audience of 2 @.@ 2 million were aged 18 to 34 . The show signed a marketing deal with Target Corporation and Burger King , expanding its merchandising , and SpongeBob 's popularity translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , the show itself was nominated at the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children 's Program . At the 29th Annie Awards , the series was nominated three times . The episodes " The Secret Box " and " Band Geeks " won at the 2002 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television — Animation , while the episodes " Jellyfish Hunter " and " The Fry Cook Games " received a nomination for Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music category . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : The Complete 2nd Season DVD was released in Region 1 on October 19 , 2004 , Region 2 on October 23 , 2006 , and Region 4 on November 30 , 2006 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producer was series creator Stephen Hillenburg , who also functioned as the series ' showrunner . During production of the previous season , Nickelodeon picked up a second season for SpongeBob SquarePants on August 31 , 1999 . The season premiered more than a year later , on October 26 , 2000 . Season production assistant and then @-@ staff writer Derek Iversen commented , " We hoped it would go one season . We hoped it would go two seasons . I figured you do the best you can and you hope . " 
 In this season , production switched from cel animation , used during the first season , to digital ink and paint . Executive producer Paul Tibbitt , in 2009 , said " The first season of SpongeBob was done the old @-@ fashioned way on cells , and every cell had to be part @-@ painted , left to dry , paint some other colours . It 's still a time @-@ consuming aspect of the process now , but the digital way of doing things means it doesn 't take long to correct . " The animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Animation directors credited with episodes in the second season included Sean Dempsey , Edgar <unk> , Larry Leichliter , Andrew Overtoom , Leonard Robinson , Frank Weiss , and Tom Yasumi . The season was storyboarded by Walt Dohrn , C.H. Greenblatt , Chris Headrick , Chuck Klein , Carson Kugler , Jay Lender , Caleb Meurer , Dan Povenmire , William " Bill " Reiss , Octavio Rodriguez , Jim Schumann , Aaron Springer , Paul Tibbitt , and Erik Wiese . 
 Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Dohrn , David Fain , Greenblatt , Mr. Lawrence , Lender , Mark O 'Hare , Povenmire , William Reiss , Springer , Tibbitt , and Merriwether Williams . During the season , the writing staff used their individual childhood experiences as inspirations to come up with much of the story lines for individual episodes . For example , in the episode " Sailor Mouth " , SpongeBob learns profanity . The idea for the episode was inspired by creative director Derek Drymon 's experience " [ when ] I got in trouble for saying the f @-@ word in front of my mother . " Drymon said , " The scene where Patrick is running to Mr. Krabs to tattle , with SpongeBob chasing him , is pretty much how it happened in real life . " The end of the episode , where Mr. Krabs uses more profanity than SpongeBob and Patrick , was also inspired " by the fact that my [ Drymon 's ] mother has a sailor mouth herself . " In " Secret Box " , SpongeBob wants to see what is inside Patrick 's secret box . The idea came to Drymon because he too had a secret box as a child . Creator Hillenburg said , " [ He ] started telling us about it . We wanted to make fun of him and use it . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 The second season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , a starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 Season two introduced various characters that would recur throughout the series . Mr. Krabs ' mother , Mama Krabs , debuted in the episode " Sailor Mouth " and was voiced by writer Paul Tibbitt . However , voice actress Sirena Irwin overtook Tibbitt 's role as the character reappeared in the fourth season episode " Enemy In @-@ Law " in 2005 . In the Christmas special " Christmas Who ? " , SpongeBob 's voice actor , Tom Kenny , portrayed Patchy the Pirate , the president of the fictional SpongeBob SquarePants fan club , while series creator Hillenburg voiced the character of Potty the Parrot . After Hillenburg 's departure from the show as showrunner in 2004 , Tibbitt was given the role voicing Potty the Parrot . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , athletes , authors , musicians , and artists . American rock band Ween guest starred as themselves in " Your Shoe 's Untied " . The band performed " Loop de Loop " , a song they written for the episode . Before SpongeBob SquarePants aired on television in 1999 , Hillenburg had approached band guitarist Dean Ween to compose a song for the show . Dean Ween said " [ Hillenburg ] called me and told me [ he ] was a marine biologist who was starting a cartoon about underwater sea creatures and that The <unk> was a big reference point for him creatively and would we like to do a song for the show . " The band conceived the song and wrote it in about three minutes . Ween 's 1997 song " Ocean Man " would also be used four years later during the end credits sequence in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie , and as part of the film 's soundtrack . In the episode " Bossy Boots " , American band The Capsules performed the song " Bossy Boots " , which was later released on SpongeBob SquarePants : The Yellow Album in 2005 . In " Bubble Buddy " , professional American surfer Corky Carroll made a vocal cameo as <unk> <unk> , a famous surfer . It also stars Brad Abrell as titular character Bubble Buddy . " Grandma 's Kisses " features Marion Ross as SpongeBob 's grandmother . She would reprise her role throughout the series , including the fifth season episode " BlackJack " . In the entry " Pre @-@ Hibernation Week " , where Sandy and SpongeBob play extreme sporting games , American heavy metal band Pantera appeared as themselves for a special musical performance . McHale 's Navy actors Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned in the episode " Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy III " , reprising their roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . John Rhys @-@ Davies also guest starred in the same episode as the heroes ' nemesis , Man Ray . Various other characters were voiced by voice acting veterans Dee Bradley Baker , Thomas F. Wilson and Clea Lewis . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since SpongeBob SquarePants made its debut in 1999 , the show had flourished into Nickelodeon 's number 2 children 's program , after Rugrats . Nearly 40 percent of the show 's audience of 2 @.@ 2 million were aged 18 to 34 . As a result , Nickelodeon moved the show from Saturday morning to a much more valuable timeslot : almost @-@ prime time , appearing at 6 PM , from Monday through Thursday . In 2001 , Nickelodeon took the " Saturday @-@ morning ratings crown " for the fourth straight season , grabbing a 4 @.@ 8 rating / 21 share ( 1 @.@ 9 million viewers ) in two- to eleven @-@ year @-@ olds , jumping 17 % from the previous year . 
 SpongeBob SquarePants signed a marketing deal with Target Corporation and Burger King , expanding its merchandising . Furthermore , the popularity of SpongeBob translated well into sales figures . In 2002 , SpongeBob SquarePants dolls sold at a rate of 75 @,@ 000 per week , which was faster than Tickle Me Elmo dolls were selling at the time . Nickelodeon 's parent company Viacom purposefully targeted women in Japan as a way of marketing the SpongeBob SquarePants brand . Skeptics initially doubted that SpongeBob could be popular in Japan , as the character 's design is very different from popular designs for Hello Kitty and Pikachu , but SpongeBob has gained popularity in Japan among women . Ratings and merchandise sales showed SpongeBob SquarePants had caught on with parents and with the college audience . In a recent promotion , college @-@ oriented website <unk> gave away 80 @,@ 000 SpongeBob T @-@ shirts , four times more than during a similar promotion for Comedy Central 's South Park . 
 The second season was well received by media critics . In 2002 , the show itself was nominated at the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children 's Program . At the 29th Annie Awards , the series was nominated three times , including Outstanding Individual Achievement for Voice Acting by a Female and Male Performer in an Animated Television Production categories for Mary Jo Catlett for her role as Mrs. Puff in " No Free Rides " and Tom Kenny for his role as SpongeBob SquarePants in " <unk> " , respectively . Peter Straus and Paul Tibbitt were nominated for Outstanding Individual Achievement for a Song in an Animated Production for their song " The Very First Christmas " that was featured in " Christmas Who ? " In 2002 , the episodes " The Secret Box " and " Band Geeks " won at the Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television — Animation , while the episodes " Jellyfish Hunter " and " The Fry Cook Games " received a nomination for Best Sound Editing in Television Animation — Music category . 
 In his review for the The Spokesman @-@ Review , Isamu Jordan said , " I 'll be honest . I dig the little yellow dude who lives in a pineapple under the sea quite a bit for his absurdity À la Ren and Stimpy . " He said that " season two is worth having in your or your kid 's SpongeBob collection " given that the episodes " Krusty Love " , " Squid 's Day Off " , and " <unk> and <unk> III " are on the set . Jason Bovberg of the DVD Talk wrote that the season release is " recommended . " He said " Let me state up front that I adore this show . I get a total kick out of watching it with my 4 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . We laugh uproariously at SpongeBob 's adventures and I 'm helplessly reduced to a boy about her age as I beam and giggle at the screen . " However , Bovberg called the included audio commentaries " downright boring . " Various celebrities — including Lance Bass of ' N Sync , Will Ferrell of Saturday Night Live , singer @-@ songwriter Tom Waits , and Jerry Lewis — admitted they were fans of the show . 
 During the 2001 – 02 television season , the Parents Television Council ( PTC ) , a watchdog media group , named SpongeBob SquarePants among the best programs on cable television . However , according to a report titled Wolves in Sheep 's Clothing , which documents the increase in potentially violent , profane , and sexual content in children 's programming , the PTC and fans believed the episode " Sailor Mouth " , which originally aired during the 2001 – 02 season , was an implicit attempt to promote and satirize use of profanity among children . The report cited a repeat broadcast of the episode from 2005 to prove its point that it promoted use of profanity among children . In a later report , several members of the PTC listed " Sailor Mouth " as an example of how levels of profane , sexual , and violent activity has increased in children 's television programming . Nickelodeon , in response to the incident , said " It 's sad and a little desperate that they stooped to literally putting profane language in the mouths of our characters to make a point . Has the FCC looked at this ? " Richard Huff of the New York Daily News criticized the report for misinterpreting the episode over its intent to satirize profanity implicitly . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD boxset for season two was released by Paramount Home Entertainment and Nickelodeon in the United States and Canada in October 2004 , almost two years after the season had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release features bonus materials including audio commentaries , storyboards , and featurettes . In 2005 , the DVD compilation was nominated at the 9th Golden Satellite Awards for Best Youth DVD , although did not win . 
 = 23rd Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 23rd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was raised in 1915 as part of the Australian Imperial Force for service during World War I and formed part of the 6th Brigade , attached to the 2nd Division . After being formed in Australia , the battalion was sent to Egypt to complete its training , before being committed to the Gallipoli Campaign as reinforcements in September 1915 . They remained on the peninsula until the evacuation of Allied troops in December , when they were withdrawn back to Egypt where they were reorganised before being transferred to the Western Front in March 1916 . Over the course of the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , the 23rd took part in a number of significant battles in France and Belgium , before being disbanded in mid @-@ 1919 following the conclusion of hostilities . In 1921 , the battalion was re @-@ raised as a part @-@ time unit within the Citizens Forces in the state of Victoria , but was amalgamated with the 21st Battalion in 1929 to form the 23rd / 21st Battalion . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 The 23rd Battalion was raised in Victoria in March 1915 as part of the formation of the 2nd Division of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . Its first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel George Morton . Together with the 21st , 22nd and 24th Battalions , it formed the 6th Brigade under the command of Colonel Richard Linton . Organised into four rifle companies , designated ' A ' through to ' D ' , with a machine gun section in support , the Australian infantry battalion of the time had an authorised strength of 1 @,@ 023 men of all ranks . After completing initial training at Broadmeadows , in May 1915 the 23rd embarked upon the troopship Euripides bound for Egypt . They arrived in Alexandria on 11 June and after being moved by train to Cairo they marched to a camp at Heliopolis where they undertook further training in preparation for deployment to Gallipoli , where the units of the 1st Division had landed on 25 April 1915 . 
 = = = = Gallipoli = = = = 
 While they were training , the Allies launched the August Offensive in an attempt to break the deadlock that had developed on the Gallipoli Peninsula following the initial landing . The offensive largely failed and heavy casualties resulted . In order to replace the men that were lost and give the survivors a rest , the decision was made by Allied commanders to move the 2nd Division from Egypt . After being moved to Lemnos Island , the 23rd Battalion embarked for Gallipoli on 4 September , arriving there at 9 : 30 pm that evening . A day of familiarisation followed before the battalion took up defensive positions at Lone Pine . On 12 September , the 23rd , along with their sister battalion , the 24th , took over responsibility for the post from the 1st Division battalions that had held it previously . During the stalemate that followed , manning positions that , in some places , were only a few metres from the Ottoman lines , the 23rd Battalion began <unk> operations after Turkish mining operations were discovered . For the next three months , due to the intensity of the fighting in the sector , the battalion alternated their position with the 24th Battalion almost every day until the evacuation of Allied troops from the peninsula occurred , embarking with the last troops to leave on the night of 19 / 20 December 1915 . 
 Following their withdrawal from Gallipoli , the 23rd Battalion was moved to Lemnos Island , where they remained until January 1916 when they were transferred back to Egypt . At this time , the AIF was reorganised and expanded in preparation for future operations . Two new infantry divisions were formed from the experienced troops of the 1st Division who had deployed to Gallipoli at the start of the campaign , while a third division was raised in Australia from scratch . The 2nd Division was largely left untouched , so that it could complete its formation which had been interrupted by its deployment to Gallipoli . The 23rd subsequently spent the early months of 1916 rebuilding its strength and conducting further training in preparation for its transfer to Europe . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 After arriving in France in March , the battalion moved to the Western Front , occupying the forward positions around Armentières in northern France on 10 April 1916 . In mid @-@ July , the battalion was transferred to the Somme , where they subsequently took part in the Battles of Pozières and Mouquet Farm , during which they suffered almost 90 per cent casualties . In early 1917 , the Germans shortened their lines and withdrew to the Hindenburg Line and the Australian divisions in the Somme were ordered to carry out an advance to follow them up . After being reinforced , the 23rd Battalion was committed to the fighting at the Second Battle of Bullecourt in early May 1917 after the first attempt to capture the town by the 4th Australian Division failed . Succeeding in capturing all its objectives , it was heavily counter @-@ attacked by German forces , suffering a large number of casualties , including 100 men killed or died of wounds before being relieved by the Australian 3rd Battalion . After this the battalion was withdrawn from the line until early September 1917 when they moved into positions around Ypres , Belgium , and participated in the Battle of Broodseinde on 4 October . During this battle , the 6th Brigade was positioned to the south of Zonnebeke Lake , and the 23rd Battalion lost three officers and 101 other ranks killed or wounded , some of which were inflicted when an intense German mortar barrage fell upon their " waiting line " prior to the attack . Nevertheless , the attack which followed , after overcoming an encounter with a German regiment , the 212th , in no man 's land , resulted in success as the Australians captured the ridge . 
 In early 1918 , Russian resistance on the Eastern Front collapsed in the wake of the October Revolution and , as a result , the Germans were able to transfer a large number of troops to the Western Front . This greatly improved the German strength in the west and , as a result , in March , they launched their Spring Offensive . With the Germans making rapid gains , many Australian units , including the 23rd Battalion , were thrown into the line to blunt the attack in early April , as the 6th Brigade relieved the 12th around Dernancourt . After the German offensive was halted , a brief lull followed during which the Allies sought to regain the initiative , launching a series of " Peaceful Penetration " operations . Following this , the 23rd participated in the fighting at Hamel on 4 July , advancing as the right @-@ hand battalion on the southern front behind a devastatingly accurate preparatory barrage . On 8 August 1918 , the 23rd joined the Allied Hundred Days Offensive , which was launched at Amiens , and was followed by a series of advances followed as the Allies began advancing through the Somme . For his actions during the fighting at Mont St. Quentin in early September , one of the battalion 's soldiers , Private Robert <unk> , was awarded the Victoria Cross posthumously . After participating in the Battle of Beaurevoir between 3 and 4 October , the battalion was sent to the rear for rest when the units of the Australian Corps , severely depleted , were withdrawn from the line upon the insistence of the Australian prime minister , Billy Hughes . As a result , it took no further part in the fighting before the armistice was declared on 11 November . 
 Following the end of hostilities , the demobilisation process began and slowly the battalion 's numbers began to dwindle as its personnel were repatriated back to Australia and returned to civilian life . The 23rd Battalion was disbanded in Belgium on 30 April 1919 . Throughout its service during the war , it suffered 686 killed and 2 @,@ 317 wounded ( including gassed ) . For its involvement during the war , the 23rd Battalion received a total of 19 battle honours ; these were bestowed upon the battalion in 1927 . 
 = = = Re @-@ raising and subsequent amalgamation = = = 
 In 1921 , the decision was made to perpetuate the battle honours and traditions of the AIF by re @-@ organising the units of the Citizens Forces to adopt the numerical designations of the AIF units with which they were affiliated . As a result of this decision , the 23rd Battalion was re @-@ raised in Victoria , drawing personnel from the 2nd and 5th Battalions , 23rd Infantry Regiment , and part of the 29th Light Horse Regiment , and perpetuating the battle honours of its AIF predecessor . It later adopted the title of the " 23rd Battalion ( The City of Geelong Regiment ) " when territorial titles were introduced in 1927 . At the same time it was granted the motto Nulli Secundus . In 1928 , the battalion was part of the 2nd Brigade , within the 3rd Military District . 
 Initially , the Citizen Forces units were maintained through a mixture of voluntary and compulsory service , but in late 1929 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , the compulsory training scheme was abolished and this , coupled with the economic privations of the Great Depression drastically reduced the number of recruits available . As a result , the decision was made to amalgamate a number of units . The 23rd Battalion was one of those chosen and it was linked with the 21st Battalion to become the 23rd / 21st Battalion , adopting the territorial designation of " The City of Geelong Regiment / The Victoria Rangers " . This battalion undertook garrison duties in the Northern Territory during World War II , before being disbanded in August 1943 as being surplus to Army requirements without having served overseas . After the war , following the demobilisation of the wartime Army , Australia 's part @-@ time military was re @-@ formed in 1948 , but the 23rd Battalion was not re @-@ raised at the time . In 1961 , although the battalion was in a state of suspended animation , it was entrusted with the 13 battle honours awarded to the 2 / 23rd Battalion for its service in North Africa and New Guinea during World War II . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 During World War I , the following officers served as commanding officer of the 23rd Battalion : 
 George Frederick Morton ; 
 George Hodges Knox ; 
 Wilfred Kent <unk> ; 
 William <unk> ; 
 William Joseph Bateman . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 23rd Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 World War I : Gallipoli 1915 , Egypt 1915 – 16 , Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bapaume 1917 , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Hamel , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Mont St Quentin , Hindenburg Line , Beaurevoir , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 . 
 World War II : North Africa 1941 – 42 , Defence of Tobruk , The Salient 1941 , Defence of Alamein Line , El Alamein , South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Lae – Nadzab , Finschhafen , Borneo , Busu River , Sattelberg , Wareo and Tarakan ( inherited ) . 
 = Their Child = 
 Their Child is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film begins with Ellen Stokes whose extravagant lifestyle is outside the means of the family . While their only son is hosting a birthday party , the husband informs Ellen that they are financially ruined because of her . Ellen attempts to get money from her uncle , who refuses , and a friend of the family soon comes to her aid with a loan . Ellen is deceptive in telling who provided the money and her jealous husband soon learns the truth . In anger , he takes the child and leaves . The child soon returns to Ellen and she whisks him away to a new home where she fails to obtain gainful employment . The son decides to sell newspapers for some money and in this job is recognized by his father , soon the family is reunited . Marie Eline played the role of " their child " and was likely so well disguised that the reviewer for The Nickelodeon believed her to be a boy . The film was released on October 21 , 1910 , and was met with positive reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from October 22 , 1910 . It states : " Ellen Stokes is a loving wife and mother , but she has one fault - extravagance . On the day that her only child is playing the host at a birthday party , Ellen 's husband informs her that he is practically ruined , and places the fault at her door . Ellen , conscience stricken , declares that she will aid her husband , and tells him that she will induce her rich uncle to aid them . When she talks to him on the subject , she finds that he is not disposed to aid her . Soon after his refusal , a friend of the family drops in , finds Ellen in tears , learns of her trouble , and offers a loan which she finally accepts . The woman 's husband is of a jealous nature and when Ellen gives him the money , he asks if it came from the other man . She hastily denies it , and says that her uncle was the one . The husband takes the money , and later finds that his wife has deceived him . In anger he leaves the house , taking their only child with him . " 
 " When Ellen finds that she has been deserted , she listens to the pleadings of the other man and is about to elope with him , when the baby , Tom , unexpectedly appears . He has run away from his father , and trudged through the streets , alone , to rejoin his mother . The woman clasped her child in her arms and decides to live for him in the future . The mother takes her child to humble lodgings , the whereabouts of which are unknown even to her husband . There she tries to make a living for herself and him by sewing , but is unable to do so . She has given the last crust of bread to the little one , and is herself in a starving condition , when the baby boy himself comes to the rescue by starting out on a business career , selling papers in the street . In this way the wolf is kept from the door for a little while longer , and the little fellow , while applying his trade on the street corner , is met and recognized by his father . With his son as his guide , the repentant husband , who now realizes his unjust action , goes to his wife , and with the baby as a mediator , the two become reconciled . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The only known credit is for Marie Eline in the role of " their child " . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . A surviving film still gives the possibility of identifying most of the actors in the film . 
 It seems that Marie Eline was so well @-@ disguised as a boy that the reviewer for The Nickelodeon was unable to recognize her true gender . The reviewer state " the meeting between the father and his newsboy child also has a touch of originality " and " [ t ] he child is a fine little actor , easily making himself the star of the piece . " Though this was not lost on the reviewer for The New York Dramatic Mirror which stated , " The work of the little girl who plays the leading role in this film is a constant wonder to spectators . " Eline had proven herself capable of handling male characters , with the first such credit as a young Italian boy in The Two Roses . Eline would also star as Hans in The Little Hero of Holland . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on October 21 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with theaters showing the film in Maryland , Pennsylvania , South Dakota , Indiana , and Kansas . In 1917 , years after its release , it was later approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Censors of Moving Pictures for viewing without modification . 
 The film was reviewed positively by the trade publications . The Moving Picture World stated , " The dramatic qualities of this film are high , but the subject is somewhat depressing ... Maybe the picture will teach the lesson that it is better to listen to explanations at first and save all those intervening years of sorrow and suffering . It ought to , at any rate , because that story is plainly wrought out and is apparent as it is possible to make it . " A review in The Nickelodeon offered little more than a summary of the film , but the reviewer found the subject to be enhanced by the attention to detail in the production . The reviewer was also pleased that the child was not brought in to serve as in deus ex machina role . Though Lonergan was fond of using the technique . Even The New York Dramatic Mirror gave some praise to the production , but noted that the acting of the mother 's friend was the weakest because " [ a ] man of his [ caliber ] wouldn 't have backed off so quickly . " Overall , the reviewer found the acting to be better than the narrative itself and concluded that " [ s ] <unk> less <unk> sentimental would be much stronger . " 
 = Victoria Cross for New Zealand = 
 The Victoria Cross for New Zealand ( VC ) is a military decoration awarded for valour or gallantry in the presence of the enemy to members of the New Zealand Armed Forces . It may be awarded to a person of any rank in any service and civilians under military command , and is presented to the recipient by the Governor @-@ General of New Zealand during an investiture held at Government House , Wellington . As the highest award for gallantry in New Zealand it takes precedence over all other <unk> and medals . 
 The Victoria Cross for New Zealand was established in 1999 when New Zealand created a new award system that replaced several Commonwealth honours with New Zealand awards . It has been awarded once , on 2 July 2007 to Corporal Willie Apiata for actions in 2004 . 
 The original Victoria Cross was introduced in 1856 by Queen Victoria to reward acts of valour during the Crimean War . That medal had been awarded 25 times to 24 individual military personnel from New Zealand ; Captain Charles Upham receiving a bar . Only 14 medals have been awarded since the end of the Second World War . The medal is made from the gunmetal of a weapon supposedly captured at the siege of Sevastopol , but several historians have since questioned the true origin of the gunmetal . Originally all Commonwealth recipients were issued with the same award , but over the last 50 years , Commonwealth countries have introduced separate award systems ; three of these retain " Victoria Cross " as part of the name of the highest award for gallantry . 
 = = Origin = = 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 The original Victoria Cross was created by Queen Victoria in 1856 to recognise incidents of gallantry that were unconnected with a man 's lengthy or meritorious service . She signed a Royal Warrant on 29 January 1856 that officially instituted the VC . The order was retroactive to 1854 to recognise acts of valour during the Crimean War . 
 The Australian and New Zealand Victoria Crosses are made from the same gunmetal as the originals . It was originally intended that the VCs would be cast from the bronze cascabels of two cannon that were captured from the Russians at the siege of Sevastopol . The historian John Glanfield has since shown that the metal used for VCs is in fact from Chinese cannon not Russian , and their origin is a mystery . 
 The barrels of the cannon in question are stationed outside the Officers ' Mess at the Royal Artillery Barracks at Woolwich . The remaining portion of the only remaining cascabel , weighing 10 kilograms ( 385 oz ) , is stored in a vault maintained by 15 Regiment Royal Logistic Corps at MoD Donnington . It can only be removed under armed guard . It is estimated that approximately 80 to 85 more VCs could be cast from this source . A single company of jewellers , Hancocks of London , has been responsible for the production of every VC . 
 = = = Separate Commonwealth awards = = = 
 In the last 60 years several Commonwealth countries have introduced their own honours systems , separate from the British Honours System . Australia , Canada and New Zealand have each introduced their own decorations for gallantry and bravery , replacing British decorations such as the Military Cross with their own awards . Most Commonwealth countries , however , still recognise some form of the VC as their highest decoration for valour . 
 Australia was the first Commonwealth nation to create its own VC , on 15 January 1991 . Although it is a separate award , its appearance is identical to its British counterpart . Canada followed suit when in 1993 Queen Elizabeth signed Letters Patent creating the Canadian VC , which is also similar to the British version , except that the legend has been changed from FOR VALOUR to the Latin PRO VALORE . The New Zealand and Australian awards are still made by the jewellers Hancocks from the gunmetal used for the originals . The Canadian Victoria Cross also includes metal from the same cannon , along with copper and other metals from all regions of Canada . 
 New Zealand was the third country to create the VC as part of its own honours system . On 21 September 1999 , Prime Minister Jenny Shipley announced that the Queen had approved the formal institution of a new range of Royal awards to recognise acts of gallantry and bravery performed by New Zealanders . The awards were designed to be the final major element in the development of a distinct New Zealand Royal honours system . 
 The start of the process came with proposals released in 1995 by the Honours Advisory Committee that reviewed the honours system . Until May 1996 , New Zealand made recommendations for various British awards for acts of gallantry performed during military operations and acts of bravery by civilians including the Victoria Cross and George Cross . However , the British Government 's review and simplification of their awards system provided an ideal opportunity for New Zealand to also develop a unique and simplified system . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The Victoria Cross for New Zealand is identical to the original design . The decoration is a cross pattée , 41 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) high , 36 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) wide , bearing a crown surmounted by a lion , and the inscription FOR VALOUR . This was originally to have been FOR <unk> , until it was changed on the recommendation of Queen Victoria , who thought some might erroneously consider that only the recipients of the VC were brave in battle . The decoration , suspension bar and link weigh about 27 grams ( 0 @.@ 87 troy ounces ) . 
 The cross is suspended by a ring from a seriffed " V " to a bar ornamented with laurel leaves , through which the ribbon passes . The reverse of the suspension bar is engraved with the recipient 's name , rank , number and unit . On the reverse of the medal is a circular panel on which the date of the act for which it was awarded is engraved in the centre . The ribbon is crimson , 38 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 inches ) wide . Although the warrants state the colour as being red it is described by most commentators as being crimson or " wine @-@ red " . 
 = = Conferment = = 
 The Victoria Cross for New Zealand is awarded for 
 The power of awarding the medal officially resides with the Queen of New Zealand . The Royal Warrant states that the " Awards of a New Zealand Gallantry Award and of a Bar to an Award shall be made by Us , Our Heirs and Successors , only on a recommendation by Our Prime Minister of New Zealand or a Minister of the Crown acting for Our Prime Minister . " As with the original Victoria Cross any recommendations pass through the New Zealand Defence Force chain of command to the Minister of Defence . 
 The original Victoria Cross had been awarded to 24 New Zealanders . Thirteen of these awards were for action in the First World War . The Victoria Cross for New Zealand has been awarded once . It was officially announced on 2 July 2007 that Corporal Willie Apiata of the NZ SAS was awarded the Victoria Cross for New Zealand for his actions in saving the life of a " comrade under heavy fire from opposing forces " during the Afghanistan conflict in 2004 . Apiata received his medal from Governor @-@ General Anand Satyanand at a ceremony held at Government House , Wellington on 26 July 2007 . 
 = 1999 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado = 
 The 1999 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado ( locally referred to as the May 3rd tornado ) was an extremely powerful F5 tornado in which the highest wind speeds ever measured globally , 301 miles per hour ( 484 km / h ) , were recorded by a Doppler on Wheels ( <unk> ) radar . The tornado devastated southern portions of Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , along with surrounding suburbs and towns during the early evening of May 3 , 1999 . Throughout its 85 @-@ minute existence , the tornado covered 38 miles ( 61 km ) , destroying thousands of homes , killing 36 people ( plus an additional five indirectly ) , and leaving US $ 1 billion in damage , ranking it as the fifth @-@ costliest on record , not accounting for inflation . 
 The tornado first touched down at 6 : 23 p.m. Central Daylight Time ( CDT ) in Grady County , roughly two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ southwest of Amber . It quickly intensified into a violent F4 , and gradually reached F5 status after traveling 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) , at which time it struck the community of Bridge Creek . Once it moved through the unincorporated community , it fluctuated in strength , ranging from F2 to F5 status before it crossed into Cleveland County . Not long after entering the county , it reached F5 intensity for a third time as it moved through the city of Moore . By 7 : 30 p.m. CDT , the tornado crossed into Oklahoma County and battered southeastern Oklahoma City , Del City and Midwest City , before dissipating around 7 : 48 p.m. CDT just outside Midwest City . In terms of structural losses , a total of 8 @,@ 132 homes , 1 @,@ 041 apartments , 260 businesses , 11 public buildings and seven churches were damaged or destroyed . 
 In the wake of the tornado , large @-@ scale search and rescue operations took place in the affected areas . A major disaster declaration was signed by President Bill Clinton the following day ( May 4 ) , allowing for the state to receive federal aid . In the following months , disaster aid amounted to $ 67 @.@ 8 million . In light of the fatalities that occurred under highway overpasses , the notion of them being safe areas to seek shelter was dismissed , and they were from then on considered to be one of the most dangerous places to be during a tornado . Reconstruction projects in subsequent years led to a safer , tornado @-@ ready community . In May 2013 , similar areas adjacent to the 1999 storm 's track were again devastated by an EF5 tornado , resulting in 24 fatalities and extreme damage in Moore . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 The Bridge Creek – Moore tornado was part of a much larger outbreak , which spawned 71 tornadoes across five states throughout the Central Plains on May 3 alone , along with an additional 25 that touched down on May 4 in some of the areas affected by the previous day 's activity ( some of which were spawned supercells that developed on the evening of May 3 ) , stretching eastward to the Mississippi River Valley . On the morning of May 3 , in its Day 1 Convective Outlook for the United States , the Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) issued a slight risk for severe weather , as a dry line that stretched from western Kansas into western Texas approached a warm , humid air @-@ mass over the Central Plains ; the conditions ahead of the dry line and a connecting trough positioned over northeastern Colorado appeared to favor the development of thunderstorms later that day that would contain large hail , damaging straight @-@ line winds and isolated tornadoes . 
 Forecasters at the SPC initially underestimated the atmospheric conditions that would support tornadic development that afternoon and evening ; around 4 : 00 a.m. CDT , Doppler radar and wind profile data indicated a 90 @-@ knot ( 100 mph ) jet streak along the border of California and Nevada , with weather balloon soundings sent up the previous evening by National Weather Service offices in the western United States and numerical computer model data failing to detect the fast @-@ moving air current as it moved ashore from the Pacific Ocean . In addition , the dry line was diffused , with surface winds behind and ahead of the boundary moving into the region from a southerly direction . SPC meteorologists began to recalculate model data during the morning to account for the stronger wind profiles caused by the jet streak ; the data acknowledged that thunderstorms would occur within the Central Plains , but disagreed on the exact area of greatest severe weather risk . 
 By 7 : 00 a.m. Central Daylight Time , CAPE values began exceeding 4 @,@ 000 j / kg , a level which climatologically favors the development of severe thunderstorms . Despite conflicting model data on the specified area where thunderstorms would develop , the newly available information that denoted a more favorable severe thunderstorm setup in that part of the state prompted the SPC to upgrade the forecasted threat of severe weather to a moderate risk for south @-@ central Kansas , much of the western two @-@ thirds of Oklahoma , and northwestern and north @-@ central Texas at 11 : 15 a.m. CDT that morning , which now indicated an elevated threat of strong tornadoes . 
 By the early afternoon hours , forecasters at both the SPC and the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman , Oklahoma realized that a major event was likely to take place based solely on observational data from radar and weather satellite imagery and balloon soundings , as the computer models remained uncooperative in helping meteorologists determine where the greatest threat of severe storms would occur . 
 Conditions became highly conducive for tornadic development by 1 : 00 p.m. CDT as wind shear intensified over the region ( as confirmed by an unscheduled balloon sounding flight conducted by the NWS Norman office ) , creating a highly unstable atmosphere . The sounding balloon recorded winds blowing southwesterly ( at 20 mph ( 17 kn ) and 50 mph ( 43 kn ) , respectively ) at the surface and at the 12 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) level , southerly winds of 40 mph ( 35 kn ) at 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) and westerly winds of 20 mph ( 17 kn ) at 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) ; it also indicated that a capping inversion over the region was weakening in southwestern Oklahoma and north Texas ; with the warm air above the surface cooling down , this allowed warm air at the surface the chance to rise and potentially create thunderstorms . Although cirrus clouds − a bank of which had developed in west Texas and overspread portions of Oklahoma later in the morning − were present through much of the day , an area of clearing skies over western north Texas and southwestern Oklahoma early that afternoon allowed for the sun to heat up the moisture @-@ laden region , creating significant atmospheric instability . 
 At 3 : 49 p.m. CDT , a high risk of severe weather was issued by the Storm Prediction Center for much of central Oklahoma . Within 25 minutes of this , the National Weather Service office in Norman issued a severe thunderstorm warning for Comanche County by 4 : 15 p.m. CDT late that afternoon , as the first storm of the event rapidly intensified . A half @-@ hour later at 4 : 45 p.m. CDT , the Storm Prediction Center issued a tornado watch for western and central Oklahoma , for the threat of tornadoes , hail up to 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) in diameter and wind gusts to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . 
 = = Storm development and track = = 
 The thunderstorm that eventually spawned the F5 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado formed around 3 : 30 p.m. CDT over Tillman County . Despite the lack of overall lift prevalent in the region , the storm formed out of a contrail @-@ like horizontal area of convective clouds that developed during peak surface heating over southwestern Oklahoma , located well ahead of the dry line still positioned farther to the west , which provided enhanced lift and speed shear necessary to develop the supercell . Tracking northeast , the storm strengthened and entered Comanche County shortly after 4 : 00 p.m. CDT ; there , hail up to 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 cm ) in diameter fell . 
 As the rotation in the supercell began to rapidly increase at the cloud base , a tornado warning was issued for Comanche , Caddo and Grady Counties at 4 : 50 p.m. CDT ; at 4 : 51 p.m. , a small tornado roughly 25 yards ( 75 ft ) in diameter − the first of 14 associated with supercell " A " ( the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman designated lettered names for the three tornado @-@ producing supercells in the outbreak in storm surveys ) − touched down along U.S. Route 62 , seven miles ( 11 km ) east @-@ northeast of Medicine Park . Five more tornadoes touched down as the storm continued northeast ; the sixth touchdown was an F3 , which caused substantial damage in central Grady County , including at Chickasha Municipal Airport , where the roofs were torn off of two hangars . At 6 : 23 p.m. CDT , the ninth tornado associated with supercell " A " touched down about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ southwest of Amber . 
 That tornado quickly intensified as it crossed Oklahoma State Highway 92 , attaining F4 strength about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east @-@ northeast of Amber . Damage consistent with this rating was sustained over the following 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) of the path before striking Bridge Creek . There , it attained the highest @-@ possible rating on the Fujita Scale , F5 . Damage in this area was extreme , as many homes were completely swept away , leaving only concrete slabs where the structures once were . Damage surveyors noted that the remaining structural debris from some of the homes in this area was finely granulated into small fragments , and that trees and shrubs were completely debarked . A few of these homes were bolted to their foundations . Extensive ground scouring occurred , and vehicles were thrown hundreds of yards from where they originated , including a mangled pickup truck that was found wrapped around a telephone pole . It was in this area that a mobile Doppler weather radar recorded winds of 301 mph ( 484 km / h ) within the tornado , the highest wind speed ever recorded on Earth . However , since the record for maximum winds are reported from only non @-@ tornadic events , the 253 mph ( 407 km / h ) wind gust from Cyclone Olivia in 1996 retained the title . About 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of asphalt was scoured off of a road in this area by the violent tornado . Approximately 200 mobile homes / houses were destroyed , and hundreds of other structures were damaged . The Ridgecrest Baptist Church in Bridge Creek was also destroyed . Twelve people died in Bridge Creek , nine of whom were in mobile homes ; all fatalities and the majority of injuries were concentrated in the Willow Lake Addition , Southern Hills Addition , and Bridge Creek Estates , consisting mostly of mobile homes . 39 people were injured in the area as well . Continuing northeastward , the tornado briefly weakened to F4 status before re @-@ strengthening to F5 intensity as it neared the Grady @-@ McClain County line , where a car was thrown roughly 0 @.@ 25 mi ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) , and a well @-@ built home with anchor bolts was reduced to a bare slab . At this time , it had attained a width of one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . 
 Around 6 : 57 p.m. CDT , the National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office in Norman issued the first @-@ ever tornado emergency for southern portions of the Oklahoma City metropolitan area , which was released as a standalone weather statement ( instead of within a newly issued or a Special Weather Statement on an existing tornado warning , as became usual afterward ) . David Andra , a meteorologist at the NWS Norman office , said that he drafted the enhanced warning statement to " paint the picture that a rare and deadly tornado was imminent in the metro area . " 
 Paralleling Interstate 44 , the tornado moved into McClain County , where it crossed the highway twice at F4 intensity , killing a woman as she was blown out from an underpass where she was attempting to seek shelter , after being dragged down the embankment by the intense channeling winds ; her 11 @-@ year @-@ old son − with whom the woman vacated their stalled car nearby − survived , staying held tight onto the steel girders of the overpass . A man who helped the mother and son up the overpass suffered severe injuries to his leg , which was partially sliced by a highway sign thrown by the winds . At 7 : 10 p.m. CDT , a satellite tornado touched down over an open field north of Newcastle ; it was rated as an F0 due to lack of damage . 38 homes and two businesses were destroyed in McClain County , and 40 homes were damaged . Some of the homes were leveled at F4 intensity , and 17 people were injured . 
 After crossing the Canadian River , the tornado entered Cleveland County and weakened to F2 intensity . By this time , it had entered the southern reaches of the Oklahoma City limits . Several minutes after entering the county , it re @-@ attained F4 status , and then moved directly into the city of Moore , where the tornado reached F5 intensity for a third time . Some of the most severe damage took place in Cleveland County , especially in the city of Moore , where 11 people were killed and 293 others were injured . The tornado caused an estimated $ 450 million in damage across the county . The first area impacted in Moore was the Country Place Estates subdivision , where 50 homes were damaged and one was completely swept away at F5 intensity , with only the foundation remaining . Several vehicles were picked up and tossed nearly 0 @.@ 25 mi ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) . According to local police , an airplane wing , believed to have been from an airport in Grady County , was found near Country Place Estates . Next , the powerful tornado struck the densely populated Eastlake Estates at F5 intensity , killing three people and reducing entire rows of homes to rubble . In one instance , four adjacent homes were completely destroyed , with only concrete slabs remaining , warranting an F5 rating at that location . Three other homes in this housing division also received F5 damage , with the remaining destruction rated high @-@ end F4 . Severe debarking of trees was noted in this area . At the Emerald Springs Apartments , three more people were killed and a two @-@ story apartment building was mostly flattened . 
 As it entered Cleveland County , the National Weather Service and Storm Prediction Center activated emergency procedures , preparing to evacuate staff and others present at the facility in the event that the supercell should turn right , placing areas surrounding the Norman campus in the tornado 's path ( under NOAA protocol in situations posing a danger to personnel at local Weather Forecast Offices and related guidance centers , responsibility over the issuance of warnings and statements on the unfolding outbreak would have been transferred to the nearest NWS Forecast Office , based in Tulsa , while the SPC 's forecasting responsibilities would be turned over to the 557th Weather Wing at Offutt Air Force Base ) . The supercell , however , continued on a northeastward track , sparing the Norman area . 
 Safety precautions were also enacted elsewhere in and near the storm 's path ; council members and citizens at Moore City Hall − where a council meeting was scheduled to be held that evening − sheltered in place in the building 's first @-@ floor restrooms , away from the multiple large @-@ pane windows at its facade . In downtown Oklahoma City , spectators attending sporting events being held that evening involving two of the city 's minor league teams – a regular season baseball game between the Oklahoma RedHawks and Memphis Redbirds ( which was suspended during the second inning ) and Game 2 of the Ray Miron President 's Cup series between the Oklahoma City Blazers and the Huntsville Channel Cats – were also evacuated to shelter in an underground storage area connected to the Southwestern Bell <unk> Ballpark and Myriad Convention Center amid concerns that the storm would jog northward and place Oklahoma City itself in the tornado 's path . Flights were grounded at Will Rogers World Airport as the northern edge of the supercell approached the area ; the tornado turned right , away from southwestern parts of the city proper , shortly before airport officials began evacuating employees and visitors at the terminals . Traffic on Interstate 35 in south Oklahoma City and north Moore became backed up for several miles , as drivers evacuated from their vehicles to seek shelter under an overpass overlooking South Shields Boulevard . 
 Just outside the Eastlake Estates , an honors ceremony was being held at <unk> High School at the time of the tornado ; however , adequate warning time allowed those at the school to seek shelter ; more than 400 adults and children attending the awards ceremony at the school 's auditorium were moved to the main building , sheltering in reinforced hallways and bathrooms . Ultimately , <unk> High sustained heavy damage and dozens of cars in the parking lot were tossed around , some of which were completely destroyed or thrown into nearby homes . No injures took place at the school , though a horse was found dead between a couple of destroyed cars in this area . The tornado proceeded through additional densely populated areas of Moore shortly thereafter , where several large groups of homes were flattened in residential areas , with a mixture of high @-@ end F4 and low @-@ end F5 damage noted . Near Janeway Avenue , four people were killed in an area where multiple homes were completely destroyed . A woman , who took shelter with her husband and two children , was also killed when she was blown out from under the Shields overpass on Interstate 35 . The tornado weakened somewhat as it moved through the Highland Park neighborhood of Moore , but still caused widespread F3 and F4 damage . 
 The tornado then entered Oklahoma County and struck the southeast fringes of Oklahoma City , where it re @-@ intensified to high @-@ end F4 strength and two people were killed as a trucking company was completely destroyed . Shortly before it tracked into the county , patrons and employees at Crossroads Mall were evacuated to storage areas in the basement of the building . Numerous industrial buildings were leveled in this area of the city . A freight car , weighing 36 @,@ 000 lb ( 16 @,@ 000 kg ) was thrown 0 @.@ 75 mi ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) . The car bounced as it traveled , remaining airborne for 50 to 100 yd ( 46 to 91 m ) at a time . Multiple homes were also completely destroyed in southeast Oklahoma City , and one woman was killed in that area . Crossing Southeast 44th Street into Del City , the tornado moved through the highly populated Del Aire housing addition , killing six people and damaging or destroying hundreds of homes , with many sustaining F3 to F4 damage . Seven people were killed as a direct result of the tornado in Del City , and hundreds of homes were damaged or destroyed . 
 The tornado then crossed Sooner Road , damaged an entry gate and several buildings at Tinker Air Force Base , then crossed 29th Street into Midwest City , destroying one building at the Boeing Complex and damaging two others . Widespread F3 / F4 damage continued as the tornado moved across Interstate 40 , affecting a large business district . Approximately 800 vehicles were damaged at <unk> Auto Group , located just south of Interstate 40 . Hundreds of vehicles at the dealership were moved from their original location on the lot , and dozens of vehicles ( including 30 awaiting tune @-@ ups or repairs at Morris ' Auto Machine and Supply , and an unoccupied Mid @-@ Del School District bus ) were picked up and tossed northward across the interstate into several motels , a distance of approximately two @-@ tenths of a mile . Numerous motels and other businesses including Hampton Inn , Comfort Inn , Inn Suites , Clarion Inn , Cracker Barrel , and portions of Rose State College , were destroyed . Some of the damage through this area was rated high @-@ end F4 , however low @-@ end F5 was considered . The tornado then continued into another residential area located between Southeast 15th and Reno Avenue , where three fatalities occurred . Damage consistent with high @-@ end F4 wind speeds was inflicted to four homes in this area . Two of these homes were located between Southeast 11th and 12th Streets , near Buena Vista , and the other two homes were located on Will Rogers Road , just south of Southeast 15th . Damage then diminished rapidly to F0 / F1 strength as the tornado crossed Reno Avenue , before dissipating three blocks north of Reno , between Sooner Road and Air Depot Boulevard . Throughout Oklahoma County , 12 people were killed and 234 others were injured while losses amounted to $ 450 million . 
 = = Impact and casualties = = 
 Throughout the tornado 's path , 36 people were killed as a direct result of the storm and five more died of indirect causes in the hours following it ( most of the indirect deaths were due to heart attacks or injuries suffered while trying to seek shelter ; however , one survivor , who was uninsured , died from a self @-@ inflicted gunshot wound ) . According to the Oklahoma Department of Health , an estimated 583 people were injured by the tornado , accounting for those who likely did not go to the hospital or were unaccounted for . In terms of structural losses , a total of 8 @,@ 132 homes , 1 @,@ 041 apartments , 260 businesses , eleven public buildings and seven churches were damaged or destroyed . Total estimated damage costs in the areas affected by the storm totaled $ 1 @.@ 2 billion , making it the first single tornado since records were first recorded to produce damage exceeding $ 1 billion . The Bridge Creek − Moore tornado produced an estimated 220 cubic yards ( 170 m3 ) of debris from the buildings that were destroyed in the storm . 
 The 1999 Bridge Creek − Moore tornado was the deadliest tornado recorded in Oklahoma since an F5 tornado killed 107 people in Woodward on April 9 , 1947 . It is also the deadliest tornado ever recorded in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area ; the previous record was held by an F4 tornado that affected southwestern portions of the city on June 12 , 1942 , which killed 31 people and caused $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage ( $ 10 @.@ 6 million in ( 2016 USD ) when adjusted for inflation ) . The Bridge Creek − Moore tornado was the costliest single tornado in U.S. history until an EF4 tornado hit Tuscaloosa and northern portions of Birmingham in Alabama on April 27 , 2011 , causing an estimated $ 2 @.@ 45 billion in damage ( as of 2015 the Bridge Creek – Moore tornado is the fourth @-@ costliest single tornado , having also been surpassed by the EF5 tornadoes that hit Joplin on May 24 , 2011 and areas of Moore near the 1999 storm track on May 20 , 2013 ) . National Weather Service researchers estimated that the death toll from the storm would likely have exceeded 600 , had it not been for the advanced warning through local television and radio stations ( with coverage provided by three of the Oklahoma City market 's four television news outlets at the time − NBC affiliate KFOR @-@ TV ( channel 4 ) , ABC affiliate <unk> @-@ TV ( channel 5 ) and CBS affiliate <unk> ( channel 9 ) − being simulcast on some radio stations through central parts of Oklahoma as the storms became increasingly intense ) , and the extensive education among Oklahomans on tornadoes and the dangers they pose , as well as exercising proper safety precautions . 
 Preliminary damage surveys conducted by a group of structural engineers from Texas Tech University determined that many of the frame homes that were destroyed by the Bridge Creek − Moore tornado were constructed below minimal residential building code standards , discovering some structural deficiencies that violated codes , which were considered to be inadequate for regions prone to tornadic activity ( under federal building code standards , frame homes that were properly strapped and bolted would have withstood winds between 152 and 157 miles per hour ( 245 and 253 km / h ) , equivalent to an F2 tornado ) . The team , led by meteorological researcher Charles Doswell and storm damage engineer / meteorologist Tim Marshall , determined that nails attached to a plywood roof deck in one damaged home were not properly anchored to the rafters ; several homes in rural areas that were swept nearly 300 feet ( 91 m ) from their original location did not have anchor bolts that secured the frame to their foundations , as was the case at Country Place Estates , where the homes − which left a trail of debris strewn 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) away from their location − were attached to the concrete foundations by tapered cut nails that extended only a half @-@ inch to the bases ; many homes that were left at least partially standing also had their garage doors ( mainly those made from aluminum material ) collapse inward , allowing the tornado 's destructive winds to enter the houses . 
 Marshall discovered other building and vehicle remains that became debris missiles , including a twisted 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) steel beam , a steel leg broken off of a lawn chair that was impaled into a 5 @-@ by @-@ 5 @-@ inch ( 13 cm × 13 cm ) post by the violent winds and a six @-@ foot ( 180 cm ) section of a sewer pipe that was blown into the interior hallway of one house through the front door . The team 's findings also revealed that several homes were obliterated before they experienced the full impact of the vortex 's peak wind velocities , with some disintegrating as the external winds surrounding the parent tornado reached speeds of F2 intensity . Three months later , as homes were being built in the damage path , Marshall found their construction to be scarcely superior to that of the homes destroyed in the May 3 storm . 
 The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) corroborated with Doswell and Marshall 's findings in its Building Performance Assessment Team Report on the May 3 outbreak , noting that much of the structural damage resulted from strong winds generated by the tornado and associated <unk> debris that often " produced forces on buildings not designed to withstand such forces " and in some cases , were due to improper construction techniques and " poor selection " of materials used in their construction . The report acknowledged that federal construction code requirements needed to be revised above the then @-@ current minimum standards to allow newer buildings to better withstand higher wind speeds consistent with tornadoes of lesser intensity than the one which devastated Bridge Creek and Moore , thereby lessening the degree of damage , fatalities and injuries that are probable in buildings of typically less reinforced construction . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the outbreak of deadly and destructive tornadoes , President Bill Clinton signed a major disaster declaration for eleven Oklahoma counties on May 4 . In a press statement by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , then @-@ director James Lee Witt stated that " The President is deeply concerned about the tragic loss of life and destruction caused by these devastating storms . " The American Red Cross opened ten shelters overnight across central Oklahoma , housing 1 @,@ 600 people immediately following the disaster . By May 5 , this number had lowered to 500 . Throughout May 5 , several post @-@ disaster teams from FEMA were deployed to the region , including emergency response and preliminary damage assessment units . The United States Department of Defense deployed the 249th Engineering Battalion and placed the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on standby for assistance . Medical and mortuary teams were also sent by the Department of Health and Human Services . By May 6 , donation centers and phone banks were being established to create funds for victims of the tornadoes . 
 Continuing search and rescue efforts for thirteen people who were listed as missing through May 7 were assisted by urban search and rescue dogs from across the country . Nearly 1 @,@ 000 members of the Oklahoma National Guard were deployed throughout the affected region . The American Red Cross had set up ten mobile feeding stations by this time and stated that 30 more were en route . On May 8 , a disaster recovery center was opened in Moore for individuals recovering from the tornadoes . According to the Army Corps of Engineers , roughly 500 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 382 @,@ 277 cubic meters ) of debris was left behind and would likely take weeks to clear . Within the first few days of the disaster declaration , relief funds began being sent to families who requested aid . By May 9 , roughly $ 180 @,@ 000 had been approved by FEMA for disaster housing assistance . 
 Debris removal finally began on May 12 as seven cleanup teams were sent to the region , more were expected to join over the following days . That day , FEMA also declared that seven counties − Canadian , Craig , Grady , Lincoln , Logan , Noble and Oklahoma − were eligible for federal financial assistance . By May 13 , roughly $ 1 @.@ 6 million in disaster funds had been approved for housing and businesses loans . This quickly rose to more than $ 5 @.@ 9 million over the following five days . By May 21 , more than 3 @,@ 000 volunteers from across the country traveled to Oklahoma to help residents recover ; 1 @,@ 000 of these volunteers were sent to Bridge Creek to clean up debris , cut trees , sort donations and cook meals . With a $ 452 @,@ 199 grant from FEMA , a 60 @-@ day outreach program for victims suffering tornado @-@ related stress was set up to help them cope with trauma . 
 Applications for federal aid continued through June , with state approvals reaching $ 54 million on June 3 . By this date , the Army Corps of Engineers reported that 964 @,@ 170 cubic yards ( 737 @,@ 160 cubic meters ) , roughly 58 % , of the 1 @.@ 65 million cubic yards ( 1 @.@ 26 million cubic meters ) of debris had been removed . Assistance for farmers and ranchers who suffered severe losses from the tornadoes was also available by June 3 . After more than a month of being open , emergency shelters were set to be closed on June 18 . On June 21 , an educational road show made by FEMA visited the hardest hit areas in Oklahoma to urge residents to build storm cellars . According to FEMA , more than 9 @,@ 500 residents applied for federal aid during the allocated period in the wake of the tornadoes . Most of the applicants lived in Oklahoma and Cleveland counties , 3 @,@ 800 and 3 @,@ 757 persons respectively . In all , disaster recovery aid for the tornadoes amounted to roughly $ 67 @.@ 8 million by the end of July 2 . 
 From a meteorological and safety standpoint , the tornado also brought the use of highway overpasses as shelters into question . Prior to the events on May 3 , 1999 , videos of people taking shelter in overpasses during tornadoes in the past ( most notably one filmed near Wichita , Kansas during the April 26 , 1991 tornado outbreak involving a television news crew from Wichita NBC affiliate <unk> and other bystanders ) gave the public misunderstanding that overpasses provided shelter from tornadoes . For nearly 20 years , meteorologists had questioned the safety of these structures ; however , they lacked incidents involving loss of life . During the May 3 outbreak , three overpasses were directly struck by tornadoes , with a fatality taking place at each one . Two of these were from the F5 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado while the third was from a small F2 , which struck a rural area in Payne County , north @-@ northeast of Oklahoma City . According to a study by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , seeking shelter in an overpass " is to become a stationary target for flying debris . " 
 Over the following four years , a $ 12 million project to construct storm shelters for residents across the Oklahoma City metropolitan area was enacted . The goal was to create a safer community in a tornado @-@ prone region . By May 2003 , a total of 6 @,@ 016 safe rooms were constructed . On May 9 , 2003 , the new initiative was put to the test as a tornado outbreak in the region spawned an F4 tornado , which took a path similar to that of the Bridge Creek – Moore tornado . Due to the higher standards for public safety , no one was killed by the 2003 tornado , a substantial improvement in just four years . On May 20 , 2013 , an EF5 tornado took a roughly similar path to the 1999 storm , tracking through the heart of Moore . Throughout the city , 24 people were killed ( along with one additional person who died as an indirect result of the tornado ) and more than 230 were injured . 
 = Dunder Mifflin Infinity = 
 " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " is the third and fourth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifty @-@ sixth and fifty @-@ seventh episode overall . The episode was written by Michael Schur , who also acts in the show , and directed by Craig Zisk . It first aired in the United States on October 4 , 2007 on NBC . 
 In this episode , Ryan returns to his old office and reveals his plan to bring technology to Dunder Mifflin . Michael and Dwight try to prove that the personal touch is better than technology . Meanwhile , Jim and Pam reveal their relationship to the rest of the office , Kelly attempts to reunite with Ryan , and Dwight and Angela 's relationship continues to plummet . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) returns to the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of Dunder Mifflin for the first time since his promotion to the corporate headquarters . Although he sports a much more urbane look and attitude , he garners little respect from his former peers . Ryan introduces " Dunder Mifflin Infinity , " his initiative to revitalize the company with new technology . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is initially excited about the prospect of getting a BlackBerry , but is warned by Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) that the program is a ploy to get rid of older workers . Creed dyes his hair black with printer ink in an attempt to convince everyone that he is much younger . Michael holds a conference room meeting on the subject of ageism . To show that personal interaction is more effective than new technology , Michael and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) decide to go out and win back the clients they lost in the past year with gift baskets . Each manager they encounter refuses to consider returning to Dunder Mifflin unless the company improves its technology , such as Dunder Mifflin 's website . While driving back to the office , Michael misinterprets his rental car 's GPS map system 's directions and drives into Lake Scranton . He takes this as further proof that new technology is useless because it tried to kill him . After the lake incident , he and Dwight walk back to one of the former clients to awkwardly get back their gift basket , causing a scene . 
 Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) are exposed as a couple when Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) circulates a memo about public displays of affection . Jim secretly informs Pam that Dwight and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) are dating , only to discover that she already knew . Meanwhile , Dwight attempts to make amends for the death of Angela 's cat Sprinkles by giving her a stray cat he found in his barn , named Garbage . Angela rejects the gift . Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) tries to restart her relationship with Ryan , an effort he ignores until she tells him she is pregnant . After going out to dinner , Ryan learns that Kelly 's pregnancy claim was a lie that Kelly used in attempt to get them back together . Back at the office , Ryan asks Pam to create a logo for Dunder Mifflin Infinity . Pam is excited about the opportunity to use her art background , but Ryan uses the logo as an excuse to ask her out , which he does in front of Jim . Pam responds that she is dating Jim , which leaves the new boss thoroughly embarrassed . 
