 Nearly all of Cartier 's 1950s television productions were performed live , and the majority of them were not recorded — he once described them as being " gone with the speed of light " . Several of those which do survive have been highly regarded by later reviewers . In 2000 , the British Film Institute ( BFI ) compiled a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century . Voted on by a group of industry professionals , the list featured both Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four and Quatermass and the Pit . In the accompanying analysis of each entry to the list , Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four was described as " An early example of the power of television drama ... Even now , the torture sequences retain their power to shock and disturb . " 
 Nigel Kneale , scriptwriter of both of the Cartier dramas acclaimed by the BFI , felt that the productions would not have been as successful as they were had they been handled by any other director . " I don 't think any of the things I wrote then would have come to anything much in other hands . In his they worked . " Television historian Jason Jacobs , a lecturer in film and television studies at the University of Warwick , wrote in 2000 that Kneale and Cartier together created an entirely new , more expansive vision for British television drama in the 1950s . 
 " It was the arrival of Nigel Kneale ... and Rudolph Cartier ... that challenged the intimate drama directly . Cartier is rightly recognised as a major influence on the visual development of British television drama ... Cartier and Kneale had the ambition for their productions to affect a mass audience , and the scope of their attention was not confined to the ' cosy ' aesthetics of intimacy . Cartier uses the close @-@ up both to reveal emotions and as a shock device : a more threatening — and perhaps exhilarating — method than was used before . ' Intimacy ' is reformulated by Cartier in terms of his power and control over the viewer — no longer a part of the family , but isolated in his home . " 
 Cartier 's pioneering use of an increased number of pre @-@ filmed sequences to open out the studio @-@ bound , live television drama productions of the 1950s is also praised by Lez Cooke . " While film inserts were being used in television drama from the early 1950s , Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four represented the most extensive use of them in a TV play up to that time , and signalled Cartier 's determination to extend the boundaries of TV drama . " Similarly , his Times obituary stated that : " At a time when studio productions were usually as static as the conventional theatre , he was widely respected for a creative contribution to British television drama which gave it a new dimension . " 
 In addition to his 1950s productions , several of Cartier 's later works have also been regarded as influential . His 1962 production of Wuthering Heights was praised by Dennis Potter , then a television critic , who wrote in the Daily Herald newspaper that the production " was like a thunderstorm on the flat , dreary plains of the week 's television ... The howl of the wind against the windows , the muted pain of Claire Bloom as the wretched Cathy , and the hunted misery of Keith Mitchell as Heathcliff , made this a more than adequate offering of a great work . " While Screenonline states that Lee Oswald — Assassin ( 1966 ) " could be argued [ to be ] of historical interest only " , due to its basis in the flawed Warren Commission report , The Times praised it as being " possibly the first drama @-@ documentary " . 
 Not all of Cartier 's work was so well regarded ; in particular , his cinematic efforts have not achieved the level of praise of his television work . In the book America 's Best , Britain 's Finest : A Survey of Mixed Movies , critic John Howard Reid says of Cartier 's 1958 film Passionate Summer : " It 's hard to believe that ... anyone could make such a dull movie . Yet this is precisely what director Rudolph Cartier has done . I 've never heard of Mr Cartier before or since but presumably he made this brief foray into films from that synthetic world of ugly close @-@ ups — TV . " 
 Speaking to The Times in 1958 , Cartier explained that television was still developing as a medium , and that part of his work was to help create the next generation of those who would produce television drama . " The BBC is producing producers as well as plays . They are feeling their way towards what television drama will one day be , and we are trying to create a generation of writers who study the medium . " His 1994 obituary in the same newspaper judged that he had been successful in creating a lasting influence on later producers , describing his 1962 production of the opera Carmen as " an example and inspiration to a younger generation of television producers " . 
 In 1990 , the BBC Two arts magazine programme The Late Show produced an edition which featured a retrospective of Cartier 's work , including a new interview with the director discussing his career . This feature was repeated on BBC Two under the title Rudolph Cartier : A Television Pioneer on 1 July 1994 , followed by a tribute screening of the surviving telerecording copy of the second performance of Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four . 
 = = Selected filmography = = 
 The Copper ( 1930 ) 
 The Man with the Claw ( 1931 ) 
 Invisible Opponent ( 1933 ) 
 The Oil Sharks ( 1933 ) 
 = Battle of Stillman 's Run = 
 The Battle of Stillman 's Run , also known as the Battle of Sycamore Creek or the Battle of Old Man 's Creek , occurred in Illinois on May 14 , 1832 . The battle was named for the panicked retreat by Major Isaiah Stillman and his detachment of 275 Illinois militia after being attacked by many fewer Sauk warriors of Black Hawk 's British Band . The engagement was the first battle of the Black Hawk War ( 1832 ) , which developed after Black Hawk crossed the Mississippi River from Iowa into Illinois with his band of Sauk and Fox warriors to try to reclaim territory . The militia had pursued a small group of Sauk scouts to the main British Band camp following a failed attempt by Black Hawk 's emissaries to negotiate a truce . 
 During the engagement , 12 militia men were killed by Band warriors while making a stand on a small hill . The remainder of the militia fled back to Dixon 's Ferry . Citizens erected a monument in 1901 in Stillman Valley , Illinois commemorating the battle . A 2006 article corroborates that militia volunteer Abraham Lincoln was present at the battleground 's burials ; sources agree about little else . Investigation continues in the early 21st century about facts of the skirmish . 
 = = Background = = 
 Black Hawk , a Sauk chief , believed that the Treaty of St. Louis ( 1804 ) was invalid . It ceded Sauk territory to the US that included his birthplace . He led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River from Iowa to Illinois beginning in 1830 . Each time , he was persuaded to return west without bloodshed . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliances with other tribes and the British , he again moved his " British Band " into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return to Iowa , but ensuing events led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . A number of other engagements followed , and the state militias of Wisconsin and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's band . The conflict became known as the Black Hawk War . 
 On April 5 , 1832 , Black Hawk and around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and civilians recrossed the Mississippi River into Illinois in an attempt to reclaim their land . About half of Black Hawk 's band were combatants and the rest were a combination of women , children , and elderly . The band consisted of Sauk , Fox , some Potawatomi , and some Kickapoo ; in addition some members of the Ho @-@ Chunk nation were sympathetic to Black Hawk . Black Hawk 's reason for crossing into Illinois was that he wanted to reclaim lost lands , and perhaps , create a confederacy of Native Americans to stand against white settlement . Other Illinois tribes promised aid to the British Band and Black Hawk believed that he had been promised assistance by the British in Canada . 
 Black Hawk led the march of the group along the Rock River into Illinois . Illinois Governor John Reynolds perceived the return of Black Hawk as an invasion , and he immediately called up the militia . General Henry Atkinson , whom Black Hawk addressed as " White Beaver , " commanded the military expedition . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Atkinson was not told about Governor Reynolds ' decision to order Major Isaiah Stillman 's militia to march on Old Man 's Creek , despite being in overall command . Reynolds ' orders , issued on his behalf by General Samuel Whiteside to Stillman , were for Stillman to find Black Hawk and coerce him into submission . Following these orders , Stillman moved on Old Mans Creek . Whiteside had refused to accept Stillman 's battalion under his command , thus leaving it " orphaned " and under the direct command of Governor Reynolds . The militia commanded by Whiteside grew restless as they awaited the arrival of Atkinson and his Army regulars ; many of the volunteer militia wanted to quit the war and head back home . When diplomacy failed to persuade Black Hawk to take his band back west to Iowa , Stillman and Bailey 's battalions of Illinois Militia were marched up the Rock River . 
 Prior to the battle at Stillman 's Run , Black Hawk 's grand vision of British support , and a Native American confederacy had collapsed . No parties aided him and his followers . The British Band started to weaken with hunger , and Black Hawk soon realized that the only option was to return across the Mississippi River . When he detected the U.S. militia camp eight miles ( 13 km ) away , Black Hawk sent out peace envoys in order to negotiate a truce . They were told to wave a white flag at the militia . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On May 14 , 1832 , a detachment of 275 militia under the command of Majors Isaiah Stillman and David Bailey , under orders from Illinois Governor Reynolds , were encamped near Old Man 's Creek , not far from its confluence with the Rock River . The militia camp was located about three miles ( 5 km ) east of the Rock River near present @-@ day Stillman Valley , Illinois , and seven miles ( 11 km ) south of the Sauk encampment . It is believed that the militia and its commanders were unaware of their proximity to Black Hawk 's British Band . 
 In conference with the local Potawatomi , Black Hawk learned of Stillman 's presence and sent three emissaries to the militia camp under a flag of parley in order to negotiate a peace with the soldiers . The already suspicious soldiers took the three emissaries to their camp , and during the proceedings the militia became aware of several of Black Hawk 's scouts in the surrounding hills , watching the proceedings . Once the scouts were spotted , soldiers shot at the three emissaries , killing one . The other two fled back toward their camp , located near the confluence of the Rock and Kishwaukee rivers . 
 The scouts were pursued by the disorganized militia and several were killed . The surviving scouts arrived at Black Hawk 's camp ahead of the militia and reported the events . At the camp , the warriors set up a skirmish line in order to fend off the pending militia attack . The militia soldiers , intent on pursuing the scouts , chased them back toward the main force of Black Hawk 's warriors and their skirmish line . Black Hawk and his force concealed themselves and ambushed the pursuers . Believing that thousands of Sauk and Fox were attacking them , the militia panicked and fled back to the main force camped at Dixon 's Ferry . Stillman 's exact whereabouts are unknown during this point in the battle . His later account published in a newspaper did not mention his location and noted his only order was to retreat . Stillman 's account , published in the Missouri Republican , has been called fanciful . 
 Twelve of Stillman 's militia were killed in the melee . A band of volunteers under the leadership of Captain John Giles Adams made a stand on a hill south of the main militia camp . The men fought by moonlight as the main body of the militia fled back to Dixon . The entire 12 @-@ man detachment , including Adams , was killed in the fight . Dyer has said that Adams may have been killed by his own men as he attempted to muster them to battle . The number of Sauk and Fox killed in the engagement is largely unknown ; the militia party that was sent to locate the " missing " 53 militia men found no dead Sauk . Black Hawk is quoted as saying at least three and maybe as many as five of his warriors were killed . 
 = = Lincoln 's role = = 
 The facts about Abraham Lincoln 's service during the Black Hawk War have been disputed . Lincoln was associated with two major battle sites , including Stillman 's Run , in the aftermath of combat . A number of sources assert that on June 26 , 1832 , the morning after the Second Battle of Kellogg 's Grove , members of the company of Captain Jacob M. Early arrived at the grove to help bury the dead . One of these soldiers was Lincoln , who assisted with the burial . His later statement about the events has been linked to both the battle at Kellogg 's Grove and the fight at Stillman 's Run . 
 The Lincoln quote was featured in both William H. Herndon and Jesse W. Wiek 's Life of Lincoln and Carl Sandburg 's Lincoln biography , Abraham Lincoln The Prairie Years . Lincoln 's presence at Stillman 's Run has been under investigation in the early 21st century , but his presence at Kellogg 's Grove has been corroborated by several sources . In a 2006 article , author Scott Dyer asserted that Whiteside 's men , including Captain Lincoln , " paraded " the area the morning after , and buried the dead from Stillman 's Run . Their movements were an unsuccessful effort to draw out the Sauk , after which they returned to Dixon 's Ferry . 
 During an 1848 speech before the U.S. Congress in which he referred to his Black Hawk War service , Lincoln noted Stillman 's Run by name : 
 The marble facade on the Stillman Valley monument , erected in 1901 to commemorate the battle , refers to Lincoln 's presence at Stillman 's Run , " The presence of soldier , statesman , martyr , Abraham Lincoln assisting in the burial of these honored dead has made this spot more sacred . " Other sources assert that General Whiteside originally buried the dead in a common grave on a ridge south of the battlefield , marked with a rudimentary wooden memorial . These sources make no mention of Lincoln . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the first confrontation with Black Hawk at Stillman Valley , the press reported that 2 @,@ 000 " bloodthirsty warriors were sweeping all Northern Illinois with the bosom of destruction , " sending shock waves of terror through the region . Past midnight on May 15 , soldiers from Stillman 's ill @-@ fated detachment began streaming back into Dixon 's Ferry , wide @-@ eyed and panic @-@ stricken , telling tales of a horrible slaughter that had ensued during the battle . In the immediate aftermath of the battle , 53 militia men were missing . Later officials determined that the majority of these men had simply bypassed Dixon 's Ferry on their way home . 
 After this initial skirmish , Black Hawk led many of the civilians in his band to the Michigan Territory . On May 19 , the militia traveled up the Rock River trailing and searching for Black Hawk and his band . Several small skirmishes and massacres ensued over the next month in northern Illinois and southern Wisconsin before the militia regained public confidence in battles at Bloody Lake and Waddams Grove . 
 Critics of the Illinois Militia , mostly members of the Regular Army , attacked their behavior at the debacle at Stillman ' Run . They began to refer to the battle at Old Man 's Creek as the Battle of Stillman 's Run , because Stillman had apparently fled with the panicked militia . 
 Armed hostilities during the Black Hawk War began at Stillman 's Run , and the victory was unexpected for Black Hawk and his British Band . Black Hawk feared that the white militia and its allies would seek revenge through his total defeat . Leading his starving band , Black Hawk fled from Atkinson 's pursuing army . The chase would take them as far as present day Madison , Wisconsin . It ended at the Battle of Bad Axe , where the militia and its allies massacred a weakened foe , by then made up of mostly women and children . 
 The remains of the soldiers at Stillman 's Run were originally buried in a common grave , but who buried them remains an open question . A memorial , erected in 1901 , stands near their marked graves . The monument and battle site are listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places . They are near Illinois Route 72 a block west of present @-@ day Stillman Creek . 
 = Australian Defence Force = 
 The Australian Defence Force ( ADF ) is the military organisation responsible for the defence of Australia . It consists of the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , Australian Army , Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) and a number of ' tri @-@ service ' units . The ADF has a strength of just over 80 @,@ 000 full @-@ time personnel and active reservists , and is supported by the Department of Defence and several other civilian agencies . 
 During the first decades of the 20th century , the Australian Government established the armed services as separate organisations . Each service had an independent chain of command . In 1976 , the government made a strategic change and established the ADF to place the services under a single headquarters . Over time , the degree of integration has increased and tri @-@ service headquarters , logistics and training institutions have supplanted many single @-@ service establishments . 
 The ADF is technologically sophisticated but relatively small . Although the ADF 's 57 @,@ 982 full @-@ time active @-@ duty personnel , 23 @,@ 232 active reserves and 22 @,@ 166 standby reserves make it the largest military in Oceania , it is still smaller than most Asian militaries . Nonetheless , the ADF is supported by a significant budget by worldwide standards and is able to deploy forces in multiple locations outside Australia . 
 = = Role = = 
 = = = Legal standing = = = 
 The ADF 's legal standing draws on the executive government sections of the Australian Constitution . Section 51 ( vi ) gives the Commonwealth Government the power to make laws regarding Australia 's defence and defence forces . Section 114 of the Constitution prevents the States from raising armed forces without the permission of the Commonwealth and Section 119 gives the Commonwealth responsibility for defending Australia from invasion and sets out the conditions under which the government can deploy the defence force domestically . 
 Section 68 of the Constitution sets out the ADF 's command arrangements . The Section states that " the command in chief of the naval and military forces of the Commonwealth is vested in the Governor @-@ General as the Queen 's representative " . In practice , the Governor @-@ General does not play an active part in the ADF 's command structure , and the elected government controls the ADF . The Minister for Defence and several subordinate ministers exercise this control . The Minister acts on most matters alone , though the National Security Committee of Cabinet considers important matters . The Minister then advises the Governor @-@ General who acts as advised in the normal form of executive government . The Commonwealth Government has never been required by the Constitution or legislation to seek parliamentary approval for decisions to deploy military forces overseas or go to war . 
 = = = Current priorities = = = 
 The ADF 's current priorities are set out in the 2016 Defence White Paper , which identifies three main areas of focus . The first of these is to defend Australia from direct attack or coercion . The second priority is to contribute to the security of South East Asia and the South Pacific . The third priority is to contribute to stability across the Indo @-@ Pacific region and a " rules @-@ based global order which supports our interests " . The white paper states that the government will place equal weight on the three priorities when developing the ADF 's capabilities . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Australia has maintained military forces since federation as a nation in January 1901 . Shortly after Federation , the Australian Government established the Australian Army and Commonwealth Naval Force by amalgamating the forces each of the states had maintained . In 1911 , the Government established the Royal Australian Navy , which absorbed the Commonwealth Naval Force . The Army established the Australian Flying Corps in 1912 although this separated to form the Royal Australian Air Force in 1921 . The services were not linked by a single chain of command , as they each reported to their own separate Minister and had separate administrative arrangements . The three services saw action around the world during World War I and World War II , and took part in conflicts in Asia during the Cold War . 
 The importance of ' joint ' warfare was made clear to the Australian military during World War II when Australian naval , ground and air units frequently served as part of single commands . Following the war , several senior officers lobbied for the appointment of a commander in chief of the three services . The government rejected this proposal and the three services remained fully independent . The absence of a central authority resulted in poor co @-@ ordination between the services , with each service organising and operating on the basis of a different military doctrine . 
 The need for an integrated command structure received more emphasis as a result of the inefficient arrangements which at times hindered the military 's efforts during the Vietnam War . In 1973 , the Secretary of the Department of Defence , Arthur Tange , submitted a report to the Government that recommended the unification of the separate departments supporting each service into a single Department of Defence and the creation of the post of Chief of the Defence Force Staff . The government accepted these recommendations and the Australian Defence Force was established on 9 February 1976 . 
 = = = Defence of Australia era = = = 
 Until the 1970s , Australia 's military strategy centred on the concept of ' forward defence ' , in which the role of the Australian military was to co @-@ operate with allied forces to counter threats in Australia 's region . In 1969 , when the United States began the Guam Doctrine and the British withdrew ' east of Suez ' , Australia developed a defence policy emphasising self @-@ reliance of the Australian continent . This was known as the Defence of Australia Policy . Under this policy , the focus of Australian defence planning was to protect Australia 's northern maritime approaches ( the sea @-@ air gap ) against enemy attack . In line with this goal , the ADF was restructured to increase its ability to strike at enemy forces from Australian bases and to counter raids on continental Australia . The ADF achieved this by increasing the capabilities of the RAN and RAAF and relocating regular Army units to northern Australia . 
 At this time , the ADF had no military units on operational deployment outside Australia . In 1987 , the ADF made its first operational deployment as part of Operation Morris Dance , in which several warships and a rifle company deployed to the waters off Fiji in response to the 1987 Fijian coups d 'état . While broadly successful , this deployment highlighted the need for the ADF to improve its capability to rapidly respond to unforeseen events . 
 Since the late 1980s , the Government has increasingly called upon the ADF to contribute forces to peacekeeping missions around the world . While most of these deployments involved only small numbers of specialists , several led to the deployment of hundreds of personnel . Large peacekeeping deployments were made to Namibia in early 1989 , Cambodia between 1992 and 1993 , Somalia in 1993 , Rwanda between 1994 and 1995 and Bougainville in 1994 and from 1997 onwards . 
 The Australian contribution to the 1991 Gulf War was the first time Australian personnel were deployed to an active war zone since the establishment of the ADF . Although the warships and clearance diving team deployed to the Persian Gulf did not see combat , the deployment tested the ADF 's capabilities and command structure . Following the war the Navy regularly deployed a frigate to the Persian Gulf or Red Sea to enforce the trade sanctions imposed on Iraq . 
 = = = East Timor and after = = = 
 In 1996 , John Howard led the Liberal Party 's election campaign and became Prime Minister . Subsequently , there were significant reforms to the ADF 's force structure and role . The new government 's defence strategy placed less emphasis on defending Australia from direct attack and greater emphasis on working in co @-@ operation with regional states and Australia 's allies to manage potential security threats . From 1997 the Government also implemented a series of changes to the ADF 's force structure in an attempt to increase the proportion of combat units to support units and improve the ADF 's combat effectiveness . 
 The ADF 's experiences during the deployment to East Timor in 1999 led to significant changes in Australia 's defence policies and to an enhancement of the ADF 's ability to conduct operations outside Australia . This successful deployment was the first time a large Australian military force had operated outside of Australia since the Vietnam War and revealed shortcomings in the ADF 's ability to mount and sustain such operations . 
 In 2000 , the Government released a new Defence White Paper , Defence 2000 – Our Future Defence Force that placed a greater emphasis on preparing the ADF for overseas deployments . The Government committed to improve the ADF 's capabilities by improving the readiness and equipment of ADF units , expanding the ADF and increasing real Defence expenditure by 3 % per year ; in the event , expenditure increased by 2 @.@ 3 % per annum in real terms in the period to 2012 – 13 . In 2003 and 2005 , the Defence Updates emphasised this focus on expeditionary operations and led to an expansion and modernisation of the ADF . 
 Since 2000 , the ADF 's expanded force structure and deployment capabilities have been put to the test on several occasions . Following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States , Australia committed a special forces task group and an air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling aircraft to operations in Afghanistan , and naval warships to the Persian Gulf as Operation Slipper . In 2003 , approximately 2 @,@ 000 ADF personnel , including a special forces task group , three warships and 14 F / A @-@ 18 Hornet aircraft , took part in the invasion of Iraq . 
 Later in 2003 , elements of all three services deployed to the Solomon Islands as part of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands . In late 2004 , over 1 @,@ 000 ADF personnel deployed to Indonesia in Operation Sumatra Assist following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . In May 2006 , approximately 2 @,@ 000 ADF personnel deployed to East Timor in Operation Astute following unrest between elements of the Timor Leste Defence Force . 
 = = = Current operations = = = 
 In September 2015 , 2 @,@ 241 ADF personnel were deployed on operations in Australian territory and overseas . 
 The ADF currently has several forces deployed to the Middle East . The ADF 's contribution to the Military intervention against ISIL makes up the largest overseas commitment with 780 personnel deployed as part of Operation Okra . As of November 2015 , six F / A @-@ 18A Hornets , one E @-@ 7A Wedgetail and one KC @-@ 30A tanker were deployed to strike Islamic State targets in Iraq and Syria . Approximately 380 personnel were deployed to Iraq as part of an international effort to provide training and other forms of assistance to the Iraqi military . Deployments in Afghanistan number 250 personnel in Operation Highroad , a non @-@ combat training mission supporting the Afghan National Army . A frigate is also deployed to the Middle East in maritime security operations in and around the Gulf of Aden as part of the Combined Maritime Forces . Australian personnel also form part of peacekeeping missions in Israel , Jordan , Egypt and Sudan . The ADF has a further 400 personnel based in the Middle East to support operations in the region . 
 Australian military units are also deployed on operations in Australia 's immediate region . As of September 2015 , 500 personnel were deployed on Australia 's northern approaches in maritime security operations , forming Operation Resolute . ADF units undertake periodic deployments in the South China Sea and South West Pacific . 
 = = = Future trends = = = 
 Australia 's changing security environment will lead to new demands being placed on the Australian Defence Force . Although it is not expected that Australia will face any threat of direct attack from another country , terrorist groups and tensions between nations in East Asia pose threats to Australian security . More broadly , the Australian Government believes that it needs to make a contribution to maintaining the rules based order globally . There is also a risk that climate change , weak economic growth and social factors could cause instability in South Pacific countries . 
 Australian demographic trends will put pressure on the ADF in the future . Excluding other factors , the ageing of the Australian population will result in smaller numbers of potential recruits entering the Australian labour market each year . Some predictions are that population ageing will result in slower economic growth and increased government expenditure on pensions and health programs . As a result of these trends , the ageing of Australia 's population may worsen the ADF 's manpower situation and may force the Government to reallocate some of the Defence budget . Relatively few young Australians consider joining the military and the ADF has to compete for recruits against private sector firms which are able to offer higher salaries . 
 The ADF has developed strategies to respond to Australia 's changing strategic environment . The 2016 Defence White Paper states that " the Government will ensure Australia maintains a regionally superior ADF with the highest levels of military capability and scientific and technological sophistication " . To this end , the government intends to improve the ADF 's combat power and expand the number of military personnel . This will include introducing new technologies and capabilities . The ADF is also seeking to improve its intelligence capabilities and co @-@ operation between the services . 
 = = Current structure = = 
 The Australian Defence Force , Department of Defence and Defence Materiel Organisation ( DMO ) make up the Australian Defence Organisation ( ADO ) , which is often referred to as ' Defence ' . A diarchy of the Chief of the Defence Force ( CDF ) and the Secretary of the Department of Defence administers the ADO . The ADF is the military component of the ADO and consists of the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . 
 The Department of Defence is staffed by both civilian and military personnel and includes agencies such as the DMO , Defence Intelligence Organisation ( DIO ) and Defence Science and Technology Group ( DST Group ) . The DMO purchases and maintains defence equipment . The <unk> provides science and technology support to the defence forces . 
 = = = Command arrangements = = = 
 The ADF 's command arrangements are specified in the Defence Act ( 1903 ) and subordinate legislation . This act states that the Minister of Defence " shall have the general control and administration of the Defence Force " and that the CDF , the Secretary of the Department of Defence and the chiefs of the three services must act " in accordance with any directions of the Minister " . The leaders of the ADO are also responsible to the junior ministers who are appointed to manage specific elements of the defence portfolio . The position of Minister for Defence is held by Senator <unk> Payne who is also currently serving in the capacity of Acting Minister for Defence Materiel and Science and Darren Chester is the Assistant Minister for Defence . 
 The CDF is the most senior appointment in the ADF . The CDF commands the ADF , and is notionally the equal of the Secretary of Defence , the most senior public servant in the Department of Defence . The CDF is the only four @-@ star officer in the ADF and is a general , admiral or air chief marshal . As well as having command responsibilities , the CDF is the Minister of Defence 's principal military adviser . Air Chief Marshal Mark <unk> is the current CDF , and assumed this position on 30 June 2014 . Hugh White , a prominent academic and former Deputy Secretary in the Department of Defence , has criticised the ADF 's current command structure . White argues that the Minister plays too large a role in military decision @-@ making and does not provide the CDF and Secretary of Defence with necessary and sufficient authority to manage the ADO effectively . 
 Under the current ADF command structure the day @-@ to @-@ day management of the ADF is distinct from the command of military operations . The services are administered through the ADO , with the head of each service ( the Chief of Navy , Chief of Army and Chief of Air Force ) and the service headquarters being responsible for raising , training and sustaining combat forces . The Chiefs are also the CDF 's principal advisor on matters concerning the responsibilities of their service . 
 While the individual members of each service ultimately report to their service 's Chief , the Chiefs do not control military operations . Control of ADF operations is exercised through a formal command chain headed by the Chief of Joint Operations ( CJOPS ) , who reports directly to the CDF . The CJOPS commands the Headquarters Joint Operations Command ( HQJOC ) as well as temporary joint task forces . These joint task forces comprise units assigned from their service to participate in operations or training exercises . 
 = = = Joint combat forces = = = 
 Operational command of the ADF is exercised by HQJOC , which is located at a purpose @-@ built facility near Bungendore , New South Wales . This is a ' joint ' headquarters comprising personnel from the three services and includes a continuously manned Joint Control Centre . HQJOC 's main role is to " plan , monitor and control " ADF operations and exercises , and it is organised around groups of plans , operations and support staff . HQJOC also monitors the readiness of the ADF units which are not assigned to operations and contributes to developing Australia 's military doctrine . 
 As well as HQJOC , the ADF has permanent joint operational commands responsible to the CJOPS . Joint Operations Command ( JOC ) includes the two headquarters responsible for patrolling Australia 's maritime borders on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis , Northern Command and Border Protection Command . Other JOC units include the Joint Movements Group and the Air and Space Operations Centre . Individual ADF units and Joint Task Groups are assigned to JOC during operations , and HQJOC includes officers responsible for submarine and special operations forces . 
 = = = Royal Australian Navy = = = 
 The Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) is the naval branch of the Australian Defence Force . The RAN operates just under 50 commissioned warships , including frigates , submarines , patrol boats and auxiliary ships , as well as a number of non @-@ commissioned vessels . In addition , the RAN maintains a force of combat , logistics and training helicopters . The RAN is one of the most modern navies in the Pacific and is responsible for defending Australian waters and undertaking operations in distant locations . 
 There are two parts to the RAN 's structure . One is an operational command , Fleet Command , and the other is a support command , Navy Strategic Command . The Navy 's assets are administered by four ' forces ' which report to the Commander Australian Fleet . These are the Fleet Air Arm , the Mine Warfare , Clearance Diving , Hydrographic , Meteorological and Patrol Force , Submarine Force and Surface Force . All naval bases across Australia also report to the Commander Australian Fleet . 
 = = = Australian Army = = = 
 The Australian Army is Australia 's military land force . While the Australian Army is principally a light infantry force , it is currently being ' hardened and networked ' and expanded to enable it to conduct higher @-@ intensity operations . 
 The Army is organised into three main elements which report to the Chief of Army ; the Headquarters of the 1st Division , Special Operations Command and Forces Command . Headquarters 1st Division is responsible for high @-@ level training activities and is capable of being deployed to command large scale ground operations . It does not have any combat units permanently assigned to it , though it commands units during training activities and the Land Combat Readiness Centre reports to the divisional headquarters . Most of the Army 's units report to Forces Command , which is responsible for overseeing their readiness and preparing them for operations . Special Operations Command is responsible for preparing the ADF 's special forces units for operational deployments . This organisation came into effect during January 2011 ; before this time the Army 's three regular brigades were permanently assigned to the Headquarters 1st Division . 
 The Australian Army 's main combat forces are grouped in brigades . Its main conventional forces are three regular combat brigades which are organised on a common structure ; the 1st , 3rd and 7th Brigades . Support for the units in these formations is provided by an aviation brigade ( 16th Brigade ) , a combat support and <unk> brigade ( 6th Brigade ) and a logistics brigade ( the 17th Brigade ) . In addition , there are six Army Reserve brigades ; these brigades are administrated by the 2nd Division and " paired " with the three regular combat brigades . The Army 's main tactical formations are combined arms battlegroups made up of elements drawn from different units . 
 Special Operations Command ( SOC ) commands the ADF 's special forces units . It comprises the Special Air Service Regiment , two commando regiments , the Special Operations Engineer Regiment and signals , logistics and training units . The Army 's special forces units have been expanded since 2001 and are well equipped and capable of being deployed by sea , air or land . It currently comprises approximately 2 @,@ 200 personnel . 
 = = = Royal Australian Air Force = = = 
 The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) is the air force branch of the ADF . The RAAF has modern combat and transport aircraft and a network of bases in strategic locations across Australia . 
 The RAAF has a single operational command , Air Command . Air Command is the operational arm of the RAAF and consists of Air Combat Group , Air Mobility Group , Surveillance and Response Group , Combat Support Group , Air Warfare Centre and Air Force Training Group . Each group consists of several wings . 
 The RAAF has nineteen flying squadrons ; four combat squadrons , two maritime patrol squadrons , six transport squadrons , six training squadrons ( including three Operational Conversion Units and a forward air control training squadron ) as well as one Airborne Early Warning & Control squadron and a Joint Terminal Attack Controller squadron . The Air Force also includes a single independent flight ( No. 5 Flight ) . The ground units supporting these flying squadrons include three expeditionary combat support squadrons , three security force squadrons and a range of intelligence , air traffic control , communications , radar and medical units . 
 = = Logistic support = = 
 The ADF 's logistics are managed by the DMO and the Joint Logistics Command . The DMO was created in 2000 by merging the ADF 's Support Command Australia with the Department of Defence 's Defence Acquisition Organisation and National Support Division . The DMO purchases all forms of equipment and services used by the ADF and is also responsible for maintaining this equipment throughout its life of type . 
 The DMO is not responsible for directly supplying deployed ADF units ; this is the responsibility of the Joint Logistics Command and the single service logistic units . These units include the Navy 's Systems Command and replenishment ships , the Army 's 17th Combat Service Support Brigade and Combat Service Support Battalions , and the Combat Support Group RAAF . 
 The increasing role of the private sector forms an important trend in the ADF 's logistics arrangements . During the 1990s many of the ADF 's support functions were transferred to the private sector to improve the efficiency with which they were provided . Since these reforms most of the ' garrison ' support services at military bases have been provided by private firms . The reforms also led to many of the ADF 's logistics units being disbanded or reduced in size . Since this time private firms have increasingly been contracted to provide critical support to ADF units deployed outside Australia . This support has included transporting equipment and personnel and constructing and supplying bases . 
 = = Military intelligence and surveillance = = 
 The Australian Defence Force 's intelligence collection and analysis capabilities include each of the services ' intelligence systems and units , two joint civilian @-@ military intelligence gathering agencies and two strategic and operational @-@ level intelligence analysis organisations . 
 Each of the three services has its own intelligence collection assets . RAN doctrine states that " all maritime units " contribute to the collection of intelligence and many of the RAN 's ships are capable of collecting communications and electronic transmissions . The Collins class submarines are particularly effective in this role . The Army 's intelligence and surveillance units include the 1st Intelligence Battalion , 7th Signal Regiment ( Electronic Warfare ) , three Regional Force Surveillance Units and the Special Air Service Regiment . The RAAF monitors the airspace of Australia and neighbouring countries using the <unk> system , which combines input from the service 's Jindalee Operational Radar Network , other ADF air defence radars ( including airborne and naval systems ) and civilian air traffic control radars . The RAAF 's other intelligence assets include No. 87 Squadron and the AP @-@ 3C Orion aircraft operated by No. 92 Wing . A Space Situational Awareness capability is currently being installed at Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt to allow the tracking of space assets and debris . Australia also provides personnel to the US Joint Space Operations Center in Colorado Springs which tracks and identifies any man @-@ made object in orbit . 
 The Defence Intelligence and Security Group within the Department of Defence supports the services and co @-@ operate with the civilian agencies within the Australian Intelligence Community . This Group consists of the Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation ( DIGO ) , Australian Signals Directorate ( ASD ) and Defence Intelligence Organisation ( DIO ) . The DIGO is responsible for geospatial intelligence and producing maps for the ADF , the ASD is Australia 's signals intelligence agency and the DIO is responsible for the analysis of intelligence collected by the other intelligence agencies . The three agencies are headquartered in Canberra , though the DIGO has staff in Bendigo and the ASD maintains several permanent signals collection facilities in other locations . 
 The ASD includes a Cyber Security Operations Centre ( <unk> ) which is responsible for protecting Defence and other Australian Government agencies against cyberwarfare attacks . The <unk> was established in January 2010 and is jointly staffed by the DSD , other sections of the ADO , Attorney @-@ General 's Department , Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and Australian Federal Police . Unlike the United States military , the ADF does not class cyberwarfare as being a separate sphere of warfare . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Australian military has been an all @-@ volunteer force since the abolition of conscription in 1972 . Both women and men can enlist in the ADF , although there are some restrictions on the positions that women may fill . In general , only Australian citizens can enlist in the ADF though permanent residents are accepted in " exceptional circumstances " . The minimum age for recruits is 17 and the retirement age is 60 for permanent personnel and 65 for reservists . Discipline of defence personnel is guided by the Defence Force Discipline Act ( 1982 ) , ultimately overseen by the Judge Advocate General of the ADF . 
 = = = Personnel numbers = = = 
 Over the 2014 – 15 financial year the ADF had an average strength of 56 @,@ 922 permanent ( full @-@ time ) and 23 @,@ 232 reserve ( part @-@ time ) personnel . There were a further 22 @,@ 166 inactive members of the Standby Reserve as at June 2009 . The Army is the largest service , followed by the RAAF and RAN . The ADO also employed 19 @,@ 988 civilian Australian Public Service ( APS ) staff as of the 2014 – 15 financial year . The average distribution of ADF personnel between the services and categories of service over the 2014 – 15 financial year was as follows : 
 During the 2009 – 10 financial year 6 @,@ 063 people enlisted in the ADF on a permanent basis . This represented 91 % of the ADF 's recruitment target for that year . A further 671 people enlisted as part of the gap year scheme ( 96 % of the target ) and 2 @,@ 629 joined the reserves ( 84 % of the target ) . During that financial year 4 @,@ 000 people left the ADF 's permanent force , representing a 7 @.@ 1 % separation rate . 
 The number of ADF personnel has changed over the last 20 years . During the 1990s the strength of the ADF was reduced from around 70 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 permanent personnel as a result of budget cuts and the commercialisation of some elements of the military . The ADF began to grow from 2000 after the defence white paper released that year called for an expansion to the military 's strength . During the 2003 – 04 to 2005 – 06 financial years the strength of the ADF dropped as a result of problems with attracting further recruits . The ADF has consistently grown in all subsequent financial years , however . This growth is attributable to increased spending on recruitment and improved recruitment and retention policies . Nevertheless , some parts of the ADF are suffering from shortages of personnel ( such as technicians and trades people ) and demand for skilled labour in the broader economy is driving up the wages the ADF needs to pay to retain key personnel . As of May 2010 , 20 employment categories were considered " critical or perilous " due to a shortage of skilled personnel , though this had been reduced from 32 such categories in 2009 . 
 As of the 2011 – 12 budget , Defence planned to have a strength of 58 @,@ 627 full @-@ time personnel supported by 21 @,@ 397 civilians and contractors in the 2018 – 19 financial year . The Strategic Reform Program has included transferring the roles filled by several hundred ADF members to civilian APS staff as a means of reducing costs . 
 = = = Reserves = = = 
 Each of the branches of the ADF has a reserve component . These forces are the Royal Australian Naval Reserve , Australian Army Reserve and Royal Australian Air Force Reserve . The main role of the reserves is to supplement the permanent elements of the ADF during deployments and crises , including natural disasters . This can include attaching individual reservists to regular units or deploying units composed entirely of reserve personnel . As reservists serve on a part @-@ time basis , they are less costly to the government than permanent members of the ADF , but the nature of their service can mean that reservists have a lower level of readiness than regular personnel and require further training before they can be deployed . It has historically proven difficult to set a level of training requirements which allows reservists to be rapidly deployable yet does not act as a disincentive to recruitment and continued participation . 
 There are two main categories of reserve personnel ; those in the active reserve and those in the standby reserve . Members of the active reserve have an annual minimum training obligation . Army and RAAF reservists may also volunteer for the high readiness reserve ; this category of reservists have higher training and active service obligations . Members of the standby reserve are not required to undertake training , and would only be called up in response to a national emergency or to fill a specialised position . Most standby reservists are former full @-@ time members of the ADF . 
 While Australian Naval Reserve personnel are assigned to permanent units , most members of the Army Reserve and Air Force Reserve are members of reserve units . Most of the RAAF 's reserve units are not intended to be deployed , and reserve personnel are generally attached to regular air force units during their periods of active service . The Army Reserve is organised into permanent combat and support units , though most are currently manned at levels well below their authorised strengths and are not capable of deploying as formed units . There have been long @-@ running debates over whether the Army Reserve and its structure remain relevant to modern warfare . 
 The ADF 's increased activities since 1999 and shortfalls in recruiting permanent personnel has led to reservists being more frequently called to active service . This has included large scale domestic deployments , which have included providing security for major events such as the 2000 Summer Olympics and responding to natural disasters . Large numbers of reserve personnel have also been deployed as part of ADF operations in Australia 's region ; this has included the deployment of Army Reserve rifle companies to East Timor and the Solomon Islands . Smaller numbers of reservists have taken part in operations in locations distant from Australia . Notably , companies of the Army Reserve 1st Commando Regiment were regularly deployed to Afghanistan as part of the Special Operations Task Group . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 Individual training of Australian servicemen and women is generally provided by the services in their own training institutions . Each service has its own training organisation to manage this individual training . Where possible , however , individual training is increasingly being provided through tri @-@ service schools . 
 Military academies include HMAS Creswell for the Navy , Royal Military College , Duntroon for the Army , and the Officer Training School – RAAF Base East Sale for the Air Force . The Australian Defence Force Academy is a tri @-@ service university for officer cadets of all services wishing to attain a university degree through the Australian Defence Force . Navy recruit training is conducted at HMAS Cerberus , Army recruits are trained at the Army Recruit Training Centre and Air Force recruits at RAAF Base Wagga . 
 = = = Women in the ADF = = = 
 Women first served in the Australian military during World War II when each service established a separate female branch . The RAAF was the first service to fully integrate women into operational units , doing so in 1977 , with the Army and RAN following in 1979 and 1985 respectively . The ADF initially struggled to integrate women , with integration being driven by changing Australian social values and Government legislation rather than a change in attitudes within the male @-@ dominated military . 
 The number of positions available to women in the ADF has increased over time . Although servicewomen were initially barred from combat positions , these restrictions began to be lifted in 1990 . In 2010 approximately 92 % of employment categories and 84 % of positions in the ADF were available to females as well as males . The only positions which women are currently excluded from are those in which there is a high probability of ' direct combat ' , which includes all infantry positions and other positions in which there is a high probability of hand to hand combat . As a result , while almost all positions in the Navy and Air Force are open to women , women are excluded from a high proportion of Army positions . 
 Despite the expansion in the number of positions available to women and other changes which aim to encourage increased female recruitment and retention , there has been little growth in the proportion of female permanent defence personnel . In the 1989 – 1990 financial year women made up 11 @.@ 4 % of the ADF personnel . In the 2008 – 2009 financial year women occupied 13 @.@ 5 % of ADF positions . During the same period the proportion of civilian positions filled by women in the Australian Defence Organisation increased from 30 @.@ 8 % to 42 @.@ 8 % . As of the 2014 – 15 financial year , women made up 14 @.@ 5 % of permanent ADF positions and 16 @.@ 1 % of reserve positions . In 2008 , defence minister Joel Fitzgibbon instructed the ADF to place a greater emphasis on recruiting women and addressing barriers to women being promoted to senior roles . In September 2011 Minister for Defence Stephen Smith announced that the Cabinet had decided to remove all restrictions on women serving in combat positions , and that this change would come into effect within five years . This decision was supported by the CDF and the chiefs of the services . Women became able to apply for all positions other than special forces roles in the Army on 1 January 2013 ; it is planned that this remaining restriction will be removed in 2014 once the physical fitness standards required for service in these units are determined . Women will be directly recruited into all frontline combat positions from late 2016 . In 2015 the ADF adopted targets to increase the proportion of service personnel who are female by 2018 . 
 There continue to be concerns over the incidence of sexual abuse and gender @-@ based discrimination in the ADF . In 2014 the Defence Abuse Response Taskforce estimated that around 1 @,@ 100 currently @-@ serving ADF personnel had abused other members of the military , and recommended that a royal commission be conducted to investigate long @-@ running allegations of sexual abuse and assault of servicewomen at the Australian Defence Force Academy . In 2013 Chief of Army General David Morrison publicly released a video in which he warned against gender @-@ based discrimination , and stated that he would dismiss members of the Army who engaged in such conduct . 
 = = = Ethnic composition = = = 
 A high percentage of ADF personnel are drawn from the Anglo @-@ Celtic portion of Australia 's population . In 2007 the proportion of ADF personnel born in Australia and the other predominately Anglo @-@ Celtic countries was higher than this population group 's share of both the Australian workforce and overall population . As a result , analyst Mark Thomson has argued that the ADF is unrepresentative of Australia 's society in this regard and that recruiting more personnel from other ethnic backgrounds would improve the ADF 's language skills and cultural empathy . 
 The ADO is seeking to expand the number of Indigenous Australians it recruits and improve their retention rate . Restrictions on Indigenous Australians ' ability to enlist in the military existed until the 1970s , though hundreds of Indigenous men and women had joined the military when restrictions were reduced during the world wars . By 1992 the representation of Indigenous Australians in the ADF was equivalent to their proportion of the Australian population , though they continue to be under @-@ represented among the officer corps . Two of the Army 's three Regional Force Surveillance Units ( <unk> and the 51st Battalion , Far North Queensland Regiment ) are manned mostly by Indigenous Australian reservists . In 2007 Indigenous Australians made up 1 @.@ 4 % of permanent ADF personnel and 1 @.@ 8 % of reservists . 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 Australia allows gay men and lesbians to serve openly . Openly gay and lesbian personnel were banned from the ADF until November 1992 when the Australian Government decided to remove this prohibition . The heads of the services and most military personnel opposed this change at the time , and it caused considerable public debate . Opponents of lifting the ban on gay and lesbian personnel argued that doing so would greatly harm the ADF 's cohesiveness and cause large numbers of resignations . This did not eventuate , and the reform caused relatively few problems . A 2000 study found that lifting the ban on gay service did not have any negative effects on the ADF 's morale , effectiveness or recruitment and retention , and may have led to increased productivity and improved working environments . 
 Since 1 January 2009 same @-@ sex couples have had the same access to military retirement pensions and <unk> as opposite @-@ sex couples . Transgender personnel are also permitted to serve in the ADF , and are provided with support when necessary . The ADF has permitted a contingent of gay and lesbian personnel to march together in the Sydney Mardi Gras since 2008 , and from 2013 these personnel were authorised to wear their uniforms during the parade . 
 = = Defence expenditure and procurement = = 
 = = = Current expenditure = = = 
 The Australian Government allocated A $ 31 @.@ 9 billion to the Australian Defence Organisation in the 2015 – 16 financial year . This level of expenditure is equivalent to approximately 1 @.@ 92 % of Australian Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) . This was an increase from the A $ 25 @.@ 4 billion allocated in the 2013 – 14 financial year which represented approximately 1 @.@ 59 % of GDP . In 2013 – 14 the Defence budget was 6 @.@ 6 % of the Government 's planned expenditure . In broad terms , 42 @.@ 2 % of the 2011 – 12 defence budget will be allocated to personnel expenses , 35 @.@ 4 % to operating costs and 22 @.@ 4 % to investment . The amount allocated to defence in the 2013 – 14 budget was 2 @.@ 3 % higher than that in the previous year 's budget in real terms , though the 2012 – 13 expenditure was the lowest proportion of GDP to be allocated to Defence since 1938 . The 2013 – 14 budget also forecast that total expenditure on Defence over the next six years will be $ 200 billion , representing a real annual growth rate of 2 @.@ 5 % . This was despite the former Labor Government promising to increase Defence spending by 3 % in real terms until 2016 at the 2007 election . 
 The 2009 defence white paper included a commitment to increase defence spending by 3 % in real terms each year over a 21 @-@ year period . The white paper also specified that defence would be required to undertake a package of reforms named the ' Strategic Reform Program ' which aimed to save A $ 20 @.@ 6 billion over ten years through improvements to management practices and other efficiencies . However , the actual rate of growth in funding over the seven years covered by the white paper will be 1 % . 
 In relative terms , Australia 's defence expenditure as a proportion of GDP is greater than that of most developed Western nations , but is smaller than the proportion allocated to defence by Australia 's larger neighbours . The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute has estimated that Australia 's defence spending in 2010 was the 13th highest of any country in purchasing power parity terms . As a proportion of GDP Australia 's defence spending ranks as 57th of the countries for which data is available . 
 = = = Long term procurement projects = = = 
 The Defence Capability Plan ( DCP ) sets out the ADF 's long term capital programs . <unk> have been regularly produced since 2000 . The current public version DCP , which was released in 2009 and updated in late 2010 , contains 140 projects and phases of projects which have a total estimated cost of A $ 153 billion in 2010 dollars . Work on these projects will take place between 2011 and 2020 . The most expensive and complex projects in the DCP are the Collins class submarine replacement project , the purchase of at least 72 F @-@ 35 Lightning II fighters , upgrades to the RAAF 's Wedgetail AEW & C aircraft , the replacement of many of the ADF 's wheeled vehicles , the replacement of the Army 's ASLAV and M @-@ 113s and the development of new offshore combatant vessels and frigates to replace most of the RAN 's surface combatants . 
 = = Current equipment = = 
 The Australian Defence Force seeks to be a high @-@ technology force , and much of its equipment is scheduled to be replaced or upgraded in the near future . Australia does not possess weapons of mass destruction and has ratified the Biological Weapons Convention , Chemical Weapons Convention and Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty . Although most of the ADF 's weapons are only used by single service , there is an increasing emphasis on commonality . The three services use the same small arms and the FN Herstal 35 is the ADF 's standard hand gun , the <unk> <unk> the standard rifle , the <unk> Minimi the standard light support weapon , the FN Herstal MAG @-@ 58 the standard light machine gun and the Browning <unk> the standard heavy machine gun . 
 The Royal Australian Navy operates 47 commissioned ships and submarines , and 3 non @-@ commissioned vessels . The Navy 's 11 frigates are its most capable surface combatants ; the three remaining Adelaide @-@ class frigates provide the RAN 's surface offensive capability , while the eight Anzac @-@ class frigates are general purpose escorts . The RAN 's submarine force has six Collins @-@ class submarines . There are 13 Armidale @-@ class patrol boats for border security and fisheries patrol duties in Australia 's northern waters . The RAN 's amphibious force comprises the two Canberra @-@ class landing helicopter docks and the dock landing ship HMAS Choules . The Navy 's minesweeping force operates six Huon @-@ class <unk> . Two replenishment vessels ( Sirius and Success ) and six survey vessels ( the Leeuwin and Paluma classes ) support these combatants . Non @-@ commissioned ships operated by the RAN include the sail training ship Young Endeavour and two Cape @-@ class patrol boats leased to the RAN from the Australian Border Force . As of September 2014 , the Fleet Air Arm 's helicopter force comprised 42 helicopters ; 16 Seahawks and 4 MH @-@ <unk> Romeos for anti @-@ submarine tasks , 6 MRH 90 transport helicopters , 13 Eurocopter AS350 Squirrels and 3 Bell 429 <unk> for training purposes . 
 The Australian Army is primarily a light infantry force with equipment which may be carried by individual soldiers . It is also equipped with armoured vehicles and artillery ; the Army is introducing more armoured vehicles into service as part of the ' hardened and networked army ' initiative . The Army 's armoured , mechanised and motorised units are currently equipped with 59 M1A1 Abrams main battle tanks , 774 M113 armoured personnel carriers ( including vehicles in store ) , and 257 ASLAV armoured reconnaissance vehicles . 838 Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicles are currently in service with 214 on order as of July 2012 . The Army 's artillery holdings consist of 112 <unk> Hamel 105 mm calibre towed guns , 36 155 mm towed M198 howitzers , an unspecified number of 81 mm mortars and 30 RBS @-@ 70 surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . As of July 2015 , Australian Army Aviation is equipped with 115 helicopters , including 19 Kiowa reconnaissance helicopters , 22 Eurocopter Tiger armed reconnaissance helicopters , 34 S @-@ 70A @-@ 9 Blackhawk , six CH @-@ 47D Chinooks , one CH @-@ 47F Chinook ( with six on order ) , 27 of a planned 46 MRH 90 transport helicopters , and 12 Bell 206 training aircraft . The Army also operates 18 AAI RQ @-@ 7 Shadows as well as several <unk> and Skylark unmanned aerial vehicles . To support amphibious operations , the Army is equipped with 15 LCM @-@ 8 watercraft . 
 The Royal Australian Air Force operates combat , maritime patrol , transport and training aircraft . As at July 2015 the combat aircraft force comprised 71 F / A @-@ 18A and B Hornets and 24 F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets . The maritime patrol force was equipped with 15 AP @-@ 3C Orions and 6 Boeing E @-@ 7A Wedgetail AEW & C aircraft . The air transport force operated 12 C @-@ 130J @-@ 30 Super Hercules , 6 C @-@ 17 Globemaster IIIs with 2 on order , 2 C @-@ 27 Spartans with 8 on order and 9 Super King Air 200 / 300 utility transport aircraft . The RAAF also operates 3 Bombardier Challenger and 2 Boeing Business Jet 737 aircraft as VIP transports . 5 Airbus KC @-@ 30B Multi @-@ Role Tanker Transports were in service . The RAAF also operates 67 Pilatus PC @-@ 9 , 8 Beechcraft <unk> King Air and 33 Hawk 127 training aircraft . 
 = = Current bases = = 
 The Australian Defence Force maintains 60 major bases and many other facilities across all the states and territories of Australia . These bases occupy millions of hectares of land , giving the ADO Australia 's largest real estate portfolio . Defence Housing Australia manages around 17 @,@ 000 residences occupied by members of the ADF . While most of the Army 's permanent force units are based in northern Australia , the majority of Navy and Air Force units are based near Sydney , Brisbane and Perth . Few ADF bases are currently shared by different services . Small Army and RAAF units are also located at Royal Malaysian Air Force Base Butterworth . 
 The administrative headquarters of the ADF and the three services is located in Canberra alongside the main offices of the Department of Defence and Defence Materiel Organisation and the interim headquarters of Joint Operations Command . JOC and the other operational headquarters will be co @-@ located near Bungendore , New South Wales as part of the Headquarters Joint Operations Command Project . 
 The Royal Australian Navy has two main bases ; Fleet Base East ( HMAS Kuttabul ) in Sydney and Fleet Base West ( HMAS Stirling ) near Perth . The Navy 's operational headquarters , Fleet Headquarters , is located adjacent to Fleet Base East . The majority of the Navy 's patrol boats are based at HMAS Coonawarra in Darwin , Northern Territory with the remaining patrol boats and the hydrographic fleet located at HMAS Cairns in Cairns . The Fleet Air Arm is based at HMAS Albatross near Nowra , New South Wales . 
 The Australian Army 's regular units are concentrated in a few bases , most of which are located in Australia 's northern states . The Army 's operational headquarters , Forces Command , is located at Victoria Barracks in Sydney . Most elements of the Army 's three regular brigades are based at Robertson Barracks near Darwin , Lavarack Barracks in Townsville , Queensland , and Gallipoli Barracks in Brisbane . The Deployable Joint Force ( Land ) Headquarters is also located at Gallipoli Barracks . Other important Army bases include the Army Aviation Centre near Oakey , Queensland , Holsworthy Barracks near Sydney , Woodside Barracks near Adelaide , South Australia and Campbell Barracks in Perth . Dozens of Army Reserve depots are located across Australia . 
 The Royal Australian Air Force maintains several air bases , including three which are only occasionally activated . The RAAF 's operational headquarters , Air Command , is located at RAAF Base Glenbrook near Sydney . The Air Force 's combat aircraft are based at RAAF Base Amberley near Ipswich , Queensland , RAAF Base Tindal near Katherine , Northern Territory and RAAF Base Williamtown near Newcastle , New South Wales . The RAAF 's maritime patrol aircraft are based at RAAF Base Edinburgh near Adelaide and most of its transport aircraft are based at RAAF Base Richmond in Sydney . RAAF Base Edinburgh is also home to the control centre for the Jindalee Operational Radar Network . Most of the RAAF 's training aircraft are based at RAAF Base Pearce near Perth with the remaining aircraft located at RAAF Base East Sale near Sale , Victoria and RAAF Base Williamtown . The RAAF also maintains a network of bases in northern Australia to support operations to Australia 's north . These bases include RAAF Base Darwin and RAAF Base Townsville and three ' bare bases ' in Queensland and Western Australia . Of the RAAF 's operational bases , only Tindal is located near an area in which the service 's aircraft might feasibly see combat . While this protects the majority of the RAAF 's assets from air attack , most air bases are poorly defended and aircraft are generally <unk> in un @-@ hardened shelters . 
 = = Domestic responsibilities = = 
 The Australian Defence Force has domestic responsibilities . In most of these tasks the ADF supports the relevant civilian authorities . These responsibilities are typically undertaken by specialised elements of the ADF , though the services ' combat elements can be deployed within Australia in response to major emergencies . 
 The ADF makes a significant contribution to Australia 's domestic maritime security . ADF ships , aircraft and Regional Force Surveillance Units conduct patrols of northern Australia in conjunction with the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service . This operation , which is code @-@ named Operation Resolute , is commanded by the Border Protection Command which is jointly manned by members of the ADF and Customs . Up to 400 personnel were assigned to Operation Resolute in July 2010 . 
 While the ADF does not have a significant nation @-@ building role , it provides assistance to remote Indigenous Australian communities through the Army Aboriginal Community Assistance Program . Under this program , which has been conducted since 1996 , an engineer squadron works with one community for several months each year to upgrade local infrastructure and provide training . The ADF also took part in the intervention in remote Northern Territory Indigenous communities between June 2007 and October 2008 . During this operation ADF personnel provided logistical support to the Northern Territory Emergency Response Task Force and helped conduct child health checks . 
 The ADF shares responsibility for counter @-@ terrorism with civilian law enforcement agencies . Under the Australian National Counter @-@ Terrorism Plan the State and Territory police and emergency services have the primary responsibility for responding to any terrorist incidents on Australian territory . If a terrorist threat or the consequences of an incident are beyond the capacity of civilian authorities to resolve the ADF may be ' called out ' to provide support . To meet its counter @-@ terrorism responsibilities the ADF maintains two elite Tactical Assault Groups , the Special Operations Engineer Regiment as well as a company @-@ sized high readiness group in each Army Reserve brigade and the 1st Commando Regiment . While these forces provide a substantial counter @-@ terrorism capability , the ADF does not regard domestic security as being part of its ' core business ' . 
 = = Foreign defence relations = = 
 The Australian Defence Force cooperates with militaries around the world . Australia 's formal military agreements include the ANZUS Alliance with the United States of America , the Closer Defence Program with New Zealand and the Five Power Defence Arrangements with Malaysia , Singapore , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . Australia is currently developing closer security ties with Japan . ADF activities under these agreements include participating in joint planning , intelligence sharing , personnel exchanges , equipment standardisation programs and joint exercises . Australia is also a member of the <unk> signals intelligence gathering agreement . 
 New Zealand , Singapore and the United States maintain military units in Australia . The New Zealand and Singaporean forces are limited to small training units at ADF bases , with the New Zealand contingent comprising nine Army personnel involved in air navigation training . Two Republic of Singapore Air Force pilot training squadrons are based in Australia ; 126 Squadron at the Oakey Army Aviation Centre and 130 Squadron at RAAF Base Pearce . The Singapore Army also uses the Shoalwater Bay Military Training Area in Queensland for annual large @-@ scale exercises . 
 Two United States intelligence and communications facilities are located in Australia ; the Pine Gap satellite tracking station near Alice Springs and Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt near Exmouth , Western Australia . Pine Gap is jointly operated by Australian and United States personnel and Naval Communication Station Harold E. Holt has been an exclusively Australian @-@ operated facility since 1999 . In early 2007 the Australian Government approved the construction of a new unmanned US communications installation at the Defence Signals Directorate Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station facility near Geraldton , Western Australia . The United States Military also frequently uses Australian exercise areas and these facilities have been upgraded to support joint Australian @-@ United States training . As well as these facilities , between 200 and 300 US Military personnel are posted to Australia to liaise with the ADF and in November 2011 the Australian and American Governments announced plans to rotate United States Marine Corps and United States Air Force units through bases in the Northern Territory for training purposes . 
 The ADF provides assistance to militaries in Australia 's region through the Defence Cooperation Program . Under this program the ADF provides assistance with training , infrastructure , equipment and logistics and participates in joint exercises with countries in South East Asia and Oceania . The Pacific Patrol Boat Program is the largest Defence Cooperation Program activity and supports 22 Pacific class patrol boats operated by twelve South Pacific countries . Other important activities include supporting the development of the Timor Leste Defence Force and Papua New Guinea Defence Force and supplying watercraft to the Armed Forces of the Philippines . Australia also directly contributes to the defence of Pacific countries by periodically deploying warships and aircraft to patrol their territorial waters ; this includes an annual deployment of RAAF AP @-@ 3 Orions to the region as part of a multi @-@ national maritime surveillance operation . Under an informal agreement Australia is responsible for the defence of Nauru . 
 = = Assessment of capabilities = = 
 The ADF 's capabilities enable it to carry out a range of tasks . The size of the force that the government can deploy differs according to the likelihood of high @-@ intensity combat and the distance from Australia . In overall terms , Dr. Mark Thomson of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute assesses the ADF 's size and capability as being typical for a Western nation with Australia 's economic and population base . 
 The ADF has probably the most capable air and naval capabilities in the South @-@ East Asia region , though the small size of the Army and the age of much of the RAN and RAAF 's equipment constrains Australia 's ability to make large @-@ scale deployments or engage in high @-@ intensity combat . The ADF 's personnel shortages may also limit its ability to quickly conduct new deployments . 
 The ADF is highly capable of defeating direct attacks on Australia by conventional forces , though such attacks are highly improbable at present . The ADF 's intelligence gathering capabilities should enable it to detect any attacking force before it reaches Australia . Once detected , the RAN and RAAF would be able to defeat the attacking force while it was still in Australia 's maritime approaches . The Army and RAAF are also capable of defeating small raiding forces once they are detected . The ADF currently maintains sufficient forces to meet its domestic security and counter @-@ terrorism responsibilities . 
 The RAN and RAAF are capable of deploying significant numbers of capable ships and aircraft , these forces are large and modern enough to operate independently in a high @-@ threat environment and would typically make up a small part of a larger international coalition force . Due to its relatively small size the Army 's capability for high intensity warfare is more limited than that of the other services . 
 As a result of these limitations , the ADF is capable of providing only relatively small , but high @-@ quality , ' niche ' forces for high intensity warfare . Such forces include the Navy 's submarines , the Army 's special forces and the RAAF 's Orion aircraft . However , the ADF 's logistic capabilities are insufficient to independently supply such forces deployed in areas distant from Australia . As a result , the ADF can only contribute forces to high intensity warfare outside of Australia 's region when larger coalition partners provide logistical support . 
 The ADF is highly capable of undertaking peacekeeping operations around the world . The Navy 's frigates and transport ships , the Army 's light infantry battalions and the RAAF 's transport aircraft are well @-@ suited to peacekeeping . The ADF has the capability to undertake peacekeeping and low @-@ intensity warfare operations independently in Australia 's region and can sustain such deployments for a lengthy period . It is also capable of leading international peacekeeping forces in the Asia @-@ Pacific region and , in the unlikely event of an external attack , defending Australia 's Pacific neighbours . 
 = = = Works consulted = = = 
 = Battle of Old Trafford = 
 The " Battle of Old Trafford " is a name used by the British press to refer to a Premier League match played on Sunday , 21 September 2003 between Manchester United and Arsenal . The name was later applied to the same fixture during the following season . The final result , a 0 – 0 draw , turned out to be significant for Arsenal as they went on to finish the league season without a single defeat , something that had only been achieved once before in English football , by Preston North End in 1888 – 89 . 
 The highlights of the match included the sending @-@ off of Arsenal captain Patrick Vieira for a second bookable offence , for an incident that also brought about a booking for Manchester United centre @-@ forward Ruud van Nistelrooy , and the decision by referee Steve Bennett to award Manchester United a penalty kick in the last minute of the match . Players from both teams were charged by The Football Association ( the FA ) for their reactions at the end of the game , five Arsenal players and two Manchester United players were forced to pay fines . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fixtures between Manchester United and Arsenal had seen a number of controversial incidents in the previous seasons . The rivalry between the two clubs had grown more intense since the formation of the Premier League in 1992 , since when all but one Premier League title had been won by Manchester United or Arsenal ( Blackburn Rovers won the title in 1994 – 95 ) . However , the rivalry could be traced back to Alex Ferguson 's first fixture against Arsenal as United manager in 1987 , when David Rocastle was sent off and a row erupted . The following season , Brian McClair missed a penalty for United in an FA Cup tie and Nigel Winterburn made a point of aggravating him . McClair got his revenge in 1990 : after a lunging tackle from Winterburn on Denis Irwin , McClair and Irwin both kicked Winterburn while he lay on the floor , sparking a 21 @-@ man brawl . Both teams were fined and deducted points and it has often been suggested that this was a turning point in relations . The rivalry continued to intensify as " hard men " such as Patrick Vieira , Roy Keane and Martin Keown joined the sides . 
 The previous league match between the two clubs in April 2003 at Highbury was a competitive and bad @-@ tempered affair . In a match that finished in a 2 – 2 draw , Sol Campbell received a straight red card for violent conduct after elbowing Ole Gunnar Solskjær in the face . Manchester United went on to claim the title from Arsenal by five points after clawing back from being eight points down at the start of March 2003 . 
 The clubs had also been paired together in the fourth round of the FA Cup in February 2003 . Paul Scholes and Ruud van Nistelrooy of Manchester United , and Patrick Vieira of Arsenal were all shown yellow cards within the first seven minutes of the match and referee Jeff Winter had to call Vieira and Roy Keane together to calm their team @-@ mates down . Keane himself received a yellow card in the first half and Ryan Giggs missed an open goal from 18 yards . Arsenal eventually won the match 2 – 0 and the result infuriated Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson to such an extent that he kicked a boot across the changing room that hit David Beckham above the left eye . 
 As Manchester United and Arsenal won the Premier League and FA Cup respectively , both teams met in another heated match at the Millennium Stadium a month earlier for the 2003 Community Shield . Phil Neville was booked in the first minute for a challenge on Patrick Vieira , and a minute later Ashley Cole received a booking for fouling Ole Gunnar Solskjær . Yellow cards were also given to Quinton Fortune and Paul Scholes for United and Patrick Vieira for Arsenal , Arsenal substitute Francis Jeffers was shown a straight red for a kick on Phil Neville and , despite originally going unpunished , Sol Campbell was later given a three @-@ match ban by the FA for kicking out at Eric Djemba @-@ Djemba . The game finished 1 – 1 after 90 minutes and United eventually won the Shield 4 – 3 on penalties . Ruud van Nistelrooy had his spot kick saved by debutant Jens Lehmann but it was his opposite number and fellow debutant Tim Howard who was the hero , saving penalties from Giovanni van Bronckhorst and Robert Pirès . 
 Arsenal entered the match in second place in the Premier League after five matches , holding an unbeaten record that stretched back to the end of the previous season . Manchester United were a point behind Arsenal in third place , but they had already lost one match that season , against Southampton three weeks earlier . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Arsenal were missing defender Sol Campbell from their team after the death of his father , and manager Arsène Wenger dropped wingers Robert Pirès and Sylvain Wiltord in favour of Ray Parlour and Fredrik Ljungberg , creating a more physical midfield . Wenger 's tactics worked , as the Arsenal defence withstood the pressure from the Manchester United attack . United themselves were without Paul Scholes due to injury , and they played a 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 formation with Phil Neville , Roy Keane and Quinton Fortune completing a defensively minded midfield . 
 When Cristiano Ronaldo was fouled on the right wing 40 yards from goal in the 13th minute , Ryan Giggs was presented with the first chance of the match ; although intended as a cross , Giggs ' free @-@ kick hit the outside of the post . Another foul on Ronaldo gave Giggs another chance to apply pressure with a crossed free @-@ kick shortly after , but Ruud van Nistelrooy was only able to loop the ball over the goal with his head with goalkeeper Jens Lehmann beaten . Arsenal 's attacking play lacked their usual ambition , with their best opportunity coming in the 75th minute , when a deft touch from Dennis Bergkamp almost played Patrick Vieira into the penalty area . 
 The match was characterised by a large number of fouls – 13 by United , 18 by Arsenal – and referee Steve Bennett showed four yellow cards to each team , although most of those came as a result of the fracas at the end of the game . Vieira was booked in the 77th minute for a foul on Quinton Fortune , and was shown a second yellow card not long after , in the 80th minute . In challenging for a high ball outside the Arsenal penalty area , Van Nistelrooy jumped up onto Vieira 's back . Vieira fell to the ground and kicked out at Van Nistelrooy in retaliation , causing the Manchester United striker to jump backwards . Van Nistelrooy was booked for the original foul , and although Vieira 's kick failed to connect with the Dutchman , the referee believed that the intent was there and booked Vieira for the second time , resulting in his dismissal . 
 Despite Arsenal being reduced to 10 men , the scores remained level as the game went into its final minute , when Diego Forlán went to ground in the penalty area under a challenge from Arsenal defender Martin Keown while trying to reach a Gary Neville cross . The referee deemed this a foul and awarded a penalty . Van Nistelrooy stepped up to take the penalty , despite having missed his previous two penalties for Manchester United . Lehmann tried to put him off by moving from side to side along the goal line , and it appeared to work : the shot hit the bar and rebounded back into play , and the Dutchman was immediately confronted by Keown . Within a minute , the final whistle blew and the match finished as a goalless draw . 
 At the final whistle , Van Nistelrooy was immediately confronted by Arsenal players Martin Keown , Lauren , Ray Parlour , Ashley Cole and Kolo Touré . Keown jumped up next to Van Nistelrooy and brought his arms down hard on the Dutchman 's back , while Lauren pushed Van Nistelrooy in the back and Parlour and Cole offered verbal abuse . Van Nistelrooy did not react and was escorted away by Manchester United captain Roy Keane , but the incident escalated away from the two of them . In defence of their team @-@ mate , Manchester United players Ryan Giggs , Cristiano Ronaldo , Gary Neville , Mikaël Silvestre , Quinton Fortune and Rio Ferdinand also became involved in the situation . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the post @-@ match interviews , Van Nistelrooy was accused by both Vieira and Arsenal 's manager , Arsène Wenger , of feigning contact to get Vieira sent off , while United manager Alex Ferguson defended his player and denied he had dived . 
 As a result of these reactions , six Arsenal players , two Manchester United players and Arsenal Football Club itself were charged with improper conduct by The Football Association . As a club , Arsenal were charged with " failing to ensure the proper behaviour of their players " , while their players ' charges ranged from one charge of improper conduct for Ashley Cole 's " involvement in a confrontation with Cristiano Ronaldo after the final whistle " to Lauren 's two counts of violent behaviour for " kicking out at Quinton Fortune following the penalty award and for forcibly pushing Ruud van Nistelrooy in the back following the final whistle " , and two counts of improper conduct for " confronting Van Nistelrooy after Patrick Vieira 's sending @-@ off , and for confronting Ryan Giggs after the final whistle " . Manchester United as a club were not charged , but Ryan Giggs was charged with improper conduct for " his involvement in a confrontation with Lauren after the match had ended " and Cristiano Ronaldo was charged with improper conduct for " confronting Martin Keown at the conclusion of the match " . Phil Neville was also warned about his future behaviour . 
 Arsenal and their players pleaded guilty to the charges against them , but still received a £ 175 @,@ 000 fine , the largest ever given to a club by the FA . Lauren , Martin Keown , Patrick Vieira and Ray Parlour were all suspended for between one and four matches : Lauren received a four @-@ game ban – half of the potential ban he could have received – and a £ 40 @,@ 000 fine ; Keown was suspended for three matches and had to pay a £ 20 @,@ 000 fine ; Vieira and Parlour were given one @-@ game bans and had to pay £ 20 @,@ 000 and £ 10 @,@ 000 respectively . Jens Lehmann was originally charged but this was later dropped . Ashley Cole was not suspended but was given a £ 10 @,@ 000 fine . Ryan Giggs and Cristiano Ronaldo both pleaded not guilty to their involvement in the incident , but after a five @-@ hour hearing in December 2003 , Giggs was handed a £ 7 @,@ 500 fine and Ronaldo a £ 4 @,@ 000 fine and both were warned about their future conduct . 
 Arsenal finished the league season without a single defeat and earned the tag of The Invincibles , a tag once given to the 1888 – 89 Preston North End team , the only previous team to go through a league season undefeated . Van Nistelrooy 's missed penalty , therefore , was a crucial moment in Arsenal 's season . The return fixture between the two sides at Highbury finished as a 1 – 1 draw and passed without incident . The team was recognised for its excellent conduct throughout the rest of the campaign , being awarded the season 's Fair Play Award . Manchester United finished in third place in the league table behind Chelsea but defeated Millwall in the 2004 FA Cup Final . Their run included a semi @-@ final victory against Arsenal courtesy of a Paul Scholes goal . The following season , after Manchester United had brought Arsenal 's unbeaten run to an end after 49 matches , the two clubs were involved in another incident at Old Trafford , variously dubbed the Battle of Old Trafford II , the Battle of the Buffet or simply the Battle of Old Trafford . 
 = Bizarre Ride II the Pharcyde = 
 Bizarre Ride II the Pharcyde is the debut album of American hip hop group The Pharcyde , released on November 24 , 1992 through Delicious Vinyl Records . The album was produced by former group member J @-@ Swift , and features only one guest appearance , provided by little known Los Angeles rapper <unk> ( known then as " Buckwheat " from The <unk> ) . In the years after its release , Bizarre Ride has been hailed by music critics and alternative hip hop fans , as a classic hip hop album along with Souls of Mischief 's " 93 ' til Infinity " , and has appeared in numerous publications ' " best albums " lists . 
 Released during the dominant Gangsta rap era of West Coast hip hop , Bizarre Ride was described as " refreshing " due to its playful , light @-@ hearted humor and lush , jazzy production . Along with albums such as To Whom It May Concern ... by Freestyle Fellowship , and I Wish My Brother George Was Here by Del tha <unk> Homosapien , Bizarre Ride helped establish a new alternative scene on the West Coast , followed by artists such as Hieroglyphics , The Coup and Jurassic 5 . Despite its wide critical acclaim , the album produced only moderate sales , peaking at No. 75 on the Billboard 200 album chart in 1993 . However , on the strength of the second single , " <unk> ' Me By " , the album was certified gold in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 28 , 1996 . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 High school friends " <unk> " ( Tre Hardson ) , " Imani " ( <unk> Wilcox ) and " Bootie Brown " ( <unk> Robinson ) began their career in the entertainment industry as dancers and choreographers under the moniker " Two For Two " , making numerous appearances in music videos . Their most notable exposure came with a short stint on the television show In Living Color . While working on the show , the group met their future manager Suave , then a road manager for Candyman and Tone Loc . The trio met Derrick " Fatlip " Stewart and producer John " J @-@ Swift " Martinez at an after @-@ school music program called South Central Unit . The program 's teacher , Reggie Andrews , taught the group about essential elements of the music industry , and later oversaw the group 's writing and recording sessions . While attending SCU , the group recorded their first demo tape , which included the track " Ya Mama " . In 1991 , the group signed a deal with Delicious Vinyl Records , following a performance of the track " Ya Mama " at an artist showcase . Soon after , the group made their first notable appearance , with the track " Soul Flower " , released on the Heavy Rhyme Experience album by the Brand New Heavies . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The four emcees , along with producer J @-@ Swift , began recording their debut album in 1991 at the Hollywood Sounds studio in California , with Delicious Vinyl Records head Michael Ross overseeing the project as Executive Producer . J @-@ Swift produced 10 songs and five interludes — 15 of the album 's 16 tracks . Before the completion of the album , Swift had a falling @-@ out with the group over internal problems . He claimed that he was not properly compensated for his work , and that the other group members had tried to take production credit , when he had crafted all the beats himself . After leaving Pharcyde , J @-@ Swift began a crack cocaine habit , which he has yet to completely recover from . In a 2006 interview with Mass Appeal Magazine , Swift stated : 
 I would be in the studio crying ’ cause I couldn ’ t believe that I was in the situation that I was in . I was like , What did I do to deserve this ? All I did was try to help everybody , so I was kinda feeling sorry for myself . I was feeling suicidal but I knew that I didn ’ t have the balls to put a gun to my head , so I figured I ’ d smoke dope and just kill myself off this dope . 
 Now without a producer or a finished product , the group recruited local producer L.A. Jay to craft the album 's final recording , " Otha Fish " , which was also co @-@ produced by SlimKid 3 . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Lyrical content = = = 
 Much of the album 's acclaim was due to the eccentric , comedic content provided by the four emcees , who were described as a " pack of class clowns set loose in a studio " by Rolling Stone . The album 's wacky storytelling and light @-@ hearted playfulness provided an alternative to the pessimistic , hardcore hip hop that had ruled the scene at the time . Due to its light lyrical content , the album has been described as an extension of the " Daisy Age " , established by De La Soul and the Native Tongues Posse . AllMusic described the group 's rapping as " amazing " , and stated , " The <unk> quartet introduced listeners to an uproarious vision of earthy hip @-@ hop informed by P @-@ Funk silliness and an everybody @-@ on @-@ the @-@ mic street @-@ corner atmosphere that highlights the incredible rapping skills of each member . " Instead of focusing on the troubles of the inner city , the quartet use their verses to provide humorous first @-@ person narratives , with varying topics . On the album opener " Oh Shit " , SlimKid , Imani and Fatlip trade embarrassing tales about drunken antics , unusual sex partners and transsexuals . SlimKid , Imani and guest rapper Buckwheat use the song " On the DL " to vent personal stories that they 'd like to be kept " on the down @-@ low " , with topics including masturbation and murder . On the single " 4 Better or 4 Worse " , Fatlip dedicates an entire verse to prank calling , in which the rapper spouts insane and psychotic threats while a confused female victim continually threatens to call the police . The group 's debut single " Ya Mama " , described by the Rolling Stone Album Guide as the album 's most memorable track , calling it a " marathon game of the dozens " , sees the four rappers trading comical insults towards each other 's mothers . An online reviewer comments on the group 's humorous rapping style : 
 The first album by the lovably obnoxious California rappers , is a wonderfully adventurous exploration that covers almost every social topic known to man in the best way possible – with a brilliant mixture of low and high comedy and introspective contemplation . The four rappers that form The Pharcyde are all very humorous , thoughtful , <unk> lucid and self @-@ depreciating , and most importantly , they can actually rap . 
 While the majority of the album has a focus on comedic stories , the song " Officer " touches on the topic of racial profiling . " Otha Fish " finds the group rising up and moving on from their past hang @-@ ups as described in the previous track , " Passing Me By " , the album 's hit single . On the song , the four recount heartbreaking tales of school @-@ boy crushes that had eluded them . Their mix of humor and social insight was one factor in the album 's acclaim . An editorial reviewer comments on the group 's unique style : 
 When the Pharcyde burst onto the scene in the summer of ' 92 with its brilliantly disconnected grab bag Bizarre Ride II the Pharcyde , it seemed at first an <unk> enjoyable , goofy if somewhat lightweight disc . However , it would swiftly become clear that there were deeper waters stirring within the Pharcyde 's rhymes and rhythms , and that the group 's style was unlike that of those who came before . The main distinction came in the Pharcyde 's subject matters , which run the gamut from the usual sexual conquests all the way to rejection and masturbation . The group 's lyrics are often reflective and vulnerable , bordering on self @-@ deprecating at times . While many rappers who came before poked fun at themselves as a gimmick , the Pharcyde relates its rebuffs with confident candor . " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Bizarre Ride also featured the acclaimed production work of J @-@ Swift , who provides the album with a lush , jazzy soundscape through use of live instrumentation and sampling . Swift relied on a large number of samples , by artists including James Brown , Donald Byrd , Sly & the Family Stone , The Meters , Quincy Jones , Jimi Hendrix , Roy Ayers and Marvin Gaye . Aside from the samples , Swift also provided piano , bass and rhodes on the album , and fellow producer JMD provided drum arrangements . These upbeat key arrangements and quick @-@ paced drum loops provide much of the backdrop for the rapper 's animated lyrical deliveries . Allmusic calls the album 's production " easily some of the tightest and most inventive of any hip @-@ hop record of the era . " NME magazine stated , " The Pharcyde use jazz samples and phat beats to the ultimate effect : to create their own sonic Utopia . " . An online review describes the album 's unique musical atmosphere and layered production : 
 The music on the album is very lush and multi @-@ layered , with a mixture of live instruments , turntable <unk> , and samples from jazz , R & B , funk , classic rock and everything in between . Powerful beats pervade , with some of the most kinetic bass lines this side of <unk> . The Pharcyde forgoes the minimalism that now dominates mainstream rap music , favoring intense rhythmic layering and a strong melodic element instead . Piano lines cascade down dropping bass lines while three or four vocal tracks attack from all sides . The music is jaunty , elaborate and even atmospheric in parts ( consider the stoner rap anthem " Pack the Pipe " ) , all of it drawn tightly together with the band 's satirical lyrical outlook . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Bizarre Ride II the Pharcyde featured four singles , all of which were accompanied by music videos . The group 's debut single , " Ya Mama " , was originally released in 1991 , then re @-@ packaged by Delicious Vinyl in 1992 , with two additional songs , " I 'm That Type of Nigga " and " Soul Flower " . Though the song landed the group their record deal , it failed to reach any Billboard singles chart . Their first major exposure came with the release of the album 's second single , " <unk> ' Me By " . Utilizing a sample from Quincy Jones ' " Summer in the City " , the song became the group 's biggest crossover hit , peaking at No. 52 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and No. 1 on the Hot Rap Singles chart . The song was later featured on the soundtrack to , and in Adam Sandler 's 1999 film Big Daddy . The song is now considered a classic hip hop single , and was later included on comprehensive hip hop compilation albums like The Hip Hop Box and Hip Hop Gold . The album 's third single , " 4 Better or 4 Worse " , was released in mid @-@ 1993 , and featured the stoner song " Pack the Pipe " and the throwback track " Return of the B @-@ Boy " as its B @-@ Side . The single did not reach any Billboard chart . The final single , the SlimKid solo track " Otha Fish " , was released in late 1993 . The song became the second charting single from the album , though not as highly placed as " Passing Me By " , reaching only the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales chart . 
 A number of tracks from the album were later remixed . " Ya Mama " , " Soul Flower " , " Otha Fish " , and " Passing Me By " all featured a number of remixes , which were later included on the 2005 Pharcyde compilation album Sold My Soul : The Remix & Rarity Collection . 
 = = Reception = = 
 At the time of its release , Bizarre Ride received mostly positive , though at times , mixed reviews . In the years following its release , critical reaction became increasingly more positive . A number of music publications have since recognized the album as a classic . Bizarre Ride was listed on Pitchfork Media 's " Top 100 Favorite Records of the 90s " , and was also featured in the 2005 publication 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , in which it is stated : 
 When many MCs and rappers were striving to ' keep it real ' , The Pharcyde instead went out of their way to ' keep it original ' . J @-@ Swift 's production , along with the core members , sacrificed the more immediately catchy hooks for greater depth and a lush , soulful sound . While this may have cost them audiences at the time , the album is now a true classic , both of its time and of hip hop . It remains an influence on the scene even today . 
 Hip hop magazine The Source originally gave the album a humble 3 ½ ( out of 5 ) mic rating , but in 1998 , included Bizarre Ride on their 100 Best Rap Albums list . Allmusic gave the album a perfect 5 Star rating , while Rolling Stone and Q both gave Bizarre Ride positive 4 Star ratings . 
 An Ink Blot Magazine review called Bizarre Ride " the most fun album ever " , and stated : 
 Bizarre Ride II The Pharcyde reaffirms every positive stereotype you 've ever heard about hip hop while simultaneously exploding every negative myth with under a barrage of head @-@ twisting rhymes , jazz breaks and straight @-@ up funk . The samples nod ( wink ? ) at the past , the urgency of the rhymes keep things rooted in the present and the vibrancy of the overall vision keeps Bizarre Ride ... reaching for the future . Make no mistake , this is one of the most important records in the history of hip hop . It is the sound of black music 's past erupting in a riot of colour and excitement and possibility . It 'll make you dance , it 'll make you smile , and it 'll make you wanna do it all over again . 
 NME ( December 25 , 1993 , p . 67 ) – Ranked No. 39 in New Musical Express ' list of <unk> Top 50 LPs Of 1993 ' – " ... a cartoon @-@ strip of blunt @-@ smoking antics , sexual innuendo and unashamed political incorrectness , crammed with infectious funky beats .... " 
 In November 2010 , Kanye West named the album as his ' favorite album of all time ' . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 While alternative East Coast hip hop albums , such as De La Soul 's 3 Feet High and Rising ultimately sold over a million copies , there was no equivalent from the West Coast . With Bizarre Ride , The Pharcyde became one of the first alternative acts on the West Coast to sell large numbers of albums . Though Bizarre Ride did reach Gold status , the album 's sales paled in comparison to West Coast G @-@ funk releases of the era , such as The Chronic by Dr. Dre and Doggystyle by Snoop Dogg . 
 While Bizarre Ride sparked the career of The Pharcyde , the group did not attempt to capitalize on the album 's reception . Following the release , the group set out on the Lollapalooza tour , and waited almost three years to release their second album , Labcabincalifornia . While the album featured two highly regarded hit singles , " Runnin ' " and " Drop " , it received mixed reviews . Critics weighed the album against their debut , and some felt Labcabincalifornia fell victim to the sophomore jinx . Group member Bootie Brown later stated in a 2005 interview : 
 I don ’ t think it ’ s that they slept on it , they were just expecting a sound like Bizarre [ Ride II ] and we came out with something different . But after people actually listened , they felt it and <unk> to it and now it ’ s considered a classic . 
 Following the release of Labcabincalifornia , member Fatlip split from The Pharcyde , and the group did not return until 2000 , releasing the album Plain Rap to mediocre reviews . Though the album marked the first collaboration between the group and J @-@ Swift , Bootie Brown and Imani had a falling out with SlimKid ( now known by his birth name Tre Hardson ) , before the album was released , turning the group into a duo . In 2004 , Imani and Bootie released the group 's fourth album , Humboldt Beginnings , receiving little attention and harsh reviews . Tre and Fatlip have both since released solo albums , but no project released by the group or its members since their debut has been able to reach the acclaim of Bizarre Ride . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing and production information is taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Chart history = = 
 = = = Album chart positions = = = 
 All chart positions from Billboard magazine ( North America ) . 
 = = = Singles chart positions = = = 
 All chart positions from Billboard magazine ( North America ) . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Information is taken from Acclaimed Music . ( * ) designates lists which are unordered . 
 = SM U @-@ 29 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 29 or U @-@ XXIX was a U @-@ 27 class U @-@ boat or submarine for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . U @-@ 29 , built by the Hungarian firm of Ganz Danubius at Fiume , was launched in October 1916 and commissioned in January 1917 . 
 U @-@ 29 had a single hull and was just over 121 feet ( 37 m ) in length . She displaced nearly 265 metric tons ( 261 long tons ) when surfaced and over 300 metric tons ( 295 long tons ) when submerged . Her two diesel engines moved her at up to 9 knots ( 17 km / h ) on the surface , while her twin electric motors propelled her at up to 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ) while underwater . She was armed with two bow torpedo tubes and could carry a load of up to four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and a machine gun . 
 During her service career , U @-@ 29 sank three ships and damaged two others , sending a combined tonnage of 9 @,@ 838 GRT to the bottom . U @-@ 29 was at Fiume at war 's end and was surrendered at Venice in March 1919 . She was granted to France as war reparation in 1920 , but foundered while under tow to Bizerta for scrapping . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Austria @-@ Hungary 's U @-@ boat fleet was largely obsolete at the outbreak of World War I. The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy satisfied its most urgent needs by purchasing five Type UB I submarines that comprised the U @-@ 10 class from Germany , by raising and recommissioning the sunken French submarine Curie as U @-@ 14 , and by building four submarines of the U @-@ 20 class that were based on the 1911 Danish Havmanden class . 
 After these steps alleviated their most urgent needs , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy selected the German Type UB II design for its newest submarines in mid 1915 . The Germans were reluctant to allocate any of their wartime resources to Austro @-@ Hungarian construction , but were willing to sell plans for up to six of the UB II boats to be constructed under license in Austria @-@ Hungary . The Navy agreed to the proposal and purchased the plans from AG Weser of Bremen . 
 U @-@ 29 displaced 264 metric tons ( 260 long tons ) surfaced and 301 metric tons ( 296 long tons ) submerged . She had a single hull with saddle tanks , and was 121 feet 1 inch ( 36 @.@ 91 m ) long with a beam of 14 feet 4 inches ( 4 @.@ 37 m ) and a draft of 12 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 71 m ) . For propulsion , she had two shafts , twin diesel engines of 270 bhp ( 200 kW ) for surface running , and twin electric motors of 280 shp ( 210 kW ) for submerged travel . She was capable of 9 knots ( 16 @.@ 7 km / h ) while surfaced and 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ) while submerged . Although there is no specific notation of a range for U @-@ 29 in Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 , the German UB II boats , upon which the U @-@ 27 class was based , had a range of over 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) surfaced , and 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ) submerged . U @-@ 27 @-@ class boats were designed for a crew of 23 – 24 . 
 U @-@ 29 was armed with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry a complement of four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm / 26 ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and an 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun . 
 After intricate political negotiations to allocate production of the class between Austrian and Hungarian firms , U @-@ 27 was ordered from Ganz Danubius on 12 October 1915 . She was laid down on 3 March 1916 at Fiume and launched on 21 October . 
 = = Service career = = 
 U @-@ 29 underwent diving trials at Fiume and then made her way to Pola on 29 November 1916 . There , on 21 January 1917 , SM U @-@ 29 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy under the command of Linienschiffleutnant Leo Prásil . Prásil , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old native of Pola , had previously served as commander of U @-@ 10 . 
 U @-@ 29 departed on her first patrol on 23 January , destined for duty in the Mediterranean . The next day , however , the U @-@ boat encountered a severe storm near <unk> that damaged her . Prásil steered the boat into the harbor at Brgulje to wait out the storm . Departing Brgulje on the 25th to resume her journey to the Mediterranean , the submarine developed a leak when performing a test dive . U @-@ 29 headed back to Pula for repairs , which lasted until 30 January . On 5 February the U @-@ boat set out for Cattaro , which she reached after three days journey . 
 Prásil took U @-@ 29 out of Cattaro on 17 February to begin the delayed patrol in the Mediterranean , but on the 20th encountered another severe storm . Suffering no damage in the tempest , the boat continued on . On 24 February , she had an at @-@ sea rendezvous with U @-@ 43 . On 1 March the U @-@ boat 's gyrocompass broke down , necessitating a return to port . Two days later , as she neared Cattaro , U @-@ 29 encountered yet another storm , this one again damaging the ship . The beleaguered U @-@ boat headed back to the base at Pula for more repairs , and remained there until early April . 
 On 4 April , U @-@ 29 set out from Pula , touched at Cattaro , and continued on into the Mediterranean for her second patrol there . While 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ) from Cape Matapan , Prásil torpedoed and sank the steamer Dalton , traveling in ballast . U @-@ 29 took the master of the 3 @,@ 486 @-@ ton British ship captive ; three other men lost their lives in the attack . Five days later and some 115 nautical miles ( 213 km ) away , U @-@ 29 torpedoed Mashobra , a British India Line passenger steamer of 8 @,@ 173 gross register tons ( GRT ) . The ship , en route from Calcutta to London with a general cargo , was finished off by U @-@ 29 's deck gun . As with Dalton , Mashobra 's master was taken prisoner . Eight persons died in the attack . U @-@ 29 's gyrocompass broke down again on 17 April , once again forcing the boat to return for repairs . U @-@ 29 's second Mediterranean tour ended when Prásil docked the boat at Cattaro on 19 April . 
 U @-@ 29 's third Mediterranean deployment began on 8 May when she departed Cattaro . After eleven days at sea , Prásil torpedoed the British cargo ship <unk> 90 nautical miles ( 170 km ) from Cape Matapan . U @-@ 29 took the 3 @,@ 125 @-@ ton ship 's master captive . Two sources disagree on the number of casualties when <unk> went down , but place the number at either 21 or 31 . Escorting destroyers launched a depth charge attack on U @-@ 29 but did not succeed in damaging the U @-@ boat . Two days later , U @-@ 29 launched a torpedo attack on the British steamer Marie Suzanne but did not sink the ship . U @-@ 29 arrived at Cattaro on 25 May . 
 After a brief time in port , U @-@ 29 set out for the Mediterranean again on 17 June . One day out , the U @-@ boat came under attack from an airplane out of Valona , compelling U @-@ 29 to crash dive ; none of the three bombs dropped by the aircraft hit their mark . U @-@ 29 's patrol ended without success when she docked at Cattaro on 6 July . After a return to Pola on 12 July , the U @-@ boat underwent extensive repairs that kept her out of action for the next nine months . 
 On 16 March 1918 , the newly refitted boat sailed from Pola to Cattaro , departing that port for another Mediterranean tour on 25 March . Near Valona the next day , an Italian destroyer attempted to ram U @-@ 29 , scraping one of her propellers against U @-@ 29 's conning tower . The damage done was slight and U @-@ 29 continued on into the Mediterranean , weathering a storm in the Ionian Sea on the 27th . On 4 April , U @-@ 29 launched a torpedo attack on what was thought to be a cargo ship . In fact , it was the British protected cruiser Edgar which had been hit . Edgar was damaged but did not sink ; she suffered no casualties in the attack . The following day Prásil attempted to torpedo a ship in a convoy but missed and was exposed to a depth charge attack by the convoy 's escorts . The U @-@ boat ended the patrol with no further successes . 
 In June , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy planned an assault on the Otranto Barrage , similar to a May 1917 action that evolved into the Battle of Otranto Straits . U @-@ 29 was deployed from Cattaro on 9 June in advance of the attack . One of the seven separate groups participating in the attack , the two dreadnoughts Tegetthoff and Szent István , came under attack from Italian MAS torpedo boats in the early morning hours of 10 June . Szent István was hit and sank just after 06 : 00 , and the entire operation was called off . U @-@ 29 returned to Cattaro on 12 June . Over the next two months , U @-@ 29 operated in the Adriatic out of Cattaro , patrolling off Durazzo and the Albanian coast . 
 While at Cattaro , command of U @-@ 29 passed to Linienschiffleutnant Friedrich Sterz on 4 September . The 27 @-@ year @-@ old native of <unk> , <unk> ( in present @-@ day Italy ) , had previously commanded U @-@ 22 and , like Prásil , had also served a stint as commander of U @-@ 10 . After assuming command of U @-@ 29 , Sterz set sail for Durazzo the same day . The U @-@ boat had encounters with MAS torpedo boats on 9 and 12 September . On the latter date , U @-@ 29 had to crash dive to avoid a bombing attack from Allied airplanes . None of the seven bombs hit their mark and U @-@ 29 returned to Cattaro on 16 September . 
 Linienschiffleutnant Robert Dürrial replaced Sterz as commander on 29 September . The Galician Dürrial , like both <unk> and Prásil , had served as the commander of U @-@ 10 , but had most recently commanded U @-@ 21 . A day after assuming command , Dürrial headed for the Albanian coast in U @-@ 29 and patrolled off Durazzo . 
 After the Armistice with Bulgaria on 29 September ended Bulgaria 's participation in the war , Durazzo gained importance to the remaining Central Powers as the main port for supplying their forces fighting in the Balkans . Anticipating this , the Allies put together a force to bombard Durazzo . While the second echelon of the attacking force got into position to bombard the town , U @-@ 29 and sister boat U @-@ 31 maneuvered to attack . While U @-@ 31 was able to hit and damage the British cruiser Weymouth , U @-@ 29 was blocked by screening ships and herself attacked . The Allied escorts ( mainly American submarine chasers ) subjected U @-@ 29 to a heavy depth charge attack . U @-@ 29 was able to make her way back to Cattaro on 8 October . 
 Over the next three weeks , U @-@ 29 patrolled between Cattaro and Antivari , Montenegro . After her arrival back at Cattaro on 1 November , U @-@ 29 was moored between the coastal battleship Monarch and U @-@ 14 . There she remained until she was awarded to France as a war reparation in 1920 . U @-@ 29 was towed , along with sister boats U @-@ 31 and U @-@ 41 , from Cattaro for Bizerta for scrapping , but foundered on the way . In total , U @-@ 29 sank three ships with a combined tonnage of 14 @,@ 784 , and damaged one warship . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 * damaged but not sunk 
 = Black @-@ throated blue warbler = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler ( Setophaga caerulescens ) is a small passerine bird of the New World warbler family . Its breeding ranges are located in the interior of deciduous and mixed coniferous forests in eastern North America . Over the cooler months , it migrates to islands in the Caribbean and Central America . It is a very rarely found in western Europe , where it is considered to be a non @-@ indigenous species . The black @-@ throated blue warbler is sexually dimorphic ; the adult male has a black face and cheeks , deep blue upperparts and white underparts , while the adult female is olive @-@ brown above and light yellow below . 
 Predominantly insectivorous , the black @-@ throated blue warbler supplements its diet with berries and seeds in winter . It builds its nests in thick shrubs and the closeness of its nesting sites to the ground make it a favored species for the study of warbler behavior in the wild . The black @-@ throated blue warbler defends its territory against other birds of the same species for both nesting and winter habitats . As the black @-@ throated blue warbler requires large , unbroken forest areas for nesting , its numbers are declining . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin described the black @-@ throated blue warbler in 1789 . Its species name is the Latin adjective caerulescens meaning " turning blue " . 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler is one of the New World warblers or wood @-@ warblers in the family Parulidae . This species was originally placed under the genus Dendroica . It was recently adjusted to be a member of genus Setophaga along with all other members of the genus Dendroica , based on the findings from a recent phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA in 2010 . The old genus Dendroica was then deleted . Within the genus , it appears to have no particularly close relatives . 
 The species breeds in North America and winters in the Caribbean . Some studies have observed significant differences in terms of migratory behavior and plumage color between northern and southern populations within the breeding range . The northern population mainly winters in the western Caribbean ( Cuba and Jamaica ) while the southern population usually spends the winter on eastern islands ( Hispaniola and Puerto Rico ) . Moreover , males in the southern population have darker plumage than those in the northern population . These differences have led biologists to consider them as separate subspecies . However , a recent study in the United States reveals no significant genetic differentiation between northern ( samples from Michigan , New Hampshire and New York states ) and southern populations ( sample from North Carolina ) . The study results actually show a recent population expansion from a single glacial refugium , therefore the current populations are homogeneous in terms of genetics . The differentiation that is observed between the northern and southern populations should have occurred quite recently . 
 = = Description = = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler measures 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) in length and weighs 8 @.@ 4 – 12 @.@ 4 g ( 0 @.@ 30 – 0 @.@ 44 oz ) . The adult male has white underparts with a black throat , face and flanks . The upperparts are deep blue . The immature male is similar , but with greener upperparts . The female has olive @-@ brown upperparts and light yellow underparts with darker wings and tail , gray crown and brown patches on the cheek . Both sexes have a thin pointed bill and small white wing patches which are not always visible . Like many other warbler species , it has colorful plumage during the spring and summer . However , outside the breeding season its plumage is drab and less distinctive . In the fall , the black @-@ throated blue warbler can be distinguished by its small white wing patches . Juveniles have brown upperparts with a creamy supercilium and brownish spots on the throat , the breast and the belly . 
 The bird 's song can be described as a buzzed zee @-@ zee @-@ <unk> with an upward inflection . Its call is a flat <unk> . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler is a migratory species . It breeds in temperate mature deciduous forests or mixed coniferous @-@ deciduous forest with a thick understory . The species is often found in hilly and mountainous regions in the northeastern United States and southeastern Canada . In late summer , it migrates to the tropical wooded and scrub habitats in the Greater Antilles for wintering . Along the migration route , the black @-@ throated blue warbler can be observed in habitats such as parks and gardens . Its nesting site is more important than its foraging site in playing a role in determining the habitat of the black @-@ throated blue warbler . The black @-@ throated blue warbler is an open @-@ nesting species , that nests very close to the ground so it has to choose a protected nesting site where the risk of predation is relatively low . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Feeding and foraging = = = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler forages actively in low vegetation , sometimes hovering or catching insects in flight . It often forages in one area for a while before moving on to the next . It mainly eats invertebrates such as caterpillars , crane flies , and spiders . It may supplement its diet with seeds , berries , and fruit in the winter . 
 Males and females prefer different foraging sites . While males usually hover among the higher shrub foliage between 3 and 9 m ( 9 @.@ 8 and 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , females tend to forage at lower strata . The time within a breeding season influences where the males forage . When it is time to feed the fledglings , males come down to the same foraging strata as females . The black @-@ throated blue warbler mostly forages in the understory instead of the canopy . The large leaves and long branches in the understory affect its foraging behaviors . The black @-@ throated blue warbler more often hovers rather than gleans its prey because it is more difficult to glean among thick understory foliage . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler is a monogamous species . Its breeding season usually begins in May and ends in July . As a songbird , the male black @-@ throated blue warbler attracts a female ’ s attention by singing a soft melody . He then follows the female while she is foraging or searching for nesting sites . As soon as the female stops to rest , the male droops his wings slightly , stretches his head forward and up , opens his bill , and faces the female . The female also makes displays to the male by vibrating her wings . In response , the male mounts the female for 2 – 3 seconds and then flies off . 
 A 1996 , researchers showed that the black @-@ throated blue warbler prefers to reside in hardwood forests with higher shrub densities where food is more abundant compared to lower shrub density plots . Within these high shrub density habitats , not only is there a higher density of warblers , but the population age average is also older , being composed of males and females who are at least two years of age . 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler uses social cues in its evaluation and choice of nesting sites . In particular , it listens to the post @-@ breeding songs given out by other males . These songs have strong temporal dependencies . Males sing at the beginning and the peak of breeding season , but songs are not indicative of reproductive success . Near the end of a breeding season , a male that has successfully mated continues to sing while a male that has failed to reproduce abandons the habitat . Therefore , post @-@ breeding songs are reliable indicators of reproductive success within the particular habitat and convey essential information to the natal and breeding dispersers . In comparison to the traditional idea of direct assessment of the vegetation structure , the vocal cue is much more efficient and easier to obtain , hence revealing the advantage of social communication in survival and reproduction . A female , however , does not respond to post @-@ breeding songs directly . Instead , she is likely to rely on the presence of males in deciding nesting sites . 
 = = = = Extra @-@ pair mating = = = = 
 Although the black @-@ throated blue warbler is a socially monogamous species , males are frequently observed in territories of other males , suggesting the occurrence of extra @-@ pair matings . Nestling parentage is identified by microsatellites in a study plot at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire . The results show that extra @-@ pair fertilization occurs and that the majority of the extra @-@ pair sires come from males in neighboring territories . Only very few extra @-@ pair sires are from distant territories . This local reproductive interaction is also supported by another study conducted earlier , which finds that extra pair fertilizations are strongly and positively correlated with local synchrony but there is no significant association with population level synchrony . 
 Males engage in mate guarding during the period females are most vulnerable to successful extra pair copulations . They usually stay close to their social mate , singing slowly on the side and following the mate while she is foraging or searching for a nesting site . The guarding behavior , though , may conflict with males ’ pursuit of extra @-@ pair fertilizations . It is not yet clear to what extent a male will prefer mate guarding over extra @-@ pair fertilizations . Male retention studies have shown that removal of a male increases the chance of extra @-@ pair offspring in the brood , suggesting that mate guarding reduces extra @-@ pair fertilization attempts . The extra @-@ pair fertilization rate nonetheless cannot be eliminated even if males are allowed to stay near their social mates during fertility risk period . Several hypotheses try to explain this phenomenon : females may be able to manage extra @-@ pair mating even while its social mate is guarding it , or females may reject extra @-@ pair copulation attempts by other males in the absence of male guarding . 
 Females who participate in extra @-@ pair fertilizations may incorporate better genes in their offspring than they could get with their social mate , but they are likely to receive less help with parental care from their social mates because of cheating . Extra @-@ pair fertilization , therefore , can be costly to females as well . A possible theory why extra @-@ pair fertilization occurs is that female organisms select males with overall high heterozygosity or dissimilar genetics from themselves . A microsatellite study suggests an alternative to heterozygosity selection . Because no correlation is found between female extra @-@ pair fertilization frequencies and the overall heterozygosity of their social mates , it is suggested that females may choose only a selective set of heterozygous genes , particularly the MHC locus , which can affect the <unk> of offspring . 
 = = = Sexual selection = = = 
 Males ’ differential recognition of local and nonlocal songs has been studied in two populations : one in the northern United States ( New Hampshire ) and the other in the southern United States ( North Carolina ) . An asymmetry of response has been found between the two populations . The northern black @-@ throated blue warbler responds strongly to local songs but relatively weakly to the song of southern warblers . In contrast , a warbler from the south responds equally to songs from both the north and the south . A potential explanation of this asymmetry is the difference in female preference between the northern and southern black @-@ throated blue warblers . Females from the north are less likely to mate with a “ heterospecific ” male from the south ; therefore it is not necessary for a northern male to respond strongly to the song of a southern challenger . It is possible that a barrier to gene flow from south to north exists while a barrier to the reverse does not . Therefore , female choice of male songs is likely to play a role in gene flow and reproductive isolation , which may eventually lead to diversification . 
 It has long been believed that a male black @-@ throated blue warbler achieves reproductive maturation well into its first breeding season . A yearling participates in extra @-@ pair mating and cuckoldry as much as or even more than older males . However , research by Graves has found opposing evidence in terms of testicular size and sperm production . Directional asymmetry is present in many passerine birds . The left testicle is often larger in size than the right one , and this holds true for both yearling and older male warblers . However , the testicle to body mass ratio nonetheless is much lower in yearlings than in older males . Moreover , older males have a greater degree of directional asymmetry than do yearlings . Because the size of testes in birds is correlated to the ejaculate quality , it is likely that females employ age @-@ dependent choice in favor of older males who can be distinguished by their definitive age @-@ specific plumage . 
 = = Status and threats = = 
 The black @-@ throated blue warbler enjoys a large range and a big population . Its population trend is currently increasing . This species was ranked as Least Concern by the IUCN in 2012 . Deforestation and habitat fragmentation are threatening the black @-@ throated blue warbler in its tropical wintering areas . A report in 2000 discussed the impact of global climate change on the population dynamics of the black @-@ throated blue warbler by an observation from 1986 to 1998 . In particular , the effect of El Niño Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) was studied in relation to the survival , fecundity and recruitment of this migratory bird . It was found that El Niño years ( the warm South Pacific oceanic phase ) were associated with lower adult survival rate in their wintering ground , Jamaica , lower fecundity in the breeding habitats in New Hampshire of the United States , and lower annual recruitment of yearlings and juveniles to both breeding and wintering grounds . All the three factors were relatively higher during La Niña years ( cold South Pacific ocean ) when the weather was wetter and the food availability was much more abundant . Long @-@ term global warming can aggravate the ENSO effect , adding to the fluctuation of the black @-@ throated blue warbler population . 
 = Alboin = 
 Alboin ( 530s – June 28 , 572 ) was king of the Lombards from about 560 until 572 . During his reign the Lombards ended their migrations by settling in Italy , the northern part of which Alboin conquered between 569 and 572 . He had a lasting effect on Italy and the Pannonian Basin ; in the former his invasion marked the beginning of centuries of Lombard rule , and in the latter his defeat of the Gepids and his departure from Pannonia ended the dominance there of the Germanic peoples . 
 The period of Alboin 's reign as king in Pannonia following the death of his father , Audoin , was one of confrontation and conflict between the Lombards and their main neighbors , the Gepids . The Gepids initially gained the upper hand , but in 567 , thanks to his alliance with the Avars , Alboin inflicted a decisive defeat on his enemies , whose lands the Avars subsequently occupied . The increasing power of his new neighbours caused Alboin some unease however , and he therefore decided to leave Pannonia for Italy , hoping to take advantage of the Byzantine Empire 's reduced ability to defend its territory in the wake of the Gothic War . 
 After gathering a large coalition of peoples , Alboin crossed the Julian Alps in 568 , entering an almost undefended Italy . He rapidly took control of most of Venetia and Liguria . In 569 , unopposed , he took northern Italy 's main city , Milan . Pavia offered stiff resistance however , and was only taken after a siege lasting three years . During that time Alboin turned his attention to Tuscany , but signs of factionalism among his supporters and Alboin 's diminishing control over his army increasingly began to manifest themselves . 
 Alboin was assassinated on June 28 , 572 , in a coup d 'état instigated by the Byzantines . It was organized by the king 's foster brother , Helmichis , with the support of Alboin 's wife , Rosamund , daughter of the Gepid king whom Alboin had killed some years earlier . The coup failed in the face of opposition from a majority of the Lombards , who elected Cleph as Alboin 's successor , forcing Helmichis and Rosamund to flee to Ravenna under imperial protection . Alboin 's death deprived the Lombards of the only leader who could have kept the newborn Germanic entity together , the last in the line of hero @-@ kings who had led the Lombards through their migrations from the vale of the Elbe to Italy . For many centuries following his death Alboin 's heroism and his success in battle were celebrated in Saxon and Bavarian epic poetry . 
 = = Father 's rule = = 
 The Lombards under King <unk> had migrated towards the east into Pannonia , taking advantage of the difficulties facing the Ostrogothic Kingdom in Italy following the death of its founder , Theodoric in 526 . <unk> 's death in about 540 brought his son <unk> to the throne , but as the latter was still a minor the kingdom was governed in his stead by Alboin 's father , Audoin , of the <unk> clan . Seven years later <unk> died , giving Audoin the opportunity to crown himself and overthrow the reigning <unk> . 
 Alboin was probably born in the 530s in Pannonia , the son of Audoin and his wife , Rodelinda . She may have been the niece of King Theodoric and betrothed to Audoin through the mediation of Emperor Justinian . Like his father , Alboin was raised a pagan , although Audoin had at one point attempted to gain Byzantine support against his neighbours by professing himself a Christian . Alboin took as his first wife the Christian Chlothsind , daughter of the Frankish King Chlothar . This marriage , which took place soon after the death of the Frankish ruler <unk> in 555 , is thought to reflect Audoin 's decision to distance himself from the Byzantines , traditional allies of the Lombards , who had been lukewarm when it came to supporting Audoin against the Gepids . The new Frankish alliance was important because of the Franks ' known hostility to the Byzantine empire , providing the Lombards with more than one option . However , the <unk> of the Later Roman Empire interprets events and sources differently , believing that Alboin married Chlothsind when already a king in or shortly before 561 , the year of Chlothar 's death . 
 Alboin first distinguished himself on the battlefield in a clash with the Gepids . At the Battle of Asfeld ( 552 ) , he killed Turismod , son of the Gepid king Thurisind , in a victory that resulted in the Emperor Justinian 's intervention to maintain equilibrium between the rival regional powers . After the battle , according to a tradition reported by Paul the Deacon , to be granted the right to sit at his father 's table , Alboin had to ask for the hospitality of a foreign king and have him donate his weapons , as was customary . For this initiation , he went to the court of Thurisind , where the Gepid king gave him Turismod 's arms . Walter Goffart believes it is probable that in this narrative Paul was making use of an oral tradition , and is sceptical that it can be dismissed as merely a typical topos of an epic poem . 
 = = Reign in Pannonia = = 
 Alboin came to the throne after the death of his father , sometime between 560 and 565 . As was customary among the Lombards , Alboin took the crown after an election by the tribe 's freemen , who traditionally selected the king from the dead sovereign 's clan . Shortly afterwards , in 565 , a new war erupted with the Gepids , now led by Cunimund , Thurisind 's son . The cause of the conflict is uncertain , as the sources are divided ; the Lombard Paul the Deacon accuses the Gepids , while the Byzantine historian Menander Protector places the blame on Alboin , an interpretation favoured by historian Walter Pohl . 
 An account of the war by the Byzantine Theophylact Simocatta <unk> the reasons behind the conflict , claiming it originated with Alboin 's vain courting and subsequent kidnapping of Cunimund 's daughter Rosamund , that Alboin proceeded then to marry . The tale is treated with scepticism by Walter Goffart , who observes that it conflicts with the Origo Gentis Langobardorum , where she was captured only after the death of her father . The Gepids obtained the support of the Emperor in exchange for a promise to cede him the region of Sirmium , the seat of the Gepid kings . Thus in 565 or 566 Justinian 's successor Justin II sent his son @-@ in @-@ law <unk> as magister militum ( field commander ) to lead a Byzantine army against Alboin in support of Cunimund , ending in the Lombards ' complete defeat . 
 Faced with the possibility of annihilation , Alboin made an alliance in 566 with the Avars under Bayan I , at the expense of some tough conditions ; the Avars demanded a tenth of the Lombards ' cattle , half of the war booty , and on the war 's conclusion all of the lands held by the Gepids . The Lombards played on the pre @-@ existing hostility between the Avars and the Byzantines , claiming that the latter were allied with the Gepids . Cunimund , on the other hand , encountered hostility when he once again asked the Emperor for military assistance , as the Byzantines had been angered by the Gepids ' failure to cede Sirmium to them , as had been agreed . Moreover , Justin II was moving away from the foreign policy of Justinian , and believed in dealing more strictly with bordering states and peoples . Attempts to mollify Justin II with tributes failed , and as a result the Byzantines kept themselves neutral if not outright supportive of the Avars . 
 In 567 the allies made their final move against Cunimund , with Alboin invading the Gepids ' lands from the northwest while Bayan attacked from the northeast . Cunimund attempted to prevent the two armies joining up by moving against the Lombards and clashing with Alboin somewhere between the <unk> and Danube rivers . The Gepids were defeated in the ensuing battle , their king slain by Alboin , and Cunimund 's daughter Rosamund taken captive , according to references in the Origo . The full destruction of the Gepid kingdom was completed by the Avars , who overcame the Gepids in the east . As a result , the Gepids ceased to exist as an independent people , and were partly absorbed by the Lombards and the Avars . Some time before 568 , Alboin 's first wife Chlothsind died , and after his victory against Cunimund Alboin married Rosamund , to establish a bond with the remaining Gepids . The war also marked a watershed in the geo @-@ political history of the region , as together with the Lombard migration the following year , it signalled the end of six centuries of Germanic dominance in the Pannonian Basin . 
 = = Preparations and departure from Pannonia = = 
 Despite his success against the Gepids , Alboin had failed to greatly increase his power , and was now faced with a much stronger threat from the Avars . Historians consider this the decisive factor in convincing Alboin to undertake a migration , even though there are indications that before the war with the Gepids a decision was maturing to leave for Italy , a country thousands of Lombards had seen in the 550s when hired by the Byzantines to fight in the Gothic War . Additionally , the Lombards would have known of the weakness of Byzantine Italy , which had endured a number of problems after being retaken from the Goths . In particular the so @-@ called Plague of Justinian had ravaged the region and conflict remained endemic , with the Three @-@ Chapter Controversy sparking religious opposition and administration at a standstill after the able governor of the peninsula , Narses , was recalled . Nevertheless , the Lombards viewed Italy as a rich land which promised great booty , assets Alboin used to gather together a horde which included not only Lombards but many other peoples of the region , including Heruli , Suebi , Gepids , <unk> , Bulgars , Sarmatians , the remaining Romans and a few Ostrogoths . But the most important group , other than the Lombards , were the Saxons , of whom 20 @,@ 000 participated in the trek . These Saxons were tributaries to the Frankish King Sigebert , and their participation indicates that Alboin had the support of the Franks for his venture . 
 The precise size of the heterogeneous group gathered by Alboin is impossible to know , and many different estimates have been made . Neil Christie considers 150 @,@ 000 – 500 @,@ 000 to be a realistic size , a number which would make the Lombards a more numerous force than the Ostrogoths on the eve of their invasion of Italy . Jörg Jarnut proposes 100 @,@ 000 – 150 @,@ 000 as an approximation ; Wilfried <unk> in Die <unk> estimates 150 @,@ 000 to 200 @,@ 000 ; while Stefano Gasparri cautiously judges the peoples united by Alboin to be somewhere between 100 @,@ 000 and 300 @,@ 000 . 
 As a precautionary move Alboin strengthened his alliance with the Avars , signing what Paul calls a <unk> perpetuum ( " perpetual treaty " ) and what is referred to in the 9th @-@ century Historia Langobardorum <unk> Gothani as a <unk> et <unk> <unk> ( " pact and treaty of friendship " ) , adding that the treaty was put down on paper . By the conditions accepted in the treaty , the Avars were to take possession of Pannonia and the Lombards were promised military support in Italy should the need arise ; also , for a period of 200 years the Lombards were to maintain the right to reclaim their former territories if the plan to conquer Italy failed , thus leaving Alboin with an alternative open . The accord also had the advantage of protecting Alboin 's rear , as an Avar @-@ occupied Pannonia would make it difficult for the Byzantines to bring forces to Italy by land . The agreement proved immensely successful , and relations with the Avars were almost uninterruptedly friendly during the lifetime of the Lombard Kingdom . 
 A further cause of the Lombard migration into Italy may have been an invitation from Narses . According to a controversial tradition reported by several medieval sources , Narses , out of spite for having been removed by Justinian 's successor Justin II , called the Lombards to Italy . Often dismissed as an unreliable tradition , it has been studied with attention by modern scholars , in particular Neil Christie , who see in it a possible record of a formal invitation by the Byzantine state to settle in northern Italy as foederati , to help protect the region against the Franks , an arrangement that may have been disowned by Justin II after Narses ' removal . 
 = = = March to Italy = = = 
 The Lombard migration started on Easter Monday , April 2 , 568 . The decision to combine the departure with a Christian celebration can be understood in the context of Alboin 's recent conversion to Arian Christianity , as attested by the presence of Arian Gothic missionaries at his court . The conversion is likely to have been motivated mostly from political considerations , and intended to consolidate the migration 's cohesion , distinguishing them from the Catholic Romans . It also connected Alboin and his people to the Gothic heritage , and in this way obtain the support of the Ostrogoths serving in the Byzantine army as foederati . It has been speculated that Alboin 's migration could have been partly the result of a call from surviving Ostrogoths in Italy . 
 The season chosen for leaving Pannonia was unusually early ; the Germanic peoples generally waited until autumn before beginning a migration , giving themselves time to do the harvesting and replenish their granaries for the march . The reason behind the spring departure could be the anxiety induced by the neighboring Avars , despite the friendship treaty . Nomadic peoples like the Avars also waited for autumn to begin their military campaigns , as they needed enough forage for their horses . A sign of this anxiety can also be seen in the decision taken by Alboin to ravage Pannonia , which created a safety zone between the Lombards and the Avars . 
 The road followed by Alboin to reach Italy has been the subject of controversy , as is the length of the trek . According to Neil Christie the Lombards divided themselves into migrational groups , with a vanguard scouting the road , probably following the <unk> – <unk> – Emona – Forum Iulii route , while the wagons and most of the people proceeded slowly behind because of the goods and chattels they brought with them , and possibly also because they were waiting for the Saxons to join them on the road . By September raiding parties were looting Venetia , but it was probably only in 569 that the Julian Alps were crossed at the <unk> Valley ; the eyewitness Secundus of Non gives the date as May 20 or 21 . The 569 date for the entry into Italy is not void of difficulties however , and Jörg Jarnut believes the conquest of most of Venetia had already been completed in 568 . According to Carlo Guido Mor , a major difficulty remains in explaining how Alboin could have reached Milan on September 3 assuming he had passed the border only in the May of the same year . 
 = = Invasion of Italy = = 
 = = = Foundation of the Duchy of Friuli = = = 
 The Lombards penetrated into Italy without meeting any resistance from the border troops ( <unk> limitanei ) . The Byzantine military resources available on the spot were scant and of dubious loyalty , and the border forts may well have been left unmanned . What seems certain is that archaeological excavations have found no sign of violent confrontation in the sites that have been excavated . This agrees with Paul the Deacon 's narrative , who speaks of a Lombard takeover in Friuli " without any hindrance " . 
 The first town to fall into the Lombards ' hands was Forum Iulii ( Cividale del Friuli ) , the seat of the local magister militum . Alboin chose this walled town close to the frontier to be capital of the Duchy of Friuli and made his nephew and shield bearer , <unk> , duke of the region , with the specific duty of defending the borders from Byzantine or Avar attacks from the east . <unk> obtained from his uncle the right to choose for his duchy those <unk> , or clans , that he preferred . 
 Alboin 's decision to create a duchy and designate a duke were both important innovations ; until then , the Lombards had never had dukes or duchies based on a walled town . The innovation adopted was part of Alboin 's borrowing of Roman and Ostrogothic administrative models , as in Late Antiquity the comes civitatis ( city count ) was the main local authority , with full administrative powers in his region . But the shift from count ( comes ) to duke ( dux ) and from county ( comitatus ) to duchy ( ducatus ) also signalled the progressive militarization of Italy . The selection of a fortified town as the centre for the new duchy was also an important change from the time in Pannonia , for while urbanized settlements had previously been ignored by the Lombards , now a considerable part of the nobility settled itself in Forum Iulii , a pattern that was repeated regularly by the Lombards in their other duchies . 
 = = = Conquest of Milan = = = 
 From Forum Iulii , Alboin next reached Aquileia , the most important road junction in the northeast , and the administrative capital of Venetia . The imminent arrival of the Lombards had a considerable impact on the city 's population ; the Patriarch of Aquileia Paulinus fled with his clergy and flock to the island of Grado in Byzantine @-@ controlled territory . 
 From Aquileia , Alboin took the Via <unk> and swept through Venetia , taking in rapid succession <unk> ( Treviso ) , <unk> ( Vicenza ) , Verona , Brixia ( Brescia ) and <unk> ( Bergamo ) . The Lombards faced difficulties only in taking <unk> ( <unk> ) , which Alboin decided to avoid , as he similarly avoided tackling the main Venetian towns closer to the coast on the Via <unk> , such as <unk> , <unk> ( Padova ) , Mons <unk> ( <unk> ) , Mantua and Cremona . The invasion of Venetia generated a considerable level of turmoil , spurring waves of refugees from the Lombard @-@ controlled interior to the Byzantine @-@ held coast , often led by their bishops , and resulting in new settlements such as <unk> and <unk> . 
 Alboin moved west in his march , invading the region of Liguria ( north @-@ west Italy ) and reaching its capital Mediolanum ( Milan ) on September 3 , 569 , only to find it already abandoned by the vicarius Italiae ( vicar of Italy ) , the authority entrusted with the administration of the diocese of <unk> Italy . Archbishop <unk> , his clergy , and part of the laity accompanied the vicarius Italiae to find a safe haven in the Byzantine port of <unk> ( Genoa ) . Alboin counted the years of his reign from the capture of Milan , when he assumed the title of dominus Italiae ( Lord of Italy ) . His success also meant the collapse of Byzantine defences in the northern part of the Po plain , and large movements of refugees to Byzantine areas . 
 Several explanations have been advanced to explain the swiftness and ease of the initial Lombard advance in northern Italy . It has been suggested that the towns ' doors may have been opened by the betrayal of the Gothic auxiliaries in the Byzantine army , but historians generally hold that Lombard success occurred because Italy was not considered by Byzantium as a vital part of the empire , especially at a time when the empire was imperilled by the attacks of Avars and Slavs in the Balkans and Sassanids in the east . The Byzantine decision not to contest the Lombard invasion reflects the desire of Justinian 's successors to reorient the core of the Empire 's polices eastward . 
 = = = Impact of the migration on <unk> Italy = = = 
 The impact of the Lombard migration on the Late Roman aristocracy was disruptive , especially in combination with the Gothic War ; the latter conflict had finished in the north only in 562 , when the last Gothic stronghold , Verona , was taken . Many men of means ( Paul 's <unk> ) either lost their lives or their goods , but the exact extent of the despoliation of the Roman aristocracy is a subject of heated debate . The clergy was also greatly affected . The Lombards were mostly pagans , and displayed little respect for the clergy and Church property . Many churchmen left their sees to escape from the Lombards , like the two most senior bishops in the north , <unk> and Paulinus . However , most of the suffragan bishops in the north sought an accommodation with the Lombards , as did in 569 the bishop of <unk> Felix when he journeyed to the Piave river to parley with Alboin , obtaining respect for the Church and its goods in return for this act of homage . It seems certain that many sees maintained an uninterrupted episcopal succession through the turmoil of the invasion and the following years . The transition was eased by the hostility existing among the northern Italian bishops towards the papacy and the empire due to the religious dispute involving the " Three @-@ Chapter Controversy " . In Lombard territory , churchmen were at least sure to avoid imperial religious persecution . 
 In the view of Pierre <unk> , the disappearance of 220 bishops ' seats indicates that the Lombard migration was a crippling catastrophe for the Church . Yet according to Walter Pohl the regions directly occupied by Alboin suffered less devastation and had a relatively robust survival rate for towns , whereas the occupation of territory by autonomous military bands interested mainly in raiding and looting had a more severe impact , with the bishoprics in such places rarely surviving . 
 = = = Siege of Ticinum = = = 
 The first attested instance of strong resistance to Alboin 's migration took place at the town of Ticinum ( Pavia ) , which he started to besiege in 569 and captured only after three years . The town was of strategic importance , sitting at the confluence of the rivers Po and Ticino and connected by waterways to Ravenna , the capital of Byzantine Italy and the seat of the Praetorian prefecture of Italy . Its fall cut direct communications between the garrisons stationed on the Alpes <unk> and the Adriatic coast . 
 Careful to maintain the initiative against the Byzantines , by 570 Alboin had taken their last defences in northern Italy except for the coastal areas of Liguria and Venetia and a few isolated inland centres such as Augusta Praetoria ( Aosta ) , <unk> ( Susa ) , and the island of <unk> in the <unk> <unk> ( Lake Como ) . During Alboin 's kingship the Lombards crossed the Apennines and plundered <unk> , but historians are not in full agreement as to whether this took place under his guidance and if this constituted anything more than raiding . According to Herwig Wolfram , it was probably only in 578 – 579 that Tuscany was conquered , but Jörg Jarnut and others believe this began in some form under Alboin , although it was not completed by the time of his death . 
 Alboin 's problems in maintaining control over his people worsened during the siege of Ticinum . The nature of the Lombard monarchy made it difficult for a ruler to exert the same degree of authority over his subjects as had been exercised by Theodoric over his Goths , and the structure of the army gave great authority to the military commanders or duces , who led each band ( <unk> ) of warriors . Additionally , the difficulties encountered by Alboin in building a solid political entity resulted from a lack of imperial legitimacy , as unlike the Ostrogoths , they had not entered Italy as foederati but as enemies of the Empire . 
 The king 's disintegrating authority over his army was also manifested in the invasion of Frankish Burgundy which from 569 or 570 was subject to yearly raids on a major scale . The Lombard attacks were ultimately repelled following <unk> ' victory at Embrun . These attacks had lasting political consequences , souring the previously cordial Lombard @-@ Frankish relations and opening the door to an alliance between the Empire and the Franks against the Lombards , a coalition agreed to by Guntram in about 571 . Alboin is generally thought not to have been behind this invasion , but an alternative interpretation of the <unk> raids presented by Gian Piero Bognetti is that Alboin may actually have been involved in the offensive on Guntram as part of an alliance with the Frankish king of Austrasia , Sigebert I. This view is met with scepticism by scholars such as Chris Wickham . 
 The weakening of royal authority may also have resulted in the conquest of much of southern Italy by the Lombards , in which modern scholars believe Alboin played no role at all , probably taking place in 570 or 571 under the auspices of individual warlords . However it is far from certain that the Lombard takeover occurred during those years , as very little is known of <unk> and Zotto 's respective rise to power in <unk> ( Spoleto ) and Beneventum ( Benevento ) . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 = = = Earliest narratives = = = 
 Ticinum eventually fell to the Lombards in either May or June 572 . Alboin had in the meantime chosen Verona as his seat , establishing himself and his treasure in a royal palace built there by Theodoric . This choice may have been another attempt to link himself with the Gothic king . 
 It was in this palace that Alboin was killed on June 28 , 572 . In the account given by Paul the Deacon , the most detailed narrative on Alboin 's death , history and saga intermingle almost inextricably . Much earlier and shorter is the story told by Marius of Aventicum in his Chronica , written about a decade after Alboin 's murder . According to his version the king was killed in a conspiracy by a man close to him , called <unk> ( Paul 's <unk> ) , with the connivance of the queen . Helmichis then married the widow , but the two were forced to escape to Byzantine Ravenna , taking with them the royal treasure and part of the army , which hints at the cooperation of Byzantium . Roger Collins describes Marius as an especially reliable source because of his early date and his having lived close to Lombard Italy . 
 Also contemporary is Gregory of Tours ' account presented in the Historia Francorum , and echoed by the later <unk> . Gregory 's account diverges in several respects from most other sources . In his tale it is told how Alboin married the daughter of a man he had slain , and how she waited for a suitable occasion for revenge , eventually poisoning him . She had previously fallen in love with one of her husband 's servants , and after the assassination tried to escape with him , but they were captured and killed . However , historians including Walter Goffart place little trust in this narrative . Goffart notes other similar doubtful stories in the Historia and calls its account of Alboin 's demise " a suitably ironic tale of the doings of depraved humanity " . 
 = = = Skull cup = = = 
 Elements present in Marius ' account are echoed in Paul 's Historia Langobardorum , which also contains distinctive features . One of the best known aspects unavailable in any other source is that of the skull cup . In Paul , the events that lead to Alboin 's downfall unfold in Verona . During a great feast , Alboin gets drunk and orders his wife Rosamund to drink from his cup , made from the skull of his father @-@ in @-@ law Cunimund after he had slain him in 567 and married Rosamund . Alboin " invited her to drink merrily with her father " . This reignited the queen 's determination to avenge her father . 
 The tale has been often dismissed as a fable and Paul was conscious of the risk of disbelief . For this reason , he insists that he saw the skull cup personally during the 740s in the royal palace of Ticinum in the hands of king <unk> . The use of skull cups has been noticed among nomadic peoples and , in particular , among the Lombards ' neighbours , the Avars . Skull cups are believed to be part of a shamanistic ritual , where drinking from the cup was considered a way to assume the dead man 's powers . In this context , Stefano Gasparri and Wilfried <unk> see in Cunimund 's skull cup the sign of nomadic cultural influences on the Lombards : by drinking from his enemy 's skull Alboin was taking his vital strength . As for the offering of the skull to Rosamund , that may have been a ritual request of complete submission of the queen and her people to the Lombards , and thus a cause of shame or humiliation . Alternatively , it may have been a rite to appease the dead through the offering of a libation . In the latter interpretation , the queen 's answer reveals her determination not to let the wound opened by the killing of her father be healed through a ritual act , thus openly displaying her thirst for revenge . 
 The episode is read in a radically different way by Walter Goffart . According to him , the whole story assumes an allegorical meaning , with Paul intent on telling an edifying story of the downfall of the hero and his expulsion from the promised land , because of his human weakness . In this story , the skull cup plays a key role as it unites original sin and barbarism . Goffart does not exclude the possibility that Paul had really seen the skull , but believes that by the 740s the connection between sin and barbarism as exemplified by the skull cup had already been established . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In her plan to kill her husband she found an ally in Helmichis , the king 's foster brother and <unk> ( arms bearer ) . According to Paul the queen then recruited the king 's <unk> ( <unk> ) , Peredeo , into the plot , after having seduced him . When Alboin retired for his midday rest on June 28 , care was taken to leave the door open and unguarded . Alboin 's sword was also removed , leaving him defenceless when Peredeo entered his room and killed him . Alboin 's remains were allegedly buried beneath the palace steps . 
 Peredeo 's figure and role is mostly introduced by Paul ; the Origo had for the first time mentioned his name as " <unk> " , but there his role had been different , as he was not the assassin , but the instigator of the assassination . In the vein of his reading of the skull cup , Goffart sees Peredeo as not as a historical figure but as an allegorical character : he notes a similarity between Peredeo 's name and the Latin word <unk> , meaning " lost " , a representation of those Lombards who entered into the service of the Empire . 
 Alboin 's death had a lasting impact , as it deprived the Lombards of the only leader they had that could have kept together the newborn Germanic entity . His end also represents the death of the last of the line of the hero @-@ kings that had led the Lombards through their migrations from the Elba to Italy . His fame survived him for many centuries in epic poetry , with Saxons and Bavarians celebrating his prowess in battle , his heroism , and the magical properties of his weapons . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 To complete the coup d 'état and legitimize his claim to the throne , Helmichis married the queen , whose high standing arose not only from being the king 's widow but also from being the most prominent member of the remaining Gepid nation , and as such her support was a guarantee of the Gepids ' loyalty to Helmichis . The latter could also count on the support of the Lombard garrison of Verona , where many may have opposed Alboin 's aggressive policy and could have cultivated the hope of reaching an entente with the Empire . The Byzantines were almost certainly deeply involved in the plot . It was in their interest to stem the Lombard tide by bringing a pro @-@ Byzantine regime into power in Verona , and possibly in the long run break the unity of the Lombards ' kingdom , winning over the dukes with honors and emoluments . 
 The coup ultimately failed , as it met with the resistance of most of the warriors , who were opposed to the king 's assassination . As a result , the Lombard garrison in Ticinum proclaimed Duke Cleph the new king , and Helmichis , rather than going to war against overwhelming odds , escaped to Ravenna with Longinus ' assistance , taking with him his wife , his troops , the royal treasure and Alboin 's daughter Albsuinda . In Ravenna the two lovers became estranged and killed each other . Subsequently Longinus sent Albsuinda and the treasure to Constantinople . 
 Cleph kept the throne for only 18 months before being assassinated by a slave . Possibly he too was killed at the instigation of the Byzantines , who had every interest in avoiding a hostile and solid leadership among the Lombards . An important success for the Byzantines was that no king was proclaimed to succeed Cleph , opening a decade of interregnum , thus making them more vulnerable to attacks from Franks and Byzantines . It was only when faced with the danger of annihilation by the Franks in 584 that the dukes elected a new king in the person of <unk> , son of Cleph , who began the definitive consolidation and centralization of the Lombard kingdom while the remaining imperial territories were reorganized under the control of an exarch in Ravenna with the capacity to defend the country without the Emperor 's assistance . 
 The consolidation of Byzantine and Lombard dominions had long @-@ lasting consequences for Italy , as the region was from that moment on fragmented among multiple rulers until Italian unification in 1871 . 
 = Blue carbon = 
 Blue carbon is the carbon captured by the world 's oceans and coastal ecosystems . The carbon captured by living organisms in oceans is stored in the form of biomass and sediments from mangroves , salt marshes , seagrasses and potentially algae . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Historically the ocean and terrestrial forest ecosystems have been the major natural carbon ( C ) sinks . New research on the role of vegetated coastal ecosystems have highlighted their potential as highly efficient C sinks , and led to the scientific recognition of the term " Blue Carbon " . " Blue Carbon " designates carbon that is fixed via ocean and coastal ecosystems , rather than traditional land ecosystems , like forests . Although the ocean ’ s vegetated habitats cover less than 0 @.@ 5 % of the seabed , they are responsible for more than 50 % , and potentially up to 70 % , of all carbon storage in ocean sediments . Mangroves , salt marshes and seagrasses make up the majority of the ocean ’ s vegetated habitats but only equal 0 @.@ 05 % of the plant biomass on land . Despite their small footprint , they can store a comparable amount of carbon per year and are highly efficient carbon sinks . Seagrasses , mangroves and salt marshes can capture carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) from the atmosphere by sequestering the C in their underlying sediments , in underground and below @-@ ground biomass , and in dead biomass . In plant biomass such as leaves , stems , branches or roots , blue carbon can be sequestered for years to decades , and for thousands to millions of years in underlying plant sediments . Current estimates of long @-@ term blue carbon C burial capacity are variable , and research is ongoing . Although vegetated coastal ecosystems cover less area and have less aboveground biomass than terrestrial plants they have the potential to impact longterm C sequestration , particularly in sediment sinks . One of the main concerns with Blue Carbon is the rate of loss of these important marine ecosystems is much higher than any other ecosystem on the planet , even compared to rainforests . Current estimates suggest a loss of 2 @-@ 7 % per year , which is not only lost carbon sequestration , but also lost habitat that is important for managing climate , coastal protection , and health . 
 = = Types of blue carbon ecosystems = = 
 = = = Seagrass = = = 
 Seagrass are a group of about 60 angiosperm species that have adapted to an aquatic life , and can grow in meadows along the shores of all continents except Antarctica . Seagrass meadows form in maximum depths of up to 50m , depending on water quality and light availability , and can include up to 12 different species in one meadow . These seagrass meadows are highly productive habitats that provide many ecosystem services , including sediment stabilization , habitat and biodiversity , better water quality , and carbon and nutrient sequestration . The current documented seagrass area is 177 @,@ 000 km2 , but is thought to underestimate the total area since many areas with large seagrass meadows have not been thoroughly documented . Most common estimates are 300 @,@ 000 to 600 @,@ 000 km2 , with up to 4 @,@ 320 @,@ 000 km2 suitable seagrass habitat worldwide . Although seagrass makes up only 0 @.@ 1 % of the area of the ocean floor , it accounts for approximately 10 @-@ 18 % of the total oceanic carbon burial . Currently global seagrass meadows are estimated to store as much as 19 @.@ 9 Pg ( <unk> , or billion tons ) of organic carbon . Carbon primarily accumulates in marine sediments , which are anoxic and thus continually preserve organic carbon from decadal @-@ millennial time scales . High accumulation rates , low oxygen , low sediment conductivity and slower microbial decomposition rates all encourage carbon burial and carbon accumulation in these coastal sediments . Compared to terrestrial habitats that lose carbon stocks as CO2 during decomposition or by disturbances like fires or deforestation , marine carbon sinks can retain C for much longer time periods . Carbon sequestration rates in seagrass meadows vary depending on the species , characteristics of the sediment , and depth of the habitats , but on average the carbon burial rate is approximately 138 g C m − 2 yr − 1 . Seagrass habitats are threatened by coastal eutrophication , increased seawater temperatures , increased sedimentation and coastal development , and sea @-@ level rise which may decrease light availability for photosynthesis . Seagrass loss has accelerated over the past few decades , from 0 @.@ 9 % per year prior to 1940 to 7 % per year in 1990 , with about 1 / 3 of global loss since WWII . Scientists encourage protection and continued research of these ecosystems for organic carbon storage , valuable habitat and other ecosystem services . 
 = = = Mangrove = = = 
 Mangroves are woody <unk> that form intertidal forests and provide many important ecosystem services including coastal protection , nursery grounds for coastal fish and crustaceans , forest products , recreation , nutrient filtration and carbon sequestration . Currently they are found in 123 countries , with 73 identified species . They grow along coastlines in subtropical and tropical waters , depending mainly on temperature , but also vary with precipitation , tides , waves and water flow . Because they grow at the intersection between land and sea , they have semi @-@ terrestrial and marine components , including unique adaptations including aerial roots , viviparous embryos , and highly efficient nutrient retention mechanisms . Mangroves cover approximately 150 @,@ 000 km2 worldwide , but have declined by 20 % in the last 25 years , mainly due to coastal development and land conversion . Mangrove deforestation is slowing , from 1 @.@ 04 % loss per year in the 1980s to 0 @.@ 66 % loss in the early 2000s , as research and understanding of mangrove benefits have increased . Mangrove forests are responsible for approximately 10 % of global carbon burial , with an estimated carbon burial rate of 174 g C m − 2 yr − 1 . Mangroves , like seagrasses , have potential for high levels of carbon sequestration . They account for 3 % of the global carbon sequestration by tropical forests and 14 % of the global coastal ocean 's carbon burial . Mangroves are naturally disturbed by floods , tsunamis , coastal storms like cyclones and hurricanes , lightning , disease and pests , and changes in water quality or temperature . Although they are resilient to many of these natural disturbances , they are highly susceptible to human impacts including urban development , aquaculture , mining , and overexploitation of shellfish , crustaceans , fish and timber . Mangroves provide globally important ecosystem services and carbon sequestration and are thus an important habitat to conserve and repair when possible . 
 = = = Marsh = = = 
 Marshes , intertidal ecosystems dominated by herbaceous vegetation , can be found globally on coastlines from the arctic to the subtropics . In the tropics , marshes are replaced by mangroves as the dominant coastal vegetation . Marshes have high productivity , with a large portion of primary production in <unk> biomass . This <unk> biomass can form deposits up to 8m deep . Marshes provide valuable habitat for plants , birds , and juvenile fish , protect coastal habitat from storm surge and flooding , and can reduce nutrient loading to coastal waters . Similarly to mangrove and seagrass habitats , marshes also serve as important carbon sinks . Marshes sequester C in underground biomass due to high rates of organic sedimentation and anaerobic @-@ dominated decomposition . Salt marshes cover approximately 22 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 km2 globally , with an estimated carbon burial rate of 210 g C m − 2 yr − 1 . Tidal marshes have been impacted by humans for centuries , including modification for grazing , <unk> , reclamation for agriculture , development and ports , evaporation ponds for salt production , modification for aquaculture , insect control , tidal power and flood protection . Marshes are also susceptible to pollution from oil , industrial chemicals , and most commonly , eutrophication . Introduced species , sea @-@ level rise , river damming and decreased sedimentation are additional longterm changes that affect marsh habitat , and in turn , may affect carbon sequestration potential . 
 = = = Algae = = = 
 Both macroalgae and microalgae are being investigated as possible means of carbon sequestration . Because algae lack the complex lignin associated with terrestrial plants , the carbon in algae is released into the atmosphere more rapidly than carbon captured on land . Algae have been proposed as a short @-@ term storage pool of carbon that can be used as a feedstock for the production of various biogenic fuels . <unk> are often put forth as a potential feedstock for carbon @-@ neutral biodiesel and <unk> production due to their high lipid content . <unk> , on the other hand , do not have high lipid content and have limited potential as biodiesel feedstock , although they can still be used as feedstock for other biofuel generation . <unk> have also been investigated as a feedstock for the production of biochar . The biochar produced from macroalgae is higher in agriculturally important nutrients than biochar produced from terrestrial sources . Another novel approach to carbon capture which utilizes algae is the <unk> @-@ based Integrated Carbon Capture and Algae Production Systems ( <unk> ) developed by a collaboration between Washington State University in the United States and Dalian Ocean University in China . Many cyanobacteria , microalgae , and macroalgae species can utilize carbonate as a carbon source for photosynthesis . In the <unk> , <unk> microalgae utilize carbon captured from flue gases in the form of bicarbonate . In South Korea , macroalgae have been utilized as part of a climate change mitigation program . The country has established the Coastal CO2 Removal Belt ( <unk> ) which is composed of artificial and natural ecosystems . The goal is to capture carbon using large areas of kelp forest . 
 = = Ecosystem restoration = = 
 Restoration of mangrove forests , seagrass meadows , marshes , and kelp forests has been implemented in many countries . These restored ecosystems have the potential to act as carbon sinks . Restored seagrass meadows were found to start sequestering carbon in sediment within about four years . This was the time needed for the meadow to reach sufficient shoot density to cause sediment deposition . Similarly , mangrove plantations in China showed higher sedimentation rates than barren land and lower sedimentation rates than established mangrove forests . This pattern in sedimentation rate is thought to be a function of the plantation ’ s young age and lower vegetation density . 
 = = Nutrient stoichiometry of seagrasses = = 
 The primary nutrients determining sea grass growth are carbon ( C ) , nitrogen ( N ) , phosphorus ( P ) , and light for photosynthesis . Nitrogen and P can be acquired from sediment pore water or from the water column , and sea grasses can uptake N in both ammonium ( NH4 + ) and nitrate ( <unk> ) form . 
 A number of studies from around the world have found that there is a wide range in the concentrations of C , N , and P in seagrasses depending on their species and environmental factors . For instance , plants collected from high @-@ nutrient environments had lower C : N and C : P ratios than plants collected from low @-@ nutrient environments . Sea grass stoichiometry does not follow the Redfield ratio commonly used as an indicator of nutrient availability for phytoplankton growth . In fact , a number of studies from around the world have found that the proportion of C : N : P in sea grasses can vary significantly depending on their species , nutrient availability , or other environmental factors . Depending on environmental conditions , sea grasses can be either P @-@ limited or N @-@ limited . 
 An early study of sea grass stoichiometry suggested that the " Redfield " balanced ratio between N and P for sea grasses is approximately 30 : 1 . However , N and P concentrations are strictly not correlated , suggesting that sea grasses can adapt their nutrient uptake based on what is available in the environment . For example , sea grasses from meadows fertilized with bird excrement have shown a higher proportion of phosphate than unfertilized meadows . Alternately , sea grasses in environments with higher loading rates and organic matter diagenesis supply more P , leading to N @-@ limitation . P availability in T. testudinum is the limiting nutrient . The nutrient distribution in T. testudinum ranges from 29 @.@ 4 @-@ 43 @.@ 3 % C , 0 @.@ 88 @-@ 3 @.@ 96 % N , and 0 @.@ 048 @-@ 0 @.@ 243 % P. This equates to a mean ratio of 24 @.@ 6 C : N , 937 @.@ 4 C : P , and 40 @.@ 2 N : P. This information can also be used to characterize the nutrient availability of a bay or other water body ( which is difficult to measure directly ) by sampling the sea grasses living there . 
 Light availability is another factor that can affect the nutrient stoichiometry of sea grasses . Nutrient limitation can only occur when photosynthetic energy causes grasses to grow faster than the influx of new nutrients . For example , low light environments tend to have a lower C : N ratio . Alternately , high @-@ N environments can have an indirect negative effect to sea grass growth by promoting growth of algae that reduce the total amount of available light . 
 Nutrient variability in sea grasses can have potential implications for wastewater management in coastal environments . High amounts of anthropogenic nitrogen discharge could cause eutrophication in previously N @-@ limited environments , leading to hypoxic conditions in the sea grass meadow and affecting the carrying capacity of that ecosystem . 
 A study of annual deposition of C , N , and P from P. <unk> sea grass meadows in northeast Spain found that the meadow sequestered 198 g C m @-@ 2 yr @-@ 1 , 13 @.@ 4 g N m @-@ 2 yr @-@ 1 , and 2 @.@ 01 g P m @-@ 2 yr @-@ 1 into the sediment . Subsequent <unk> of carbon from the sediments due to respiration returned approximately 8 % of the sequestered carbon , or 15 @.@ 6 g C m @-@ 2 yr -1 . 
 = = Distribution and decline of blue carbon ecosystems = = 
 Seagrasses , mangroves and marshes are types of vegetated coastal habitats that cover approximately 49 million hectares worldwide . Seagrass ecosystems range from polar to tropical regions , mangroves are found in tropical and sub @-@ tropical ecosystems and tidal marshes are found in mostly temperate regions such as on the east coast of the United States . As habitats that sequester carbon are altered and decreased , that stored amount of C is being released into the atmosphere , continuing the current accelerated rate of climate change . Impacts on these habitats globally will directly and indirectly release the previously stored carbon , which had been sequestered in sediments of these habitats . Declines of vegetated coastal habitats are seen worldwide ; examples seen in mangroves are due to clearing for shrimp ponds such is the case in Indonesia , while in seagrasses there are both natural causes due to pathogens and may be exacerbated by anthropogenic effects . <unk> rates of decrease are difficult to calculate , however measurements have been estimated by researchers indicating that if blue carbon ecosystems continue to decline , for any number of reasons , 30 @-@ 40 % of tidal marshes and seagrasses and approximately 100 % of mangroves could be gone in the next century . 
 Decline in seagrasses are due to a number of factors including drought , water quality issues , agricultural practices , invasive species , pathogens , fishing and climate change . Over 35 % of global mangrove habitat remains . Decreases in habitat is due to damming of rivers , clearing for aquaculture , development etc . , overfishing , and climate change , according to the World Wildlife Fund . Nearly 16 % of mangroves assessed by the IUCN are on the IUCN Red List ; due to development and other causes 1 in 6 worldwide mangroves are in threat of extinction . Dams threaten habitats by slowing the amount of freshwater reaching mangroves . Coral reef destruction also plays a role in mangrove habitat health as reefs slow wave energy to a level that mangroves are more tolerant of . Salt marshes may not be expansive worldwide in relation to forests , but they have a C burial rate that is over 50 times faster than tropical rainforests . Rates of burial have been estimated at up to 87 @.@ 2 ± 9 @.@ 6 Tg C yr @-@ 1 which is greater than that of tropical rainforests , 53 ± 9 @.@ 6 Tg C yr @-@ 1 . Since the 1800s salt marshes have been disturbed due to development and a lack of understanding their importance . The 25 % decline since that time has led to a decrease in potential C sink area coupled with the release of once buried C. Consequences of increasingly degraded marsh habitat are a decrease in C stock in sediments , a decrease in plant biomass and thus a decrease in photosynthesis reducing the amount of CO2 taken up by the plants , failure of C in plant blades to be transferred into the sediment , possible acceleration of erosive processes due to the lack of plant biomass , and acceleration of buried C release to the atmosphere . 
 Reasons for decline of mangroves , seagrass , and marshes include land use changes , climate and drought related effects , dams built in the watershed , convergence to aquaculture and agriculture , land development and sea @-@ level rise due to climate change . Increases in these activities can lead to significant decreases in habitat available and thus increases in released C from sediments . As anthropogenic effects and climate change are heightened , the effectiveness of blue carbon sinks will diminish and CO2 emissions will be further increased . Data on the rates at which CO2 is being released into the atmosphere is not robust currently , however research is being conducted to gather a better information to analyze trends . Loss of underground biomass ( roots and rhizomes ) will allow for CO2 to be emitted changing these habitats into sources rather than carbon sinks . 
 = = Sedimentation and blue carbon burial = = 
 Organic carbon is only sequestered from the oceanic system if it reaches the sea floor and gets covered by a layer of sediment . Reduced oxygen levels in buried environments mean that tiny bacteria who eat organic matter and respire CO2 can ’ t decompose the carbon , so it is removed from the system permanently . Organic matter that sinks but is not buried by a sufficiently deep layer of sediment is subject to re @-@ suspension by changing ocean currents , bioturbation by organisms that live in the top layer of marine sediments , and decomposition by heterotrophic bacteria . If any of these processes occur , the organic carbon is released back into the system . Carbon sequestration takes place only if burial rates by sediment are greater than the long term rates of erosion , bioturbation , and decomposition . 
 = = = Spatial variability in sedimentation = = = 
 Sedimentation is the rate at which floating or suspended particulate matter sinks and accumulates on the ocean floor . The faster ( more energetic ) the current , the more sediment it can pick up . As sediment laden currents slow , the particles fall out of suspension and come to rest on the sea floor . In other words , a fast current can pick up lots of heavy grains , where as a slow current can pick up only tiny pieces . As one can imagine , different places in the ocean vary drastically when it comes to the amount of suspended sediment and rate of deposition . 
 = = = = Open ocean = = = = 
 The open ocean has very low sedimentation rates because most of the sediments that make it here are carried by the wind . Wind transport accounts for only a small fraction of the total sediment delivery to the oceans . Additionally , there is much less plant and animal life living in the open ocean that could be buried . Therefore , carbon burial rates are relatively slow in the open ocean . 
 = = = = Coastal margins = = = = 
 Coastal margins have high sedimentation rates due to sediment input by rivers , which account for the vast majority of sediment delivery to the ocean . In most cases , sediments are deposited near the river mouth or are transported in the <unk> direction due to wave forcing . In some places sediment falls into submarine canyons and is transported off @-@ shelf , if the canyon is sufficiently large or the shelf is narrow . Coastal margins also contain diverse and plentiful marine species , especially in paces that experience periodic upwelling . More marine life combined with higher sedimentation rates on coastal margins creates hotspots for carbon burial . 
 = = = = Submarine Canyons = = = = 
 Marine canyons are magnets for sediment because as currents carry sediment on the shelf in the <unk> direction , the path of the current crosses canyons perpendicularly . When the same amount of water flow is suddenly in much deeper water it slows down and deposits sediment . Due to the extreme depositional environment , carbon burial rates in the <unk> Canyon near Portugal are 30 times greater than the adjacent continental slope ! This canyon alone accounts for about 0 @.@ 03 % of global terrestrial organic carbon burial in marine sediments . This may not seem like much , but the <unk> submarine canyon only makes up 0 @.@ 0001 % of the area of the worlds ocean floor . 
 = = = Human changes to global sedimentary systems = = = 
 Humans have been modifying sediment cycles on a massive scale for thousands of years through a number of mechanisms . 
 = = = = Agriculture / land clearing = = = = 
 The first major change to global sedimentary cycling happened when humans started clearing land to grow crops . In a natural ecosystem , roots from plants hold sediment in place when it rains . Trees and shrubs reduce the amount of rainfall that impacts the dirt , and create obstacles that forest streams must flow around . When all vegetation is removed rainfall impacts directly on the dirt , there are no roots to hold on to the sediment , and there is nothing to stop the stream from scouring banks as it flows straight downhill . Because of this , land clearing causes an increase in erosion rates when compared to a natural system . 
 = = = = Dams = = = = 
 The first dams date back to 3000 BC and were built to control flood waters for agriculture . When sediment laden river flow reaches a dam ’ s reservoir , the water slows down as it pools . Since slower water can ’ t carry as much sediment , virtually all of the sediment falls out of suspension before the water passes through the dam . The result is that most dams are nearly 100 % efficient sediment traps . Additionally , the use of dams for flood control reduces the ability of downstream channels to produce sediment . Since the vast majority of sedimentation occurs during the biggest floods , reduced frequency and intensity of flood @-@ like flows can drastically change production rates . For thousands of years there were too few dams to have a significant impact on global sedimentary cycles , except for local impacts on a few river deltas such as the Nile which were significant . However The popularization of hydroelectric power in the last century has caused an enormous boom in dam building . Currently only a third of the world ’ s largest rivers flow unimpeded to the ocean . 
 = = = = Channelization = = = = 
 In a natural system , the banks of a river will meander back and forth as different channels erode , accrete , open , or close . Seasonal floods regularly overwhelm riverbanks and deposit nutrients on adjacent flood plains . These services are essential to natural ecosystems , but can be troublesome for humans , who love to build infrastructure and development close to rivers . In response , rivers in populated areas are often channelized , meaning that their banks and sometimes beds are armored with a hard material , such as rocks or concrete , which prevent erosion and fixes the stream in place . This inhibits sedimentation because there is much less soft substrate left for the river to take downstream . 
 = = = = Impacts = = = = 
 Currently , the net effect of humans on global sedimentary cycling is a drastic reduction in the amount of sediment that makes it to the ocean . If we continue to build dams and <unk> rivers , we will continue to see a number of problems in coastal areas including sinking deltas , shrinking beaches , and disappearing salt marshes . In addition , it ’ s possible that we might ruin the ability of coastal margins to bury blue carbon . Without sequestration of carbon in coastal marine sediments , we will likely see accelerated global climate change . 
 = = Other Factors influencing blue carbon burial rates = = 
 = = = Density of vegetation = = = 
 The density of vegetation in mangrove forests , seagrass meadows , and tidal marshes is an important factor in carbon burial <unk> density of the vegetation must be sufficient to change water flows enough to reduce erosion and increase sediment deposition . 
 = = = Nutrient load = = = 
 Increases in carbon capture and sequestration have been observed in both mangrove and seagrass ecosystems which have been subjected to high nutrient loads , either intentionally or due to waste from human activities . Intentional fertilization has been used in seagrass meadow restoration . <unk> for seabirds are installed in the meadow and the bird droppings are the fertilizer source . The fertilization allows fast growing varieties of seagrasses to establish and grow . The species composition of these meadows is markedly different than the original seagrass meadow , although after the meadow has been reestablished and fertilization terminated , the meadows return to a species composition that more closely resembles an undisturbed meadow . Research done on mangrove soils from the Red Sea have shown that increases in nutrient loads to these soils do not increase carbon mineralization and subsequent CO2 release . This neutral effect of fertilization was not found to be true in all mangrove forest types . Carbon capture rates also increased in these forests due to increased growth rates of the mangroves . In forests with increases in respiration there were also increases in mangrove growth of up to six times the normal rate . 
 = = Engineered approaches to blue carbon = = 
 A US Department of Energy study from 2001 proposed to replicate a natural process of carbon sequestration in the ocean by combining water rich in CO2 gas with carbonate [ <unk> ] to produce a bicarbonate [ <unk> ] slurry . Practically , the engineered process could involve hydrating the CO2 from power plant flue gas and running it through a porous bed of limestone to ‘ fix ’ the carbon in a saturated bicarbonate solution . This solution could then be deposited at sea to sink in the deep ocean . The cost of this process , from capture to ocean burial , was estimated to range between $ 90 to $ 180 per tonne of CO2 and was highly dependent on the distance required to transport limestone , seawater , and the resulting bicarbonate solution . 
 Expected benefits from bicarbonate production over direct CO2 gas injection would be a significantly lesser increase in ocean acidity and a longer timescale for burial before the captured carbon would be released back to the atmosphere . 
 = Underground Electric Railways Company of London = 
 The Underground Electric Railways Company of London Limited ( UERL ) , known operationally as the Underground for much of its existence , was established in 1902 . It was the holding company for the three deep @-@ level " tube " underground railway lines opened in London during 1906 and 1907 : the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway , the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway and the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway . It was also the parent company from 1902 of the District Railway , which it electrified between 1903 and 1905 . The UERL is a precursor of today 's London Underground ; its three tube lines form the central sections of today 's Bakerloo , Northern and Piccadilly lines . 
 The UERL struggled financially in the first years after the opening of its lines and narrowly avoided bankruptcy in 1908 by restructuring its debt . A policy of expansion by acquisition was followed before World War I , so that the company came to operate the majority of the underground railway lines in and around London . It also controlled large bus and tram fleets , the profits from which subsidised the financially weaker railways . After the war , railway extensions took the UERL 's services out into suburban areas to stimulate additional passenger numbers , so that , by the early 1930s , the company 's lines stretched beyond the County of London and served destinations in Middlesex , Essex , Hertfordshire and Surrey . 
 In the 1920s , competition from small unregulated bus operators reduced the profitability of the road transport operations , leading the UERL 's directors to seek government regulation . This led to the establishment of the London Passenger Transport Board in 1933 , which absorbed the UERL and all of the independent and municipally operated railway , bus and tram services in the London area . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The first deep @-@ level tube railway , the City & South London Railway ( C & SLR ) , opened in 1890 . Its early success resulted in a rush of proposals to Parliament for other deep @-@ level routes under the capital , but by 1901 only two more lines had opened : the Waterloo & City Railway ( W & CR ) in 1898 and the Central London Railway ( CLR ) in 1900 . Construction had started on one other line and then stopped following a financial crisis . The rest of the companies were struggling to raise funding . 
 The District Railway ( DR ) was a sub @-@ surface underground railway which had opened in 1868 . Its steam @-@ hauled services operated around the Inner Circle and on branches to Hounslow , Wimbledon , Richmond , Ealing , Whitechapel and New Cross . By 1901 , the DR was struggling to compete with emerging motor bus and electric tram companies and the CLR which were eroding its passenger traffic . To become more competitive , the DR was contemplating a programme of electrification , although it was not financially strong enough to raise the capital to carry out the work on its own . It also had parliamentary approval for a congestion @-@ relieving deep @-@ level line that was to run beneath its existing route between Gloucester Road and Mansion House . 
 By 1898 , American financier Charles Tyson Yerkes had made a large fortune developing the electric tramway and elevated railway systems in Chicago , but his questionable business methods , which included bribery and blackmail , had finally drawn the disapproving attention of the public . Yerkes had unsuccessfully attempted to bribe the city council and Illinois state legislature into granting him a 100 @-@ year franchise for the tramway system . Following a public backlash , he sold his Chicago investments and turned his attention to opportunities in London . 
 = = = Acquisitions = = = 
 Yerkes ' first acquisition in London was the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) . The company had parliamentary permission to build a deep @-@ level tube railway from Charing Cross to Hampstead and Highgate , but had been unable to raise the finance , selling only a tiny fraction of the shares available . Robert Perks , a solicitor for a number of railway companies and Member of Parliament for Louth , had suggested the CCE & HR to Yerkes and the American 's consortium bought the company for £ 100 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 9 @.@ 8 million today ) on 28 September 1900 . 
 Perks was also a large shareholder in Yerkes ' next target , the Metropolitan District Railway , usually known as the District Railway or DR. By March 1901 , the syndicate had acquired a controlling interest in the DR and made a proposal for its electrification . Yerkes established the Metropolitan District Electric Traction Company ( MDETC ) on 15 July 1901 with himself as managing director . The company raised £ 1 million ( £ 97 @.@ 9 million today ) to carry out the electrification works including the construction of the generating station and supplying the new electric rolling stock . In September 1901 , Perks became the DR 's chairman . 
 The Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) was a tube railway company which had been purchased by the DR in 1898 , but had remained a separate financial entity . It had permission to construct a line from South Kensington to Piccadilly Circus , but had not raised the capital to do so . At South Kensington it was to connect to the deep level line planned by the DR. On 12 September 1901 , the DR @-@ controlled board of the B & PCR sold the company to the MDETC . In the same month , the B & PCR took over the Great Northern and Strand Railway ( GN & SR ) , a tube railway with permission to build a line from Strand to Finsbury Park . The routes of the B & PCR and GN & SR were subsequently linked and combined with part of the DR 's tube route to create the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) . 
 Yerkes ' final purchase was the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) in March 1902 for £ 360 @,@ 000 ( £ 35 @.@ 3 million today ) . The BS & WR had permission to construct a line from Paddington to Elephant & Castle and , unlike his other tube railway purchases , construction work had started in 1898 . Substantial progress had been made before it was stopped following the collapse of the BS & WR 's parent company , the London & Globe Finance Corporation , due to the fraud of its managing director Whitaker Wright in 1900 . With a varied collection of companies under his control , Yerkes established the UERL in April 1902 to take control of them all and manage the planned works , and took the position of chairman . On 8 June 1902 , the UERL took over the MDETC and paid off the company 's shareholders with cash and UERL shares . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 The UERL was set up with an initial capitalisation of £ 5 million ( £ 490 million today ) . The company was backed by three merchant banks , Speyer Brothers in London , Speyer & Co. in New York and Old Colony Trust Company in Boston , each of which was to receive £ 250 @,@ 000 from the capital raised . Almost 60 per cent of the initial share offering was bought in the United States , with a third sold in Britain and the rest mainly in the Netherlands . Further capital was soon needed for the construction works and additional share and bond issues followed . The UERL eventually raised a total of £ 18 million ( £ 1 @.@ 74 billion today ) . 
 Like many of Yerkes ' schemes in the United States , the structure of the UERL 's finances was highly complex and involved the use of novel financial instruments . One method , used by Yerkes to raise £ 7 million , was " profit @-@ sharing secured notes " , a form of bond which was secured against the value of shares . They were sold at a 4 per cent discount , paid 5 per cent interest and were due for repayment in 1908 . The assumption was that shares would inevitably rise in value once the UERL 's tube railways were operational and producing a profit . Investors in the notes would gain the double benefit of the growth in share price and interest . 
 = = Engineering works = = 
 = = = Electrification of the District Railway = = = 
 Before its takeover , the DR had carried out some joint electrification experiments with the Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , the other sub @-@ surface line with which the DR shared the Inner Circle . A section of track between Earl 's Court and High Street Kensington was electrified with a four @-@ rail system and a jointly owned test train operated a shuttle service between February and November 1900 . Having proven the practicality of electric traction , the two companies set up a joint committee to select a supplier of equipment for the electrification of their networks . 
 The committee 's preferred system was a 3 @,@ 000 volt , three @-@ phase alternating current system proposed by Hungarian electrical engineering company Ganz . The system delivered current by overhead conductor wires and was cheaper than alternatives using power rails and required fewer electrical sub @-@ stations . An experimental line had been constructed by Ganz in Budapest , although the system had not yet been adopted for the full @-@ scale operation of a railway . Before the appointment of Ganz could be finalised , Yerkes took control of the DR. He and his engineers preferred the low voltage direct current conductor rail system they had worked with in the United States and were intending to use on the tube lines when they were constructed ; they rejected the Ganz system putting the DR and the MDETC into dispute with the MR which wanted to proceed with the Ganz system . After some acrimonious debate between the two companies , some of which was carried out in public through the letters pages of The Times newspaper , the dispute went to arbitration at the Board of Trade . The decision was made in December 1901 to use the four @-@ rail system , although the arbitrator , Alfred Lyttelton , was critical of the DR 's unilateral decision . 
 Victorious , the MDETC quickly began the electrification of the DR 's tracks , starting with an extension from Ealing Common to South Harrow that opened with its first electric service in June 1903 . Conversion of the rest of the DR 's tracks was completed in mid @-@ 1905 , although failure to coordinate installations with the MR meant that the first electric services on the Inner Circle from 1 July 1905 were disrupted for several months due to equipment failures on the MR 's trains . Power came from the UERL 's own Lots Road Power Station on Chelsea Creek . Originally planned by the B & PCR , construction of the power station began in 1902 and finished in December 1904 . It became operational on 1 February 1905 , generating three @-@ phase alternating current at 11 @,@ 000 volts , which was converted to 550 volts direct current at track @-@ side transformers located around the network . The power station was constructed large enough to power all of the UERL 's lines once they opened plus others later . By the time the last of the DR 's steam trains were retired on 5 November 1905 , the UERL had spent £ 1 @.@ 7 million ( £ 165 million today ) on the electrification of the line . 
 = = = Construction of the tube railways = = = 
 With funds in place , construction of the BS & WR was quickly restarted . 50 per cent of the tunnelling and 25 per cent of the station work had been completed before work had been stopped , and by February 1904 virtually all of the tunnels and underground parts of the stations between Elephant & Castle and Marylebone were complete and works on the station buildings were under way . Construction of the GNP & BR and the CCE & HR began in July 1902 and proceeded quickly so that the UERL was able to record in its annual report in October 1904 that 80 per cent of the GNP & BR 's and 75 per cent of the CCE & HR 's tunnels had been completed . 
 Following the pattern adopted by the earlier tube lines , each of the UERL 's lines was constructed as a pair of circular tunnels using tunnelling shields with segmental cast iron tunnel linings bolted together and grouted into place as the shield advanced . Generally the tunnels followed surface roads and were constructed side by side , but where the width of the road above was insufficient , tunnels were placed one above the other . Stations on all three lines were provided with surface buildings designed by the UERL 's architect Leslie Green in a standardised style modified for each site . These consisted of two @-@ storey steel @-@ framed buildings faced with red glazed terracotta blocks with wide semi @-@ circular windows on the upper floor . The stations had flat roofs and were designed to accommodate upward extension for commercial development . Most stations were provided with between two and four lifts and an emergency spiral staircase in a separate shaft . At platform level , the wall tiling featured the station name and an individual geometric pattern and colour scheme designed by Green . 
 The UERL used a Westinghouse automatic signalling system operated through electrified track circuits . This controlled signals based on the presence or absence of a train on the track ahead . Signals incorporated an arm that was raised when the signal was red . If a train failed to stop at a red signal , the arm would activate a " <unk> " on the train ; applying the brakes automatically . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Early struggle for survival = = = 
 Apart from the electrification of the DR , Yerkes did not live to see the completion of the fast @-@ paced construction works that he set in motion ; he died in New York on 29 December 1905 and was replaced as UERL chairman by Edgar Speyer . Speyer was chairman of the UERL 's backer Speyer Brothers and a partner in Speyer & Co . Sir George Gibb , general manager of the North Eastern Railway , was appointed managing director . The BS & WR opened to passengers on 10 March 1906 . The GNP & BR followed on 15 December 1906 , with the CCE & HR on 22 June 1907 . The three tube lines quickly came to be known as the Bakerloo Tube , Piccadilly Tube and Hampstead Tube . 
 Yerkes also did not live to see the UERL 's financial struggle during the first years after the opening of the new lines . Because of greatly over @-@ optimistic pre @-@ opening predictions of passenger numbers , the lines failed to generate the income expected and needed to fund the interest payments on the UERL 's substantial borrowings . In the Bakerloo Tube 's first twelve months of operation , it carried 20 @.@ 5 million passengers , less than sixty per cent of the 35 million that had been predicted during the planning of the line . The Piccadilly Tube achieved 26 million of a predicted 60 million and the Hampstead Tube managed 25 million of a predicted 50 million . For the DR , the UERL had predicted an increase to 100 million passengers after electrification , but achieved 55 million . The lower than expected passenger numbers were partly due to competition between the UERL 's lines and those of the other tube and sub @-@ surface railway companies , and the further spread of electric trams and motor buses , replacing slower , horse @-@ drawn road transport , took a large number of passengers away from the trains . The low price of tickets also depressed income . 
 The crisis point for the UERL was the need to redeem the five @-@ year profit @-@ sharing secured notes on 30 June 1908 . The UERL did not have the money . Speyer unsuccessfully tried to persuade the London County Council ( LCC ) to inject £ 5 million into the UERL and used some of his own bank 's money to pay @-@ off disgruntled shareholders threatening bankruptcy proceedings . Eventually , Speyer and Gibb managed to obtain agreement from the shareholders to convert the notes into long @-@ term debt to be repaid in 1933 and 1948 . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 As Speyer and Gibb worked to restructure the debt , the UERL 's general manager , Albert Stanley , appointed by Gibb in 1907 , began to increase the UERL 's income by improving management structures . With commercial manager Frank Pick , Stanley instigated a plan to increase passenger numbers ; developing the " Underground " brand and establishing a joint booking system and coordinated fares throughout all of London 's underground railways , including those not controlled by the UERL . 
 In 1909 , the UERL overcame the objections of previously reluctant American investors , and announced a parliamentary bill for the formal merger of the Bakerloo , Hampstead and Piccadilly Tube lines into a single company , the London Electric Railway Company ( LER ) . This bill received Royal Assent and was enacted on 26 July 1910 as the London Electric Railway Amalgamation Act , 1910 , The DR was not merged with the tube lines and remained a separate company . 
 As managing director of the UERL from 1910 , Stanley led further transport consolidation with the UERL 's take @-@ over of London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) in 1912 and the CLR and the C & SLR on 1 January 1913 . The LGOC was the dominant bus operator in the capital and its high profitability ( it paid dividends of 18 per cent compared with Underground Group companies ' dividends of 1 to 3 per cent ) subsidised the rest of the group . Through the UERL 's shareholding in the London and Suburban Traction Company ( <unk> ) , which it owned jointly with British Electric Traction , the UERL took control in 1913 of the London United Tramways , the Metropolitan Electric Tramways and the South Metropolitan Electric Tramways . The UERL also took control of bus builder AEC . The much enlarged group became known as the Combine . Only the MR ( and its subsidiaries the Great Northern & City Railway and the East London Railway ) and the W & CR ( by then fully owned by the London and South Western Railway ) remained outside of the Underground Group 's control . 
 = = = Extensions and improvements = = = 
 Another way in which the UERL tried to improve income was the construction of extensions to its lines to generate additional passenger traffic , often through the stimulation of new housing developments in the areas through which the lines ran . The DR was extended to Uxbridge in 1910 , by a connection made to the MR. In 1913 , the Bakerloo Tube was extended to Paddington and to Queen 's Park and Watford Junction four years later . The Hampstead tube was extended a short distance at its southern end to provide an interchange with the Bakerloo and the DR at Embankment in 1914 . It was extended at its northern end from Golders Green into the Middlesex countryside to reach Edgware in 1924 . In 1926 , the Hampstead tube was extended south to connect to the C & SLR at Kennington in conjunction with a reconstruction of the C & SLR and its 1926 extension from Clapham Common to Morden . The CLR was extended to Ealing Broadway in 1920 . Permission for an extension of the line to Richmond was obtained in 1913 and again in 1920 , but was not used . Later , during 1932 and 1933 , the Piccadilly Tube was extended at both ends : in the north from Finsbury Park to Cockfosters , and in the west from Hammersmith to Hounslow and Uxbridge using the DR 's tracks . 
 In addition , a programme of modernising many of the Underground 's busiest central London stations was started ; providing them with escalators to replace lifts . New and refurbished rolling stock was gradually introduced on a number of lines with automatic sliding doors along the length of the carriages instead of manual end gates , reducing boarding times . By the middle of the 1920s , the organisation had expanded to such an extent that a large , new headquarters building designed by Charles Holden was constructed at 55 Broadway over St. James 's Park station . 
 = = Move to public ownership = = 
 Starting in the early 1920s , competition from numerous small bus companies , nicknamed " pirates " because they operated irregular routes and plundered the LGOC 's passengers , eroded the profitability of the Combine 's bus operations . This had a negative impact on the profitability of the whole group . Stanley lobbied the government for regulation of transport services in the London area . Starting in 1923 , a series of legislative initiatives were made in this direction , with Stanley and Labour politician Herbert Morrison , London County Councillor ( and later member of parliament and Minister of Transport ) at the forefront of debates as to the level of regulation and public control under which transport services should be brought . Stanley aimed for regulation that would give the UERL group protection from competition and allow it to take substantive control of the LCC 's tram system ; Morrison preferred full public ownership . After seven years of false starts , a bill was announced at the end of 1930 for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , a public corporation that would take control of the UERL , the Metropolitan Railway and all bus and tram operators within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area . As Stanley had done with shareholders in 1910 over the consolidation of the three UERL controlled tube lines , he used his persuasiveness to obtain their agreements to the government buy @-@ out of their stock . 
 The Board was a compromise – public ownership but not full nationalisation – and came into existence on 1 July 1933 , with Stanley as chairman and Pick as Chief Executive . 
 = Revolution ( Beatles song ) = 
 " Revolution " is a song by the Beatles , written by John Lennon and credited to Lennon – McCartney . Two versions of the song were recorded in 1968 : a hard rock version , released as the B @-@ side of the " Hey Jude " single , and a slower , bluesier arrangement ( titled " Revolution 1 " ) for the Beatles ' self @-@ titled double album , commonly known as " the White Album " . Although the single version was issued first , it was recorded several weeks after " Revolution 1 " , as a re @-@ make specifically intended for release as a single . A third connected piece , written by Lennon , is the experimental track " Revolution 9 " , based on the latter parts of the same performance that produced " Revolution 1 " , and which also appears on the White Album . 
 Inspired by political protests in early 1968 , Lennon 's lyrics expressed doubt in regard to some of the tactics . When the single version was released in August , the political left viewed it as betraying their cause . The release of the album version in November indicated Lennon 's uncertainty about destructive change , with the phrase " count me out " recorded differently as " count me out , in " . In 1987 , the song became the first Beatles recording to be licensed for a television commercial , which prompted a lawsuit from the surviving members of the group . 
 In the same year Nina Simone recorded her single " Revolution " with some structural similarities ( some lyrics are also the same ) to the Beatles ' song , but credited to her and Weldon Irvine . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In early 1968 , media coverage in the aftermath of the Tet Offensive spurred increased protests in opposition to the Vietnam War , especially among university students . The protests were most prevalent in the US , but on 17 March , several thousand demonstrators marched to the American embassy in London 's Grosvenor Square and violently clashed with police . Major protests concerning other political issues made international news , such as the March 1968 protests in Poland against their communist government , and the campus uprisings of May 1968 in France . 
 By and large , the Beatles had avoided publicly expressing their political views , with " Taxman " being their only overtly political track thus far . During his time in Rishikesh , Lennon decided to write a song about the recent wave of social upheaval . He recalled , " I thought it was about time we spoke about it [ revolution ] , the same as I thought it was about time we stopped not answering about the Vietnamese war . I had been thinking about it up in the hills in India . " 
 Despite Lennon 's antiwar feelings , he had yet to become anti @-@ establishment , and expressed in " Revolution " that he wanted " to see the plan " from those advocating toppling the system . The repeated phrase " it 's gonna be alright " in " Revolution " came directly from Lennon 's Transcendental Meditation experiences in India , conveying the idea that God would take care of the human race no matter what happened politically . Another influence on Lennon was his burgeoning relationship with avant @-@ garde artist Yoko Ono ; Ono attended the recording sessions , and participated in the unused portion of " Revolution 1 " which evolved into " Revolution 9 " . 
 Around the fourth week of May 1968 , the Beatles met at Kinfauns , George Harrison 's home in Esher , to demonstrate their compositions to each other in preparation for recording their next studio album . A bootleg recording from that informal session shows that " Revolution " had two of its three verses intact . The line referencing Mao Zedong was added to the lyrics in the studio . During filming of a promotional clip later that year , Lennon told the director that it was the most important lyric of the song . Lennon had changed his mind by 1972 , saying " I should have never put that in about Chairman Mao " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 = = = Revolution 1 = = = 
 The Beatles began their studio sessions for the new album on 30 May , starting with " Revolution 1 " ( simply titled " Revolution " for the first few sessions ) . The first day concentrated on recording the basic rhythm track . Take 18 lasted 10 : 17 , much longer than the earlier takes , and it was this take that was chosen for additional overdubs recorded over the next two sessions . 
 During overdubs which brought the recording to take 20 , Lennon took the unusual step of performing his lead vocal while lying on the floor . He also altered one line into the ambiguous " you can count me out , in " . He later explained that he included both because he was undecided in his sentiments . The appended " in " did not appear on the lyric sheet included with the original album . 
 " Revolution 1 " has a blues style , performed at a relaxed tempo . The electric guitar heard in the intro ( similar to the blues song " Dust My Broom " ) shows a blues influence , and the " shoo @-@ bee @-@ do @-@ wop " backing vocals are a reference to Doo Wop music . The basic time signature is 12 / 8 ( or 4 / 4 in a " shuffle " style ) , but the song has several extra half @-@ length bars during the verses . There are also two extra beats at the end of the last chorus , the result of an accidental bad edit during the mixing process that was left uncorrected at Lennon 's request . 
 = = = = Take 20 = = = = 
 Low @-@ quality monitor mixes of the full @-@ length version of " Revolution " appeared on various bootlegs , such as From Kinfauns to Chaos , throughout the 1990s . Then in 2009 , a high @-@ quality version labelled " Revolution Take 20 " appeared on the bootleg CD Revolution : Take ... Your Knickers Off ! The release triggered considerable interest among the media and fans of the group . This version , <unk> ( Remix in Mono # 1 ) of Take 20 , runs to 10 minutes 46 seconds ( at the correct speed ) and was created at the end of the 4 June session , with a copy taken away by Lennon . It was an attempt by Lennon to augment the full @-@ length version of " Revolution " in a way that satisfied him before he chose to split the piece between the edited " Revolution 1 " and the musique concrète " Revolution 9 " . 
 The bootlegged recording starts with engineer Geoff Emerick announcing the remix as " <unk> of Take ... " and then momentarily forgetting the take number , which Lennon jokingly finishes with " Take your knickers off and let 's go " , hence the name of the bootleg CD . The first half of the recording is almost identical to the released track " Revolution 1 " . It lacks the electric guitar and horn overdubs of the final version , but features two tape loops in the key of A ( same as the song ) that are faded in and out at various points . After the final chorus , the song launches into an extended coda similar to that in " Hey Jude " . ( The album version only features about 40 seconds of this coda . ) Beyond the point where the album version fades out , the basic instrumental backing keeps repeating while the vocals and overdubs become increasingly chaotic : Harrison and Paul McCartney repeatedly sing " dada , mama " in a childlike register ; Lennon 's histrionic vocals are randomly distorted in speed ( a little of this can be heard in the fade of " Revolution 1 " ) ; and radio tuning noises à la " I Am the Walrus " appear . Several elements of this coda appear in the officially released " Revolution 9 " . Throughout the body of that song , Lennon 's histrionic vocal track periodically appears ( albeit minus the speed distortion ) , as do the tape loops . 
 After the band track ends , the song moves into avant @-@ garde territory , with Yoko Ono reciting some prose over an unknown , vaguely operatic recording ( possibly captured live from the radio ) . Ono 's piece begins with the words " Maybe , it 's not that … " , with her voice trailing off at the end ; Lennon or Harrison jokingly replies , " It is ' that ' ! " As the piece continues , Lennon quietly mumbles " Gonna be alright " a few times . Then follows a brief piano riff , some comments from Lennon and Ono on how well the track has preceded , and final appearances of the tape loops . Most of this coda was lifted for the end of " Revolution 9 " , with a little more piano at the beginning ( which monitor mixes reveal was present in earlier mixes of " Revolution " ) and minus Lennon 's ( or Harrison 's ) joking reply . 
 = = = = Splitting of Revolution 1 and Revolution 9 = = = = 
 Lennon soon decided to divide the existing ten @-@ minute recording into two parts : a more conventional Beatles track and an avant @-@ garde sound collage . Within days after take 20 , work began on " Revolution 9 " using the last six minutes of the take as a starting point . Numerous sound effects , tape loops , and overdubs were recorded and compiled over several sessions almost exclusively by Lennon and Ono , although Harrison provided assistance for additional spoken overdubs . With more than 40 sources used for " Revolution 9 " , only small portions of the take 20 coda are heard in the final mix ; most prominent from take 20 are Lennon 's multiple screams of " right " and " alright " , and around a minute near the end featuring Ono 's lines up to " you become naked " . 
 On 21 June , the first part of take 20 received several overdubs and became officially titled " Revolution 1 " . The overdubs included a lead guitar line by Harrison and a brass section of two trumpets and four trombones . Final stereo mixing was completed on 25 June . The final mix included the hurried announcement of " take two " by Geoff Emerick at the beginning of the song . 
 = = = Revolution ( single version ) = = = 
 Lennon wanted " Revolution 1 " to be the next Beatles single , but McCartney was reluctant to invite controversy , and argued along with Harrison that the track was too slow for a single . Lennon persisted , and rehearsals for a faster and louder re @-@ make began on 9 July ; recording started the following day . This proved an immense success . 
 The song begins with " a startling machine @-@ gun fuzz guitar riff " , with Lennon and Harrison 's guitars prominent throughout the track . The distorted guitar sound was achieved by direct injection of the guitar signal into the mixing console . Emerick later explained that he routed the signal through two microphone preamplifiers in series while keeping the amount of overload just below the point of overheating the console . Lennon overdubbed the opening scream , and double @-@ tracked some of the words " so roughly that its careless spontaneity becomes a point in itself " , according to author Ian MacDonald . 
 " Revolution " was performed in a higher key , B major , compared to the A major of " Revolution 1 " , although the distortion changes the key slightly , leaving the song halfway between B ♭ and B. The " shoo @-@ bee @-@ do @-@ wop " backing vocals were omitted in the re @-@ make , and an instrumental break was added . " Revolution " was given a climactic end , as opposed to the fade out of " Revolution 1 " . For this version , Lennon unequivocally sang " count me out " . An electric piano overdub by Nicky Hopkins was added on 11 July , with final overdubs on 13 July and mono mixing on 15 July . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Revolution " was released as the B @-@ side of the " Hey Jude " single in late August 1968 . In the US , the song peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The single was listed as a double @-@ sided number 1 in Australia , while " Revolution " topped New Zealand 's singles chart for one week , following " Hey Jude " ' s five @-@ week run at number 1 there . " Revolution 1 " was released on The Beatles in late November 1968 . It was the opening track on side four of the LP , four spots ahead of the companion piece " Revolution 9 " . 
 " Revolution " later appeared on the 1970 US compilation album Hey Jude , the first time the song was issued in stereo . Lennon disliked the stereo mix , saying in a 1974 interview that the mono mix of " Revolution " was a " heavy record " but " then they made it into a piece of ice cream ! " The song was released on other compilations , including 1967 – 1970 and Past Masters . It was remixed for the 2006 soundtrack album Love , appearing in full length on the DVD @-@ Audio version and as a shortened edit on other versions . 
 Music journalist Greil Marcus noted that the political critics had overlooked the music ; he wrote that while " there is sterility and repression in the lyrics " , the " freedom and movement in the music ... dodges the message and comes out in front . " Among later music critics , Dave Marsh included " Revolution " in his 1989 book covering the 1001 greatest singles , describing it as a " gem " with a " ferocious fuzztone rock and roll attack " and a " snarling " Lennon vocal . Writing for AllMusic , Richie Unterberger called " Revolution " one of the Beatles ' " greatest , most furious rockers " with " challenging , fiery lyrics " where the listener 's " heart immediately starts pounding before Lennon goes into the first verse " . 
 = = = Political reception = = = 
 Politically , the release of " Revolution " prompted immediate responses from the New Left and counterculture press . Ramparts branded it a " betrayal " , and the New Left Review said the song was " a lamentable petty bourgeois cry of fear " . The far left contrasted " Revolution " with a song by the Rolling Stones that was inspired by similar events and released around the same time : " Street Fighting Man " was perceived to be more supportive of their cause . Others on the left praised the Beatles for rejecting radicalism and advocating " pacifist idealism " . The song 's apparent scepticism about revolution caused Lennon to become the target of a few minority Trotskyist , Leninist and in particular Maoist groups . 
 The far right remained suspicious of the Beatles , saying they were moderate subversives who were " warning the Maoists not to ' blow ' the revolution by pushing too hard " . As further evidence of group 's supposed " pro @-@ Soviet " sentiments , the John Birch Society magazine cited another song on the White Album , " Back in the U.S.S.R. " Anti @-@ communist and far @-@ right groups also picked on the track " Piggies " , which was about social class and corporate greed . 
 = = Promotional clips = = 
 Filming for promotional clips of " Hey Jude " and " Revolution " took place on 4 September 1968 under the direction of Michael Lindsay @-@ Hogg . Two finished clips of " Revolution " were produced , with only lighting differences and other minor variations . The Beatles sang the vocals live over the pre @-@ recorded instrumental track from the single version . Their vocals included elements from " Revolution 1 " : McCartney and Harrison sang the " shoo @-@ bee @-@ doo @-@ <unk> " backing vocals , and Lennon sang " count me out , in " . Lennon also substituted " we 'd all love " for " we all want " in the opening verse . Later it was correctly pointed out that a track of Lennon 's voice is in fact playing in the background during the performance and can be heard quite noticeably at the end of the song when he fails to shout out his last and most explosive " All right " . Instead , the shout is heard from the soundtrack after he has already stopped singing and backed away from the microphone . 
 While the " Hey Jude " clip debuted on David Frost 's ITV television programme , the " Revolution " clip was first broadcast on the BBC1 programme Top of the Pops on 19 September 1968 . The first US screening of " Revolution " was on the 13 October 1968 broadcast of The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour . The promo clip is included in the three @-@ disc versions , titled 1 + , of the Beatles ' 2015 video compilation 1 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Revolution 
 John Lennon – vocal , lead guitar , handclaps , scream 
 Paul McCartney – bass guitar , Hammond organ , handclaps 
 George Harrison – lead guitar , handclaps 
 Ringo Starr – drums , handclaps 
 Nicky Hopkins – electric piano 
 Revolution 1 
 John Lennon – lead vocal , acoustic guitar , lead guitar 
 Paul McCartney – bass guitar , piano , organ , backing vocals 
 George Harrison – lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 Francie Schwartz - backing vocals 
 Derek Watkins and Freddy Clayton – trumpets 
 Don Lang , Rex Morris , J. Power , and Bill Povey – trombones 
 Personnel per Ian MacDonald 
 = = Use in Nike advertisement = = 
 In 1987 , " Revolution " became the first Beatles recording to be licensed for use in a television commercial . Nike paid $ 500 @,@ 000 for the right to use the song for one year , split between recording owner Capitol @-@ EMI and song publisher ATV Music Publishing ( owned by Michael Jackson ) . Commercials using the song started airing in March 1987 . 
 The three surviving Beatles , through their record company Apple , filed a lawsuit in July 1987 objecting to Nike 's use of the song . The suit was aimed at Nike , its advertising agency Wieden + Kennedy , and Capitol @-@ EMI Records . Capitol @-@ EMI said the lawsuit was groundless because they had licensed the use of " Revolution " with the " active support and encouragement of Yoko Ono Lennon , a shareholder and director of Apple " . Ono had expressed approval when the commercial was released , saying the commercial " is making John 's music accessible to a new generation " . 
 The " Revolution " lawsuit and others involving the Beatles and EMI were settled out of court in November 1989 , with the terms kept secret . The financial website <unk> included the Nike " Revolution " advertisement campaign in its list of the 100 key business events of the 20th century , as it helped " commodify dissent " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = Thompson Twins version = = = 
 Thompson Twins covered " Revolution " on their 1985 album Here 's to Future Days , from which it was released as the fourth and final single . The song peaked at number 56 in the UK , spending five weeks on the chart . The band made a promotional video for the single version of the song . The B @-@ side , " The Fourth Sunday " , was exclusive to this single . 
 Thompson Twins also performed the song with Madonna and Nile Rodgers at Live Aid in July 1985 . 
 = = = = Formats = = = = 
 7 " UK vinyl single ( 1985 ) Arista TWINS 10 
 Side A 
 " Revolution " – 3 : 23 
 Side B 
 " The Fourth Sunday " – 4 : 18 
 12 " UK vinyl single ( 1985 ) Arista TWINS 1210 
 Side One 
 " Revolution " ( Extended Mix ) – 6 : 25 
 Side Two 
 " The Fourth Sunday " – 4 : 18 
 12 " UK vinyl single ( 1985 ) Arista TWINS 2210 
 Side One 
 " Revolution " ( Remix ) – 6 : 00 
 Side Two 
 " The Fourth Sunday " – 4 : 18 
 = = = = Chart performance = = = = 
 = = = = Official versions = = = = 
 = = = = Personnel = = = = 
 Tom Bailey – vocals , piano , Fairlight , synthesizers , guitar , contrabass , Fairlight and drum programming 
 Alannah Currie – lyrics , marimba , backing vocals , acoustic drums , percussion , tuned percussion 
 Joe Leeway – backing vocals , congas , percussion 
 Steve Stevens – additional guitar 
 Produced by Nile Rodgers and Tom Bailey 
 Mixed by James Farber 
 Mixed at Skyline Studio , NYC 
 Photography – Rebecca Blake 
 Artwork / Design – Andie Airfix , Satori 
 Art Direction – Alannah 
 = = = Stone Temple Pilots version = = = 
 In October 2001 , Stone Temple Pilots performed " Revolution " live during Come Together : A Night for John Lennon 's Words and Music , a television special in tribute to Lennon that raised funds for victims of the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center . After their performance received significant radio airplay , the group recorded a studio version of the song , which was released as a single in November 2001 . The song reached number 30 on the US Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . 
 = Furtum = 
 Furtum was a <unk> of Roman law comparable to the modern offence of theft ( as it is usually translated ) despite being a civil and not criminal wrong . In the classical law and later , it denoted the <unk> ( “ handling ” ) of most types of property with a particular sort of intention – fraud and in the later law , a view to gain . It is unclear whether a view to gain was always required or added later , and , if the latter , when . This meant that the owner did not consent , although Justinian broadened this in at least one case . The law of furtum protected a variety of property interests , but not land , things without an owner , or types of state or religious things . An owner could commit theft by taking his things back in certain circumstances , as could a borrower or similar user through misuse . 
 The Romans distinguished between " manifest " and " non @-@ manifest theft " based on how close to the scene of the crime the thief was caught , although exactly where the line was debated by jurists . Under the Twelve Tables , death or flogging could be expected for a manifest thief , later changed to damages of four times the thing . The penalty for non @-@ manifest theft was two times . There were complementary actions against the occupier of the property where the stolen goods were found , if the defendant did not bring the thing to court or refused a search . <unk> or condictio could also be undertaken by the owner of the thing , in addition to an action under furtum . 
 = = Contrectatio = = 
 Contrectatio meant " handling " and was established as the prohibited action associated with furtum before the end of the republic . Furtum had in the early and mid @-@ Republic required the carrying away of a thing . This was widened and there are several examples from the classical Rome and later where it is even hard to find physical contact in any sense . Contrectatio extended to dealing with the thing as if the owner , and " physical interference " can be considered a more accurate term than just touching . The idea of furtum , and <unk> in particular , broadened during the republic to complement the narrowly defined Lex Aquilia . This did , for example , include using a borrowed thing in a way which went beyond that agreed with the lender ( furtum usus ) , such as borrowing a horse and riding it for longer than agreed . During the Republic , no distinction was made in language between furtum usus and furtum in general . <unk> included what might be thought of as fraud : knowingly accepting a wrongful payment , or embezzlement , for example . The case of wrongful payment is problematic , because a mistaken payment still transferred ownership ; it seems contradictory that the receiver was granted ownership and still liable for theft . To accept a thing as a pledge knowing that it did not belong to the <unk> was also furtum – not merely acting as an accomplice . Plautus , a playwright , suggests that failing to report a theft after the fact was furtum , but this should not be assumed . The development of <unk> as the preferred prohibited act accompanied that of the criminal law , the actio <unk> ( for fraud ) and the <unk> actions . 
 An accomplice could be sued if he had provided help ope <unk> – a physical act relating to the method of execution , rather than mere encouragement . It appears that Labeo was the first to require help or advice , and earlier sources suggest that both help and advice was required . Labeo 's version was certainly entrenched by the early second century AD . An accomplice was treated as if he himself had committed the crime . Only one person needed to have handled the thing for all wrongdoers to be liable . Republican jurists were harder on accomplices than later jurists under the empire . Indeed , Ulpian considers the unwitting accomplice , who accidentally knocks out of the victim 's hand some coins which are then stolen , an accomplice to the theft . Some commentators have gone as far to say that the <unk> ( " ancients " ) may not have even required a third party to remove the coins , as long as they were otherwise lost to the owner . 
 = = <unk> intent = = 
 The requisite intention ( sometimes described as " animus <unk> " ) was a fraud ( <unk> ) . The act had to be against the will of the owner . The prospective thief also had to believe that he did not have the owner 's consent . This is confirmed in Gaius in the case of the slave who alerts his master to the fact that he has been bribed by another to steal from his master . The owner now consents to the thief 's appropriation so he can be caught in the act , and therefore prevents the crime actually occurring . Justinian , however , reverses this distinction for public policy reasons , and thus creates rather an anomaly . The acts had to be done deliberately , not merely negligently . 
 Intention to make a gain was probably necessary in Justinian 's time . It is thought that this was the case during classical Rome , as well : an example of Gaius is quoted in the Digest , and implies so ; Sabinus is quoted by Gellius as including such a condition . It is not entirely clear , however . This rule complements the existence of <unk> <unk> datum . In a notable example , a man , acting dishonestly , calls a mule @-@ driver to court frivolously , which caused the mules to be lost . Although this was classed as theft , there is no obvious intention to make a gain . This may have been because if the mules were lost , they had necessarily been stolen by someone . That being the case , the perpetrator could be held as an accomplice . <unk> <unk> datum focussed on wrongful damage to property . It is then , in form , more appropriate an action than furtum in cases where a loss has been caused , although the penalty nature of furtum did mean it could result in a higher payment . 
 <unk> ( young children ) and <unk> ( " lunatics " ) were considered incapable of formulating the necessary intention and could therefore not commit furtum . 
 = = Protected interests = = 
 The thing must be movable , if it is to be stolen . Whilst an immovable thing cannot be carried away , the pre @-@ classical extension to other types of interference with property means that immovable were not by their nature excluded . Gaius indicates that certain <unk> ( " ancients " ) believed that land could be stolen . This was also the view of Sabinus , but it was rejected by other classical jurists . A thing separated from the land could be stolen , however . <unk> was particularly important with regard to land , and therefore the exclusion may have be retained to help the good faith possessor of land to <unk> . Res <unk> and <unk> were covered by separate <unk> ; and one could not steal a res nullius . One can commit furtum of one 's own property , for example by taking back a thing pledged to a creditor , or by secretly reclaiming one 's own thing from a good faith possessor . Free persons could also be stolen , for example , children ; a wife in manu ; <unk> and <unk> . This was probably a hang @-@ over from a time when dominium ( ownership ) , manus and potestas were indistinct and not formally separate . Res <unk> could not be stolen , perhaps for want of a suitable plaintiff with a sufficient interest . 
 The general rule was that anyone with an interest in the safety of the thing stolen may sue . It could be that the owner did not have a sufficient interest to bring an action . If one person had a positive right in a thing , such as a <unk> , <unk> , or good faith possessor , both he and the owner could sue . The unsecured creditor could not . Those obliged by contract to return the thing , and other forms of " negative interest " , had an action available at the expense of owner . This was only true so long as the person obliged was solvent – that is , under a real risk of losing out by a theft . If the person obliged was insolvent , the owner would have an action instead . The plaintiff with a negative interest was precluded from an action if it was by his own fault ( dolus ) , or other dishonest . The lower standard of care required of a <unk> meant he could not be sued by a depositor , and so had no action available for furtum . A vendor , who had agreed a price but not delivered his thing , retained legal ownership of the thing . Thus if the thing was stolen , the vendor had the action on the theft because he was liable to the purchaser . 
 = = Applicable actions = = 
 There were several possible actions available to the claimant . In the typical theft , the damages were a multiple of the value of the thing stolen , available through the actio furti . A subsequent rise in the value of the thing stolen whilst the claim was being brought was borne by the defendant , if found liable . If part of a thing was stolen , probably the value of that part . A successful action for theft brought with it <unk> for the thief . If the claimant had an interest short of ownership , then the value of that interest formed the basis for the damages instead . An heir of the claimant could sue , but the heir of a thief was not liable . Some types of theft were criminal wrongs by the end of the republic . Ulpian reports that criminal proceedings were more common , and Julian that a successful prosecution prevented a civil action under furtum . Even furtum itself was not compensatory but penal in nature . 
 In the time of the Twelve Tables , a " manifest " thief and a " non @-@ manifest " thief were treated differently . Manifest theft denoted some sort of being caught in the act . Being found later with the stolen thing was not manifest theft , unless it was found during a seemingly bizarre ritual ( furtum lance <unk> <unk> ) , whereby the searcher would come with a silver platter and wearing few clothes . Gaius is highly critical of the by @-@ then obsolete ritual , imagining the platter was for removal of the goods . In practice , it may have been for an offering to the household gods . Being almost naked would have prevented the searcher bringing with him a thing he would then pretend to find . Gaius reports that manifest theft brought a penalty of a severe flogging and enslavement for freemen . Slaves found liable for manifest furtum would be thrown off to their deaths off the <unk> Rock . The manifest thief was at the time of the Twelve tables was not given a full trial , his case merely adjudicated by a magistrate . The extreme penalty must have acted as a deterrent . The victim could kill the thief on the spot in two situations : at night , and where the thief was using a weapon and had been verbally warned . The verbal warning was designed to make the act of killing more public , and prevent it being an underhand way of committing murder . This rule was accepted by Gaius but is questioned by Ulpian . The penalty for non @-@ manifest theft was always double damages . 
 By the classical period , physical punishment had been abandoned for manifest theft and Gaius records merely four @-@ times damages , introduced by the praetor . This meant , somewhat strangely , that a praetorian action could be more serious than a civil action , which was unusual . Gaius also elaborates slightly on what constitutes manifest theft . He says that most jurists believed it extended to being caught in the place of the theft with the thing , and no further . Julian ( jurist ) , Ulpian , and Justinian all described it as including the thief who was still carrying the thing to its intended hiding place . There may have been a maximum time limit on manifest theft of this type , but it is unclear how long it was . The general rules for furtum were almost fully developed by the classical period and few significant changes were made during and after it . 
 There were now four possible actions for theft , by the victim : the action furti itself and three complementary actions . The actio furti <unk> was available against the occupier of the building in which the stolen goods were found , regardless of his knowledge of them and brought three @-@ times damages . The actio furti <unk> could be pursued against anyone who declined a search with witnesses , with four @-@ times damages . The actio furti non <unk> could be brought if the respondent did not bring the thing to court , although its penalty is unclear . There was a further action available to the respondent of an actio furti <unk> who had been found liable : he could sue the person who gave it to him , for the extent of his own liability . That the victim could sue both the thief and handler , if he could show who the thief was , which would have difficult without the presence of the thing . This was both penal , and an attempt to give the plaintiff enough actions to compensate him , because the thief , at least was not usually solvent . 
 By Justinian 's time , the scheme was simpler : instead of complementing actions for manifest and non @-@ manifest theft , handling stolen goods , or concealing them made one instead liable for non @-@ manifest theft , whose two @-@ times penalty was maintained . Searches were carried out by public authorities , and the wide definition of theft covered a bad faith receiver of goods . 
 There were <unk> actions available in addition to penal actions , those actions which followed from a finding of theft but were additional to it . An action for furtum allowed the dominus or his heirs a claim under <unk> ( and action in rem ) , which would result in the thing being returned if its value could not be paid instead . It also allowed a claim by the owner for the thing ’ s value under the condictio <unk> against the thief in <unk> , although only one could be successful . Allowing a condictio was anomalous : it was an action more usually brought by a non @-@ owner , possibly kept over from before condictio was restricted in this way . It is also possible it was allowed because it granted to the claimant an advantage insofar as he did not need ascertain who had the property itself . Gaius suggests that it was kept " out of hatred for thieves " . A possessory interdict was another option in either case . 
 = Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex is a platform game published by Universal Interactive Studios along with Konami and developed by Traveller 's Tales for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox and was ported by Eurocom for GameCube . It was first released on the PlayStation 2 in North America on October 29 , 2001 . 
 The game is the fourth main installment ( sixth overall ) in the Crash Bandicoot video game series . It is the first main installment of the series not to be developed by Naughty Dog , and the first of the entire series to not be released exclusively for a PlayStation console . The story centers on the appearance of Crunch Bandicoot , a genetically advanced bandicoot created by the main antagonist of the series , Doctor Neo Cortex , who is aided by a group of destructive masks known as the Elementals . Crash Bandicoot and his sister Coco must travel the world and gather special Crystals that will return the Elementals to a hibernated state , and defeat Crunch . 
 Critical reception of the game was mixed , with many reviewers opining that the game recycled elements from its PlayStation predecessors with minimal innovation . The PlayStation 2 edition has sold 1 @.@ 95 million copies in North America , and the game qualified for various best @-@ seller ranges , including the Platinum Range for PlayStation 2 , Xbox Classics , and Player 's Choice on GameCube . It was released as a launch title for the Xbox Originals line of downloadable original @-@ Xbox games for the Xbox 360 's Live Marketplace service on December 4 , 2007 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex is a platform game in which the player controls Crash and Coco Bandicoot , who must gather 25 Crystals and defeat the main antagonists of the story : Doctor Neo Cortex , his new superweapon Crunch Bandicoot and Crunch 's power sources , the renegade Elementals . Much of the game takes place in a " Virtual Reality ( VR ) Hub System " created by Coco to help Crash gather the Crystals . The VR Hub System is split up into five " VR Hubs " ; initially , only the first VR Hub is available . Each VR Hub has five teleportation portals to different levels . The goal in each level is to find and obtain the Crystal hidden in the area . In some levels , the Crystal will be located at the end of a level or must be earned by completing a specific challenge . Most levels contain a " Bonus Platform " that leads to a special bonus area , where the player must navigate through a maze and collect everything in sight . Once a bonus area is completed , it cannot be played again unless the level is replayed . After completing all five levels in a VR Hub , a sixth teleportation portal to a boss fight with Crunch will appear . By defeating the boss , the next VR Hub will become available for play . When all 25 Crystals are collected and Doctor Cortex and Crunch are defeated , the game is won . 
 Besides Crystals , Gems and Colored Gems can be collected for extra accomplishment . Gems are rewarded to the player if all of the crates in a level are broken open or if a secret area is completed . Colored Gems are found in special levels and lead to hidden areas . " Relics " can be won by re @-@ entering a level where the Crystal has already been retrieved . To obtain a Relic , the player must initiate the " Time Trial " mode and race through a level in the pre @-@ designated time displayed before entering a level . To begin a Time Trial run , the player must enter a level and activate the floating stopwatch near the beginning of the level to activate the timer ; if the stopwatch is not touched , the level can be played regularly . The player must then race through the level as quickly as possible . Scattered throughout the level are yellow crates with the numbers one , two , or three on them . When these crates are broken , the timer is frozen for the number of seconds designated by the box . As no lives are lost in the Time Trial mode , the level can be played through as often as the player desires . Sapphire , Gold and Platinum Relics can be won depending on how low the player 's final time is . The first five Relics the player receives unlocks access to a secret level . Every five Relics thereafter open up another level in the Secret Warp Room . The levels in the Secret Warp Room must be won before the game can be fully completed . 
 Crash and Coco Bandicoot start the game with four lives . Crash and Coco lose a life when they are struck by an enemy attack or suffer any other type of damage . More lives can be earned by collecting 100 " Wumpa Fruits " or break open a special crate to collect a life . Crash and Coco can be shielded from enemy attack by collecting an Aku Aku mask . Collecting three of these masks allows temporary invulnerability from all minor dangers . If Crash or Coco run out of lives , the game is over . However , the game can be continued by selecting " Continue " at the " Game over " screen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Ten returning characters from previous Crash titles star in Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex along with five new characters . The protagonist of the game , Crash Bandicoot , is a genetically enhanced eastern barred bandicoot who must defeat the antagonist Doctor Neo Cortex and his new superweapon . Coco Bandicoot , Crash 's younger sister , is a highly intelligent computer expert with an interest in Hong Kong martial arts films . Aku Aku is an omnipotent witch doctor who guides and aids Crash and Coco in stopping the plans of Doctor Neo Cortex . Pura , Coco 's pet tiger cub , serves a very minor role and appears only in the introduction of the game . 
 The main antagonist of the series , Doctor Neo Cortex , is a mad scientist who created Crash Bandicoot among other characters and now seeks Crash 's elimination along with world domination . The controlling force behind Cortex 's plots for conquering the world is Uka Uka , the twin brother of Aku Aku . Four recurring villains from the series serve minor roles in the game : Doctor N. Gin , Cortex 's main assistant ; Doctor Nefarious Tropy , a scientist who specialises in time travel ; Tiny Tiger , a hulking and ferocious thylacine ; and Dingodile , a dingo @-@ crocodile hybrid armed with a flamethrower . 
 Five new characters in the series make their appearance in Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex , of which the most important is Doctor Cortex 's genetically enhanced superweapon Crunch Bandicoot , a bionic bandicoot created for the purpose of destroying Crash Bandicoot . Acting as Crunch 's power source are the Elementals , a group of destructive masks who control the elements of Earth , Water , Fire and Air . The Elementals consist of Rok @-@ Ko , a temperamental and rock @-@ headed <unk> mask who controls earthquakes and landslides , Wa @-@ Wa , a waterbending mask who controls thunderstorms and floods , Py @-@ Ro , an easily perturbed firebending mask who controls volcano eruptions , and Lo @-@ Lo , a joke @-@ cracking airbending mask who controls tornadoes . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In a space station orbiting the Earth , Uka Uka , having called a convention of villains , berates Doctor Neo Cortex , Tiny Tiger , Dingodile , Dr. <unk> Tropy and Dr. N. Gin for their low " track record for spreading evil " , and orders them to come up with a plan to eliminate Crash Bandicoot , their main opponent . Cortex comes forward with the announcement of a previously secret " genetically enhanced superweapon of unbelievable strength " , but reveals that it is missing a power source . Uka Uka then suggests using the Elementals , a group of renegade masks who had elemental power over earth , water , fire and air and used these elements to ravage the globe until they were imprisoned by The Ancients with the aid of special Crystals that put the masks in a state of hibernation . Cortex deduces that if they awaken the Elementals and harness their destructive power , they can bring his secret weapon to life and eliminate Crash Bandicoot forever . 
 Back on Earth , the world is suddenly terrorised by severe natural disasters , leading Aku Aku to conclude that Uka Uka is up to something . A confrontation with Uka Uka confirms his suspicions and nearly results in his destruction at the hands of the Elementals . Aku Aku returns to Crash and Coco Bandicoot and alerts them of the current situation , disclosing that the only way to stop the Elementals is to imprison them once more with the Crystals , which have been scattered across the Earth . Using Coco 's new Virtual Reality Hub System , Crash and Coco travel the world and gather the Crystals , fending off attacks from Cortex 's superweapon , Crunch Bandicoot , and the Elementals along the way . However , by the time the Crystals have been gathered and the Elementals have been put in their hibernation state , Crunch 's elemental powers have reached maximum capacity , forcing Crash to battle Crunch at full power in Cortex 's space station . Nevertheless , Crash defeats Crunch , which releases him from Cortex 's control . Infuriated by this failure , Uka Uka attacks Cortex with a fireball , only to have it hit a vital part of the space station , which causes a chain reaction that results in the space station 's self @-@ destruction . Crash , Aku Aku , and Crunch escape and return to the Bandicoot home on Coco 's space fighter ship , while Cortex and Uka Uka deploy an escape pod and end up landing somewhere in Antarctica , where Uka Uka furiously chases Cortex around a small ice floe . 
 = = Development = = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex was originally intended to be designed by Mark Cerny , who had designed all the games in the series thus far , and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . The game under Cerny 's direction was to be a free @-@ roaming title with puzzle elements that would see Crash travelling between different planets . In early 2000 , when Universal approached Traveller 's Tales to be the development team behind the game , they produced a 3 @-@ D rendered demo of Crash running through a volcanic level . Development of the game 's engine began in mid @-@ 2000 . 
 On September 21 , 2000 , Universal Interactive Studios and Konami announced that they had entered an agreement that would enable Konami to publish a Crash Bandicoot game for next @-@ generation game systems , with Universal Interactive handling the production of the games . The agreement served to break the Crash Bandicoot franchise 's exclusivity to Sony @-@ produced consoles and effectively made Crash Bandicoot a mascot character for Universal rather than Sony . After Universal fell out with Cerny and Sony , Traveller 's Tales was forced to alter the game from a free @-@ roaming title to a standard Crash title in the lieu of Warped , the third game in the series . Traveller 's Tales had to begin development of the game from scratch and were given only twelve months to complete the game . 
 The character Crunch Bandicoot was designed by Craig Whittle of Traveller 's Tales and Sean <unk> of Universal . The concept of battling mini @-@ bosses within the game 's levels was dropped to uphold the fast and frantic pace of the series ' gameplay . Multiplayer capability was also considered before being dropped . An earlier draft of the story featured an alternate version of the game 's climax and ending , which involved Crash battling Crunch in a mechanical robot suit . At the end of the fight , Crunch would destroy Crash 's suit with a bolt of electricity . The resulting debris would render Cortex unconscious , destroy the remote control device controlling Crunch and start an electrical fire in the space station . As the Bandicoots escape to resume their beach @-@ going vacation , the ruins of the space station would crash @-@ land onto the island of Cortex 's original settlement , conveniently allowing Cortex and Uka Uka to resume their world domination bids . 
 The majority of the characters and vehicles in the game were built and textured by Nicola Daly and animated by Jeremy Pardon . The main game systems and game code as a whole were coded by John <unk> . The game 's music is composed by Andy Blythe and Marten <unk> of Swallow Studios . A rearranged version of the original Crash Bandicoot theme by Mutato Muzika 's Josh Mancell also appears in the game . The game 's sound effects were created by Ron Horwitz , Tom Jaeger , John Robinson , and Harry <unk> of Universal Sound Studios . The game 's voice actors were cast and directed by Margaret Tang . Only two of the series ' original voice actors reprised their roles for the game : Clancy Brown voices the dual role of Doctor Neo Cortex and Uka Uka , while Mel Winkler provides the voice of Aku Aku . Debi Derryberry inherited the role of Coco Bandicoot from Hynden Walch , while Corey Burton voices the returning villains Doctor N. Gin and Doctor Nefarious Tropy , taking over for Brendan O 'Brien and Michael Ensign respectively . Kevin Michael Richardson provides the voice of new character Crunch Bandicoot , while the Elementals , consisting of Rok @-@ Ko , Wa @-@ Wa , Py @-@ Ro and Lo @-@ Lo , are voiced by Thomas F. Wilson , R. Lee Ermey , Mark Hamill , and Jess Harnell respectively . 
 Following the release of the PlayStation 2 edition on October 29 , 2001 , the Xbox version of the game was announced by Universal Interactive on January 31 , 2002 . The Xbox version features reduced loading times and improved graphics . On September 17 , 2002 , the game was released on the GameCube , initially in North America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex received mixed to generally positive reviews , with some critics criticizing the game for making little changes to the formula established by its predecessors . Louis Bedigian of GameZone wrote a positive review , saying that " any Crash Bandicoot fan would be a fool not to go out and buy this game . I started playing at 2am one night and did not stop until three in the afternoon ! " Doug Perry of IGN described the game as " a decent playing and pretty looking Crash Bandicoot game . It 's nothing terribly special , but it 's not bad , not bad at all . " Official US PlayStation Magazine felt that " when the strongest feeling I get from a game is the desire to play its predecessors , something 's not quite right . " Game Informer criticized the " outrageously bad load times " , saying that they " keep the game from being average . " Star Dingo of GamePro cautioned that " if you were hoping the new management would give Crash a big kick in the pants , however , this is one pair of pants you will find quite <unk> . " Electronic Gaming Monthly criticised the trial @-@ and @-@ error gameplay , saying that " when forced to blindly jump , die , then discover what you missed , where I come from , that ’ s just cheating . " 
 Play Magazine noted that " they 've caressed the music to great effect , made the bosses a bit more challenging , [ and ] adhered to a massive replayability standard that would drive any developer to drink . " Game Informer felt that " every little morsel of platforming goodness in The Wrath of Cortex has already been done to death on the Playstation . " Carlos <unk> of GameZone warned that " if you are looking for an innovative and original experience that does justice to the series you ’ ll have to look elsewhere . " Official Xbox Magazine concluded that " this is a game for those who want what Crash has always had to offer – good graphics , jump @-@ and @-@ spin gameplay , and tons of collectible items . Nothing more , nothing less . " Hilary Goldstein felt that while Crash Bandicoot : The Wrath of Cortex was " a fun game for the most part , " " it fails in some areas , like proper game balance and correct use of surround sound . " Star Dingo of GamePro concluded that " love it or hate it , Wrath of Cortex Xbox is more of more of the same . " Electronic Gaming Monthly felt that " save for a few additions to WOC , like some cool hamster @-@ ball levels , it 's almost identical to its predecessors . " 
 The GameCube version rated the lowest among critics out of the three versions . Ben <unk> of Nintendo World Report promised that " gamers experiencing the wacky mascot for the first time may enjoy it . " Michael Lafferty of GameZone described the game as " safe , sterile and redundant . " Matt Casamassina on IGN concluded that " at the end of the day this is the same Crash game I played so many years ago without any real innovations or evolutions . " Nintendo Power praised the " sheer variety " of the gameplay . Kilo Watt of GamePro said that " graphically , this version is slightly below the recent Xbox release but in line with the competent PlayStation 2 iteration . " Electronic Gaming Monthly agreed that " Wrath on the GC is much more polished here than on the PS2 , " while Play Magazine denounced the GameCube version as " a shell of the other two console versions , so I beg you to pass . " 
 Commercially , the PlayStation 2 version sold over 1 @.@ 95 million units in North America , and around 170 @,@ 000 copies in 2001 in Japan . As a result , the game was re @-@ released for the Platinum Range on October 11 , 2002 , for the Sony Greatest Hits line @-@ up on October 15 , 2002 , and for the Best line @-@ up on October 17 , 2002 . The " Greatest Hits " version of the game features quicker load times than those of the original version . The Xbox version was re @-@ released for the Xbox Classics line @-@ up on April 11 , 2003 , and the GameCube version was re @-@ released for the Player 's Choice line @-@ up in Europe on October 22 , 2004 . 
 = South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut = 
 South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut is a 1999 American adult animated musical comedy film based on the Comedy Central television series South Park . The film was directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , and stars the regular television cast of Parker , Matt Stone , Mary Kay Bergman , and Isaac Hayes , with guest performances by George Clooney , Eric Idle , and Mike Judge . The plot follows the four boys — Stan Marsh , Kyle Broflovski , Eric Cartman , and Kenny McCormick — as they see a controversial R @-@ rated movie featuring Canadians Terrance and Phillip and begin cursing incessantly . Their parents pressure the United States to wage war against Canada for allegedly corrupting their children . 
 The film tackles issues of censorship and bad parenting and parodies the animated films of the Disney Renaissance as well as musicals such as the West End 's Les Misérables , and satirizes the controversy surrounding the show itself . The movie also heavily satirizes the Motion Picture Association of America ; Parker and Stone battled the MPAA throughout the production process and the movie received an R rating just two weeks prior to its release . A writing team consisting of Parker , Stone , and Pam Brady was assembled . They conceived numerous plot ideas , with Parker and Stone 's being the one developed into a film . The film features twelve original songs by Parker and Marc Shaiman with additional lyrics by Stone . 
 The film was released in theaters on June 30 , 1999 , and on home video on November 23 , 1999 . Produced on a $ 21 million budget , it went on to gross $ 83 @.@ 1 million worldwide in theaters , making it the highest @-@ grossing R @-@ rated animated film of all time . The song " Blame Canada " earned Parker and Marc Shaiman a nomination for Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 72nd Academy Awards . The song was performed by Robin Williams at the ceremony . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stan Marsh , Kenny McCormick , Kyle Broflovski and Eric Cartman head to the local movie theater to see the new film Terrance and Phillip : Asses of Fire which stars the boys ' favorite Canadian comedy duo Terrance and Phillip ( " Mountain Town " ) , but when the boys get there , they are refused entry due to the film being rated R by the MPAA , so they pay a homeless man to accompany them . The boys learn obscene phrases from the movie ( " Asses of fire " ) which makes the other kids in town want to see the movie . 
 The following day , the kids begin swearing in class , and they are sent to see Counselor Mr. Mackey , who informs their mothers . Learning that the language was from the movie , their parents force the teachers to enforce a strict dress code banning all types of Terrance and Phillip clothing . While more drastic measures are being taken , Mr. Mackey abandons their previous lesson plans and run a rehabilitation center for the kids to get them to stop swearing ( " It 's Easy , M <unk> " ) . Afterwards , the boys and the rest of the children go to see the movie again . Kenny bets Cartman $ 100 that he can set his fart on fire like Terrance did in the film . Kenny <unk> himself and dies when the doctors accidentally replace his heart with a baked potato . Stan , Kyle , and Cartman are grounded for seeing the Terrance & Phillip movie again . Kenny is refused admission to Heaven and sent to Hell ( " Hell Isn 't Good " ) , where he is tormented by Satan and Saddam Hussein who are gay lovers . The parents of South Park organize a boycott against Canada and Terrance and Phillip ( " Blame Canada " ) , which is led by Kyle 's mother Sheila . The new group of angry mob - called " Mothers Against Canada " - has Terrance and Phillip arrested as war criminals , and when the United States refuses to release the duo , Canada retaliates by bombing the residence of the Baldwin brothers . 
 Sheila , now appointed as the " Secretary of Offense of the United States " , and President Bill Clinton announce that the United States will go to war with Canada and will have Terrance and Phillip executed at an upcoming USO show . After overhearing Cartman leading the kids in annoying Kyle with a song degrading herself and admonishing her ridiculous methods ( " Kyle 's Mom 's a Bitch " ) , she has Dr. <unk> forcibly implant a V @-@ Chip in Cartman . The device gives sharp violent electrical shock every time Cartman swears . Meanwhile , back in Hell , Satan declares that if the blood of the two innocent Canadians touches American soil , it will be time for him to rise up and rule the world . Saddam wants to come with him , but Satan is tired of being bossed around by Saddam ( " Up There " ) . Kenny tells Satan to break up with Saddam to which Satan initially agrees , but Saddam wins back Satan with a song ( " I Can Change " ) . Later , Kenny 's ghost visits Cartman to warn him of the consequences of executing Terrance and Phillip . After failing to convince their parents , the boys decide to take matters into their own hands ( " What Would Brian Boitano Do " ) . They have a secret meeting to talk about how they can save Terrance and Phillip . They form La Resistance and Gregory tells Stan to recruit a God @-@ hating French expert on covert operations named " The Mole " ( " La Resistance " ) . 
 While the troops , waiting for the execution of Terrance and Phillip , are being entertained by Big Gay Al ( " I 'm Super " ) , La Resistance and The Mole infiltrate the USO show , but The Mole is discovered by Sheila and the guards , and he is killed by the guard dogs after Cartman fails to deactivate the alarms ( " The Mole 's Reprise " ) . The remaining three boys attempt to warn their mothers and the army about what will happen if Terrance and Phillip are killed , but they instead laugh at them , and Mr. Garrison throws the switch to the electric chair . A large Canadian force attacks the base and a massive battle ensues between the two armies . In the confusion , the boys are able to free Terrance and Phillip , though Cartman 's V @-@ chip begins to malfunction from the electric shock . The other mothers , seeing the destruction their " Mothers Against Canada " movement has incited , decide to call it quits and head off to look for their children . After being stunned by an explosion , Stan has a hallucination and is visited by " The Clitoris " which tells him that all he needs is confidence if he wants to win Wendy 's heart and also reminds him about what 's more important : saving the world . 
 Stan leads the kids to find Terrance and Phillip who have been cornered by the US army . La Resistance forms a human shield while Kyle tries to persuade the army and his mother against killing the two , stating that he wants her to stop fighting everyone and deal with him . However , Sheila refuses and shoots Terrance and Phillip , which fulfills the prophecy and results in Satan , his minions , and Saddam rising from Hell and attacking both Canadian and United States armies . As a result , Sheila now regrets everything , even though she wanted " to make the world a better place for children " . Saddam immediately tries to usurp Satan 's authority , demanding homage and announcing his intent to rule the world himself . Cartman is able to hold Saddam off by using his malfunctioning V @-@ Chip to generate massive blasts of lightning every time he swears . With Kenny 's encouragement , Satan finally gets rid of Saddam by casting him back to Hell and getting impaled on a sharp stalagmite . Satan then grants Kenny a wish in repayment : Kenny asks for everything to return to how it was before the war , even though it means he 'll go back to Hell . He takes off his hood to say goodbye to his friends , revealing his face and voice for the first time . All the other deceased characters are brought back to life , the Canadians and Americans become friends again , Wendy becomes Stan 's girlfriend again and dumps Gregory ( she never really liked him ) , and everything returns to normal in South Park ( " Mountain Town ( reprise ) " ) . Instead of returning to Hell , Kenny ascends to Heaven due to his act of sacrifice , where naked angels are waiting for him and he is granted a halo and wings . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Trey Parker as Stan Marsh / Eric Cartman / Gregory / Satan / Mr. Garrison / Mr. Hat / Phillip Niles Argyle / Randy Marsh / Tom – News Reporter / Midget In A Bikini / Canadian Ambassador / <unk> / Mr. Mackey / Army General / Ned Gerblanski / Christophe – Ze Mole ( or The Mole ) / Big Gay Al ( singing voice ) / Additional Voices / Adolf Hitler 
 Matt Stone as Kyle Broflovski / Kenny McCormick / Saddam Hussein ( credited as " Himself " ) / Terrance Henry <unk> / Big Gay Al / Ticket Taker / Jimbo <unk> / Gerald Broflovski / Additional Voices 
 Mary Kay Bergman as Liane Cartman / Sheila Broflovski / Sharon Marsh / Carol McCormick / Wendy Testaburger / Clitoris / Additional Voices 
 Isaac Hayes as Chef Jerome McElroy 
 Jesse Howell , Anthony Cross @-@ Thomas & Franchesca Clifford as Ike Broflovski ( Franchesca Clifford was credited as " Francesca Clifford " ) 
 Bruce Howell as Man In Theatre 
 Deb Adair as Woman In Theatre 
 Jennifer Howell as Bebe Stevens 
 George Clooney as Dr. <unk> 
 Brent Spiner as Conan O 'Brien 
 Minnie Driver as Brooke Shields 
 Dave Foley as the Baldwin brothers 
 Eric Idle as Dr. <unk> 
 Nick Rhodes as Canadian Fighter Pilot 
 Toddy E. Walters as Winona Ryder 
 Stewart Copeland as American Soldier # 1 
 Stanley G. Sawicki as American Soldier # 2 
 Mike Judge as Kenny 's Goodbye 
 Howard McGillin as Gregory ( singing voice ) ( uncredited ) 
 = = Themes = = 
 South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut is a cautionary tale on the dangers of censorship . It uses the execution of Terrance and Phillip as the Seventh Sign in a parody of the Apocalypse . Cartman 's use of foul language helps to avert the disaster . Parents and " lazy child rearing " come in for particularly sharp criticism . On their way to see Terrance and Phillip , the boys sing that " movies teach us what our parents don 't have time to say ! " During " Blame Canada " a couple are seen abandoning their baby in their enthusiasm to join Mothers Against Canada . The song ends with : " We must blame them and cause a fuss / Before somebody thinks of blaming us ! " Much of the film 's satire and many of the songs are concerned with the refusal of people to accept responsibility for failure and their tendency to look for scapegoats ( Some of the songs are also parodies of musical theatre , but this is usually secondary to furthering the satire ) . Movies , government , society , foreigners , and Satan are all blamed leading Kyle to remark : " whenever I get in trouble , you go off and blame everybody else . But I 'm the one to blame . Deal with me . " The movie is also self @-@ reflective in nature . The enthusiasm the kids display for seeing the Terrence and Phillip movie reflects the creators ' anticipation of the real world enthusiasm many people , including those under age , would experience to see the movie . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Developmental stages began for the film midway through the series ' first season production in January 1998 . Co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone signed a deal with Comedy Central in April 1998 that contracted the duo to producing South Park episodes until 1999 , gave them a slice of the lucrative spinoff merchandising the show generated within its first year , as well as an unspecified seven @-@ figure cash bonus to bring the show to the big screen , in theaters . A large part of Parker and Stone 's conditions attached to any potential movie project was that it must at least be R @-@ rated , to keep in touch with the series ' humor and its roots , the short The Spirit of Christmas . Parker stated that their desire was to approach the film from a much more creative perspective and do something other than a simple movie @-@ length version of a regular episode . Despite alleged pressure from Paramount Pictures officials to keep the movie toned down , the two won the battle for a more mature rating . " They really wanted to be able to go beyond the South Park television show , " said Comedy Central spokesman Tony Fox to TV Guide at the time . " They really fought hard for and won the right to make an R @-@ rated movie . " Paramount executives went as far to prepare graphs displaying how much more money a PG @-@ 13 @-@ rated South Park feature would perhaps accumulate . The William Morris Agency , which represented Parker and Stone , pushed for movie production to begin as soon as possible , while public interest was still high , instead of several years into its run , as was done with Beavis and Butt @-@ head Do America , possibly because Beavis and Butt @-@ head and South Park were owned by Viacom Music and Entertainment Group , a unit of the Viacom Media Networks division of Viacom after Van Toffler left Viacom Media Networks on February 17 , 2015 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The cast of South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut is mostly carried over faithfully from the television series . Co @-@ creator Trey Parker voices the characters of Eric Cartman and Stan Marsh , and Satan , Clyde Donovan , Mr. Garrison , Phillip Niles Argyle , Randy Marsh , Mr. Mackey , Ned Gerblanski , the singing voice of Big Gay Al , the speaking voice of Gregory , The Mole , and President Bill Clinton , as well as multiple other background characters . Matt Stone portrays Kyle Broflovski and Kenny McCormick , as well as Saddam Hussein ( even though during the end credits it says that he was voiced by himself ) , Terrance Henry <unk> , Big Gay Al , Jimbo <unk> , Gerald Broflovski , Bill Gates , and additional voices . Mary Kay Bergman voices Wendy Testaburger , the core mothers of the film ( Sheila Broflovski , Sharon Marsh , Liane Cartman , and Carol McCormick ) , Shelley Marsh , and the clitoris . Isaac Hayes reprised his role from the series as Chef , and voice clips of staff children Jesse Howell , Anthony Cross @-@ Thomas , and Franchesca Clifford make up Ike Broflovski . Guest voices for the film included George Clooney as Dr. <unk> , Brent Spiner as Conan O 'Brien , Minnie Driver as Brooke Shields , Eric Idle as Dr. <unk> , and Dave Foley provides the combined voices of Alec , Billy , Daniel , and Stephen Baldwin . 
 Michael McDonald as himself ( the track " Eyes of a Child " ) and as Satan 's high notes in " Up There " , and Howard McGillin provides Gregory 's singing voice in " La Resistance ( Medley ) " . Stewart Copeland , former drummer for The Police , guests as an American soldier . Mike Judge , creator and voices of Beavis and Butt @-@ head , King of the Hill and The Goode Family , provides Kenny 's voice in his sole speaking appearance at the end of the film . Although initially denied by Paramount , Metallica lead singer James Hetfield said in 2001 that he provides vocals for the track " Hell Isn 't Good " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The season one episode " Death " heavily influenced the film 's screenplay . The plot and theme of both scripts revolves heavily around the parents of South Park protesting about Terrance and Phillip due to the perceived negative influence it has over their children . Parker said , " After about the first year of South Park , Paramount already wanted to make a South Park movie , and we sort of thought this episode would make the best model just because we liked the sort of pointing at ourselves kind of thing . " During the time , the team was also busy writing the second and third seasons of the series , the former of which Parker and Stone later described as " disastrous " . As such , they figured the phenomenon would be over soon , and they decided to write a personal , fully committed musical . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The animation in South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut was created in 3D using Alias | Wavefront ( now the Alias Systems Corporation ) PowerAnimator software , running on Silicon Graphics O2 and Octane workstations . Characters and individual scene elements were designed with both texture mapping and shading that , when rendered , resemble 2D paper cut @-@ out stop @-@ motion animation . The artists at South Park Studios ( at the time , called South Park Productions ) used a multiprocessor SGI Origin 2000 and 31 multiprocessor Origin 200 servers ( with 1 @.@ 14 terabytes of storage ) for both rendering and asset management . Backgrounds , characters and other items could be saved separately or as fully composited scenes , with speedy access later . " By creating flat characters and backgrounds in a 3D environment , we are able to add textures and lighting effects that give the film a cut @-@ out construction paper stop @-@ motion style which would have taken many more months if done traditionally , " said Gina Shay , line producer of the film . The animation team , beginning with season five , began using Maya instead of PowerAnimator . The studio now runs a 120 @-@ processor render farm that can produce 30 or more shots an hour . As the show 's visual quality has substantially improved in recent seasons , the animation of South Park : Bigger , Longer , & Uncut is a prime example of the show 's old , cruder , even more primitive animation style . In the audio commentary on the Blu @-@ ray reissue of the film , Stone and Parker take ample time to criticize how " bad and time consuming " the animation was during the era . IGN described the animation as " fall [ ing ] somewhere within the middle ground — not quite cardboard cutouts , but not quite fully computerized either . " Nate Boss , in a review of the Blu @-@ ray reissue for High @-@ Def Digest , commented , " There is no comparing the two , as the movie has a classic ( for South Park , at least ) animated feel , so full of the cut @-@ outs we have grown to love , while the newer seasons sport a more computer processed feel . " The film , unlike the television series ( at the time ) , was animated in widescreen ( 1 @.@ 78 : 1 ) . " Although the ' primitive ' animation of South Park is supposedly a joke , it 's really a secret weapon , " said Stephanie Zacharek of Salon . " The simplicity of Parker and Stone 's technique is what makes it so effective . " 
 = = = Editing and censorship = = = 
 The team working on the film commuted between the project and the series , pushing both to scheduling extremes ( changes to Bigger , Longer & Uncut were made as late as two weeks before its release ) and fighting constantly with Paramount . " They wanted a Disney kind of trailer . We said no . They put together a totally un @-@ South Park MTV video for the song ' What Would Brian Boitano Do ? ' . We had to go make our own version . " Paramount 's first trailer for the film advertised it , according to Parker , as " the <unk> movie of the summer " , and promoted it in a way that South Park is completely against . Parker and Stone told the studio of their dissatisfaction with the trailer , and upon the creation of a second trailer with minimal changes , the two broke the videocassette in half and sent it back in its original envelope . " It was war , " said Stone in 2000 . " They were saying , ' Are you telling us how to do our job ? ' And I was going , ' Yes , because you 're fucking stupid and you don 't know what you 're doing . ' " In another instance , Paramount took the songs from the film and created a music video to be aired on MTV . In accordance with broadcast standards , the studio cut various " R @-@ rated " parts out and edited it into what Parker described as a " horrible little medley " , with all humor absent . The studio sent the original tape to Parker and Stone over a weekend , with plans to send it to MTV on Monday to prepare it for airtime beginning Wednesday . Stone instead put the tape in the trunk of his car and went home . Paramount threatened to sue Parker and Stone in response . Parker also noted that the title was an obvious innuendo , and " they ( the MPAA ) just didn 't get it " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The musical score and songs featured in the film were composed and written by Parker and Marc Shaiman . The musical features 14 songs , each evoking a familiar Broadway style . The soundtrack also parodies many familiar Disney conventions , with several songs spoofing Disney musicals such as Beauty and the Beast and The Little Mermaid . The tracks " Mountain Town " brought comparisons to Oklahoma ! and the opening to Beauty and the Beast , and the " La Resistance " medley drew forth favorable Les Misérables comparisons . " I 'm Super " recalls Beauty and the Beast 's " Be Our Guest " and South Pacific 's Honey Bun and " Kyle 's Mom 's a Bitch " echoes Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , " Up There " , " I Can Change " and the " Mountain Town ( Reprise ) " recalls The Little Mermaid 's " Part of Your World " , " Poor Unfortunate Souls " and " Part of Your World ( Finale ) " , and " Uncle Fucka " is reminiscent of Oklahoma ! ( especially the ending ) . " Eyes of the Child " recalls pop versions of Disney songs played at the end credits like " Colors of the Wind " and " A Whole New World " and " Go The Distance " . The score received critical acclaim , with Entertainment Weekly claiming it is " a cast album that gleefully sends up all the Hollywood musical conventions we 're being deprived of . " The soundtrack was released June 15 , 1999 by Atlantic Records and Warner Music Group . " Blame Canada " was constantly highlighted as one of the best from the soundtrack and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . " I was like , ' We 're going to get nominated for an Academy Award for this . ' I really was , " Parker said . " I even told him [ Shaiman ] . " The song takes place in the film when the United States blames Canada for corrupting its youth . " We 're making fun of people who pick ridiculous targets to blame anything about what 's going on in their lives , so Canada was just the perfect , ridiculous , innocuous choice for a target , " said Shaiman . In 2011 , Time called the music of the film the " finest , <unk> full @-@ movie musical score since the disbanding of the Freed unit at MGM . " 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 = = = = Musical numbers = = = = 
 " Mountain Town " – Stan Marsh ( Trey Parker ) , Kenny McCormick ( Matt Stone ) , Kyle Broflovski ( Matt Stone ) , Eric Cartman ( Trey Parker ) , Sharon Marsh ( Mary Kay Bergman ) , Sheila Broflovski ( Mary Kay Bergman ) 
 " Uncle Fucka " – Terrance ( Matt Stone ) and Phillip ( Trey Parker ) 
 " Wendy 's Song ( There 's the Girl That I Like ) " – Stan Marsh ( Trey Parker ) 
 " It 's Easy , <unk> " – Mr. Mackey ( Trey Parker ) , Stan ( Trey Parker ) , Cartman ( Trey Parker ) , Kyle ( Matt Stone ) , Gregory ( Howard McGillin ) , South Park Elementary Students 
 " Hell Isn ’ t Good " – <unk> featuring James Hetfield 
 " Blame Canada " – Sheila Broflovski ( Mary Kay Bergman ) , Sharon Marsh ( Mary Kay Bergman ) , Liane Cartman ( Mary Kay Bergman ) , Carol McCormick ( Mary Kay Bergman ) , Citizens of South Park 
 " Kyle 's Mom 's a Bitch " – Cartman ( Trey Parker ) , South Park Elementary Students 
 " What Would Brian Boitano Do ? " – Stan ( Trey Parker ) , Kyle ( Matt Stone ) , Cartman ( Trey Parker ) 
 " Up There " – Satan ( Trey Parker ( and Michael McDonald on the high notes ) ) 
