 A Drama in Muslin London : Vizetelly & Company , 1886 
 A Mere Accident London : Vizetelly & Company , 1887 
 Parnell and His Island London ; Swan <unk> Lowrey & Company , 1887 
 Confessions of a Young Man Swan <unk> Lowrey & Company , 1888 
 Spring Days London : Vizetelly & Company , 1888 
 Mike Fletcher London : Ward & Downey , 1889 
 Impressions and Opinions London ; David Nutt , 1891 
 Vain Fortune London : Henry & Company , 1891 
 Modern Painting London : Walter Scott , 1893 
 The Strike at Arlingford London : Walter Scott , 1893 
 Esther Waters London : Walter Scott , 1894 
 <unk> London : Walter Scott , 1895 
 Evelyn Innes London : T. Fisher Unwin , 1898 
 The Bending of the Bough London : T. Fisher Unwin , 1900 
 Sister Theresa London : T. Fisher Unwin , 1901 
 The Untilled Field London : T. Fisher Unwin , 1903 
 The Lake London : William Heinemann , 1905 
 Memoirs of My Dead Life London : William Heinemann , 1906 
 The Apostle : A Drama in Three Acts Dublin : Maunsel & Company , 1911 
 Hail and Farewell London : William Heinemann , 1911 , 1912 , 1914 
 The Apostle : A Drama in Three Acts Dublin : Maunsel & Company , 1911 
 Elizabeth Cooper Dublin : Maunsel & Company , 1913 
 Muslin London : William Heinemann , 1915 
 The Brook <unk> : A Syrian Story London : T. Warner Laurie , 1916 
 Lewis Seymour and Some Women New York : Brentano 's , 1917 
 A Story @-@ Teller 's Holiday London : Cumann Sean @-@ eolais na hÉireann ( privately printed ) , 1918 . This work contains the story later re @-@ published in the collection Celibate Lives , 1927 , as the short story " The Singular Life of Albert Nobbs " which was made into a 2011 movie , Albert Nobbs , starring Glenn Close . 
 <unk> London : Cumann Sean @-@ eolais na hÉireann ( privately printed ) , 1919 
 The Coming of Gabrielle London : Cumann Sean @-@ eolais na hÉireann ( privately printed ) , 1920 
 Heloise and Abelard London : Cumann Sean @-@ eolais na hÉireann ( privately printed ) , 1921 
 In Single <unk> London : William Heinemann , 1922 
 Conversations in Ebury Street London : William Heinemann , 1924 
 Pure Poetry : An Anthology London : Nonesuch Press , 1924 
 The Pastoral Loves of Daphnis and Chloe London : William Heinemann , 1924 
 Daphnis and Chloe , <unk> the Fool New York : Boni & Liveright , 1924 
 Ulick and <unk> London : Nonesuch Press , 1926 
 Celibate Lives London : William Heinemann , 1927 ( This collection and his previous work A Story @-@ Teller 's Holiday both include the short story " The Singular Life of Albert Nobbs " which was made into a movie , with Glenn Close . ) 
 The Making of an Immortal New York : Bowling Green Press , 1927 
 The Passing of the Essenes : A Drama in Three Acts London : William Heinemann , 1930 
 Aphrodite in Aulis New York : Fountain Press , 1930 
 A Communication to My Friends London : Nonesuch Press , 1933 
 Diarmuid and Grania : A Play in Three Acts Co @-@ written with W.B. Yeats , Edited by Anthony Farrow , Chicago : De Paul , 1974 
 Letters 
 Moore Versus Harris Detroit : privately printed , 1921 
 Letters to Dujardin New York : Crosby <unk> , 1929 
 Letters of George Moore Bournemouth : Sydenham , 1942 
 Letters to Lady Cunard Ed . Rupert Hart @-@ Davis . London : Rupert Hart @-@ Davis , 1957 
 George Moore in Transition Ed . Helmut E. Gerber , Detroit : Wayne State University Press , 1968 
 = Presto ( film ) = 
 Presto is a 2008 American Pixar computer @-@ animated short film shown in theaters before their feature @-@ length film WALL @-@ E. The short is about a magician trying to perform a show with his uncooperative rabbit and is a gag @-@ filled homage to classic cartoons such as Tom and Jerry and Looney Tunes . Presto was directed by veteran Pixar animator Doug Sweetland , in his directorial debut . 
 The original idea for the short was a magician who incorporated a rabbit into his act who suffered from stage fright . This was considered to be too long and complicated , and the idea was reworked . To design the theater featured in Presto , the filmmakers visited several opera houses and theaters for set design ideas . Problems arose when trying to animate the theater 's audience of 2 @,@ 500 patrons ; this was deemed too expensive , and was solved by showing the back of the audience . 
 Reaction to the short was positive , and reviewers of WALL @-@ E 's home media release considered it to be an enjoyable special feature . Presto was nominated for an Annie Award and Academy Award . It was included in the Animation Show of Shows in 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Vaudeville @-@ era magician Presto <unk> is famous for a hat trick wherein he pulls his rabbit Alec Azam out of his top hat . An unfed and irritated Alec is locked in a cage , unable to reach his carrot . After Presto returns from eating a meal , he begins practicing his act with Alec , revealing that his top hat is magically connected to a wizard 's hat kept backstage with Alec , so that when Presto reaches into the top hat , his hand appears out of the wizard 's hat , allowing him to grab Alec and pull him out of the top hat . He intends to feed Alec the carrot , but realizes that he is late for the show and rushes off to the stage without doing so , much to Alec 's anger . Presto tries to start the performance , but Alec becomes reluctant to cooperate until he is given the carrot . Presto then spends the rest of the show trying to catch Alec through the opening between his top hat and the wizard 's hat . 
 Alec cleverly turns the hat 's magic against his master in multiple humiliating ways , each of which elicits increasing applause from the audience , which believe is part of Presto 's act . Presto 's finger is stuck in a mouse trap and is hit in the face by an egg , caused by a backfired attempt to aggravate Alec . Presto responds by antagonizing Alec , turning the carrot into a flower . Angered , Alec sucks Presto 's head into a ventilation pipe offstage , which spikes Presto 's hair and turns his face red . When Presto lunges at Alec through the hats , Alec directs Presto 's hand into the podium 's drawer and closes the drawer , painfully restraining the hand while he looks through Presto 's sleeve for the carrot . Presto runs toward Alec , but instead is poked in the eye by his own hand . Presto drops his hat , and when he grabs the wizard hat , he accidentally strips his slacks down to underwear , much to Alec 's amusement . Furious , Presto tries to attack Alec , but in an act to defend himself , Alec puts an offstage ladder into the wizard hat , and Presto is hit between his legs . Presto attempts to hit Alec with it , but the plan backfires when it misses and hits a backstage door , and Presto is sent hitting his chin on the ladder . Presto antagonizes Alec again , covering the carrot with a cloth before smashing it into a pulp with a piece of the ladder . Alec then furiously retaliates by aiming the opening of the wizard 's hat towards an electrical socket which Presto 's fingers go into , shocking Presto into dancing wildly to bluegrass music . 
 Now at his wit 's end , Presto storms backstage to catch Alec , but he accidentally releases a weight holding down some stage props , and his foot gets caught in a rope that lifts him up to the fly space above the stage . When his foot comes loose from the rope , he falls , along with suspended scenery . Alec , remorseful that Presto will be crushed , uses the magic hat to save him , earning the audience 's wild approval for both himself and Presto . Presto gives Alec the apparently restored carrot , as well as second billing on the posters advertising the show and they are rewarded for each show they do , with roses and carrots for Presto and Alec respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 Doug Sweetland made his directorial debut with Presto . Sweetland provides the dialogue @-@ free voice acting for both of the movie 's characters . He pitched the film at the start of 2007 and began production late in the year , completing it in May 2008 . Presto 's gag @-@ based format was heavily influenced by classic cartoons . Looney Tunes cartoons directed by Tex Avery were a major influence , with Alec being easily compared to Bugs Bunny . Other influences include Tom and Jerry , the Marx Brothers , and Charlie Chaplin . The character design for Presto was based on William Powell . 
 The original scenario for the short involved a magician who incorporates an autograph @-@ seeking rabbit into his act after his previous rabbit leaves him . Complications arise as the new rabbit suffers from stage fright . Sweetland compared it to the plot of A Star Is Born . The idea was reworked due to being too long and complicated , taking an estimated three minutes longer to tell . 
 To achieve the highly formal environment , the filmmakers looked at the Royal Opera House in London , the Paris Opera House and classic vaudeville theaters like the Geary in San Francisco — which the crew took a tour through — for set design ideas . Animating the theater 's audience of 2 @,@ 500 patrons proved an expensive proposition , even with the help of the crowd @-@ generating <unk> software . Early suggestions were to show cutaways of just a small portion of the audience , but the full effect was achieved by only showing the back of the audience . To save time , most of the audience models were borrowed from the previous Pixar film , Ratatouille . Additionally , Presto 's body ( from the neck down ) is Skinner 's lawyer , and the carrot was one of the many food props from that film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reaction to the short film was positive . Carl Cortez of If called Presto a " winner through and through " . Jake Coyle of the Associated Press found Presto to be " a delightful and cartoonish appetizer " which kept the tradition of short pre @-@ feature films alive . Darren Bevan of Television New Zealand thought that although WALL @-@ E was a " delightful tale " and " truly gorgeous " , Presto " very nearly stole Wall @-@ E 's thunder " . James Sanford of the Kalamazoo Gazette called the short a superb and hilarious curtain @-@ raiser , describing it as a Bugs Bunny Looney Tunes version of The Prestige . Presto was nominated for the 36th Annie Award for Best Animated Short Subject . The short was also nominated for the Academy Award for Animated Short Film , but lost to La Maison en Petits Cubes . 
 = Fluor Corporation = 
 Fluor Corporation is a multinational engineering and construction firm headquartered in Irving , Texas . It is a holding company that provides services through its subsidiaries in the following areas : oil and gas , industrial and infrastructure , government and power . It is the largest engineering & construction company in the Fortune 500 rankings and lists 136th overall in the same rankings . 
 Fluor was founded in 1912 by John Simon Fluor as Fluor Construction Company . It grew quickly , predominantly by building oil refineries , pipelines and other facilities for the oil and gas industry , at first in California , and then in the Middle East and globally . In the late 1960s , it began diversifying into oil drilling , coal mining and other raw materials like lead . A global recession in the oil and gas industry and losses from its mining operation led to restructuring and layoffs in the 1980s . Fluor sold its oil operations and diversified its construction work into a broader range of services and industries . 
 In the 1990s , Fluor introduced new services like equipment rentals and staffing . Nuclear waste cleanup projects and other environmental work became a significant portion of Fluor 's revenues . The company also did projects related to the Manhattan Project , rebuilding after the Iraq War , recovering from Hurricane Katrina and building the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System . 
 = = Corporate history = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Fluor Corporation 's predecessor , Rudolph Fluor & Brother , was founded in 1890 by John Simon Fluor and his two brothers in Oshkosh , Wisconsin as a saw and paper mill . John Fluor acted as its president and contributed $ 100 in personal savings to help the business get started . The company was renamed Fluor Bros. Construction Co. in 1903 . 
 In 1912 John Fluor moved to Santa Ana , California for health reasons without his brothers and founded Fluor Corporation out of his garage under the name Fluor Construction Company . By 1924 the business had annual revenues of $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @.@ 36 million in 2013 dollars ) and a staff of 100 employees . John Fluor delegated most of the company 's operations to his sons , Peter and Simon Fluor . A $ 100 @,@ 000 capital investment was made that year and it was incorporated . John 's eldest son Peter served as head of sales and grew the company to $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( $ 20 @.@ 4 million in 2013 dollars ) in revenues by 1929 . In 1929 the company re @-@ incorporated as Fluor Corporation . By the 1930s , Fluor had operations in Europe , the Middle East and Australia . Business declined rapidly during the Great Depression , but picked up again during World War II . During the war Fluor manufactured synthetic rubber and was responsible for a substantial portion of high @-@ octane gasoline production in the United States . A Gas @-@ Gasoline division of Fluor was created in Houston in 1948 . 
 Fluor 's headquarters were moved to Los Angeles in 1940 in order to be closer to its oil and gas clients , before moving again to Orange County , California in the 1960s due to concerns about the cost of living and traffic . John Simon Fluor died in 1944 . He was succeeded by his son Peter Fluor , who died three years later . Peter was followed by Shirley Meserve ( 1947 ) and Donald Darnell ( 1949 ) , then John Simon " Si " Fluor Jr. in 1952 and J. Robert ( Bob ) Fluor in 1962 . Fluor was listed on the New York Stock Exchange in the 1950s . In 1961 Fluor acquired an interest in construction , design and contracting firm William J. Moran . 
 = = = Diversification and restructuring = = = 
 Fluor diversified its business more extensively in 1967 , when five companies were merged into a division called Coral Drilling and it started a deep @-@ water oil exploration business in Houston called Deep Oil Technology . It also created Fluor Ocean Services in Houston in 1968 and acquired an interest in other fossil fuel operations in the 1970s . Fluor acquired a construction company , Pike Corp. of America and the engineering division of its prior partner in Australia , Utah Construction . In 1972 , Fluor bought land in Irvine , California and started building its new headquarters on it . The following year , the company 's oil and gas operations were consolidated under a new entity , Fluor Oil and Gas Corp. 
 In 1977 , Fluor acquired Daniel International Corporation . Fluor 's business had become predominantly international , while Daniel International 's $ 1 billion construction business was mostly domestic . The acquisition allowed the company to use union labor at Fluor , or non @-@ union labor at Daniel , for each client . Fluor made a $ 2 @.@ 9 billion acquisition of a zinc , gold , lead and coal mining operation , St. Joe Minerals , in 1981 after a bidding competition for the business with Seagram . 
 By the 1980s , Fluor 's primary business was building large refineries , petrochemical plants , oil pipelines and other facilities for the gas and oil industry , especially in the Middle East . By 1981 , Fluor 's staff had grown to 29 @,@ 000 and revenue , backlog , and profits had each increased more than 30 percent over the prior year . However , by 1984 the mining operation was causing heavy losses and the oil and gas industry Fluor served was in a worldwide recession due to declining oil prices . From 1981 to 1984 , Fluor 's backlog went from $ 16 billion to $ 4 billion . In 1985 it reported $ 633 million in losses . David Tappan took Bob Fluor 's place as CEO in 1984 after Bob died from cancer and led a difficult restructuring . 
 The company sold $ 750 million in assets , including Fluor 's headquarters in Irvine , in order to pay $ 1 billion in debt . Staff were reduced from 32 @,@ 000 to 14 @,@ 000 . In 1986 Fluor sold all of its oil assets and some of its gold mining operations . Fluor Engineers , Inc. and Daniel International were merged , forming Fluor Daniel . By 1987 , Fluor had returned to profitability with $ 26 @.@ 6 million in profits and $ 108 @.@ 5 million by 1989 . By the end of the restructuring , Fluor had three major divisions : Fluor Daniel , Fluor Construction International and St. Joe Minerals Corp. Each division had its own smaller subsidiaries . Fluor started being named by Engineering News as the largest construction and engineering company in the United States . Fluor 's international revenues rebounded . Having postponed his retirement to help Fluor , Tappan stepped down at the end of 1989 and was replaced by Leslie <unk> . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 During the restructuring , Fluor 's core construction and engineering work was diversified into 30 industries including food , paper manufacturers , prisons and others to reduce its vulnerability to market changes in the oil and gas market . In the 1990s , the company tried to change its image , calling itself a " diversified technical services " firm . It started offering equipment rentals , staffing services , and financing for construction projects . The company began offering environmental cleanup and pollution control services , which grew to half of its new business by 1992 . Fluor 's mining business grew from $ 300 million in 1990 to $ 1 billion in 1994 . The US government passed environmental regulations in 1995 that led to growth for the Massey Coal Co. business , because it had large reserves of low @-@ sulfur coal . In 1992 , Fluor sold its ownership of Doe Run Company , the world 's largest producer of refined lead , which was losing money at the time due to declining lead prices . By 1993 , Fluor had revenues of $ 4 @.@ 17 billion and 22 @,@ 000 staff . 
 In 1997 , Fluor 's revenues fell almost 50 percent , in part due to the Asian financial crisis and a decrease in overseas business . Additionally , it suffered losses from an over @-@ budget power plant project in Rabigh , Saudi Arabia . Fluor was a sub @-@ contractor to General Electric for the project . Fluor 's subsidiaries sued GE alleging that it misrepresented the complexity of the project . Though revenues declined further the following year , profits were increasing . In 1999 , nearly 5 @,@ 000 workers were laid off from Fluor Daniel and 15 offices were closed . Fluor Daniel was re @-@ structured into four business groups : an engineering and construction firm called Fluor Daniel ; an equipment rental , staffing and telecommunications division called Fluor Global Services ; a coal @-@ mining business called A.T. Massey Coal Co. and an administrative and support division called Fluor Signature Services . 
 In January 1998 <unk> ( age 63 ) resigned after being diagnosed with bladder cancer and was replaced by former Shell President , Philip J. Carroll . That same year , IT Group purchased a 54 percent interest in Fluor Daniel GTI , Fluor 's environmental division , for $ 36 @.@ 3 million . Two years later , the coal mining operation under the A.T. Massey Coal Co. name ( part of St. Joe ) was spun off into its own business . In 2001 , Fluor 's four primary subsidiaries were consolidated into a single Fluor Corporation . In 2002 Alan Boeckmann was appointed as the CEO , followed by David Seaton in 2011 . In 2005 , Fluor 's headquarters were moved to the Las Colinas area in Irving , Texas . 
 In December 2015 Fluor announced that it would take over Dutch industrial services company Stork . The acquisition of this company , which modifies and maintains large power plants , was completed in March of 2016 , in a stock purchase worth $ 755 million . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Fluor is the largest construction and engineering company in the Fortune 500 and the 136th largest company in the ranking overall . It has offices in 25 countries . Many of Fluor 's operations are located near natural resources , such as uranium in Canada , oil reserves in the Middle East and mines in Australia . About 30 percent of Fluor 's revenues are based in the United States as of 2011 . The Fluor family owns a 3 @.@ 5 percent interest in the company , while employees own six percent through its profit @-@ sharing program . 
 Fluor 's Board of Directors has 12 " Independent Directors " and the CEO . The Independent Directors elect a Lead Independent Director every three years that acts as a liaison to the CEO . Each Independent Director is on two or more of four committees : audit , executive , governance , and organization & compensation . Directors serve a three @-@ year term and are elected by shareholders . Corporate officers , such as the CEO , are elected each year by a vote of the board . 
 Fluor received an " A " ranking in Transparency International 's 2012 anti @-@ corruption study . The company hosts online and in @-@ person anti @-@ corruption training sessions for staff and operates an ethics hotline . Former CEO Alan Boeckmann helped create the Partnering Against Corruption Initiative ( <unk> ) , whereby companies agree to a set of ethics principles . A MarketLine SWOT analysis said Fluor 's environmental work " enhances the company 's brand image , " while often lengthy and unpredictable legal disputes " tarnish the company 's brand image and will erode customer confidence . " 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , Fluor is a " major corporate citizen " that supports local charities and civic groups . It started the Fluor Foundation for its charitable work in 1952 and Fluor Cares in 2010 . The company started the largest employer @-@ sponsored apprenticeship program in California with a four @-@ year program for designers in 1982 . Fluor operates a virtual college for employees called Fluor University . 
 = = Services = = 
 Fluor is a holding company that provides services through its subsidiaries . Its subsidiaries provide engineering , procurement , construction , maintenance and project management services . The company has also developed pollution control products , such as the <unk> lineup of carbon capture products . According to Fluor 's 2014 annual report , 67 percent of its work backlog is from the oil and gas industry . According to the company 's website , Fluor 's work includes designing and building power plants , petrochemical factories , mining facilities , roads and bridges , government buildings , and manufacturing facilities . The company also performs nuclear cleanup and other services . 
 Separate teams of experts , procurement staff , project managers and workers are provided for large projects that are supported by a centralized administrative staff . Fluor has trained more than 100 @,@ 000 craft workers in Indonesia , the Philippines , Korea , Pakistan , Kuwait and other countries , where the needed labor skills weren 't available locally . It may also serve clients through a joint venture with another construction firm when a local infrastructure or niche expertise is needed . 
 Fluor acquired shares of <unk> Inc. in 1981 and it bought a 10 percent interest in a smelter and refinery facility in Gresik , Indonesia in 1995 for $ 550 million . In 1994 , it invested $ 650 million with the Beacon Group Energy Investment fund to finance energy projects . Fluor also has a majority interest in NuScale LLC . , which is developing a new type of 45 @-@ megawatt nuclear reactor called a small modular reactor ( SMR ) . 
 = = Notable projects = = 
 Fluor 's first projects were in constructing and grading roads , but by the 1920s it was known for building public facilities , industrial complexes and serving a growing California oil and gas industry . It started building office and meter manufacturing facilities for the Southern California Gas Company in 1915 , as well as a compressor station for the Industrial Fuel Supply Company in 1919 . Fluor built the first " Buddha Tower " in 1921 in Signal Hill , California for the Industrial Fuel Supply Company . The Buddha Tower was a design of water @-@ cooling tower named after the Buddha temples they resemble . The following year Fluor was awarded a contract by Richfield Oil to build a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ gallon @-@ per @-@ day gasoline plant . 
 Against his father 's wishes , Peter Fluor expanded Fluor 's business outside of California in the 1930s . It built refineries in Texas , as well as oil pipelines and compressor stations from Panhandle , Texas to Indianapolis , Indiana for the Panhandle Eastern Pipeline Company . Fluor constructed the <unk> in Chile , which is the second largest copper mine in the world . In 1942 , Fluor constructed cooling towers and other facilities in Hanford , Washington for the Manhattan Project . It built an expansion of the Dhahran Aire Force Base in Saudi Arabia for the United States Army in the 1950s and accepted its first international project for ARAMCO in the Middle East . 
 In the 1960s and 1970s , Fluor built the first all @-@ hydrogen refinery in Kuwait and the first exclusively offshore power plant for the Atlantic Richfield Company . It also constructed pumps and ports for the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System , which traversed 800 miles from Northern Alaska to Valdez , Alaska and the world 's largest offshore facility for natural gas on the island of Java in Indonesia . In 1976 , it was awarded a $ 5 billion project for ARAMCO in Saudi Arabia , to design facilities that capture sour gas , which is expelled from oil wells as waste in order to refine it into fuel . That same year a partially completed copper and cobalt mine in Africa was cancelled due to a war in the neighboring region of Angola and declining copper prices . In 1979 , Fluor had 13 projects for building United States power plants and had served more than half of the world 's government @-@ owned oil companies . 
 Fluor has been working on the cleanup and shutdown of atomic energy plants in Ohio and Washington since the 1990s . In 1992 , Fluor won a contract with the United States Energy Department to clean up nuclear waste . By 1996 Hanford was the most contaminated nuclear site in the US and the US Department of Energy was conducting a $ 50 billion to $ 60 billion cleanup of the site . Fluor Hanford Inc. replaced Westinghouse Hanford Co. on the project . After a chemical explosion in 1997 , 11 workers filed a lawsuit alleging they were denied appropriate medical attention and protective gear . Fluor and the workers disagreed on whether the explosion resulted in any injuries . In 2005 the US Department of Energy fined Fluor for safety violations and that same year a jury awarded $ 4 @.@ 7 million in damages to 11 pipe fitters that claimed they were fired after complaining that a valve rated for 1 @,@ 975 pounds @-@ per @-@ inch was being used where 2 @,@ 235 were needed . 
 Fluor built the Aladdin Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas in 2001 for $ 1 @.@ 4 billion . In 2004 , the company was awarded a $ 1 @.@ 1 billion project with AMEC to help rebuild the water , power and civic infrastructure of Iraq after the Iraq War . Fluor has also built a rail line in Europe and missile sites in Arizona . The company provided disaster recovery services in Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina . In 2010 Fluor provided workers to cleanup oil tar on beaches in Florida and Alabama after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . In December 2012 , Fluor was awarded a $ 3 @.@ 14 billion contract to build a new Tappan Zee Bridge over the Hudson River . 
 = Constitution of the Roman Republic = 
 The constitution of the Roman Republic was a set of guidelines and principles by which the Roman Republic was governed . The constitution evolved over time and was largely unwritten and uncodified , being passed down mainly through precedent . Nevertheless , the constitution was also shaped by the body of written Roman law . 
 Rather than creating a government that was primarily a democracy ( as in ancient Athens ) , an aristocracy ( as in ancient Sparta ) , or a monarchy ( as in the Roman state before and , in many respects , after the Republic ) , the Roman Republic had a mixed constitution , with three separate branches of government : 
 The democratic element took the form of the legislative assemblies . 
 The aristocratic element took the form of the Senate . 
 The monarchical element took the form of the term @-@ limited consuls . 
 The ultimate source of sovereignty in this ancient republic , as in modern republics , was the people of Rome ( Latin : <unk> Romanus ) . The Roman people gathered into legislative assemblies to pass laws and to elect executive magistrates , such as consuls . The Senate managed the day @-@ to @-@ day affairs in Rome , while magistrates presided over the courts . Executive magistrates enforced the law and presided over the Senate and over the legislative assemblies . 
 A complex set of checks and balances developed between these three branches , so as to minimize the risk of tyranny and corruption , and to maximize the likelihood of good government . However , the separation of powers between these three branches of government was not absolute ; and moreover , a magistrate 's term of office was often extended beyond one year , although this conflicted with the constitution . A constitutional crisis began in 133 BC as a result of the struggles between the aristocracy and the common people . Many years later this led to the collapse of the Roman Republic and its subversion into a much more autocratic form of government , the Roman Empire . 
 = = Constitutional history ( 509 – 133 BC ) = = 
 The republican constitution evolved gradually over time , largely shaped by the class struggle between the aristocratic patricians and the common people , the plebeians . The main historical sources for the origins of the Roman political system , Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus , relied heavily on the Roman annalists , who supplemented what little written history existed with oral history . This lack of evidence poses problems for the reliability of the traditional account of the republic 's origins . 
 According to this traditional account , Rome had been ruled by a succession of kings . The Romans believed that this era , that of the Roman Kingdom , began in 753 BC and ended in 510 BC . After the overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of the Roman Republic , the people of Rome began electing two consuls each year . According to the consular <unk> , the first consuls were chosen in 509 BC . 
 According to historian Andrew Lintott , some scholars doubt this traditional account . They argue that instead of being overthrown , the monarchy evolved into a government led by elected magistrates . Remnants of the monarchy , however , were reflected in republican institutions , such as the office of rex <unk> ( " king of the sacred " ) and the interregnum ( the period of time presided over by an interrex when the consulship or other magistracy was vacant ) . 
 In 501 BC , the temporary office of dictator was first created to control popular unrest . In the year 494 BC , the plebeians seceded to the Mons Sacer and demanded of the patricians the right to elect their own officials . The patricians agreed , and the plebeians ended their secession . The plebeians called these new officials plebeian tribunes and gave these tribunes two assistants , called plebeian aediles . In 449 BC , the Senate , in an effort to satisfy the plebeians , promulgated the Twelve Tables , the first and only codification of law during the republic . 
 In 446 BC , quaestors were first elected , and the office of censor was created in 443 BC . In 367 BC , plebeians were allowed to stand for the consulship , and this implicitly opened both the censorship as well as the dictatorship to plebeians . In 366 BC , in an effort by the patricians to reassert their influence over the magisterial offices , two new offices were created . These two offices , the praetorship and the curule <unk> ( so @-@ called because its holder , like consuls and praetors , had the right to sit in a curule seat ) , were at first open only to patricians , but within a generation they were open to plebeians as well . 
 Beginning around the year 350 BC , the senators and the plebeian tribunes began to grow closer . The Senate began giving tribunes more power , and the tribunes began to feel indebted to the Senate . As the tribunes and the senators grew closer , plebeian senators began to routinely secure the office of tribune for members of their own families . Also , this period saw the enacting of the Ovinian Law , which transferred the power to appoint new senators from the consuls to the censors . This law also required the censors to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the Senate , which probably resulted in a significant increase in the number of plebeian senators . 
 As the privileged status of the old patrician elite eroded over time , a plebeian aristocracy developed whose status was theoretically based on merit and popular election rather than birth . Because patricians were ineligible to run for plebeian offices , the new plebeian aristocracy actually had more opportunities for advancement than their patrician counterparts . Over time distinctions between patricians and plebeian aristocrats became less important , giving rise to a new " <unk> @-@ plebeian aristocracy " termed the <unk> . 
 In 287 BC , the plebeians seceded to the Janiculum hill . To end the secession , the Hortensian Law was passed to end the requirement that patrician senators consent before a bill could be brought before the Plebeian Council for a vote . This was not the first law to require that an act of the Plebeian Council have the full force of law ( over both plebeians and patricians ) , since the Plebeian Council had acquired this power in 449 BC . However , this new law robbed the patricians of their last major political power . 
 The Hortensian Law resolved the last great political question of the earlier era ; no important political changes occurred over the next 150 years ( between 287 BC and 133 BC ) . The electoral and legislative sovereignty of the assemblies was confirmed and would remain part of the constitution . Nevertheless , the critical laws of this era were still enacted by the Senate due to the difficulty and inconvenience of organizing popular assemblies simply for the passage of ordinary legislation . The Senate as an institution was stronger since it now represented noble plebeians as well as patricians . 
 = = Senate = = 
 The Senate was the predominant political institution in the Roman Republic . The Senate 's authority derived from custom and tradition . The Senate 's principal role was as an advisory council to the consuls on matters of foreign and military policy , and it exercised a great deal of influence over consular decision @-@ making . A decree from the Senate was called senatus consultum ( plural senatus consulta ) . While this was formally " advice " from the Senate to a magistrate , the senatus consulta were usually obeyed by the magistrates . If a senatus consultum conflicted with a law that was passed by a popular assembly , the law overrode the senatus consultum . 
 The Senate also managed civil administration within the city . For example , only the Senate could authorize the appropriation of public money from the treasury , unless a consul demanded it . In addition , the Senate would try individuals accused of political crimes ( such as treason ) . In addition , the Senate could invalidate laws passed by popular assemblies in violation of the proper procedures . 
 Meetings could take place either inside or outside of the formal boundary of the city ( the pomerium ) , and were usually presided over by a consul . Meetings were suffused in religious ritual . Temples were a preferred meeting site and auspices would be taken before the meeting could commence . 
 The presiding consul began each meeting with a speech on an issue , and then referred the issue to the senators , who discussed the matter by order of seniority . Unimportant matters could be voted on by a voice vote or by a show of hands , while important votes resulted in a physical division of the house , with senators voting by taking a place on either side of the chamber . Any vote was always between a proposal and its negative . 
 Since all meetings had to end by nightfall , a senator could talk a proposal to death ( a filibuster ) if he could keep the debate going until nightfall . Any proposed motion could be vetoed by a tribune , and if it was not vetoed , it was then turned into a final senatus consultum . Each senatus consultum was transcribed into a document by the presiding magistrate , and then deposited into the building that housed the treasury . 
 = = Legislative assemblies = = 
 The right to make and repeal laws belonged to the Roman people voting in legislative meetings . There were two types of formal legislative gatherings . The first , the comitia ( or <unk> ) , was an assembly of all Roman citizens convened to take a legal action , such as enacting laws , electing magistrates , and trying judicial cases . The second type of legislative meeting was the council ( Latin : concilium ) , which was a gathering of a specific group of citizens . For example , the Plebeian Council were meetings of the plebeians only . 
 A third type of gathering , the convention ( Latin : <unk> or <unk> ) , was an unofficial forum for communication where citizens gathered to hear public announcements and arguments debated in speeches as well to witness the examination or execution of criminals . In contrast to the formal assembly or council , no legal decisions were made by the convention . Voters met in conventions to deliberate prior to meeting in assemblies or councils to vote . 
 Assemblies and councils operated according to established procedures overseen by the augurs . They could only be convened by magistrates , and citizens only voted on matters proposed by the presiding magistrate . Roman citizens were organized into three types of voting units — curiae ( familial groupings ) , centuries ( for military purposes ) and tribes ( for civil purposes ) — corresponding to three assemblies : the Curiate Assembly , the Centuriate Assembly , and the Tribal Assembly . Each unit ( curia , century or tribe ) cast one vote before the assembly . The majority of individual votes in any century , tribe , or curia decided how that unit voted . 
 The Curiate Assembly served only a symbolic purpose in the late Republic . At some point , the 30 curiae ceased to actually meet and were instead represented by 30 lictors . It was this assembly that ratified the powers of newly elected magistrates by passing laws known as leges <unk> . 
 The Centuriate Assembly was divided into 193 ( later 373 ) centuries , with each century belonging to one of three classes : the officer class , the enlisted class , and the unarmed adjuncts . Citizens were grouped into centuries according to the amount of property they owned , and wealthier centuries received more votes . During a vote , the centuries voted one at a time by class . Only the Centuriate Assembly could elect consuls , praetors , and censors . Only it could declare war . It was also the only institution that could ratify the results of a census . This assembly rarely passed other kinds of legislation or heard capital trials . 
 Tribal Assemblies were convened by consuls , praetors , or curule aediles . The organization of the Tribal Assembly was much simpler than the Centuriate Assembly , since its organization was based on the thirty @-@ five tribes . The tribes were not ethnic or kinship groups , but rather geographical divisions ( similar to modern electoral districts or constituencies ) . Most legislation was enacted in the Tribal Assembly . In addition , these assemblies elected quaestors , curule aediles , and military tribunes . 
 The Plebeian Council was identical to the Tribal Assembly with one key exception : only plebeians had the power to vote before it . Members of the aristocratic patrician class were excluded from this assembly . In contrast , both classes were entitled to a vote in the Tribal Assembly . Under the presidency of a plebeian tribune , the Plebeian Council elected plebeian tribunes and plebeian aediles , enacted laws called plebiscites , and presided over judicial cases involving plebeians . 
 = = Executive magistrates = = 
 Magistrates were elected officials of the Roman Republic . Each magistrate was vested with a degree of power . The dictator ( when there was one ) had the highest level of power . After the dictator was the censor ( when they existed ) , the consuls , the praetors , the curule aediles , and finally the quaestors . Each magistrate could only veto an action that was taken by an equally or lower ranked magistrate . Since plebeian tribunes and plebeian aediles were not magistrates of the republic , they relied on the sacrosanctity of their person to obstruct unwanted actions . When the tribune interposed his person to obstruct a political action it was known as intercessio . When the tribune interposed his person to aid an individual against a magistrate or another citizen , it was called <unk> . Any resistance against the tribune was considered to be a capital offense . 
 The most significant constitutional power that a magistrate could hold was that of imperium or command , which was held only by consuls and praetors . This gave a magistrate the constitutional authority to issue commands ( military or otherwise ) . 
 Election to a magisterial office resulted in automatic membership in the Senate ( for life , unless impeached ) . Once a magistrate 's annual term in office expired , he had to wait ten years before serving in that office again . Occasionally a magistrate had his command powers extended through prorogation , which , in effect , allowed him to retain the powers of his office as a <unk> . 
 The consul was the highest ranking ordinary magistrate . Two consuls were elected every year , and they had supreme power in both civil and military matters . Throughout the year , one consul was superior in rank to the other consul , and this ranking flipped every month between the two consuls . Praetors administered civil law , presided over the courts , and commanded provincial armies . The censors conducted the census , during which time they could appoint people to the Senate . Aediles were officers elected to conduct domestic affairs in Rome and were vested with powers over the markets , public games and shows . Quaestors usually assisted the consuls in Rome and the governors in the provinces with financial tasks . The plebeian tribunes and the plebeian aediles were considered to be the representatives of the people . Thus , they acted as a popular check over the Senate through their veto powers and safeguarded the civil liberties of all Roman citizens . 
 In times of military emergency , a dictator was appointed for a term of six months . Constitutional government dissolved , and the dictator became the absolute master of the state . The dictator then appointed a magister <unk> ( " master of the horse " ) to serve as his most senior lieutenant . Often the dictator resigned his office as soon as the matter that caused his appointment was resolved . When the dictator 's term ended , constitutional government was restored . The last ordinary dictator was appointed in 202 BC . After 202 BC , extreme emergencies were addressed through the passage of the decree senatus consultum ultimum ( " ultimate decree of the senate " ) . This suspended civil government , declared martial law , and vested the consuls with dictatorial powers . 
 = = Constitutional instability ( 133 – 49 BC ) = = 
 By the middle of the 2nd century BC , the economic position of the average plebeian had declined significantly . The long military campaigns had forced citizens to leave their farms to fight , only to return to farms that had fallen into disrepair . The landed aristocracy began buying bankrupted farms at discounted prices , making it impossible for the average farmer to operate his farm at a profit . Masses of unemployed plebeians soon began to flood into Rome , and thus into the ranks of the legislative assemblies , where their economic status usually led them to vote for the candidate who offered the most for them or who sponsored the most impressive games . A new culture of dependency was emerging , and hostility between the rich and the poor was growing . 
 In 133 BC , Tiberius Gracchus was elected plebeian tribune and attempted to enact a law to distribute land to Rome 's landless citizens . Gracchus ' law was vetoed by an aristocrat named Marcus Octavius . In an attempt to force Octavius to capitulate , Tiberius tried to turn the mob against Octavius by enacting a blanket veto over all governmental functions , which , in effect , shut down the entire city and precipitated rioting . While the land law was enacted , Tiberius was murdered when he stood for reelection to the tribunate . In 123 BC , Tiberius ' brother Gaius was elected plebeian tribune . After passing a series of laws which were intended to weaken the Senate , Gaius Gracchus was murdered by agents of the aristocracy . The people , however , had finally realized how weak the Senate had become . 
 In 88 BC , an aristocratic senator named Lucius Cornelius Sulla was elected consul and soon left for war in the east . When a tribune revoked Sulla 's command of the war , Sulla brought his army back to Italy , marched on Rome , secured the city , and left for the east again . In 83 BC , he returned to Rome , and captured the city a second time . In 82 BC , he made himself dictator , and then used his status as dictator to pass a series of constitutional reforms that were intended to strengthen the Senate . In 80 BC , he resigned his dictatorship , and by 78 BC he was dead . While he thought that he had firmly established aristocratic rule , his own career had illustrated the fatal weakness in the constitution : that it was the army , not the Senate , which dictated the fortunes of the state . In 70 BC , the generals Pompey the Great and Marcus Licinius Crassus were both elected consul and quickly dismantled Sulla 's constitution . 
 In 62 BC , Pompey returned to Rome from battle in the east but found the Senate refusing to ratify the arrangements that he had made . Thus , when Julius Caesar returned from his governorship in Spain in 61 BC , he found it easy to make an arrangement with Pompey . Caesar and Pompey , along with Crassus , established a private agreement , known as the First Triumvirate . Under the agreement , Pompey 's arrangements were to be ratified , Crassus was to be promised a future consulship , and Caesar was to be promised a consulship in 59 BC and then the governorship of Gaul ( modern France ) immediately afterwards . Caesar became consul in 59 BC , and , when his term as consul ended , he took command of four provinces . Eventually , the triumvirate was renewed , and Caesar 's term as governor was extended for five years . In 54 BC , violence began sweeping the city . The triumvirate ended in 53 BC when Crassus was killed in battle . In 50 BC , near the end of his term as governor , Caesar demanded the right to stand for election to the consulship in absentia . Without the protection afforded to him by the consulship or his army , he could be prosecuted for crimes he had committed . The Senate refused Caesar 's demand , and in January 49 BC , the Senate resolved that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year he would be considered an enemy of the republic . In response , Caesar quickly crossed the Rubicon with his veteran army and marched towards Rome . Caesar 's rapid advance forced Pompey , the consuls and the Senate to abandon Rome for Greece and allowed Caesar to enter the city unopposed . 
 = = Transition to empire ( 49 – 27 BC ) = = 
 By 48 BC , after having defeated the last of his major enemies , Caesar tried to ensure that his control over the government was undisputed . He increased his own authority and decreased the authority of Rome 's other political institutions . Caesar held the office of dictator and alternated between the consulship and the proconsulship ( in effect , a military governorship ) . In 48 BC , Caesar was given the powers of a plebeian tribune , which made his person sacrosanct , gave him the power to veto the Senate , and allowed him to dominate the legislative process . In 46 BC , Caesar was given the powers of censor , which he used to fill the Senate with his own partisans . Caesar then raised the membership of the Senate from 600 to 900 , which robbed the senatorial aristocracy of its prestige , and made it increasingly subservient to him . Near the end of his life , Caesar began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire . Since his absence from Rome would limit his ability to install his own consuls , he passed a law which allowed him to appoint all magistrates for the year 43 BC , and all consuls and plebeian tribunes for the year 42 BC ; so that the magistrates were appointees of the dictator rather than representatives of the people . 
 After Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC , Mark Antony formed an alliance with Caesar 's adopted son and great @-@ nephew , Gaius Octavian . Along with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus , they formed an alliance known as the Second Triumvirate , and held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution . In effect , there was no constitutional difference between an individual who held the title of dictator and an individual who held the title of triumvir . While the conspirators who had assassinated Caesar were defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC , the peace that resulted was only temporary . Antony and Octavian fought each other for the last time at Actium in 31 BC . Antony was defeated , and he committed suicide in 30 BC . In 29 BC , Octavian returned to Rome as the unchallenged master of the state . He enacted a series of constitutional reforms , the most important of which , in 27 BC , overthrew the republic . The reign of Octavian , whom history remembers as Augustus , the first Roman Emperor , marked the dividing line between the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire . By the time this process was complete : Rome had completed its transformation from a city @-@ state with a network of dependencies into the capital of a world empire . 
 = Hughie Lehman = 
 Frederick Hugh " Old Eagle Eyes " Lehman ( October 27 , 1885 – April 12 , 1961 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . He started his ice hockey career playing for the Pembroke Lumber Kings and the Berlin Dutchmen . In 1911 , Lehman joined the New Westminster Royals , playing for the Royals for three seasons , before joining the Vancouver Millionaires in 1914 . Lehman played half of his 22 @-@ year professional career with Vancouver , winning his only Stanley Cup ; he would be unsuccessful in seven other attempts . In 1926 , he joined the Chicago Black Hawks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , playing a full season and splitting the second one as player and head coach . Although some ice hockey historians credit Jacques Plante for originating the practice , Lehman was the first goaltender to regularly pass the puck to his fellow forwards and defensemen ; he even scored a goal by shooting the puck in the opponent 's net while playing for the Professionals . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Lehman began his playing career in 1903 – 04 , playing for the Pembroke Lumber Kings of the Ottawa Valley Hockey League ( <unk> ) for the first three seasons of his career . In the 1906 – 07 season , Lehman was signed as free agent by the Canadian Soo of the International Professional Hockey League ( IPHL ) ; the IPHL was the first fully professional ice hockey league . Lehman returned to Pembroke for the 1907 – 08 season , appearing in four games . For the 1908 – 09 season , Lehman joined the Berlin Dutchmen of the Ontario Professional Hockey League ( OPHL ) . In the 1909 – 10 season , Lehman was in two different Stanley Cup playoff series , with two different teams , the Berlin Dutchmen and the Galt Professionals , but he lost both times . During those playoff series , he appeared in three games , giving up 22 goals . Lehman played with the Berlin Dutchmen until 1911 . 
 In 1911 – 12 , Lehman played for the New Westminster Royals of the newly founded Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) . He played three seasons for New Westminster , winning the league championship in his first season . In 1914 – 15 , Lehman joined the Vancouver Millionaires of the PCHA . In his first season with the Millionaires , Lehman posted a 14 – 3 record , with a 4 @.@ 08 goals @-@ against average , which was a very good average in an era when goaltenders were not allowed to drop on their knees to make a save . In the Stanley Cup playoffs , Lehman helped the Millionaires become the first PCHA team to win the Stanley Cup , with a 3 – 0 record and 2 @.@ 67 goals against average . This would be the only Stanley Cup victory of Lehman 's career , as he was on the losing side in seven other attempts . The Millionaires squad consisted of seven future members of the Hockey Hall of Fame when they won the Cup : Lehman , Frank Nighbor , Cyclone Taylor , Si Griffis , Barney Stanley , Frank Patrick , and Mickey MacKay . 
 Lehman played with the Millionaires until the 1925 – 26 season . During that time , Lehman and some of his teammates were involved in a humorous incident when going back to Canada after an exhibition game against the Montreal Wanderers in New York City . In New York , Lehman 's wife bought numerous women 's designer outfits , after being treated to a shopping spree by him . When going back to Canada , Lehman , on the advice of Cyclone Taylor , who was both a professional ice hockey player and a Canadian immigration officer , split up all outfits among his teammates to avoid paying additional taxes he would have had to pay if he had brought all the clothing by himself at once ; this puzzled the Customs officers . In 1922 – 23 , the Millionaires were renamed the Maroons , and joined the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) . The WCHL was renamed to the Western Hockey League in 1925 – 26 ; however , the league disbanded at the conclusion of that season . While playing for the Millionaires , Lehman appeared in six Stanley Cup finals , losing every time , except in his first season , in 1914 – 15 . 
 Following the collapse of the WHL , Lehman joined the Chicago Black Hawks for the 1926 – 27 season . While in Chicago , Lehman mentored future Chicago goaltender and captain Charlie Gardiner . Lehman played one full season , and another four games the next one . During the 1926 season , Lehman became the oldest goaltender to win his first NHL game . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 During the 1927 – 28 season , Black Hawks owner and manager Frederic McLaughlin was sketching some plays for his team ; after Lehman was shown the plays by McLaughlin , Lehman responded by calling it " the craziest bunch of junk [ he 's ] ever seen " . Expecting to be fired after that outburst , Lehman was later told to go to McLaughlin 's office . It was how Lehman 's playing career ended : McLaughlin appointed Lehman to be Chicago 's new head coach . Lehman coached Chicago for part of one season , finishing with a 3 – 17 – 1 record over 21 games . He was replaced by Herb Gardiner the following season . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 As a goaltender , Lehman was a strong skater and good puckhandler . He chased down loose pucks , and was able to pass the puck to his forwards , surprising the other team 's defenders . Playing in the OPHL , Lehman scored a goal by shooting the puck in the opponent 's net . The first NHL goaltender to duplicate such a feat was Ron Hextall , who did it in 1987 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After retiring from ice hockey , Lehman worked in the road construction business , eventually becoming the president of a paving company . Lehman was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Coaching record = = 
 = Kevin O 'Halloran = 
 Kevin O 'Halloran ( 3 March 1937 – 5 July 1976 ) was an Australian freestyle swimmer of the 1950s who won a gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ metre freestyle relay at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne . The first Western Australian to win Olympic gold , O 'Halloran learnt to swim in his home town of Katanning . He moved to Perth to attend secondary schooling at Guildford Grammar School , where he became more committed to swimming . Competitive swimming was not well developed in Western Australia : races were held in muddy river pools ; hence , in late 1955 , O 'Halloran moved to the east coast to support his attempt to qualify for the Olympics . His new coach , Frank Guthrie , overhauled his training regimen and within a year O 'Halloran had reduced his times by approximately ten percent . He gained Olympic selection in the relay and the 400 @-@ metre freestyle . O 'Halloran led off the Australian quartet on the way to a new world record , before placing sixth in the 400 @-@ metre . Thereafter , O 'Halloran 's career was beset by ear problems , and he retired in 1958 after failing to qualify for the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games . In 1976 , O 'Halloran died after tripping and accidentally shooting himself . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Katanning , O 'Halloran grew up on his family 's 9 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 36 km2 ) sheep property at Kojonup — 40 km ( 25 mi ) to the west of his birthplace — on a property established by his grandfather in 1900 . He had two brothers and a sister . After his father enlisted during the Second World War , his mother could no longer run the farm and raise the children by herself , so the family moved to Katanning for seven years . 
 Katanning was one of the few country towns in Western Australia that had a public swimming pool . Along with his siblings , O 'Halloran learned to swim there , often defeating local boys who were four years his senior . At the age of 8 , he was taught to swim competitively by his teacher at Katanning State Primary School , who was an age group champion in her youth . The boom in wool prices at the time of the Korean War inflated his family 's income , allowing them to send O 'Halloran to Guildford Grammar School in Perth , the state 's capital city . At the age of 14 , he won five events in the school championships , and led the school to its first state championship in 29 years . He also competed for his school in Australian rules football and rowing . 
 O 'Halloran attracted the attention of the leading Western Australian coach Don <unk> , but his schoolwork limited him to a few weeks of intense training over Christmas . In 1952 , at the age of 15 , O 'Halloran began to make his mark at the state level . He played a major role in Guildford 's win at the interschool championships , placing second in the individual points tally . He won the 100 m freestyle , 50 m breaststroke and 400 m freestyle . 
 Competitive swimming was slow to develop in Western Australia and O 'Halloran 's state debut came in 1952 , only the second time the Western Australian Championships had been held . He won the junior 110 yd freestyle and butterfly and the 220 yd freestyle and was second in the open 110 yd freestyle , in a muddy pool on the Swan River in the Perth suburb of Crawley . The arena was such that the bottom could not be seen and jellyfish lurked in the area , sometimes climbing onto the swimmers ' bodies . When O 'Halloran returned to his home , he often trained in a muddy waterhole . 
 = = Swimming career = = 
 In 1953 , O 'Halloran placed second in the 110 yd and 440 yd freestyle events at the Western Australian Championships in the open division and won the 110 yd breaststroke and the 110 and 220 yd freestyle in the junior division . In the process , he cut six seconds from the state record in the 440 yd event . He was selected for the Western Australian team for the Australian Championships , but his parents and headmaster decided that his schooling was more important , much to <unk> 's chagrin . In 1954 , O 'Halloran was the state champion in the 110 yd and 220 yd freestyle , and in 1955 he added the 440 yd individual medley title to the successful defence of his freestyle crowns . In his final year at Guildford , O 'Halloran was the School Captain , led the swimming and shooting team , and was a member of the rowing eights in the Head of the River . O 'Halloran made his national debut at the 1955 Australian Championships in Adelaide ; he finished fifth in the 110 yd freestyle behind future Olympians Jon Henricks and John Devitt . 
 Upon the recommendation of his parents , O 'Halloran moved to Sydney in late 1955 to train with Frank Guthrie in an attempt to qualify for the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne , Australia . O 'Halloran boarded with a host family and worked in a wool store to pay his expenses . O 'Halloran 's initiation into Guthrie 's training program was difficult . After seeing O 'Halloran 's freestyle technique for the first time , Guthrie asked him " Can you swim any other stroke ? If you are going to swim for me you 'll have to learn all over again . " O 'Halloran refined his style and increased his workload to around 10 km a day , something that was normal for competitive swimmers in the eastern states , but uncommon in Western Australia . In one month , he cut 17 s off his personal best time in the 440 yd freestyle , reducing it to 4 min 55 s . At the 1956 New South Wales Championships , he finished third in the 220 yd freestyle behind Gary Chapman and Devitt ; his time of 2 min 12 @.@ 6 s was 10 s faster than the times he had recorded in Western Australia . He came fourth in both the 110 yd and 440 yd ; his time in the latter event was more than 30 s faster than his best time in Western Australia , and in the former event he breached the 60 s barrier for the first time . At the Australian Championships , he came third in the 440 yd freestyle in a time of 4 min 37 @.@ 8 s behind Murray Rose and Murray <unk> . He did this despite suffering from ear trouble , making him the fifth fastest swimmer in the world for the calendar year , which earned him an individual berth in the 400 m event at the Olympics . O 'Halloran came fourth in the 220 yd in a time of 2 min 9 @.@ 2 s to earn a berth on the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay squad . With Rose , Henricks and Chapman regarded as certain selections for the final quartet , O 'Halloran was expected to battle for the fourth relay position . At the end of the trials , Guthrie claimed that O 'Halloran was " the find of the recently held Australian Championships and the future swimmer for Australia . I am confident that we did not see Kevin 's best times this season . " 
 = = 1956 Melbourne Olympics = = 
 Having arrived in Melbourne , O 'Halloran was rested — along with Rose and Henricks — in the heats of the relay . Devitt , Chapman , Graham Hamilton and <unk> finished third in their heat behind Great Britain and the Soviet Union , and qualified fifth fastest behind Japan and the United States . Australia led from the start and reached the midpoint of the race with a lead of 4 @.@ 5 s . Hamilton swam a very slow third leg of 2 min 15 @.@ 4 s and conceded 8 @.@ 8 s to the British . 
 Australia 's final quartet was much stronger , with Rose winning the 400 m freestyle , and Henricks and Devitt winning the gold and silver medals respectively in the 100 m freestyle . Devitt had forced his way into the team with his heat swim of 2 min 7 @.@ 5 s , which was the second fastest among all of the swimmers in the heats . With four of the five fastest individual swimmers in the calendar year for the event , Australia was heavily favoured to win the relay ; Sports Illustrated predicted a world record and a victory margin of around 14 metres . 
 O 'Halloran 's inclusion at the expense of Chapman was the subject of controversy , because Chapman had won bronze in the 100 m event and was the national 220 yd freestyle champion . O 'Halloran 's selection also broke up the team of Devitt , Rose , Chapman and Henricks , which had won the relay for New South Wales at the Australian Championships . O 'Halloran led off and put Australia in the lead with an Olympic record time of 2 min 6 @.@ 8 s , opening a gap of 0 @.@ 7 s over the Soviet Union and 1 @.@ 2 s over the United States . The fourth @-@ placed Italians were already a full three seconds in arrears . Australia never relinquished the lead and steadily increased it , as Devitt , Rose and Henricks set the three fastest splits in the race , quicker than all the non @-@ Australian swimmers . O 'Halloran 's split was the fifth fastest in the race ; the Soviet anchor swimmer was the only non @-@ Australian to swim faster , and only by 0 @.@ 1 s despite having the benefit of a flying start . This resulted in Australia winning gold in a world record time of 8 min 23 @.@ 6 s , almost eight seconds ahead of the second @-@ place Americans and 13 ahead of the Soviets . The win made O 'Halloran the first Western Australian to win any Olympic medal . 
 In his only individual event , O 'Halloran qualified for the 400 m final , having won his heat in a time of 4 min 36 @.@ 8 s , 0 @.@ 5 s ahead of Japan 's Koji <unk> . However , his heat was relatively slow , meaning that he was the sixth fastest qualifier . Swimming from lane seven , O 'Halloran cut almost 4 s off his personal best to lose the bronze medal to the United States ' George Breen by 0 @.@ 4 s , in a race won by Rose . O 'Halloran reduced Breen 's margin by 1 @.@ 3 s in the last 100 m , but it was not enough as he finished in a time of 4 min 32 @.@ 9 s . O 'Halloran returned to Perth after the Olympics to be welcomed by a motorcade and a civic reception . He was named as one of the five Western Australian <unk> of the Year in recognition of his winning performance . Despite his achievements , the state government ignored calls for Western Australia to build an Olympic standard swimming pool , until constructing one for the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1958 , O 'Halloran 's parents traveled across the continent to watch him swim at the Australian Championships in Sydney , but a recurring ear infection hindered his performances . He missed selection for the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Cardiff and retired after the long car journey back across the Nullarbor . Upon arriving in Kojonup , O 'Halloran was reported to have said , " I 've had enough " . O 'Halloran then worked full @-@ time on the family property . 
 In 1976 , his body was discovered next to a rifle , near a fence on the property ; he had tripped as he climbed through the fence , and accidentally shot himself . O 'Halloran had never married . The 50 m pool at Kojonup was named the Kevin O 'Halloran Memorial Pool in his honour , and he was posthumously inducted into the Western Australian Hall of Champions . 
 = To My Surprise ( album ) = 
 To My Surprise is the only album by American alternative rock band To My Surprise . Released on October 7 , 2003 by Roadrunner Records , it was the only album that the band released before disbanding in 2006 . The album was intended to be self produced by Shawn Crahan and Brandon Darner , but after producer Rick Rubin was sent demos by Crahan , Rubin invited the band to Los Angeles where he assumed the role of executive producer . Following the release of the album , a music video was released for the song " In The Mood " on December 1 . 
 The album was generally well received by critics who remarked on its diversity and significantly different musical style to that of drummer Crahan 's other band Slipknot . They noted that it features music inspired by The Beatles , Led Zeppelin , Pink Floyd and Weezer , among others . However the album did not appear on any sales charts . 
 = = History = = 
 In June 2002 , band members Shawn Crahan , Brandon Darner and Stevan Robinson began working on an album together . Drummer Crahan told MTV that working on this album " made [ him ] find [ his ] voice " and that with his other band Slipknot he had been " hurting for a long time for a musical voice " . In an interview with Launch , he said that writing the track " The World 's Too Small " was his " most magical musical experience " because " [ he ] was giving more than on just one or two simple ideas . " In 2003 Crahan sent producer Rick Rubin two songs that he and Darner had written , primarily to receive an opinion on the songs . However , Rubin invited the band to Cello Studios in Los Angeles to work on an album . It was there that the album featuring 11 tracks was self @-@ produced by Crahan and Darner , with Rubin as executive producer . 
 On October 7 , 2003 , To My Surprise was released through Roadrunner Records . An animated music video for the track " In The Mood " was produced by <unk> , which was premiered on MTV 's Extreme show on December 1 . Also , the track " Get It To Go " was featured on the soundtrack for the video game MVP Baseball 2004 . To My Surprise did not tour in 2003 to promote the album because Crahan was working with Slipknot on their third album . However , they did perform a limited number shows in North America the following year . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Prior to the release of the album , drummer Crahan touted To My Surprise as " a hybrid of folk , ' 70s rock fuzz and schizophrenic grooves " . Neil Strauss of The New York Times stated that each song has a unique sound , concluding that they sound like " pop songs that have been pushed off balance " . In another article Strauss includes They Might Be Giants , Weezer and Faith No More as bands with similar sounding " elements " . Rowan Shaeffer of Counterculture , commented on the album 's diversity , saying " to say that the [ album ] is eclectic would be a gross understatement , " citing Pink Floyd and Mr. Bungle as evident influences . The Calgary Sun 's Mike Bell cited " glam , new wave , Beatles pop and country rock " as the sounds the album presents . In his review for Allmusic Robert L. Doerschuk noted that the track " Sunday " makes musical references to the single " Pleasant Valley Sunday " by The Monkees , giving the " happy , strumming guitars and skippy rhythms " as similarities . He also said that they quote " one of the darker verses in the Jim Morrison songbook " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 To My Surprise was met with generally favorable critical reviews , but did not appear on any sales charts . One point which was generally drawn upon was the significant difference between their musical style to that of Crahan 's other band Slipknot . Reviewer Neil Strauss opens his review with a reference to the title of the album , saying , " And , truly , it is a surprise " , and then going on to say that the album " is commendable not just because [ it is ] different but because [ it is ] good " . Robert L. Doerschuk of Allmusic declares that the album — aside from the track " Say Goodbye " — " maintains a buoyant and unsubtle approach " . He also noted Crahan 's " muscular style " as a notable element to the album saying that " [ it ] transplants well into this setting , which probably should not have been a surprise after all " . The vocals on the album were praised by the reviewers at <unk> , saying " the vocals [ are ] masculine yet right on key " . When reviewing for Calgary Sun , Mike Bell highlighted their eclectic nature and in conclusion said the album is " fittingly , fun and surprising " . However Rowan Shaeffer of Counterculture said that their diversity was ultimately their strength and weakness ; he suggested that they relied too heavily on their influences by creating songs of other bands , saying that " the only [ song ] left out was the To My Surprise song " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " The World 's Too Small " – 3 : 37 
 " Get It To Go " – 3 : 12 
 " In The Mood " – 3 : 31 
 " Blue " – 3 : 59 
 " Say Goodbye " – 3 : 33 
 " Easy Or Not " – 2 : 54 
 " Turn It Back Around " – 3 : 25 
 " This Life " – 5 : 34 
 " Come With Me " – 3 : 47 
 " Sunday " – 3 : 22 
 " Who 's To Say " – 4 : 23 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Cumberland Island horse = 
 The Cumberland Island horses are a band of feral horses living on Cumberland Island in the state of Georgia . Popular myth holds that horses arrived on the island some time in the 16th century with the arrival of the Spanish conquistadors . However , it is unlikely that any horses left by the Spanish survived , and more likely the current population descends from horses brought to the island in the 18th century by the English . Cumberland Island became part of the Cumberland Island National Seashore in 1972 , when the National Park Service ( NPS ) took over its management . These horses are similar to the bands of horses living on the islands of Chincoteague and Assateague . There is estimated to be a population of between 150 and 200 horses on the island . Horses on Cumberland Island have a relatively short life expectancy , due to pest infestations , disease and their rugged environment . In 2000 a behavioral study found that instability marks the bands , with large numbers of co @-@ dominant stallions , early dispersal of juveniles , and frequent band @-@ changing among mares . 
 The herd has been studied periodically since the late 1980s , with researchers recommending various management strategies depending on the focus of their study . Current herd levels have been shown to have a negative effect on their environment , and researchers focused on environmental issues recommend a severe reduction in herd numbers . Other researchers , looking at genetic variability , state that a herd size nearly as large as current is necessary to prevent inbreeding , but also state the herd is not genetically unique enough to warrant special preservation . The National Park Service has no current management plan for the horses , and their one effort to create one was blocked by Jack Kingston , a Georgia member of the US House of Representatives . 
 = = History = = 
 Horses are not native to Cumberland Island . Popular myth states they were brought to the island by the Spanish in the 16th century . However , it is believed that these first horses more than likely did not survive due to the lack of visits made by the Spanish and the local Native Americans on the island finding them of little practical use . In the 18th century , the English began settling Cumberland Island . The horses seen there today are most likely descendants of horses brought by these settlers , as this is when a large majority of the horses began to roam freely and revert to their natural state , becoming feral . During the 19th century , efforts were made to capture and make use of the horses . The first attempts were made by the island plantation owner Robert Stafford , who allowed visitors to purchase and capture the horses , which Stafford called " marsh <unk> , " for their own personal use . The horses were next used as cavalry animals during the American Civil War . After the war , records suggest that people from Jekyll Island captured some of the horses for horse meat . Around 1881 , Thomas M. Carnegie bought two plantations on the island and introduced Tennessee Walking Horses , Paso <unk> , and Arabians into the feral horse population in an attempt to improve the animals . Carnegie received a small amount of income from the buying and selling of these animals . Later , many island residents began introducing additional breeds into the herds on the island , further diversifying the bands of horses . In 1921 , a large number of horses were brought onto the island from Globe , Arizona , all of which had been running wild on western rangeland . 
 The National Park Service ( NPS ) acquired the island in 1972 and declared it the Cumberland Island National Seashore . Since then , few new horses have been introduced to the island , though four Arabians were introduced in the early 1990s in the hopes of diversifying and bettering the existing population . Since 1981 , the NPS has been monitoring the horses and tracking their impact on the environment . In 1991 , an outbreak of eastern equine encephalitis killed about 40 horses , or approximately 18 % of the herd . The population on Cumberland Island is one of seven feral horse herds on US barrier islands . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 A 2009 resource assessment of the Cumberland Island National Seashore by the National Parks Conservation Association ( NPCA ) estimated that there were approximately 200 feral horses on Cumberland Island . As of 2010 , 121 horses were counted on the island during the yearly census . Censuses conducted between 2000 and 2010 have counted between 120 and 154 horses . Not all horses are counted during the census , and park management estimates that approximately 50 horses are missed in the counts each year , bringing the 2010 total to around 170 horses . The life span of horses on Cumberland Island is approximately half that of their ancestors , due to infestations of parasites and disease . They also suffer from digestive issues linked to the ingestion of a great amount of sand , which causes intestinal blockages and abdominal distension . 
 A study published in 2000 by researchers from the University of Georgia and the US Fish and Wildlife Service looked at data collected between 1986 and 1990 in an effort to better understand the herd dynamics of the Cumberland Island herd . The study found that band instability was high , with mares not generally forming close relationships with each other and commonly switching which stallion they banded with , and juveniles dispersing quickly . The researchers attributed this to a lack of territory , with bands frequently inhabiting overlapping areas , along with a high number of bachelor stallions ( those without mares ) . They also saw a high number of co @-@ dominant stallions , where two or more stallions would lead a band together , and alternate breeding of the band 's mares . Foals born on Cumberland Island were less likely to survive than comparable foals in western feral herds , with survival rates of 58 @.@ 8 @-@ 61 @.@ 1 % and 80 % respectively . This was found to be especially true in animals born after 1 June , which was attributed to higher temperatures , higher insect levels and reduced food availability . The number of horses in the Cumberland bands was comparable to western bands and those on some eastern islands . However , Assateague and Shackleford Banks horses tended to have larger bands , with an average of 8 @.@ 1 and 12 @.@ 3 horses per band , respectively . 
 = = Controversy and management = = 
 An initial study published in 1988 by a researcher from Oak Ridge National Laboratory demonstrated the then @-@ current population of 180 horses was over @-@ grazing the island . The researcher recommended reducing the herd size to between 49 and 73 animals , which she contended was the maximum size that the island could support without environmental damage . The study showed that the horses were significantly reducing plant stocks on the island , and reducing future plant production due to trampling . A 1991 study of genetic variation in feral horse herds on eastern US barrier islands was conducted by researchers from the University of Georgia and University of Kentucky . The study concluded that a herd of 122 was the minimum size necessary to prevent inbreeding . The researchers noted that they were looking at herd size solely as it related to genetic variation , and did not take environmental damage into consideration . In addition , it was found that due to the large amount of introduced blood from outside horses , the Cumberland Island horses were not genetically unique . Due to this , and the ongoing environmental damage , it was concluded that the horses met neither the genetic nor the environmental requirements for feral horses on public lands , and that the herd should be reduced or removed completely . The researchers conceded , however , that their analysis did not take " local historical and cultural elements " into consideration , only environmental and genetic . 
 In 1995 , the NPS began the process of developing a management plan for the Cumberland Island horse . After compiling information , they released a draft environmental assessment in early 1996 and began taking public comment on a potential management plan . Public opinion was severely divided , with environmentalists approving of the management plan , which would have likely resulted in the reduction or removal of the herd , and animal rights activists and island residents protesting the plan . However , before a plan could be implemented , US Representative Jack Kingston included a provision in a federal appropriations bill that prevented any management of the horses . Kingston made the change to the bill after touring the island , but without consultation with the NPS . He initially claimed that he personally did not see significant damage to the island from the horses , and that the herd size had decreased . However , upon later questioning , he refused to expand upon his observations of the damage to the island . The provision expired in 1997 , but effectively halted momentum toward a park management plan . The study published in 2000 recommended a management strategy that reduced herd populations to environmentally @-@ recommended sizes through a combination of off @-@ island adoption to private owners and contraceptives . The researchers recommended that contraceptive use be focused on the female members of the herd , due to the high numbers of bachelor stallions . 
 In 2009 , a study was conducted by the Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources at the University of Georgia to determine public opinion on the management of the feral livestock ( horses and pigs ) on the island . The researchers found that 68 % of visitors believed the horses were damaging the habitat of the island , there was no consensus on a solution to the problem . The majority of visitors tended to prefer non @-@ lethal methods of managing the population , as opposed to non @-@ management or complete eradication . At that time , park management felt that although the horses were popular with tourists , they were also destructive to beach ecosystems , including an increase in erosion where horses had eaten grasses that previously held sand in place . The 2009 NPCA report emphasized the negative impact that the horses were having on the island environment , and endorsed study findings that between 50 and 70 animals would be an appropriate population for the island . However , the report also noted the management challenges resulting from the " public and political appeal for the animals " , but stated that a management plan is necessary . Potential solutions offered by the NPCA included eradicating the herd , confining a reduced herd to a portion of the island , and using contraceptives to reduce herd numbers . As of April 2014 , there was no management plan published by the NPS , which considers the herd " feral , free @-@ ranging and unmanaged " . 
 = 1924 Cuba hurricane = 
 The 1924 Cuba hurricane is the earliest officially classified Category 5 Atlantic hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson scale . It formed on October 14 in the western Caribbean , slowly organizing as it tracked northwestward . By October 16 , it attained hurricane status to the east of the Yucatán Peninsula , and subsequently executed a small counterclockwise loop . On October 18 , the hurricane began undergoing rapid deepening , and the next day it reached an estimated peak intensity of 165 mph ( 270 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , it struck extreme western Cuba at peak intensity , becoming the strongest hurricane on record to hit the country . Later the hurricane weakened greatly , striking southwestern Florida with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) in a sparsely populated region . While crossing the state it weakened to tropical storm status , and after accelerating east @-@ northeastward , it was absorbed by a cold front on October 23 south of Bermuda . 
 Across the western Caribbean Sea , the developing storm produced heavy rainfall and increased winds . Strong winds in western Cuba caused severe damage , with two small towns nearly destroyed . About 90 people were killed in the country , all in Pinar del Río Province . Later , the hurricane brought heavy rainfall to southern Florida , which caused flooding and crop damage . Damage was light in the state , and there were no casualties . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 14 , a tropical depression was first observed over the western Caribbean Sea , just off the eastern Honduras coast . It was a large and weak tropical cyclone , moving slowly northwestward and gradually intensifying . On October 15 , it is estimated the depression attained tropical storm status , and its strengthening became more steady . The next day , the storm reached hurricane status about 130 mi ( 215 km ) southeast of Cozumel , Quintana Roo . Around that time , it began to execute a small counterclockwise loop off the east coast of the Yucatán Peninsula . By October 18 the hurricane completed the loop , during which its winds increased to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) ; this is the equivalence of a major hurricane , or a Category 3 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The estimation of its strength at this point was based on subsequent analysis of peripheral recordings of atmospheric pressure and maximum sustained winds by ships and land stations . 
 Beginning late on October 18 as it tracked north @-@ northeastward toward Cuba , the hurricane underwent rapid deepening , evidenced by a ship wind report of 120 mph ( 193 km / h ) . This wind report was initially thought to be the peak intensity of the cyclone ; however , subsequent research confirmed further deepening , based on very low pressures recorded across the region . A ship in the radius of maximum winds reported a reading of 922 mbar ; the barometer on the ship was found to be 5 mbar too high , resulting in a pressure of 917 mbar . Additionally , a station on land reported a pressure of 932 mbar ( 27 @.@ 52 inHg ) . Based on the readings , the Hurricane Research Division estimated the hurricane attained a minimum central pressure of 910 mbar very near the western coast of Cuba ; this suggested peak winds of 165 mph ( 270 km / h ) . Late on October 19 , the hurricane made landfall in extreme western Cuba in Pinar del Río Province . José Carlos Millás , director of the National Observatory at Havana , believed that " this hurricane [ was ] one of the most severe ever experienced in our latitudes . " 
 After exiting Cuba into the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane weakened greatly . On October 20 it passed a short distance west of Key West , Florida , and very early on October 21 the hurricane moved over Marco Island with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . The cyclone weakened further as it turned eastward through the state , deteriorating to tropical storm status as it passed near or over Miami . It accelerated east @-@ northeastward , moving over the Abaco Islands in The Bahamas . Gradually weakening , the storm interacted with an approaching cold front ; late on October 23 it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , and shortly thereafter it was absorbed by the front . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 As a developing tropical cyclone , the storm produced increased winds and lower pressures in the Swan Islands , off the coast of Honduras . Heavy rainfall occurred throughout Jamaica , causing street flooding and several mudslides , but little damage . No disruptions were reported to communications or railway travel . The storm brushed eastern Belize while located off the coast , producing 3 @.@ 62 inches ( 21 @.@ 9 mm ) of rainfall and light winds . 
 In extreme western Cuba , damage was very severe from the strong winds , likened to the impact of a tornado . Severe damage was reported in Los Arroyos and Arroyos de Mantua . In the latter location , around a dozen people were killed , 50 were injured , and nearly every building in the town was severely damaged ; heavy losses also occurred to the tobacco crop . Across western Pinar del Río Province , the hurricane destroyed all communication links . Further from the center , the capital city of Havana recorded southerly winds of 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) , as well as a minimum pressure of about 999 mbar ( 29 @.@ 50 inHg ) . Around the country , the hurricane capsized several ships , primarily fishing vessels . The death toll in the country was estimated at around 90 . In the days after the storm , Cuban President Zayas authorized about $ 30 @,@ 000 in relief aid to send to hurricane victims in Pinar del Río . 
 Several days prior to striking Florida , the outer circulation began producing rainfall across the state . Storm warnings were issued along the east and west coastlines northward to Cedar Key and Titusville . Later , hurricane warnings were issued for much of the same area , and schools in the Tampa area were closed as the storm was expected to move ashore . The hurricane first affected Florida when it passed west of Key West , where sustained winds of 66 mph ( 107 km / h ) , along with gusts to 74 mph ( 120 km / h ) , were reported . Little damage occurred in the region , limited to downed trees ; this was due to advance warning by the U.S. Weather Bureau , which advised ships to remain at port and for residents to secure property . Later , the hurricane moved ashore in a sparsely populated region of southwestern Florida . Damage was reported in Fort Myers and Punta Gorda and communications were temporarily cut , although no deaths were reported . Heavy rainfall was reported along its path , and one location accumulated 23 @.@ 22 inches ( 590 mm ) in a 24 ‑ hour period ; this established a new one @-@ day rainfall record in the state . A station in Miami recorded 12 @.@ 18 inches ( 309 mm ) , and wind gusts in the area approached hurricane force . The combination of winds and rain damaged 5 % of the local citrus and avocado crop . The rainfall flooded streets , homes , and commercial buildings in the Miami area , and hundreds of people were left without telephone access . No impact was reported in the Bahamas . 
 After a reanalysis of hurricanes between 1921 and 1925 , the Hurricane Research Division determined this hurricane attained winds of 165 mph ( 270 km / h ) , making it a Category 5 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The hurricane is the earliest known to have attained the intensity , besting the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane , which was previously thought to be the earliest storm of this intensity . It is also the only one on record to make landfall on Cuba at Category 5 status . A hurricane in 1846 that hit the country was also thought to have struck at Category 5 status , although the storm existed prior to the start of the Atlantic hurricane database . When the steamship " Toledo " recorded an atmospheric pressure of 922 mbar ( 27 @.@ 22 inHg ) in the storm , it was the lowest pressure recorded in an Atlantic hurricane , breaking the previous record of 924 mbar ( 27 @.@ 28 inHg ) in the Atlantic hurricane of 1853 . The record during this storm lasted until the 1932 Cuba hurricane , when a pressure of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 02 inHg ) was reported . The reading of 932 mbar ( 27 @.@ 52 inHg ) at Los Arroyos in Mantua , Pinar del Río remains the lowest pressure recorded on land in Cuba . 
 = Manchester Metrolink = 
 Metrolink ( also known as Manchester Metrolink ) is a light rail tram system in Greater Manchester , England . The system is owned by Transport for Greater Manchester ( TfGM ) and operated and maintained under contract by RATP Group . In 2015 / 16 , 34 @.@ 3 million passenger journeys were made on the system . 
 The network consists of seven lines which radiate from Manchester city centre to termini at Altrincham , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Bury , East Didsbury , Eccles , Manchester Airport and Rochdale . Metrolink has 93 stops along 57 miles ( 92 km ) of standard @-@ gauge track making it the largest light rail system in the United Kingdom . It consists of a mixture of on @-@ street track shared with other traffic ; reserved track , segregated from other traffic , often running alongside the roadway or in the central reservation , and converted former railway lines . It is operated by a fleet of Bombardier Flexity Swift M5000s . 
 A light rail system for Greater Manchester emerged from the failure of the 1970s Picc @-@ Vic tunnel scheme to obtain central government funding . A light @-@ rail scheme was proposed in 1982 as the least expensive rail @-@ based transport solution for Manchester city centre and the surrounding Greater Manchester metropolitan area . Government approval was granted in 1988 and the network began operating services between Bury Interchange and Victoria on 6 April 1992 , becoming the United Kingdom 's first modern street @-@ running rail system ; the 1885 @-@ built Blackpool tramway being the only heritage tram system in the UK that had survived up to Metrolink 's creation . 
 Expansion of Metrolink has been a key strategy of transport planners in Greater Manchester , who have overseen its development in successive projects , known as Phases 1 , 2 , 3a , 3b and 2CC . A second line through Manchester city centre to eliminate the current bottleneck will be operational by the end of 2016 and work on an extension from Pomona station to the Trafford Centre is expected to commence in 2016 with an estimated operational date of 2019 . Furthermore , TfGM have endorsed more speculative expansion proposals for new lines to Stockport , a loop around Wythenshawe , and the addition of tram @-@ train technology . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Predecessors = = = 
 Manchester 's first tram age had begun in 1877 with the first horse trams of Manchester Suburban Tramways Company and ceased as early as in 1949 , when the last line of the municipal Manchester Corporation Tramways was displaced by motor buses . That company had managed most of the electrification of the trams , executed 1901 to 1903 . Since 1938 , some trams had been displaced by trolleybuses . Electric traction on tyres in the streets of Manchester ended in 1966 . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 A light rail system for Greater Manchester was born of the failure to obtain central government funding for the Picc @-@ Vic scheme linking the existing railway systems north and south of the city centre via a tunnel . Greater Manchester 's railway network suffered from poor north – south connections , relying on bus connections through the city centre by means of the <unk> bus service . Piccadilly and Victoria were built in the 1840s by rival companies on cheaper land on the fringes of the city centre . As early as 1839 , in anticipation of the stations being built , a connecting underground railway tunnel was proposed but abandoned on economic grounds , as was an overground suspended @-@ monorail in 1966 . SELNEC Passenger Transport Executive — the body tasked with improving public transport for Manchester and its surrounding municipalities in the 1960s – made draft proposals for a Picc @-@ Vic tunnel , " a proposed rail route beneath the city centre " forming " the centrepiece of a new electrified railway network for the region " . Despite investigatory tunnelling under the Manchester Arndale shopping centre , when the Greater Manchester County Council presented the project to the United Kingdom Government in 1974 , it was unable to secure the necessary funding , and was abandoned on economic grounds when the County Council dropped the plans in 1977 . 
 In 1982 , the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive ( GMPTE ; the successor to SELNEC PTE ) concluded that a street @-@ level light rail system to replace or complement the region 's under @-@ used heavy railways was the cheapest solution to improving Greater Manchester 's rail transport network . A Rail Study Group , composed of officials from British Rail , Greater Manchester County Council and GMPTE formally endorsed the scheme in 1984 . Abstract proposals based on light rail systems in North America and continental Europe , and a draft 62 @-@ mile ( 100 km ) network consisting of three lines were presented by the Rail Study Group to the UK Government for taxpayer funding . Following route revisions in 1984 and 1987 , and a trial on 9 February 1987 using Docklands Light Railway rolling stock on a freight @-@ only line adjacent to <unk> Park , funding was granted by HM Treasury with the strict condition that the system be constructed in phases . Additional taxpayer funding came from the European Regional Development Fund and bank lending . 
 = = = Phase 1 , Bury , Altrincham and Manchester city centre = = = 
 Conversion of the East Lancashire Railway ( Bury @-@ to @-@ Victoria ) and Manchester , South Junction and Altrincham Railway ( Altrincham @-@ to @-@ Piccadilly ) heavy rail lines , and creation of a street @-@ level tramway through Manchester city centre to unite the lines as a single 19 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 30 @.@ 9 km ) network , was chosen for Phase 1 because the two heavy rail lines were primarily used for commuting to central Manchester , and would improve north – south links and access to the city centre . The required parliamentary authority to proceed with Phase 1 was obtained with two Acts of Parliament – the Greater Manchester ( Light Rapid Transit System ) Act 1988 and Greater Manchester ( Light Rapid Transit System ) ( No. 2 ) Act 1988 . 
 On 27 September 1989 , following a two @-@ stage tender exercise , the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Authority awarded a contract to the GMA Group ( a consortium composed of AMEC , GM Buses , John Mowlem & Company , and a General Electric Company subsidiary ) who formed Greater Manchester Metro Limited to design , build , operate and maintain Phase 1 of Metrolink . The contract was approved by Michael Portillo on behalf of the Department for Transport on 24 October 1989 , and formally signed on 6 June 1990 . 
 The Bury line was closed in stages between 13 July 1991 and 17 August 1991 , after which the <unk> DC third rail electrified line was adapted for a 750 V DC overhead line operation . In Manchester city centre , a tramway – built with network expansion in mind – from Victoria to Piccadilly via Market Street and Piccadilly Gardens connected Bury to Altrincham via Manchester ; The overhead structures and wiring of the Altrincham line were adapted for light rail . As well as upgrades to signalling and stations on the network , a combined headquarters , depot and control centre was built at Cheetham Hill on Queens Road , north of Victoria station , at a cost of £ 8 million ( £ 15 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 Initially projected to open in September 1991 , then promised for 21 February 1992 , Metrolink began operation on 6 April 1992 with a service between Victoria and Bury . Along with the Tyne and Wear Metro and Docklands Light Railway , it helped to reintroduce light rail to the United Kingdom . The network was expanded beyond Victoria to G @-@ Mex tram stop on 27 April 1992 ; a service through to Altrincham joined the network on 15 June 1992 , completing Phase 1 and enabling use of all 26 T @-@ 68 vehicles acquired for the operation . Queen Elizabeth II declared Metrolink open at a ceremony in Manchester on 17 July 1992 , adding that Metrolink would improve communication between northern and southern Greater Manchester . After the ceremony the Queen visited Manchester Town Hall and rode from St Peter 's Square to Bury to visit Bury Town Hall . 
 Then costing £ 145 million ( £ 270 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) Phase 1 was expected to carry 10 million passengers per year , but surpassed this figure by the 1993 / 94 fiscal year , and every year thereafter . In recognition of passenger demands and the decommissioning of the Arndale bus station after the 1996 Manchester bombing , adjustments were made to Phase 1 to the design of Manchester City Council 's city centre masterplan , by modifying Market Street tram stop to handle two @-@ way traffic , demolishing High Street tram stop in 1998 and creating a new stop for <unk> Interchange in 2002 . Sections of track in the city centre were relaid following damage to the road surface adjacent to the line . By 2003 , Phase 1 was deemed a " long @-@ term success " by GMPTE , and , with overcrowding at peak times , carried more than 15 million passengers per year . 
 = = = Phase 2 , Salford Quays , Eccles = = = 
 Extension of the Metrolink network was intended to be continuous with successive expansion phases delivered in strict order of priority . GMPTE wanted to repeat its " success " with Phase 1 by converting other parts of Greater Manchester 's under @-@ utilised suburban rail network . However , changes in circumstances and new opportunities , combined with a shift in government policy following the early 1990s recession stalled the immediate expansion of Metrolink after Phase 1 . Phase 1a , a proposed east – west route from Eastlands to Dumplington via Salford Quays was muted by uncertainty surrounding the Manchester bid for the 2000 Summer Olympics , the ( unbuilt ) Trafford Centre , and regeneration of Manchester Docks respectively . Nevertheless , throughout the 1990s , the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Authority continued to acquire rights to construct Metrolink lines under the Transport and Works Act 1992 . 
 During the 1990s , Salford Quays became a business district specifically redeveloped for commerce , leisure , culture and tourism with a high density of business units and modern housing , complemented by a cinema complex , office blocks , and waterfront promenade . As it had poor public transport integration and no rail provision , it was earmarked for a potential Metrolink line as early as 1986 and legal authority to construct the line through the Quays was acquired in 1990 . The Quays received millions of pounds of investment and a public consultation and public inquiry resulted in government endorsement in 1994 . In autumn 1995 a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) Metrolink line branching from Cornbrook tram stop to Eccles via Salford Quays capitalising on the regenerated Quayside was confirmed as Phase 2 of Metrolink . No funding came from central government and money was raised from the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Authority ( <unk> ) , the European Regional Development Fund and private developers . In April 1997 <unk> , a consortium of the Serco , Ansaldo and John Laing was appointed to construct the Eccles Line ; Serco , responsible for the Sheffield Supertram would operate the whole network under contract ; Ansaldo provided six additional vehicles — T @-@ <unk> – and signalling equipment . Construction work officially began on 17 July 1997 . 
 The Eccles Line was officially opened as far as Broadway tram stop on 6 December 1999 by the Prime Minister , Tony Blair , who praised Metrolink as " exactly the type of scheme needed to solve the transport problems of the metropolitan areas of the country " ; a service to Eccles Interchange joined the network on 21 July 2000 , and was officially declared open by Anne , Princess Royal at a ceremony on 9 January 2001 . On completion , Phases 1 and 2 gave Metrolink a total route length of 24 miles ( 39 km ) . Phase 2 was predominantly privately funded and cost £ 160 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( £ 242 @,@ 870 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . Salford City Council considered Phase 2 " an important contribution to Salford 's public transport network , providing a fast and frequent service between Eccles , Salford Quays and Manchester city centre " . But , in competition with comparatively quicker and cheaper buses , the line navigated the Quays on a slow and meandering route , and failed to reach its initial passenger targets . Patronage increased during the 2000s as the Eccles Line steadily increased in popularity in keeping with a rise in passenger numbers across the whole Metrolink system and was beginning to become overcrowded by the end of the decade . 
 = = = Phase 3 = = = 
 In 2000 , officials and transport planners in Greater Manchester considered Metrolink to be a " phenomenal success " . The system was exceeding patronage targets and reducing traffic congestion on roads running parallel to its lines . Consequently , when the Transport Act 2000 required passenger transport executives to produce local transport plans , GMPTE 's top public transport priority was a third phase of Metrolink expansion , which would create four new lines along key transport corridors in Greater Manchester : the Oldham and Rochdale Line ( routed northeast to Oldham and Rochdale ) , the East Manchester Line ( routed east to East Manchester and Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ) , the South Manchester Line ( routed southeast to Chorlton @-@ cum @-@ Hardy and East Didsbury ) , and the Airport Line ( routed south to Wythenshawe and Manchester Airport ) . The East Manchester Line would capitalise on serving the City of Manchester Stadium , a host venue of the 2002 Commonwealth Games . Satisfied it would deliver a key policy commitment with faster expansion and greater value from economies of scale , GMPTE and the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities ( AGMA ) lobbied central government to provide partial funding to upgrade the current network with a new depot , passenger information displays , and construct four new lines in a single Phase 3 contract ( dubbed the " Big Bang " ) worth £ 489 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( £ 742 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 Conceding that it would be " very difficult " to bring Metrolink to the City of Manchester Stadium by 2002 , the Government accepted its importance to Greater Manchester and the Commonwealth Games on 22 March 2000 , with an announcement from Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott that a £ 289 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 government contribution to fund Phase 3 would make Metrolink " the envy of Europe " . The remaining £ 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was assembled from the private sector by July 2000 . Following the announcement , preparatory work such as legal costs , land acquisition and construction of rail bridges over the River Medlock was actioned . However , Metrolink made a loss in 2002 and failed to reduce traffic congestion in Manchester city centre . Costs for Phase 3 implementation were revised in the December after the 2002 Commonwealth Games , totalling £ 820 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 203 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , meaning Metrolink required a Government contribution of at least £ 520 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . With costs predicted to rise further , and concerns raised over light rail procurement nationally , on 20 July 2004 , Alistair Darling ( the Secretary of State for Transport ) announced the Government had withdrawn its share of funding Metrolink due to excessive costs . 
 In response , highlighting the legal costs and demolition of homes , schools and offices in anticipation of the new lines , the Get Our Metrolink Back on Track ( or Back on Track ) campaign spearheaded by the Manchester Evening News and Members of Parliament from Greater Manchester was organised to lobby the Department for Transport to fund Phase 3 . On 16 December 2004 Alistair Darling announced that the government would fund Phase 3 – but not at any price , capping its investment for Metrolink enhancements at £ 520 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . An initial £ 102 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 funding package was granted by the Government in July 2005 for Phase 3 preparatory work , and a Carillion @-@ led track renewal programme for 12 miles ( 19 km ) of Phase 1 line – still using original British Rail track – that was causing damage to vehicles and discomfort for passengers . Following negotiations between central government and GMPTE and AGMA , Phase 3 funding was confirmed by Douglas Alexander on 6 July 2006 , albeit with adjustments ( such as axing the Wythenshawe Loop ) and splitting the project into two stages : Phase 3a , elements of expansion funded by government investment ; and Phase 3b , elements requiring an alternative funding source . The <unk> @-@ Thales consortium , composed of Laing O 'Rourke , <unk> and the Thales Group , was appointed to design , build and maintain the 20 miles ( 32 km ) of new line plus a new depot at Old Trafford . A 0 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) spur off the Eccles Line to the new MediaCityUK development at Salford Quays , funded separately by the Northwest Regional Development Agency ( <unk> ) , would also fall to <unk> @-@ Thales . 
 = = = = Phase 3a , Oldham , Rochdale , East Manchester Line = = = = 
 Phase 3a , dubbed the " Mini Bang " , or " Little Bang " , was an extension scheme approved by the government on 6 July 2006 , with final sign off and release of Treasury funds in May 2008 . In addition to the separately <unk> @-@ funded spur from the Eccles Line to MediaCityUK , Phase 3a involved converting the 14 @-@ mile ( 23 km ) Oldham Loop heavy rail line from Victoria to Rochdale via Oldham , building a new 1 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) South Manchester Line from Trafford Bar to St Werburgh 's Road in Chorlton @-@ cum @-@ Hardy ( on a closed section of Cheshire Lines Committee railway ) , and construction of a new 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) East Manchester Line from Piccadilly to Droylsden . The Oldham and Rochdale and South Manchester Lines were funded by a £ 244 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lump sum from the government . The East Manchester Line to Droylsden was funded by borrowings by GMPTE that would be repaid over 30 years using fare revenue from Metrolink . 
 The Oldham Loop Line , subsidised by GMPTE and used for suburban commuting , closed on 3 October 2009 allowing work to convert the line from heavy rail to Metrolink , although preparatory work on Central Park tram stop and a flyover at Newton Heath over the heavy <unk> Line commenced in 2005 . Conversion of the Oldham Loop for Metrolink allowed for the addition of new stops along the line , including <unk> , South Chadderton , and Newbold ; Kingsway Business Park tram stop was authorised at a late stage of planning in July 2011 once the Phase 3b @-@ Drake Street tram stop was abandoned ( on technical and economic grounds ) and additional funding was procured from Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council and Kingsway Business Park 's private developer Wilson Bowden . 
 The planned opening of Phase 3a services was initially delayed on each line by months due to faults with a new £ 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital signalling and control system known as the Tram Management System , or TMS , designed by the Thales Group . Services on the spur from the Eccles Line to MediaCityUK tram stop were expected to commence during Summer 2010 , and began on 20 September 2010 , serving MediaCityUK , a 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) development for creative and digital mass media organisations , and The Lowry , a combined theatre @-@ gallery and Greater Manchester 's most visited tourist attraction . On its inauguration , TMS experienced several faults on the expanded Eccles Line , causing " chaos " at MediaCityUK , and 24 service delays on the network between September 2010 and February 2011 . On the South Manchester Line , services to St Werburgh 's Road tram stop were expected to commence in spring 2011 , but delayed until 7 July 2011 , due to problems with TMS . On the Oldham and Rochdale Line , services from Manchester to Central Park and Oldham Mumps were expected to open in spring 2011 and autumn 2011 respectively , but problems with TMS and the need to renew structures delayed services until 13 June 2012 , when 7 @.@ 1 miles ( 11 @.@ 4 km ) of the line from Victoria to Oldham Mumps tram stop opened in a single stage . 
 After three months in operation , Metrolink services to Oldham were hailed a " huge success " by TfGM , with 250 @,@ 000 passengers on the line between June and September , strengthening TfGM 's position that Phase 3a would raise daily ridership on Metrolink to 90 @,@ 000 . Originally planned to open in spring 2012 , then delayed to autumn 2012 , a service on the Oldham and Rochdale Line from Oldham Mumps as far as Shaw and Crompton tram stop began on 16 December 2012 . In January 2013 , a contract dispute between TfGM and Thales Group over missed deadlines and poor performance of TMS resulted in TfGM withholding payments for unfulfilled construction targets . Services to Rochdale and Droylsden were scheduled for a spring 2012 opening date , but delayed by months because of problems with the implementation of TMS , prompting outrage from Members of Parliament representing these areas . The East Manchester Line to Droylsden opened to selected residents of Manchester and Tameside on 8 February 2013 , and to the general public on 11 February 2013 . On 28 February 2013 , passenger services expanded along the 4 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) stretch of the Oldham and Rochdale Line between Shaw and Crompton and Rochdale railway station , completing Phase 3a , and giving Metrolink a total network length of 43 miles ( 69 km ) . On 9 May 2013 , TMS was successfully implemented in the City Zone , providing real @-@ time passenger information displays at all stops in Manchester city centre . 
 = = = = Phase 3b : Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , East Didsbury and Manchester Airport = = = = 
 Phase 3b was revealed in July 2006 when Phase 3 was split into two smaller phases . A range of motivators pushed transport planners to pursue Phase 3b , including attracting new passengers , value to the economy , reduction of road traffic congestion , regeneration , and improved access to town centres , business districts and labour markets . Under Phase 3b plans , Metrolink proposed to extend the East Manchester Line by 2 @.@ 4 miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) from Droylsden to Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ; extend the South Manchester Line by 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) from St Werburgh 's Road to Didsbury ; and create a new 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) Airport Line to Manchester Airport from a junction at St Werburgh 's Road . Phase 3b enacted plans first drawn up in 1983 , laid before Parliament in 1988 , and approved by the government in 1991 to re @-@ route and extend the Oldham and Rochdale Line at a cost of £ 124 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 with a street running route through Oldham and Rochdale town centres , both of which were poorly served by using the outlying Oldham Mumps and Rochdale railway stations alone . 
 Tasked with procuring funds for Phase 3b from sources other than central Government , in July 2007 GMPTE and AGMA submitted a bid to the Transport Innovation Fund , which would release a multimillion @-@ pound sum for public transport improvements linked to viable anti @-@ road traffic congestion strategies . A referendum on the Greater Manchester Transport Innovation Fund was held in Greater Manchester on 19 December 2008 , in which 79 % of voters rejected plans for public transport improvements linked to a peak @-@ time weekday @-@ only Greater Manchester congestion charge . In May 2009 , Greater Manchester Integrated Transport Authority ( formerly <unk> ) and AGMA agreed to create the Greater Manchester Transport Fund , £ <unk> raised from a combination of a levy on council tax in Greater Manchester , government grants , contributions from the Manchester Airports Group , Metrolink fares and third @-@ party funding for " major transport schemes " in the region . Phase 3b was approved with funding on a line @-@ by @-@ line basis between March and August 2010 . 
 Construction work for all Phase 3b lines began in March 2011 . On the Airport Line , a 580 @-@ tonne steel bridge was erected in Wythenshawe over the M56 motorway on 25 November 2012 . Following the closure of Mosley Street tram stop on 17 May 2013 , the 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) route of the South Manchester Line from St Werburgh 's Road to East Didsbury tram stop was the first section of Phase 3b line to open on 23 May 2013 – three months ahead of schedule . The East Manchester Line was completed on 9 October 2013 with a new service routed 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) between Droylsden and Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne tram stop , taking the total system length to 47 @.@ 7 miles ( 76 @.@ 8 km ) . The Oldham and Rochdale Line was completed with a street @-@ running service through Oldham Town Centre on 27 January 2014 , and the addition of a street @-@ running service between Rochdale railway station and Rochdale Town Centre on 31 March 2014 , taking the total system length to 48 @.@ 5 miles ( 78 @.@ 1 km ) . 
 On 3 November 2014 , the network once again expanded , with a 14 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 23 @.@ 3 km ) extension to Manchester Airport railway station , bringing the length of the system to 92 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 57 @.@ 5 mi ) , making it the longest tramway in the United Kingdom , and the longest light railway . It opened more than one year early , and at a cost of £ 368 million . 
 = = = Phase 2CC = = = 
 The Second City Crossing ( also known as 2CC ) is a second Metrolink route across Manchester city centre , first proposed in 2011 as a means to improve capacity , flexibility and reliability as the rest of the system expands due to phases 3a and 3b . Funded by the Greater Manchester Transport Fund , its 0 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) route will begin at a rebuilt St Peter 's Square tram stop , and run along Princess Street , Cross Street and Corporation Street to rejoin the existing Metrolink line by Victoria station . Following the submission of a planning document under the Transport and Works Act 1992 , and a public inquiry held throughout 2013 , the Second City Crossing was granted approval on 8 October 2013 by the Secretary of State for Transport , Patrick McLoughlin , and signed off on 28 October 2013 by the Greater Manchester Combined Authority . Construction started in early 2014 with Exchange Square tram stop and the first tracks of the line were laid in late November 2014 . Exchange Square joined the network as a new stop on the crossing in December 2015 , meaning a Shaw and Crompton @-@ to @-@ Exchange Square service could begin . Completion of the whole line is expected in 2016 / 17 . 
 = = Operator = = 
 Metrolink is owned by TfGM and operated and maintained by private transport firms under an operating and maintenance ( O & M ) contract . Between 1992 and 1997 Metrolink was operated and maintained as a concession by Greater Manchester Metro Limited , between 1997 and 2007 by Serco . From 2007 until 2011 it was operated and maintained by Stagecoach Metrolink – part of the Stagecoach Group . Metrolink RATP Dev , a part of the French state @-@ owned RATP Group which operates the Paris Métro , bought the Metrolink contract from Stagecoach on 1 August 2011 . 
 In October 2015 , TfGM announced RATP Group , Keolis / Amey , National Express and Transdev had been shortlisted to bid for the next contract starting in July 2017 . 
 Metrolink has been headed by Peter Cushing since February 2013 . 
 = = = Branding and public relations = = = 
 The name Metrolink and a system @-@ wide aquamarine , black and grey corporate branding and vehicle livery was devised by Fitch RS and Design Triangle , and first revealed at a press launch in June 1988 . Previously , during the planning and promotional stages , the system was known as Project Light Rail , and borrowed an orange and brown identity used by Greater Manchester Transport and GM Buses . In August 1991 , in partnership with BBC Manchester , Metrolink ran a " Nickname Metrolink " competition to find an affectionate short name for the system , comparable to " The Tube " for London Underground and " The L " for the Chicago elevated transit system . Most submissions were inspired by textile manufacturing , Greater Manchester 's historic staple industry , using names such as " The Thread " and " The Shuttle " , but the winning entry was " The Met " . In 2008 , a distinctive yellow and metallic silver vehicle livery , and corresponding yellow system @-@ wide corporate re @-@ branding was introduced by Manchester @-@ based Hemisphere Design and Marketing Consultancy , designed in partnership with Peter Saville , Dalton <unk> and Design Triangle . Yellow was chosen by Hemisphere for its high visibility and to reflect Greater Manchester 's culture of confidence and optimism . 
 Metrolink has been a " Football Development Partner " with the Manchester Football Association since August 2010 , meaning it is the association 's Official Travel Partner , and supports grassroots association football in Greater Manchester by selecting a " Team of the Month " . Metrolink is a sponsor of the annual Manchester Food and Drink Festival . On 6 December 2010 , to celebrate the soap opera 's 50th anniversary , Coronation Street featured a storyline with an explosion which caused a crash on the Metrolink system at Weatherfield . Although a fictitious event , at least six calls were made to GMPTE asking if services had been affected . 
 Transport planners in Greater Manchester describe Metrolink as both " an icon of Greater Manchester " , and " an integral part of the landscape in Greater Manchester " . The Guardian describes Metrolink as " Manchester 's efficient and much @-@ loved tram system " . Under ownership of the Guardian Media Group , the Manchester Evening News spearheaded the Get Our Metrolink Back on Track campaign in 2004 – 05 . Under Trinity Mirror ownership , the Manchester Evening News used the Freedom of Information Act 2000 to reveal that Metrolink received over 10 @,@ 000 complaints between May 2011 and May 2012 . 
 In 2013 , then Manchester City F.C. manager Roberto Mancini and players Joe Hart , Vincent Kompany and James Milner recorded special stop announcements to be used on Metrolink 's East Manchester Line on dates when Manchester City play at home at the City of Manchester Stadium ( served by the Etihad Campus tram stop ) . The announcements were first used on 17 February 2013 , for Manchester City 's FA Cup Fifth Round tie against Leeds United A.F.C .. 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Stops and lines = = = 
 As of December 2015 , Metrolink has a network length of 57 miles ( 92 km ) and 93 stops — along seven lines which radiate from a " central triangular junction at Piccadilly Gardens which forms the hub of the Metrolink system " in the City Zone . The lines are : the Airport Line ( which terminates at Manchester Airport ) , the Altrincham Line ( which terminates in Altrincham ) , the Bury Line ( which terminates in Bury ) , the East Manchester Line ( which terminates in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ) , the South Manchester Line ( which terminates in East Didsbury ) , the Eccles Line ( which terminates in Eccles ) , and the Oldham and Rochdale Line ( which terminates in Rochdale ) . Some stops , such as Cornbrook , are shared between lines , and may be used as interchange stations ; others , such as Altrincham Interchange , are transport hubs which integrate with heavy rail and bus stations . Each stop has at least one high @-@ floor platform measuring a minimum of 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) wide , accessed by ramp , stairs , escalator , lift or combination thereof . Low @-@ floor platforms commonly used for light rail throughout the world were ruled out for Metrolink because the system inherited 90 @-@ centimetre ( 35 in ) high @-@ floor platforms from British Rail on lines formerly used for heavy rail . Shelters and canopies at stops were supplied by <unk> , and ticket vending machines by Scheidt & Bachmann . Card readers are installed on all stop platforms , ready for the TfGM ' My Get Me There ' smart card being trialled in 2014 ; and when this is fully implemented all smart card users will touch @-@ in and touch @-@ out at a platform reader . Each line has track with standard gauge specification , powering vehicles electrically from 750 V DC overhead lines . Between 1992 and 2007 , electricity for the Metrolink system was procured by the operator , based on price only . In 2007 , GMPTE changed the contractual requirements to ensure that sustainable power would be factored into choosing an energy supplier , and in July 2007 , Metrolink became the first light rail network in the UK with electricity supplied entirely from sustainable energy via hydropower . Now , energy for the system is generated by biomass . 
 = = = Depots = = = 
 Metrolink House at Queens Road in Cheetham Hill is the headquarters of Metrolink . Constructed during Phase 1 , it served jointly as a control centre , HQ , office space , and depot for the storage , maintenance and repair of vehicles . Under the original proposals , Metrolink House was much larger , with a design which would support network expansion , but this design did not obtain the necessary planning permission from Manchester City Council . Consequently , Metrolink House was scaled down to a 4 @-@ hectare ( 9 @.@ 9 @-@ acre ) £ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 site with limited capacity , and , in light of Phase 3a network expansion , Metrolink built a second depot at Elsinore Road in Old Trafford in 2011 . This second depot occupies the site of a former warehouse , and can house up to 96 vehicles . On 7 May 2013 Metrolink completed the transfer of its main operational functions from Cheetham Hill to Old Trafford , meaning its control room – known as the Network Management Centre – is housed jointly with the Customer Services team by its newer depot . 
 = = = Wi @-@ Fi = = = 
 In July 2013 , the Transport for Greater Manchester Committee announced that it planned to enhance the experience of travelling on Metrolink by tapping in to Manchester City Council 's grant from the UK Urban Broadband Fund and using it to provide Metrolink passengers with free Wi @-@ Fi when on board . The scheme began with a trial on a single tram – number 3054 – connected to the <unk> broadband network with the intention of rolling it out across the whole Metrolink network by Spring 2015 . It was rolled out fleet wide in March 2015 . 
 = = = Proposed changes and expansion = = = 
 = = = = Buckley Wells = = = = 
 Buckley Wells tram stop has been proposed to provide better passenger access in southern Bury , and would be on the Bury Line between Bury Interchange and Radcliffe tram stop . 
 = = = = Middleton extension = = = = 
 As of 2013 , Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council aspires to link Middleton to the Metrolink network by constructing a branch off the Bury Line routed from Bowker Vale tram stop to Middleton town centre . Rochdale Council first proposed this extension of Metrolink to Middleton in 2008 , and priced the scheme at £ 80 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Oldham extension = = = = 
 In January 2016 , Jim McMahon , MP for Oldham West and Royton , proposed two loop extensions to the <unk> system around Oldham . The link would add a spur from Westwood tram stop to Middleton town centre , before joining the Bury line near Bowker Vale , in line with the proposed Middleton extension . 
 The Ashton Loop would extend the line beyond Ashton town centre to Oldham Mumps . Both would connect Rochdale to its neighbouring towns without the need to travel in and out of Manchester city centre . Initial high level feasibility work was undertaken by officials at Transport for Greater Manchester which demonstrated the route is technically possible . 
 = = = = Salford expansion = = = = 
 In Salford City Council 's 2004 – 2016 unitary development plan : 
 Extending from Eccles Interchange along the A57 road to Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell and then across the Manchester Ship Canal to the Trafford Centre . 
 Re @-@ opening the Tyldesley Loopline from Eccles to Little Hulton via Walkden with Metrolink services . 
 Tram @-@ train between Manchester and Wigan via Salford , as proposed by the Regional Spatial Strategy for North West England . 
 = = = = Stalybridge extension = = = = 
 As of 2011 , Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council aspires to extend the East Manchester Line from Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne to Stalybridge . 
 = = = = Stockport tram @-@ train strategy = = = = 
 In January 2015 Stockport Metropolitan Borough adopted a Rail Strategy proposing substantial conversion of current rail alignments around Stockport to tram @-@ train operation , running into an interchange at Stockport bus station . These proposed services expand on , and are consistent with , those outlined in the TfGM tram @-@ train strategy document . Earlier plans ( now discarded ) had envisaged the Metrolink line to East Didsbury being extended to Stockport along the Mersey Valley . The revised plan proposes instead a revised alignment for this link via Edgeley and Stockport railway station . 
 Stockport town centre to Manchester city centre via Heaton Norris , Reddish South and Belle Vue ( linking with the proposed Manchester – Marple tram @-@ train line ) ; 
 Stockport town centre to Manchester Airport via Edgeley and Baguley ; 
 Stockport town centre to Altrincham via Edgeley and Baguley ; 
 Stockport town centre to East Didsbury ( and on to Manchester city centre ) , via Edgeley and <unk> Bank ; 
 Hazel Grove to East Didsbury via <unk> Bank . 
 In the Rail Strategy , Stockport MBC also outline longer term aspirations to establish tram @-@ train services between Stockport town centre and Marple ; and between Stockport town centre and Ashton town centre . 
 = = = = Trafford Park line = = = = 
 TfGM holds powers to commission a new line from Pomona to Port Salford via Trafford Park and the Trafford Centre , and committed to procuring a funding mechanism for its construction in 2011 . Drawing on proposals made by Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council in 1984 , TfGM made this a strategic priority in each of its local transport plans since the Transport Act 2000 , attesting that Metrolink provision will improve public access to key attractions , support the development of business and freight zones , and reduce traffic congestion on the M60 motorway . In 2004 , Peel Holdings raised concerns that the lack of Metrolink provision to the Trafford Centre may impact on its Chill <unk> development , and offered to contribute towards its cost . In summer 2013 , the Greater Manchester Combined Authority and the Greater Manchester Local Enterprise Partnership announced it may fund the construction of the line as far as a stop at the Trafford Centre using the <unk> mechanism of the Greater Manchester City Deal ; with an extension to Port Salford and Eccles to be developed and costed separately . TfGM estimated that it would require £ 350 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to open this route to passengers by its target of 2018 / 19 ( subject to a satisfactory business case , Transport and Works Act Order and public consultation ) . In November 2014 , the UK Treasury confirmed <unk> funding for the Trafford Park Line as part of the devolution deal for the Greater Manchester Combined Authority . 
 = = = = Tram @-@ trains = = = = 
 Metrolink and the TfGM Committee have prepared five costed proposals for extending Metrolink using tram @-@ train technology over the existing heavy rail network in the region ; along the Mid @-@ Cheshire Line ( between Stockport and Hale ) , the Hope Valley Line ( between Manchester and Marple ) , the Glossop Line ( between Manchester and the dual termini at Hadfield and Glossop ) , the Manchester to Sheffield Line ( between Manchester and Hazel Grove ) , and along the Manchester to Southport Line ( between Manchester and Wigan via Atherton ) , with an estimated total funding requirement of £ 870 million as of 2013 . TfGM intend to proceed to the identification of potential rail industry funding options , subject to a review of lessons from a tram @-@ train pilot scheme in Sheffield . 
 = = = = Wythenshawe Loop = = = = 
 Although axed in 2005 to control costs , the Wythenshawe Loop on the Airport Line remains an aspiration of TfGM . As of October 2014 there is renewed interest from <unk> , particularly as the route could link with <unk> Manchester Interchange . It would create a loop from <unk> tram stop to the University Hospital of South Manchester ( Wythenshawe Hospital ) and Newall Green and back to <unk> , and improve access between Wythenshawe and Manchester city centre on a route which is physically impaired by the River Mersey and M60 motorway . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 Metrolink is operated by fleet of M5000 trams , the number of which will reach 120 by 2017 . The first M5000 trams were introduced in 2009 , and replaced the former fleet of thirty @-@ two T @-@ 68 and T @-@ 68A trams , which had operated the network since opening in 1992 , these were withdrawn from service during 2012 – 14 . 
 In order to be compatible with the former heavy rail stations Metrolink inherited , the network uses high @-@ floor trams with a platform height of 900 mm ( 35 in ) . 
 = = = M5000 = = = 
 In December 2009 , Metrolink took delivery of the first M5000 tram . Built by Bombardier Transportation and Vossloh <unk> , the initial eight M5000s were ordered to allow services to be increased . They are part of the Flexity Swift range of light rail vehicles , and have a design similar to the <unk> vehicle used on the Cologne Stadtbahn . 
 With the approval of the spur to MediaCityUK , a further four were ordered . To provide rolling stock for the phase 3 extensions and replace the existing fleet , the order was increased successively to 94 . In December 2013 , a further ten M5000s were ordered to provide trams for the Trafford Park line planned to open in 2020 , while in the interim supporting a service between MediaCityUK and Manchester city centre and other capacity enhancements . In September 2014 , a further 16 were ordered , this will bring the fleet up to 120 . 
 = = = Ancillary vehicles = = = 
 Metrolink has one Special Purpose Vehicle from 1991 . Numbered 1027 with its support wagon 1028 , it is a bespoke diesel @-@ powered vehicle with a crane , inspection platform , mobile workshop , and capacity for a driver and three passengers . It was designed to assist with vehicle recovery and track and line repairs . 
 = = = Former fleet = = = 
 = = = = T @-@ 68 / 68A = = = = 
 To commence operations , a fleet of 26 T @-@ 68 trams were delivered in 1992 . To provide extra trams for the Eccles Line , six modified T @-@ 68A trams were purchased in 1999 . The T @-@ 68A vehicles were based on the original T @-@ <unk> , but had modifications replacing destination <unk> with dot matrix displays , and retractable couplers and covered bogies necessary for the high proportion of on @-@ street running close to motor traffic . 
 Three of the earlier T @-@ 68 fleet were similarly equipped , and were known as T @-@ <unk> . Mechanically and electrically the T @-@ <unk> vehicles remained essentially a T @-@ 68 , but had modifications to its brakes , mirrors , and speed limiters to suit the Eccles line . Initially only these vehicles were permitted to operate the Eccles line but the entire fleet was modified between 2008 and 2012 for universal running , under a program known as the T @-@ 68X Universal Running programme . 
 All of the T @-@ 68 and T @-@ <unk> were withdrawn between April 2012 and April 2014 . 
 Tram no . 1007 , the first to pass through the City Centre on the opening day , is due to be restored into Heaton Park Tramway , and is believed to be the only T @-@ 68 to be kept from scrapping etc . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 Unlike some Metro systems in the United Kingdom , the Manchester Metrolink has a high degree of street interaction between pedestrians and motorists with on @-@ street running trams - this is most notable in Manchester city centre . All trams are equipped with a standard horn and a warning horn . A number of fatal incidents have occurred on the network since opening in 1992 : 
 On 18 October 2002 , a pedestrian died after a collision with a tram after falling onto tram tracks near Manchester Central . 
 On 25 June 2005 , a pedestrian died after a collision with a tram at Navigation Road stop . 
 On 5 June 2011 , a pedestrian died after a collision near Piccadilly Gardens . 
 On 15 December 2011 , a blind man died after a collision with a tram near St Peters ' Square . 
 On 6 February 2013 , a pedestrian died after a collision with a tram at the Failsworth stop . 
 On 11 January 2014 , a pedestrian died after a collision with a tram at the Market Street stop . 
 On 16 February 2016 , a cyclist died after a collision with a tram at the <unk> Road stop . 
 = = Travelling = = 
 = = = Service and hours of operation = = = 
 Before inauguration , GMPTE 's original concept was for Metrolink 's operator to provide a service every ten minutes from Bury @-@ to @-@ Piccadilly and Altrincham @-@ to @-@ Piccadilly 6 a.m. – Midnight , Monday to Saturday . Greater Manchester Metro Limited , the system 's original operator , argued for adjustments , citing the need to provide an efficient and commercially viable operation in line with vehicle running times and passenger demand . Due to power limitations , this pattern was modified to a twelve @-@ minute service throughout the day , doubling to a six @-@ minute service in peak periods , resulting in a " ten trams per hour " service pattern on routes running from Altrincham and Bury to Manchester every six minutes . Operators are required to provide this level of service at least 98 % of the time , or incur a financial penalty charge . This six @-@ minute service pattern has been adopted on the rest of the network as the system has grown . Heavy snowfall during the winter of 2009 / 10 impaired Metrolink services and the operator was criticised for failing to have cold weather procedures . This prompted a program to improve reliability and performance of the system in freezing conditions . Metrolink operated icebreaker @-@ style vehicles at night during snowfall in January 2013 to provide normal services . 
 A survey in 2012 revealed that passengers who used Metrolink everyday for commuting rated service levels as poor and / or unreliable , with those respondents particularly frustrated by delays and disruptions . TfGM recognised that the older vehicles in its fleet – the <unk> / <unk> — were outdated and the cause of much disruption , and agreed to replace them with M5000s by 2014 . Among those who used Metrolink less regularly , the system scored far better in the survey . A survey in 2014 by the non @-@ departmental government body Passenger Focus found that of the five major light rail systems in the United Kingdom – Metrolink , Sheffield Supertram , NET , Midland Metro and Blackpool tramway – Metrolink had the lowest overall satisfaction rating in the United Kingdom . Respondents were surveyed on value for money , punctuality , seating availability , tram stations and overall satisfaction . Metrolink was below average on all criteria , and 47 % believed Metrolink was value for money compared to a national average of 60 % . 
 In January 2016 , Transport for General Manchester agreed a baseline Service Specification to grade bidders seeking to operate the concession from July 2017 ; once the Second City Crossing is in operation . In the baseline service pattern , there are no designated ' peak ' periods of service operation ; instead there will be an ' enhanced ' service operating from start of service to 8pm Monday to Friday , and to 6pm Saturday ; and a ' core ' service running at all other times . In the ' enhanced ' service pattern , trams will run with a 6 @-@ minute frequency to Shaw & Oldham , Bury , Ashton , Altrincham , Manchester Airport and East Didsbury ; and with a 12 @-@ minute frequency to Rochdale , Eccles and <unk> . When the Trafford line opens , services will run to the Trafford Centre with a 12 @-@ minute frequency . In the ' core ' service pattern , all lines will run with a 12 @-@ minute frequency . 
 Services I & J operate only on a Sunday between 08 : 00 & 17 : 30 instead of services G & H ( shown above ) 
 = = = Ticketing = = = 
 Metrolink fares were originally set by the system 's operator , but are now set by the TfGM Committee at levels that cover both the running costs and the cost of borrowing that has part @-@ funded the expansion of the system ; Metrolink receives no public subsidy . Fares typically rise each January above the rate of inflation . The fare tariff is based on a division of the network 's stations into fare zones . Persons under 16 years of age , persons of pensionable age , and people with disabilities qualify for concessionary fares , some of which are mandatory and others discretionary , as determined by the Greater Manchester Combined Authority . The Greater Manchester Combined Authority permits reduced fares for persons under 16 years of age , and free or reduced fares on Metrolink after 9 : 30 a.m. for pensioners . In normal circumstances , tickets cannot be purchased on board Metrolink vehicles , and must be purchased from a ticket vending machine before boarding the vehicle . Fare evasion in 2006 was estimated at 2 – 6 % of all users , and in 2012 at 2 @.@ 5 % of all users . Checking tickets and passes and issuing Standard fares is the responsibility of Metrolink 's Passenger Services Representatives ( <unk> ) , who provide security and assistance on the network ; between 1992 and 2008 , Greater Manchester Police had a dedicated Metrolink unit responsible for policing the system . The original ticket vending machines were designed by Thorn EMI . In 2005 GMPTE announced that rail passengers travelling from within Greater Manchester into Manchester city centre can use the Metrolink service between the eight City Zone stations for free . Passengers must present a valid rail ticket , correctly dated with Manchester <unk> as the destination . In 2007 TfGM rolled out new ticket vending machines , designed to accept credit / debit card payments and permit the purchase of multiple tickets in a single transaction . These were replaced in 2009 with touchscreen machines , designed with the Scheidt & Bachmann Ticket XPress system . In October 2012 , TfGM announced it was devising a simpler zonal fare system , comparable to London fare zones , and preparing to introduce get me there , the region 's new contactless smartcard system , for use on all public transport modes in Greater Manchester , including Metrolink . 
 = = Tram services = = 
 Monday to Saturday service : 
 Seven services which all run every 12 minutes : 
 ( A ) Altrincham – Etihad Campus 
 ( B ) Altrincham – Deansgate @-@ Castlefield ( peak only , 07 : 00 – 20 : 00 ) 
 ( C ) Bury – East Didsbury 
 ( D ) Bury – Piccadilly ( peak only , 07 : 00 – 20 : 00 ) 
 ( E ) Eccles – Piccadilly via MediaCityUK 
 ( F ) Manchester Airport – Cornbrook 
 ( G ) Rochdale Town Centre – Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne 
 ( H ) Shaw & Crompton – Exchange Square 
 One early morning service which runs every 20 minutes : 
 ( K ) Manchester Airport – Firswood ( 03 : 00 – 06 : 00 ) 
 The combined Monday – Saturday daytime frequency on the Bury and Altrincham routes is every 6 minutes . ( Deansgate – Altrincham & Bury – Market Street ) 
 Sunday and public holiday service : 
 Six services which all run every 12 minutes from 09 : 00 – 17 : 30 and every 15 minutes at all other times . 
 ( A ) Altrincham – Etihad Campus 
 ( C ) Bury – East Didsbury 
 ( E ) Eccles – Piccadilly via MediaCityUK 
 ( F ) Manchester Airport – Cornbrook 
 ( G ) Rochdale Town Centre – Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ( after 17 : 30 ) 
 ( H ) Shaw & Crompton – Exchange Square ( after 17 : 30 ) 
 ( I ) Rochdale Town Centre – Exchange Square ( 08 : 00 – 17 : 30 ) 
 ( J ) Victoria – Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ( 08 : 00 – 17 : 30 ) 
 One early morning service which runs every 20 minutes : 
 ( K ) Manchester Airport – Firswood ( 03 : 00 – 06 : 00 ) 
 = = Patronage = = 
 The Department for Transport reported passenger journeys for the 2015 / 16 financial year at 34 @.@ 3 million ; a 10 @.@ 1 % increase from 31 @.@ 2 million the previous year . Patronage has risen steadily since its opening , from a start @-@ point of 8 @.@ 1 million in the 1992 / 93 fiscal year . Travel increased from 18 @.@ 2 million journeys in 2001 / 02 to 20 million journeys in 2008 / 09 ; numbers fell to 18 @.@ 7 million in 2009 while parts of the system were closed for upgrades , but recovered to 19 @.@ 6 million for the 2009 / 10 fiscal year . Metrolink revised its method for calculating passenger boardings in 2010 / 11 , meaning figures are not directly comparable with previous years . TfGM projects that 41 @.@ 7 million passenger journeys per year will be made on the Metrolink system by 2016 / 17 . 
 A survey in 2012 revealed that 12 % , or around one in 10 people in Greater Manchester use Metrolink to travel to work , and 8 % use the system every day . The system is most commonly used by 21- to 30 @-@ year olds , and was used most markedly by residents of the Metropolitan Borough of Bury — accounting for around a third of their commuter journeys . 
 = Emma Goldman = 
 Emma Goldman ( June 27 [ O.S. June 15 ] , 1869 – May 14 , 1940 ) was an anarchist known for her political activism , writing , and speeches . She played a pivotal role in the development of anarchist political philosophy in North America and Europe in the first half of the 20th century . 
 Born in Kovno , Russian Empire ( present @-@ day Kaunas , Lithuania ) to a Jewish family , Goldman emigrated to the United States in 1885 . Attracted to anarchism after the Haymarket affair , Goldman became a writer and a renowned lecturer on anarchist philosophy , women 's rights , and social issues , attracting crowds of thousands . She and anarchist writer Alexander Berkman , her lover and lifelong friend , planned to assassinate industrialist and financier Henry Clay Frick as an act of propaganda of the deed . Frick survived the attempt on his life in 1892 and Berkman was sentenced to 22 years in prison . Goldman was imprisoned several times in the years that followed , for " inciting to riot " and illegally distributing information about birth control . In 1906 , Goldman founded the anarchist journal Mother Earth . 
 In 1917 , Goldman and Berkman were sentenced to two years in jail for conspiring to " induce persons not to register " for the newly instated draft . After their release from prison , they were arrested — along with hundreds of others — and deported to Russia . Initially supportive of that country 's October Revolution which brought the Bolsheviks to power , Goldman reversed her opinion in the wake of the Kronstadt rebellion and denounced the Soviet Union for its violent repression of independent voices . In 1923 , she published a book about her experiences , My Disillusionment in Russia . While living in England , Canada , and France , she wrote an autobiography called Living My Life . After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War , she traveled to Spain to support the anarchist revolution there . She died in Toronto on May 14 , 1940 , aged 70 . 
 During her life , Goldman was lionized as a free @-@ thinking " rebel woman " by admirers , and denounced by detractors as an advocate of politically motivated murder and violent revolution . Her writing and lectures spanned a wide variety of issues , including prisons , atheism , freedom of speech , militarism , capitalism , marriage , free love , and homosexuality . Although she distanced herself from first @-@ wave feminism and its efforts toward women 's suffrage , she developed new ways of incorporating gender politics into anarchism . After decades of obscurity , Goldman 's iconic status was revived in the 1970s , when feminist and anarchist scholars rekindled popular interest in her life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Emma Goldman 's Orthodox Jewish family lived in the Lithuanian city of Kaunas ( called Kovno at the time , part of the Russian Empire ) . Goldman 's mother Taube <unk> had been married before , to a man with whom she had two daughters — Helena in 1860 and Lena in 1862 . When her first husband died of tuberculosis , Taube was devastated . Goldman later wrote : " Whatever love she had had died with the young man to whom she had been married at the age of fifteen . " 
 Taube 's second marriage was arranged by her family and , as Goldman puts it , " <unk> from the first " . Her second husband , Abraham Goldman , invested Taube 's inheritance in a business that quickly failed . The ensuing hardship combined with the emotional distance of husband and wife to make the household a tense place for the children . When Taube became pregnant , Abraham hoped desperately for a son ; a daughter , he believed , would serve as one more sign of failure . They eventually had three sons , but their first child was Emma . 
 Emma Goldman was born on June 27 , 1869 . Her father used violence to punish his children , beating them when they disobeyed him . He used a whip only on Emma , the most rebellious of them . Her mother provided scarce comfort , calling only rarely on Abraham to tone down his beatings . Goldman later speculated that her father 's furious temper was at least partly a result of sexual frustration . 
 Goldman 's relationships with her elder half @-@ sisters , Helena and Lena , were a study in contrasts . Helena , the oldest , provided the comfort they lacked from their mother ; she filled Goldman 's childhood with " whatever joy it had " . Lena , however , was distant and uncharitable . The three sisters were joined by brothers Louis ( who died at the age of six ) , Herman ( born in 1872 ) , and Moishe ( born in 1879 ) . 
 = = = Adolescence = = = 
 When Emma was a young girl , the Goldman family moved to the village of <unk> , where her father ran an inn . While her sisters worked , she became friends with a servant named Petrushka , who excited her " first erotic sensations " . Later in <unk> she witnessed a peasant being whipped with a <unk> in the street . This event traumatized her and contributed to her lifelong distaste for violent authority . 
 At the age of seven , Goldman moved with her family to the Prussian city of Königsberg ( then part of the German Empire ) , and she enrolled in a Realschule . One teacher punished disobedient students — targeting Goldman in particular — by beating their hands with a ruler . Another teacher tried to molest his female students and was fired when Goldman fought back . She found a sympathetic mentor in her German teacher , who loaned her books and even took her to an opera . A passionate student , Goldman passed the exam for admission into a gymnasium , but her religion teacher refused to provide a certificate of good behavior and she was unable to attend . 
 The family moved to the Russian city of Saint Petersburg , where her father opened one unsuccessful store after another . Their poverty forced the children to work , and Goldman took an assortment of jobs including one in a corset shop . As a teenager Goldman begged her father to allow her to return to school , but instead he threw her French book into the fire and shouted : " Girls do not have to learn much ! All a Jewish daughter needs to know is how to prepare gefilte fish , cut noodles fine , and give the man plenty of children . " 
 Goldman pursued an independent education on her own , however , and soon began to study the political turmoil around her , particularly the <unk> responsible for assassinating Alexander II of Russia . The ensuing turmoil intrigued Goldman , even though she did not fully understand it at the time . When she read Chernyshevsky 's novel , What Is to Be Done ? ( 1863 ) , she found a role model in the protagonist Vera , who adopts a Nihilist philosophy and escapes her repressive family to live freely and organize a sewing cooperative . The book enthralled Goldman and remained a source of inspiration throughout her life . 
 Her father , meanwhile , continued to insist on a domestic future for her , and he tried to arrange for her to be married at the age of fifteen . They fought about the issue constantly ; he complained that she was becoming a " loose " woman , and she insisted that she would marry for love alone . At the corset shop , she was forced to fend off unwelcome advances from Russian officers and other men . One persistent suitor took her into a hotel room and committed what Goldman called " violent contact " ; two biographers call it rape . She was stunned by the experience , overcome by " shock at the discovery that the contact between man and woman could be so brutal and painful . " Goldman felt that the encounter forever soured her interactions with men . 
 = = = Rochester , New York = = = 
 In 1885 , Helena made plans to move to New York to join her sister Lena and her husband . Goldman wanted to join her sister , but their father refused to allow it . Despite Helena 's offer to pay for the trip , Abraham turned a deaf ear to their pleas . Desperate , Goldman threatened to throw herself into the Neva River if she could not go . He finally agreed , and on December 29 , 1885 , Helena and Emma arrived at New York 's Castle Garden . They moved into the Rochester home Lena had made with her husband Samuel . Fleeing the rising antisemitism of Saint Petersburg , their parents and brothers joined them a year later . Goldman began working as a seamstress , sewing overcoats for more than ten hours a day , earning two and a half dollars a week . She asked for a raise and was denied ; she quit and took work at a smaller shop nearby . 
 At her new job , Goldman met a fellow worker named Jacob Kershner , who shared her love for books , dancing , and traveling , as well as her frustration with the monotony of factory work . After four months , they married in February 1887 . Once he moved in with Goldman 's family , however , their relationship faltered . On their wedding night she discovered that he was impotent ; they became emotionally and physically distant . Before long he became jealous and suspicious . She , meanwhile , was becoming more engaged with the political turmoil around her — particularly the fallout of the 1886 Haymarket affair in Chicago and the anti @-@ authoritarian political philosophy of anarchism . Less than a year after the wedding , they were divorced ; he begged her to return and threatened to poison himself if she did not . They reunited , but after three months she left once again . Her parents considered her behavior " loose " and refused to allow Goldman into their home . Carrying her sewing machine in one hand and a bag with five dollars in the other , she left Rochester and headed southeast to New York City . 
 = = = Most and Berkman = = = 
 On her first day in the city , Goldman met two men who would forever change her life . At Sachs 's Café , a gathering place for radicals , she was introduced to Alexander Berkman , an anarchist who invited her to a public speech that evening . They went to hear Johann Most , editor of a radical publication called Freiheit and an advocate of " propaganda of the deed " — the use of violence to instigate change . She was impressed by his fiery oration , and he took her under his wing , training her in methods of public speaking . He encouraged her vigorously , telling her that she was " to take my place when I am gone . " One of her first public talks in support of " the Cause " was in Rochester . After convincing Helena not to tell their parents of her speech , Goldman found her mind a blank once on stage . Suddenly , 
 something strange happened . In a flash I saw it — every incident of my three years in Rochester : the Garson factory , its drudgery and humiliation , the failure of my marriage , the Chicago crime ... I began to speak . Words I had never heard myself utter before came pouring forth , faster and faster . They came with passionate intensity ... The audience had vanished , the hall itself had disappeared ; I was conscious only of my own words , of my ecstatic song . 
 Enchanted by the experience , she refined her public persona during subsequent engagements . Quickly , however , she found herself arguing with Most over her independence . After a momentous speech in Cleveland , she felt as though she had become " a parrot repeating Most 's views " and resolved to express herself on the stage . Upon her return in New York , Most became furious and told her : " Who is not with me is against me ! " She left Freiheit and joined with another publication , Die <unk> . 
 Meanwhile , she had begun a friendship with Berkman , whom she affectionately called Sasha . Before long they became lovers and moved into a communal apartment with his cousin Modest " Fedya " Stein and Goldman 's friend , Helen <unk> , in rural Woodstock , Illinois . Although their relationship had numerous difficulties , Goldman and Berkman would share a close bond for decades , united by their anarchist principles and commitment to personal equality . 
 In 1892 , Goldman joined with Berkman and Stein in opening an ice cream shop in Worcester , Massachusetts . After only a few months of operating the shop , however , Goldman and Berkman were deflected from the venture by their involvement in the Homestead Strike . 
 = = = Homestead plot = = = 
 One of the first political moments that brought Berkman and Goldman together was the Homestead Strike . In June 1892 , a steel plant in Homestead , Pennsylvania owned by Andrew Carnegie became the focus of national attention when talks between the Carnegie Steel Company and the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers ( AA ) broke down . The factory 's manager was Henry Clay Frick , a fierce opponent of the union . When a final round of talks failed at the end of June , management closed the plant and locked out the workers , who immediately went on strike . <unk> were brought in and the company hired Pinkerton guards to protect them . On July 6 , a fight broke out between three hundred Pinkerton guards and a crowd of armed union workers . During the twelve @-@ hour gunfight , seven guards and nine strikers were killed . 
 When a majority of the nation 's newspapers came out in support of the strikers , Goldman and Berkman resolved to assassinate Frick , an action they expected would inspire the workers to revolt against the capitalist system . Berkman chose to carry out the assassination , and ordered Goldman to stay behind in order to explain his motives after he went to jail . He would be in charge of the deed ; she of the word . Berkman tried and failed to make a bomb , then set off for Pittsburgh to buy a gun and a suit of decent clothes . Goldman , meanwhile , decided to help fund the scheme through prostitution . Remembering the character of Sonya in Fyodor Dostoevsky 's novel Crime and Punishment ( 1866 ) , she mused : " She had become a prostitute in order to support her little brothers and sisters ... Sensitive Sonya could sell her body ; why not I ? " Once on the street , she caught the eye of a man who took her into a saloon , bought her a beer , gave her ten dollars , informed her she did not have " the knack " , and told her to quit the business . She was " too astounded for speech " . She wrote to Helena , claiming illness , and asked her for fifteen dollars . 
 On July 23 , Berkman gained access to Frick 's office with a concealed handgun and shot Frick three times , then stabbed him in the leg . A group of workers — far from joining in his attentat — beat Berkman unconscious , and he was carried away by the police . Berkman was convicted of attempted murder and sentenced to 22 years in prison ; his absence from her life was very difficult for Goldman . Convinced Goldman was involved in the plot , police raided her apartment and — finding no evidence — pressured her landlord into evicting her . Worse , the attentat had failed to rouse the masses : workers and anarchists alike condemned Berkman 's action . Johann Most , their former mentor , lashed out at Berkman and the assassination attempt . Furious at these attacks , Goldman brought a toy horsewhip to a public lecture and demanded , onstage , that Most explain his betrayal . He dismissed her , whereupon she struck him with the whip , broke it on her knee , and hurled the pieces at him . She later regretted her assault , confiding to a friend : " At the age of twenty @-@ three , one does not reason . " 
 = = = " <unk> to riot " = = = 
 When the Panic of 1893 struck in the following year , the United States suffered one of its worst economic crises ever . By year 's end , the unemployment rate was higher than 20 % , and " hunger demonstrations " sometimes gave way to riots . Goldman began speaking to crowds of frustrated men and women in New York . On August 21 , she spoke to a crowd of nearly 3 @,@ 000 people in Union Square , where she encouraged unemployed workers to take immediate action . Her exact words are unclear : undercover agents insist she ordered the crowd to " take everything ... by force " , while Goldman later recounted this message : " Well then , demonstrate before the palaces of the rich ; demand work . If they do not give you work , demand bread . If they deny you both , take bread . " Later in court , Detective @-@ Sergeant Charles Jacobs offered yet another version of her speech . 
 A week later she was arrested in Philadelphia and returned to New York City for trial , charged with " inciting to riot " . During the train ride , Jacobs offered to drop the charges against her if she would inform on other radicals in the area . She responded by throwing a glass of ice water in his face . As she awaited trial , Goldman was visited by Nellie Bly , a reporter for the New York World . She spent two hours talking to Goldman , and wrote a positive article about the woman she described as a " modern Joan of Arc " . 
 Despite this positive publicity , the jury was persuaded by Jacobs ' testimony and scared by Goldman 's politics . The assistant District Attorney questioned Goldman about her anarchism , as well as her atheism ; the judge spoke of her as " a dangerous woman " . She was sentenced to one year in the Blackwell 's Island Penitentiary . Once inside she suffered an attack of rheumatism and was sent to the infirmary ; there she befriended a visiting doctor and began studying medicine . She also read dozens of books , including works by the American activist @-@ writers Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau ; novelist Nathaniel Hawthorne ; poet Walt Whitman , and philosopher John Stuart Mill . When she was released after ten months , a raucous crowd of nearly three thousand people greeted her at the Thalia Theater in New York City . She soon became swamped with requests for interviews and lectures . 
 To make money , Goldman decided to pursue the medical work she had studied in prison . However , her preferred fields of specialization — midwifery and massage — were not available to nursing students in the US . Thus , she sailed to Europe , lecturing in London , Glasgow , and Edinburgh . She met with renowned anarchists like Errico Malatesta , Louise Michel , and Peter Kropotkin . In Vienna , she received two diplomas and put them immediately to use back in the US . Alternating between lectures and midwifery , she conducted the first cross @-@ country tour by an anarchist speaker . In November 1899 she returned to Europe , where she met the anarchist Hippolyte Havel , with whom she went to France and helped organize the International Anarchist Congress on the outskirts of Paris . 
 = = = McKinley assassination = = = 
 On September 6 , 1901 , Leon Czolgosz , an unemployed factory worker and registered Republican with a history of mental illness , shot US President William McKinley twice during a public speaking event in Buffalo , New York . McKinley was hit in the breastbone and stomach , and died eight days later . Czolgosz was arrested , and interrogated around the clock . During interrogation he claimed to be an Anarchist and said he had been inspired to act after attending a speech held by Goldman . The authorities used this as a pretext to charge Goldman with planning McKinley 's assassination . They tracked her to a residence in Chicago she shared with Havel , as well as Mary and Abe Isaak , an anarchist couple . Goldman was arrested , along with Abe Isaak , Havel , and ten other anarchists . 
 Earlier , Czolgosz had tried but failed to become friends with Goldman and her companions . During a talk in Cleveland , Czolgosz had approached Goldman and asked her advice on which books he should read . In July 1901 , he had appeared at the Isaak house , asking a series of unusual questions . They assumed he was an infiltrator , like a number of police agents sent to spy on radical groups . They had remained distant from him , and Abe Isaak sent a notice to associates warning of " another spy " . 
 Although Czolgosz repeatedly denied Goldman 's involvement , the police held her in close custody , subjecting her to what she called the " third degree " . She explained their distrust of him , and it was clear she had not had any significant contact with Czolgosz . No evidence was found linking Goldman to the attack , and she was eventually released after two weeks of detention . Before McKinley died , Goldman offered to provide nursing care , referring to him as " merely a human being " . Czolgosz , despite considerable evidence of mental illness , was convicted of murder and executed . 
 Throughout her detention and after her release , Goldman steadfastly refused to condemn Czolgosz 's actions , standing virtually alone in doing so . Friends and supporters — including Berkman — urged her to quit his cause . But Goldman defended Czolgosz as a " supersensitive being " and chastised other anarchists for abandoning him . She was vilified in the press as the " high priestess of anarchy " , while many newspapers declared the anarchist movement responsible for the murder . In the wake of these events , socialism gained support over anarchism among US radicals . McKinley 's successor , Theodore Roosevelt , declared his intent to crack down " not only against anarchists , but against all active and passive sympathizers with anarchists " . 
 = = = Mother Earth and Berkman 's release = = = 
 After Czolgosz 's execution , Goldman withdrew from the world . <unk> by her fellow anarchists , vilified by the press , and separated from her love , she retreated into anonymity and nursing . " It was bitter and hard to face life anew , " she wrote later . Using the name E. G. Smith , she vanished from public life and took on a series of private nursing jobs . When the US Congress passed the Anarchist Exclusion Act , however , a new wave of activism rose to oppose it , carrying Goldman back into the movement . A coalition of people and organizations across the left end of the political spectrum opposed the law on grounds that it violated freedom of speech , and she had the nation 's ear once again . 
 When an English anarchist named John Turner was arrested under the Anarchist Exclusion Act and threatened with deportation , Goldman joined forces with the Free Speech League to champion his cause . The league enlisted the aid of Clarence Darrow and Edgar Lee Masters , who took Turner 's case to the US Supreme Court . Although Turner and the League lost , Goldman considered it a victory of propaganda . She had returned to anarchist activism , but it was taking its toll on her . " I never felt so weighed down , " she wrote to Berkman . " I fear I am forever doomed to remain public property and to have my life worn out through the care for the lives of others . " 
 In 1906 , Goldman decided to start a publication of her own , " a place of expression for the young idealists in arts and letters " . Mother Earth was staffed by a cadre of radical activists , including Hippolyte Havel , Max <unk> , and Leonard Abbott . In addition to publishing original works by its editors and anarchists around the world , Mother Earth reprinted selections from a variety of writers . These included the French philosopher Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin , German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche , and British writer Mary Wollstonecraft . Goldman wrote frequently about anarchism , politics , labor issues , atheism , sexuality , and feminism . 
 On May 18 of the same year , Alexander Berkman was released from prison . Carrying a bouquet of roses , she met him on the platform and found herself " seized by terror and pity " as she beheld his gaunt , pale form . Neither was able to speak ; they returned to her home in silence . For weeks , he struggled to readjust to life on the outside ; an abortive speaking tour ended in failure , and in Cleveland he purchased a revolver with the intent of killing himself . He returned to New York , however , and learned that Goldman had been arrested with a group of activists meeting to reflect on Czolgosz . <unk> anew by this violation of freedom of assembly , he declared " My resurrection has come ! " and set about securing their release . 
 Berkman took the helm of Mother Earth in 1907 , while Goldman toured the country to raise funds to keep it functional . Editing the magazine was a revitalizing experience for Berkman ; his relationship with Goldman faltered , however , and he had an affair with a 15 @-@ year @-@ old anarchist named Becky <unk> . Goldman was pained by his rejection of her , but considered it a consequence of his prison experience . Later that year she served as a delegate from the US to the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam . Anarchists and syndicalists from around the world gathered to sort out the tension between the two ideologies , but no decisive agreement was reached . Goldman returned to the US and continued speaking to large audiences . 
 = = = Reitman , essays , and birth control = = = 
 For the next ten years , Goldman traveled around the country nonstop , delivering lectures and agitating for anarchism . The coalitions formed in opposition to the Anarchist Exclusion Act had given her an appreciation for reaching out to those of other political persuasions . When the US Justice Department sent spies to observe , they reported the meetings as " packed " . Writers , journalists , artists , judges , and workers from across the spectrum spoke of her " magnetic power " , her " convincing presence " , her " force , eloquence , and fire " . 
 In the spring of 1908 , Goldman met and fell in love with Ben Reitman , the so @-@ called " Hobo doctor " . Having grown up in Chicago 's tenderloin district , Reitman spent several years as a drifter before attaining a medical degree from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Chicago . As a doctor , he attended to people suffering from poverty and illness , particularly venereal diseases . He and Goldman began an affair ; they shared a commitment to free love , but whereas Reitman took a variety of lovers , Goldman did not . She tried to reconcile her feelings of jealousy with a belief in freedom of the heart , but found it difficult . 
 Two years later , Goldman began feeling frustrated with lecture audiences . She yearned to " reach the few who really want to learn , rather than the many who come to be amused " . Thus she collected a series of speeches and items she had written for Mother Earth and published a book called Anarchism and Other Essays . Covering a wide variety of topics , Goldman tries to represent " the mental and soul struggles of twenty @-@ one years " . In addition to a comprehensive look at anarchism and its criticisms , the book includes essays on patriotism , women 's suffrage , marriage , and prisons . 
 When Margaret Sanger , an advocate of access to contraception , coined the term " birth control " and disseminated information about various methods in the June 1914 issue of her magazine The Woman Rebel , she received aggressive support from Goldman , who had already been an active in efforts to increase birth control access for several years . In 1916 , Goldman was arrested for giving lessons in public on how to use contraceptives . Sanger , too , was arrested under the Comstock Law , which prohibited the dissemination of " obscene , lewd , or lascivious articles " — including information relating to birth control . Although they later split from Sanger over charges of insufficient support , Goldman and Reitman distributed copies of Sanger 's pamphlet Family Limitation ( along with a similar essay of Reitman 's ) . In 1915 Goldman conducted a nationwide speaking tour in part to raise awareness about contraception options . Although the nation 's attitude toward the topic seemed to be liberalizing , Goldman was arrested on February 11 , 1916 , as she was about to give another public lecture . Goldman was charged with violating the Comstock Law . Refusing to pay a $ 100 fine , Goldman spent two weeks in a prison workhouse , which she saw as an " opportunity " to reconnect with those rejected by society . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Although US President Woodrow Wilson was re @-@ elected in 1916 under the slogan " He kept us out of the war " , at the start of his second term he decided that Germany 's continued deployment of unrestricted submarine warfare was sufficient cause for the US to enter World War I. Shortly afterward , Congress passed the Selective Service Act of 1917 , which required all males aged 21 – 30 to register for military conscription . Goldman saw the decision as an exercise in militarist aggression , driven by capitalism . She declared in Mother Earth her intent to resist conscription , and to oppose US involvement in the war . 
 To this end , she and Berkman organized the No Conscription League of New York , which proclaimed : " We oppose conscription because we are internationalists , <unk> , and opposed to all wars waged by capitalistic governments . " The group became a vanguard for anti @-@ draft activism , and chapters began to appear in other cities . When police began raiding the group 's public events to find young men who had not registered for the draft , however , Goldman and others focused their efforts on spreading pamphlets and other written work . In the midst of the nation 's patriotic fervor , many elements of the political left refused to support the League 's efforts . The Women 's Peace Party , for example , ceased its opposition to the war once the US entered it . The Socialist Party of America took an official stance against US involvement , but supported Wilson in most of his activities . 
 On June 15 , 1917 , Goldman and Berkman were arrested during a raid of their offices which yielded " a wagon load of anarchist records and propaganda " for the authorities . The New York Times reported that Goldman asked to change into a more appropriate outfit , and emerged in a gown of " royal purple " . The pair were charged with conspiracy to " induce persons not to register " under the newly enacted Espionage Act , and were held on US $ 25 @,@ 000 bail each . Defending herself and Berkman during their trial , Goldman invoked the First Amendment , asking how the government could claim to fight for democracy abroad while suppressing free speech at home : 
 We say that if America has entered the war to make the world safe for democracy , she must first make democracy safe in America . How else is the world to take America seriously , when democracy at home is daily being outraged , free speech suppressed , peaceable assemblies broken up by overbearing and brutal gangsters in uniform ; when free press is curtailed and every independent opinion gagged ? Verily , poor as we are in democracy , how can we give of it to the world ? 
 However , the jury found Goldman and Berkman guilty . Judge Julius <unk> Mayer imposed the maximum sentence : two years ' imprisonment , a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine each , and the possibility of deportation after their release from prison . As she was transported to Missouri State Penitentiary ( now Jefferson City Correctional Center ) , Goldman wrote to a friend : " Two years imprisonment for having made an uncompromising stand for one 's ideal . Why that is a small price . " 
 In prison , she was again assigned to work as a seamstress , under the eye of a " miserable gutter @-@ snipe of a 21 @-@ year @-@ old boy paid to get results " . She met the socialist Kate Richards O 'Hare , who had also been imprisoned under the Espionage Act . Although they differed on political strategy — Kate O 'Hare believed in voting to achieve state power — the two women came together to agitate for better conditions among prisoners . Goldman also met and became friends with Gabriella <unk> <unk> , an anarchist and follower of Luigi <unk> . <unk> had been arrested transporting a satchel filled with dynamite on a Chicago @-@ bound train . She had refused to cooperate with authorities , and was sent to prison for 14 months . Working together to make life better for the other inmates , the three women became known as " The Trinity " . Goldman was released on September 27 , 1919 . 
 = = = Deportation = = = 
 Goldman and Berkman were released from prison during America 's Red Scare of 1919 – 20 , when public anxiety about wartime pro @-@ German activities had morphed into a pervasive fear of Bolshevism and the prospect of an imminent radical revolution . Attorney General Alexander Mitchell Palmer and J. Edgar Hoover , head of the US Department of Justice 's General Intelligence Division , were intent on using the Anarchist Exclusion Act and its 1918 expansion to deport any non @-@ citizens they could identify as advocates of anarchy or revolution . " Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman , " Hoover wrote while they were in prison , " are , beyond doubt , two of the most dangerous anarchists in this country and return to the community will result in undue harm . " 
 At her deportation hearing on October 27 , she refused to answer questions about her beliefs on the grounds that her American citizenship invalidated any attempt to deport her under the Anarchist Exclusion Act , which could be enforced only against non @-@ citizens of the US . She presented a written statement instead : " Today so @-@ called aliens are deported . Tomorrow native Americans will be banished . Already some <unk> are suggesting that native American sons to whom democracy is a sacred ideal should be exiled . " Louis Post at the Department of Labor , which had ultimate authority over deportation decisions , determined that the revocation of her husband 's American citizenship in 1908 had revoked hers as well . After initially promising a court fight , she decided not to appeal his ruling . 
 The Labor Department included Goldman and Berkman among 249 aliens it deported en masse , mostly people with only vague associations with radical groups who had been swept up in government raids in November . Buford , a ship the press nicknamed the " Soviet Ark , " sailed from the Army 's New York Port of Embarkation on December 21 . Some 58 enlisted men and four officers provided security on the journey and pistols were distributed to the crew . Most of the press approved enthusiastically . The Cleveland Plain Dealer wrote : " It is hoped and expected that other vessels , larger , more commodious , carrying similar cargoes , will follow in her wake . " The ship landed her charges in Hanko , Finland on Saturday , January 17 , 1920 . Upon arrival in Finland , authorities there conducted the deportees to the Russian frontier under a flag of truce . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Goldman initially viewed the Bolshevik revolution in a positive light . She wrote in Mother Earth that despite its dependence on Communist government , it represented " the most fundamental , far @-@ reaching and all @-@ embracing principles of human freedom and of economic well @-@ being " . By the time she neared Europe , however , she expressed fears about what was to come . She was worried about the ongoing Russian Civil War and the possibility of being seized by anti @-@ Bolshevik forces . The state , anti @-@ capitalist though it was , also posed a threat . " I could never in my life work within the confines of the State , " she wrote to her niece , " Bolshevist or otherwise . " 
 She quickly discovered that her fears were justified . Days after returning to Petrograd ( Saint Petersburg ) , she was shocked to hear a party official refer to free speech as a " bourgeois superstition " . As she and Berkman traveled around the country , they found repression , mismanagement , and corruption instead of the equality and worker empowerment they had dreamed of . Those who questioned the government were demonized as counter @-@ revolutionaries , and workers labored under severe conditions . They met with Vladimir Lenin , who assured them that government suppression of press liberties was justified . He told them : " There can be no free speech in a revolutionary period . " Berkman was more willing to forgive the government 's actions in the name of " historical necessity " , but he eventually joined Goldman in opposing the Soviet state 's authority . 
 In March 1921 , strikes erupted in Petrograd when workers took to the streets demanding better food rations and more union autonomy . Goldman and Berkman felt a responsibility to support the strikers , stating : " To remain silent now is impossible , even criminal . " The unrest spread to the port town of Kronstadt , where a military response was ordered . In the fighting that ensued , approximately 1 @,@ 000 rebelling sailors and soldiers were killed and two thousand more were arrested . In the wake of these events , Goldman and Berkman decided there was no future in the country for them . " More and more " , she wrote , " we have come to the conclusion that we can do nothing here . And as we can not keep up a life of inactivity much longer we have decided to leave . " 
 In December 1921 , they left the country and went to the Latvian capital city of Riga . The US commissioner in that city wired officials in Washington DC , who began requesting information from other governments about the couple 's activities . After a short trip to Stockholm , they moved to Berlin for several years ; during this time she agreed to write a series of articles about her time in Russia for Joseph Pulitzer 's newspaper , the New York World . These were later collected and published in book form as My Disillusionment in Russia ( 1923 ) and My Further Disillusionment in Russia ( 1924 ) . The titles of these books were added by the publishers to be scintillating and Goldman protested , albeit in vain . 
 = = = England , Canada , and France = = = 
 Goldman found it difficult to acclimate to the German leftist community . Communists despised her outspokenness about Soviet repression ; liberals derided her radicalism . While Berkman remained in Berlin helping Russian exiles , she moved to London in September 1924 . Upon her arrival , the novelist Rebecca West arranged a reception dinner for her , attended by philosopher Bertrand Russell , novelist H. G. Wells , and more than two hundred others . When she spoke of her dissatisfaction with the Soviet government , the audience was shocked . Some left the gathering ; others berated her for prematurely criticizing the Communist experiment . Later , in a letter , Russell declined to support her efforts at systemic change in the Soviet Union and ridiculed her anarchist idealism . 
 In 1925 , the spectre of deportation loomed again , but a Scottish anarchist named James Colton offered to marry her and provide British citizenship . Although they were only distant acquaintances , she accepted and they were married on June 27 , 1925 . Her new status gave her peace of mind , and allowed her to travel to France and Canada . Life in London was stressful for Goldman ; she wrote to Berkman : " I am awfully tired and so lonely and heartsick . It is a dreadful feeling to come back here from lectures and find not a kindred soul , no one who cares whether one is dead or alive . " She worked on analytical studies of drama , expanding on the work she had published in 1914 . But the audiences were " awful " and she never finished her second book on the subject . 
 Goldman traveled to Canada in 1927 , just in time to receive news of the impending executions of Italian anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti in Boston . Angered by the many irregularities of the case , she saw it as another travesty of justice in the US . She longed to join the mass demonstrations in Boston ; memories of the Haymarket affair overwhelmed her , compounded by her isolation . " Then , " she wrote , " I had my life before me to take up the cause for those killed . Now I have nothing . " 
 In 1928 , she began writing her autobiography , with the support of a group of admirers , including journalist H. L. Mencken , poet Edna St. Vincent Millay , novelist Theodore Dreiser and art collector Peggy Guggenheim , who raised $ 4 @,@ 000 for her . She secured a cottage in the French coastal city of Saint @-@ Tropez and spent two years recounting her life . Berkman offered sharply critical feedback , which she eventually incorporated at the price of a strain on their relationship . Goldman intended the book , Living My Life , as a single volume for a price the working class could afford ( she urged no more than $ 5 @.@ 00 ) ; her publisher Alfred A. Knopf , however , released it as two volumes sold together for $ 7 @.@ 50 . Goldman was furious , but unable to force a change . Due in large part to the Great Depression , sales were sluggish despite keen interest from libraries around the US . Critical reviews were generally enthusiastic ; The New York Times , The New Yorker , and Saturday Review of Literature all listed it as one of the year 's top non @-@ fiction books . 
 In 1933 , Goldman received permission to lecture in the United States under the condition that she speak only about drama and her autobiography — but not current political events . She returned to New York on February 2 , 1934 to generally positive press coverage — except from Communist publications . Soon she was surrounded by admirers and friends , besieged with invitations to talks and interviews . Her visa expired in May , and she went to Toronto in order to file another request to visit the US . However , this second attempt was denied . She stayed in Canada , writing articles for US publications . 
 In February and March 1936 , Berkman underwent a pair of prostate gland operations . Recuperating in Nice and cared for by his companion , Emmy Eckstein , he missed Goldman 's sixty @-@ seventh birthday in Saint @-@ Tropez in June . She wrote in sadness , but he never read the letter ; she received a call in the middle of the night that Berkman was in great distress . She left for Nice immediately but when she arrived that morning , Goldman found that he had shot himself and was in a nearly comatose paralysis . He died later that evening . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 In July 1936 , the Spanish Civil War started after an attempted coup d 'état by parts of the Spanish Army against the government of the Second Spanish Republic . At the same time , the Spanish anarchists , fighting against the Nationalist forces , started an anarchist revolution . Goldman was invited to Barcelona and in an instant , as she wrote to her niece , " the crushing weight that was pressing down on my heart since Sasha 's death left me as by magic " . She was welcomed by the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ( CNT ) and Federación <unk> <unk> ( FAI ) organizations , and for the first time in her life lived in a community run by and for anarchists , according to true anarchist principles . " In all my life " , she wrote later , " I have not met with such warm hospitality , comradeship and solidarity . " After touring a series of collectives in the province of Huesca , she told a group of workers : " Your revolution will destroy forever [ the notion ] that anarchism stands for chaos . " She began editing the weekly CNT @-@ FAI Information Bulletin and responded to English @-@ language mail . 
 Goldman began to worry about the future of Spain 's anarchism when the CNT @-@ FAI joined a coalition government in 1937 — against the core anarchist principle of abstaining from state structures — and , more distressingly , made repeated concessions to Communist forces in the name of uniting against fascism . She wrote that cooperating with Communists in Spain was " a denial of our comrades in Stalin 's concentration camps " . Russia , meanwhile , refused to send weapons to anarchist forces , and disinformation campaigns were being waged against the anarchists across Europe and the US . Her faith in the movement unshaken , Goldman returned to London as an official representative of the CNT @-@ FAI . 
 Delivering lectures and giving interviews , Goldman enthusiastically supported the Spanish anarcho @-@ syndicalists . She wrote regularly for Spain and the World , a biweekly newspaper focusing on the civil war . In May 1937 , however , Communist @-@ led forces attacked anarchist strongholds and broke up agrarian collectives . Newspapers in England and elsewhere accepted the timeline of events offered by the Second Spanish Republic at face value . British journalist George Orwell , present for the crackdown , wrote : " [ T ] he accounts of the Barcelona riots in May ... beat everything I have ever seen for lying . " 
 Goldman returned to Spain in September , but the CNT @-@ FAI appeared to her like people " in a burning house " . Worse , anarchists and other radicals around the world refused to support their cause . The Nationalist forces declared victory in Spain just before she returned to London . Frustrated by England 's repressive atmosphere — which she called " more fascist than the fascists " — she returned to Canada in 1939 . Her service to the anarchist cause in Spain was not forgotten , however . On her seventieth birthday , the former Secretary @-@ General of the CNT @-@ FAI , Mariano Vázquez , sent a message to her from Paris , praising her for her contributions and naming her as " our spiritual mother " . She called it " the most beautiful tribute I have ever received " . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 As the events preceding World War II began to unfold in Europe , Goldman reiterated her opposition to wars waged by governments . " [ M ] uch as I loathe Hitler , Mussolini , Stalin and Franco " , she wrote to a friend , " I would not support a war against them and for the democracies which , in the last analysis , are only Fascist in disguise . " She felt that Britain and France had missed their opportunity to oppose fascism , and that the coming war would only result in " a new form of madness in the world " . This position was vastly unpopular , as Hitler 's attacks on Jewish communities reverberated throughout the Jewish diaspora . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On Saturday , February 17 , 1940 , Goldman suffered a debilitating stroke . She became paralyzed on her right side , and although her hearing was unaffected , she could not speak . As one friend described it : " Just to think that here was Emma , the greatest orator in America , unable to utter one word . " For three months she improved slightly , receiving visitors and on one occasion gesturing to her address book to signal that a friend might find friendly contacts during a trip to Mexico . She suffered another stroke on May 8 , however , and on May 14 she died in Toronto , aged 70 . 
 The US Immigration and Naturalization Service allowed her body to be brought back to the United States . She was buried in German Waldheim Cemetery ( now named Forest Home Cemetery ) in Forest Park , Illinois , a western suburb of Chicago , among the graves of other labor and social activists including Ben Reitman and those executed after the Haymarket affair . The bas relief on her grave marker was created by sculptor Jo Davidson . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Goldman spoke and wrote extensively on a wide variety of issues . While she rejected orthodoxy and fundamentalist thinking , she was an important contributor to several fields of modern political philosophy . She was influenced by many diverse thinkers and writers , including Mikhail Bakunin , Henry David Thoreau , Peter Kropotkin , Ralph Waldo Emerson , Nikolai Chernyshevsky , and Mary Wollstonecraft . Another philosopher who influenced Goldman was Friedrich Nietzsche . In her autobiography , she wrote : " Nietzsche was not a social theorist , but a poet , a rebel , and innovator . His aristocracy was neither of birth nor of purse ; it was the spirit . In that respect Nietzsche was an anarchist , and all true anarchists were aristocrats . " 
 = = = Anarchism = = = 
 Anarchism was central to Goldman 's view of the world and she is today considered one of the most important figures in the history of anarchism . First drawn to it during the persecution of anarchists after the 1886 Haymarket affair , she wrote and spoke regularly on behalf of anarchism . In the title essay of her book Anarchism and Other Essays , she wrote : 
 Anarchism , then , really stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion ; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property ; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government . Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social wealth ; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life , according to individual desires , tastes , and inclinations . 
 Goldman 's anarchism was intensely personal . She believed it was necessary for anarchist thinkers to live their beliefs , demonstrating their convictions with every action and word . " I don 't care if a man 's theory for tomorrow is correct , " she once wrote . " I care if his spirit of today is correct . " Anarchism and free association were to her logical responses to the confines of government control and capitalism . " It seems to me that these are the new forms of life , " she wrote , " and that they will take the place of the old , not by preaching or voting , but by living them . " 
 At the same time , she believed that the movement on behalf of human liberty must be staffed by liberated humans . While dancing among fellow anarchists one evening , she was chided by an associate for her carefree demeanor . In her autobiography , Goldman wrote : 
 I told him to mind his own business , I was tired of having the Cause constantly thrown in my face . I did not believe that a Cause which stood for a beautiful ideal , for anarchism , for release and freedom from conventions and prejudice , should demand denial of life and joy . I insisted that our Cause could not expect me to behave as a nun and that the movement should not be turned into a cloister . If it meant that , I did not want it . " I want freedom , the right to self @-@ expression , everybody 's right to beautiful , radiant things . " 
 = = = = Tactical uses of violence = = = = 
 Goldman , in her political youth , held targeted violence to be a legitimate means of revolutionary struggle . Goldman at the time believed that the use of violence , while distasteful , could be justified in relation to the social benefits it might accrue . She advocated propaganda of the deed — attentat , or violence carried out to encourage the masses to revolt . She supported her partner Alexander Berkman 's attempt to kill industrialist Henry Clay Frick , and even begged him to allow her to participate . She believed that Frick 's actions during the Homestead strike were reprehensible and that his murder would produce a positive result for working people . " Yes , " she wrote later in her autobiography , " the end in this case justified the means . " While she never gave explicit approval of Leon Czolgosz 's assassination of US President William McKinley , she defended his ideals and believed actions like his were a natural consequence of repressive institutions . As she wrote in " The Psychology of Political Violence " : " the accumulated forces in our social and economic life , culminating in an act of violence , are similar to the terrors of the atmosphere , manifested in storm and lightning . " 
 Her experiences in Russia led her to qualify her earlier belief that revolutionary ends might justify violent means . In the afterword to My Disillusionment in Russia , she wrote : " There is no greater fallacy than the belief that aims and purposes are one thing , while methods and tactics are another .... The means employed become , through individual habit and social practice , part and parcel of the final purpose .... " In the same chapter , however , Goldman affirmed that " Revolution is indeed a violent process , " and noted that violence was the " tragic inevitability of revolutionary upheavals ... " Some misinterpreted her comments on the Bolshevik terror as a rejection of all militant force , but Goldman corrected this in the preface to the first US edition of My Disillusionment in Russia : 
 The argument that destruction and terror are part of revolution I do not dispute . I know that in the past every great political and social change necessitated violence ... Black slavery might still be a legalized institution in the United States but for the militant spirit of the John Browns . I have never denied that violence is inevitable , nor do I <unk> it now . Yet it is one thing to employ violence in combat , as a means of defense . It is quite another thing to make a principle of terrorism , to institutionalize it , to assign it the most vital place in the social struggle . Such terrorism begets counter @-@ revolution and in turn itself becomes counter @-@ revolutionary . 
 Goldman saw the militarization of Soviet society not as a result of armed resistance per se , but of the statist vision of the Bolsheviks , writing that " an insignificant minority bent on creating an absolute State is necessarily driven to oppression and terrorism . " 
 = = = Capitalism and labor = = = 
 Goldman believed that the economic system of capitalism was incompatible with human liberty . " The only demand that property recognizes , " she wrote in Anarchism and Other Essays , " is its own gluttonous appetite for greater wealth , because wealth means power ; the power to subdue , to crush , to exploit , the power to enslave , to outrage , to degrade . " She also argued that capitalism dehumanized workers , " turning the producer into a mere particle of a machine , with less will and decision than his master of steel and iron . " 
 Originally opposed to anything less than complete revolution , Goldman was challenged during one talk by an elderly worker in the front row . In her autobiography , she wrote : 
 He said that he understood my impatience with such small demands as a few hours less a day , or a few dollars more a week .... But what were men of his age to do ? They were not likely to live to see the ultimate overthrow of the capitalist system . Were they also to forgo the release of perhaps two hours a day from the hated work ? That was all they could hope to see realized in their lifetime . 
 Goldman realized that smaller efforts for improvement such as higher wages and shorter hours could be part of a social revolution . 
 = = = The state – militarism , prison , voting , speech = = = 
 Goldman viewed the state as essentially and inevitably a tool of control and domination . As a result , Goldman believed that voting was useless at best and dangerous at worst . Voting , she wrote , provided an illusion of participation while masking the true structures of decision @-@ making . Instead , Goldman advocated targeted resistance in the form of strikes , protests , and " direct action against the invasive , meddlesome authority of our moral code " . She maintained an anti @-@ voting position even when many anarcho @-@ syndicalists in 1930s Spain voted for the formation of a liberal republic . Goldman wrote that any power anarchists wielded as a voting bloc should instead be used to strike across the country . She disagreed with the movement for women 's suffrage , which demanded the right of women to vote . In her essay " Woman Suffrage " , she ridicules the idea that women 's involvement would infuse the democratic state with a more just orientation : " As if women have not sold their votes , as if women politicians cannot be bought ! " She agreed with the suffragists ' assertion that women are equal to men , but disagreed that their participation alone would make the state more just . " To assume , therefore , that she would succeed in purifying something which is not susceptible of purification , is to credit her with supernatural powers . " 
 Goldman was also a passionate critic of the prison system , critiquing both the treatment of prisoners and the social causes of crime . Goldman viewed crime as a natural outgrowth of an unjust economic system , and in her essay " Prisons : A Social Crime and Failure " , she quoted liberally from the 19th @-@ century authors Fyodor Dostoevsky and Oscar Wilde on prisons , and wrote : 
 Year after year the gates of prison hells return to the world an emaciated , deformed , will @-@ less , shipwrecked crew of humanity , with the Cain mark on their foreheads , their hopes crushed , all their natural inclinations thwarted . With nothing but hunger and inhumanity to greet them , these victims soon sink back into crime as the only possibility of existence . 
 Goldman was a committed war resister , believing that wars were fought by the state on behalf of capitalists . She was particularly opposed to the draft , viewing it as one of the worst of the state 's forms of coercion , and was one of the founders of the No @-@ Conscription League — for which she was ultimately arrested ( 1917 ) , imprisoned and deported ( 1919 ) . 
 Goldman was routinely surveilled , arrested , and imprisoned for her speech and organizing activities in support of workers and various strikes , access to birth control , and in opposition to World War I. As a result , she became active in the early 20th century free speech movement , seeing freedom of expression as a fundamental necessity for achieving social change . Her outspoken championship of her ideals , in the face of persistent arrests , inspired Roger Baldwin , one of the founders of the American Civil Liberties Union . Goldman 's and Reitman 's experiences in the San Diego free speech fight ( 1912 ) were notorious examples of state and capitalist repression of the Industrial Workers of the World 's campaign of free speech fights . 
 = = = Feminism and sexuality = = = 
 Although she was hostile to the suffragist goals of first @-@ wave feminism , Goldman advocated passionately for the rights of women , and is today heralded as a founder of anarcha @-@ feminism , which challenges patriarchy as a hierarchy to be resisted alongside state power and class divisions . In 1897 , she wrote : " I demand the independence of woman , her right to support herself ; to live for herself ; to love whomever she pleases , or as many as she pleases . I demand freedom for both sexes , freedom of action , freedom in love and freedom in motherhood . " 
 A nurse by training , Goldman was an early advocate for educating women concerning contraception . Like many feminists of her time , she saw abortion as a tragic consequence of social conditions , and birth control as a positive alternative . Goldman was also an advocate of free love , and a strong critic of marriage . She saw early feminists as confined in their scope and bounded by social forces of Puritanism and capitalism . She wrote : " We are in need of unhampered growth out of old traditions and habits . The movement for women 's emancipation has so far made but the first step in that direction . " 
 Goldman was also an outspoken critic of prejudice against homosexuals . Her belief that social liberation should extend to gay men and lesbians was virtually unheard of at the time , even among anarchists . As German sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld wrote , " she was the first and only woman , indeed the first and only American , to take up the defense of homosexual love before the general public . " In numerous speeches and letters , she defended the right of gay men and lesbians to love as they pleased and condemned the fear and stigma associated with homosexuality . As Goldman wrote in a letter to Hirschfeld , " It is a tragedy , I feel , that people of a different sexual type are caught in a world which shows so little understanding for homosexuals and is so crassly indifferent to the various gradations and variations of gender and their great significance in life . " 
 = = = Atheism = = = 
 A committed atheist , Goldman viewed religion as another instrument of control and domination . Her essay " The Philosophy of Atheism " quoted Bakunin at length on the subject and added : 
 Consciously or unconsciously , most theists see in gods and devils , heaven and hell , reward and punishment , a whip to lash the people into obedience , meekness and contentment .... The philosophy of Atheism expresses the expansion and growth of the human mind . The philosophy of theism , if we can call it a philosophy , is static and fixed . 
 In essays like " The Hypocrisy of Puritanism " and a speech entitled " The Failure of Christianity " , Goldman made more than a few enemies among religious communities by attacking their moralistic attitudes and efforts to control human behavior . She blamed Christianity for " the perpetuation of a slave society " , arguing that it dictated individuals ' actions on Earth and offered poor people a false promise of a plentiful future in heaven . She was also critical of Zionism , which she saw as another failed experiment in state control . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Goldman was well known during her life , described as — among other things — " the most dangerous woman in America " . After her death and through the middle part of the 20th century , her fame faded . Scholars and historians of anarchism viewed her as a great speaker and activist , but did not regard her as a philosophical or theoretical thinker on par with , for instance , Kropotkin . 
 In 1970 , Dover Press reissued Goldman 's biography , Living My Life , and in 1972 , feminist writer Alix Kates Shulman issued a collection of Goldman 's writing and speeches , Red Emma Speaks . These works brought Goldman 's life and writings to a larger audience , and she was in particular lionized by the women 's movement of the late 20th century . In 1973 , Shulman was asked by a printer friend for a quotation by Goldman for use on a T @-@ shirt . She sent him the selection from Living My Life about " the right to self @-@ expression , everybody 's right to beautiful , radiant things " , recounting that she had been admonished " that it did not behoove an agitator to dance " . The printer created a statement based on these sentiments that has become one of Goldman 's most famous quotations , even though she probably never said or wrote it as such : " If I can 't dance I don 't want to be in your revolution . " Variations of this saying have appeared on thousands of T @-@ shirts , buttons , posters , bumper stickers , coffee mugs , hats , and other items . 
 The women 's movement of the 1970s that " rediscovered " Goldman was accompanied by a resurgent anarchist movement , beginning in the late 1960s , which also reinvigorated scholarly attention to earlier anarchists . The growth of feminism also initiated some reevaluation of Goldman 's philosophical work , with scholars pointing out the significance of Goldman 's contributions to anarchist thought in her time . Goldman 's belief in the value of aesthetics , for example , can be seen in the later influences of anarchism and the arts . Similarly , Goldman is now given credit for significantly influencing and broadening the scope of activism on issues of sexual liberty , reproductive rights , and freedom of expression . 
 Goldman has been depicted in numerous works of fiction over the years , including Warren Beatty 's 1981 film Reds , in which she was portrayed by Maureen Stapleton , who won an Academy Award for her performance . Goldman has also been a character in two Broadway musicals , Ragtime and Assassins . Plays depicting Goldman 's life include Howard Zinn 's play , Emma ; Martin Duberman 's Mother Earth ( 1991 ) ; Jessica Litwak 's Emma Goldman : Love , Anarchy , and Other Affairs ( Goldman 's relationship with Berkman and her arrest in connection with McKinley 's assassination ) ; Lynn <unk> 's Love Ben , Love Emma ( Goldman 's relationship with Reitman ) ; and Carol Bolt 's Red Emma . Ethel Mannin 's 1941 novel Red Rose is also based on Goldman 's Life . 
 Goldman has been honored by a number of organizations named in her memory . The Emma Goldman Clinic , a women 's health center located in Iowa City , Iowa , selected Goldman as a namesake " in recognition of her challenging spirit . " Red Emma 's Bookstore Coffeehouse , an <unk> in Baltimore , Maryland adopted her name out of their belief " in the ideas and ideals that she fought for her entire life : free speech , sexual and racial equality and independence , the right to organize in our jobs and in our own lives , ideas and ideals that we continue to fight for , even today " . 
 Paul <unk> and his late wife Helen Hill co @-@ wrote the anarchist song " Emma Goldman " , which was performed and released by the band Piggy : The Calypso Orchestra of the Maritimes in 1999 . The song was later performed by <unk> ' new band The Troublemakers and released on their 2004 album Here Come The Troublemakers . 
 = = Works = = 
 Goldman was a prolific writer , penning countless pamphlets and articles on a diverse range of subjects . She authored six books , including an autobiography , Living My Life , and a biography of fellow anarchist Voltairine de Cleyre . 
 = = = Books written by Emma Goldman = = = 
 Anarchism and Other Essays . New York : Mother Earth Publishing Association , 1910 . 
 The Social Significance of the Modern Drama . Boston : Gorham Press , 1914 . 
 My Disillusionment in Russia . Garden City , New York : Doubleday , Page and Co . , 1923 . 
 My Further Disillusionment in Russia . Garden City , New York : Doubleday , Page and Co . , 1924 . 
 Living My Life . New York : Knopf , 1931 . 
 Voltairine de Cleyre . Berkeley Heights , New Jersey : Oriole Press , 1932 . 
 = = = Edited collections = = = 
 Red Emma Speaks : Selected Writings and Speeches . New York : Random House , 1972 . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Emma Goldman : A Documentary History Of The American Years , Volume 1 – Made for America , 1890 – 1901 . Berkeley : University of California Press , 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Emma Goldman : A Documentary History Of The American Years , Volume 2 – Making Speech Free , 1902 – 1909 . Berkeley : University of California Press , 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Emma Goldman : A Documentary History of the American Years , Volume 3 – Light and Shadows , 1910 – 1916 . Stanford : Stanford University Press , 2012 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8047 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 = = = Journal article = = = 
 Goldman , Emma ( 2002 ) [ 1910 ] . " The traffic in women " . Hastings Women 's Law Journal , symposium issue : Sexual Slavery : the Trafficking of Women and Girls into the United States for Sexual Exploitation ( University of California , Hastings College of the Law ) 13 ( 1 ) : 9 – 20 . Pdf . 
 = 1967 – 68 Manchester City F.C. season = 
 The 1967 – 68 season was Manchester City F.C. ' s seventy @-@ sixth season of league football , and second consecutive season in the Football League First Division . In the third full season under the management of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison , Manchester City were <unk> at the start of the season following a mid @-@ table finish in 1966 – 67 Following the signing of forward Francis Lee , the club embarked on an unbeaten run that saw the club challenge at the top of the table . A televised victory against Tottenham Hotspur in snowy conditions proved particularly notable , becoming known as the Ballet on Ice . 
 Going into the final match of the season , Manchester City led the table . A 4 – 3 win at Newcastle United clinched the club 's second league title , winning the First Division by two clear points over club rivals Manchester United . The league championship was the first trophy of the most successful period in Manchester City 's history . Under Mercer and Allison , the club won a further three trophies in the following two seasons . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 The 1966 – 67 season had been Manchester City 's first in the top flight after winning promotion from the Second Division in 1966 . A fifteenth @-@ place finish consolidated the club 's place in the division . Club captain Johnny Crossan struggled with injuries in 1966 – 67 , and was sold to Middlesbrough for £ 34 @,@ 500 in the close season . Tony Book succeeded him as captain . The club made no major signings before the start of the season , though Tony Coleman , a winger with a wild off @-@ field reputation , had arrived from Doncaster Rovers at the tail @-@ end of the 1966 – 67 season . Mercer had reservations about signing Coleman , but Allison convinced Mercer that he could pacify a man he once described as " the nightmare of a delirious probation officer " . City also attempted to sign England international goalkeeper Gordon Banks , but were outbid by Stoke City . 
 The team travelled to Europe in pre @-@ season , playing friendlies against Eintracht Braunschweig and Standard Liège . After returning to England they played Portsmouth at Fratton Park , winning 2 – 0 , and finished their preparations with a resounding home win against Borussia Dortmund . Between matches , the players followed a fitness plan created by former athlete Joe Lancaster , under instruction from Malcolm Allison . The training regime was initially unpopular with the players ; the severity of the first session caused some players to vomit . 
 = = Football League First Division = = 
 City 's season opened with a 0 – 0 draw at home to Liverpool . City were awarded a penalty , but new captain Tony Book hit it wide . Two defeats followed , at Southampton and Stoke . The Stoke defeat led to a tactical switch . Mike Summerbee , who played wide on the right at the start of the season , was moved to centre @-@ forward . The change reaped immediate dividends , with Summerbee playing a leading role in a 4 – 2 win against Southampton . This was the first in a run of five straight wins , after which Manchester City had caught up with the league leaders . During this run of wins young winger Stan Bowles made his league debut , scoring twice in a 5 – 2 win against Sheffield United . 
 Manchester City 's first transfer business of the season brought goalkeeper Ken Mulhearn to the club from Stockport County on 21 September , a deal that involved City 's back @-@ up goalkeeper Alan Ogley moving in the opposite direction . Harry Dowd kept goal in the next match , a 1 – 0 defeat at Arsenal , but then dislocated a finger , prompting a debut for Mulhearn in the season 's first Manchester derby . Mulhearn was reputedly so nervous before the match that Allison locked him in the medical room until he calmed down . Colin Bell scored the opener after five minutes , but two Bobby Charlton goals meant a win for Manchester United . In the second half of the match , Bowles exchanged punches with Brian Kidd , though neither man was sent off , largely thanks to the intervention of their respective captains . The derby loss was followed by a third consecutive defeat , at Sunderland . 
 A couple of days after the Roker Park defeat , Manchester City completed the signing of centre @-@ forward Francis Lee from Bolton Wanderers for a club record £ 60 @,@ 000 . During negotiations Mercer stated to Lee that " we feel we 've got the start of a good side . We are just one player short , and we think you are that player . " Lee made his debut in a 2 – 0 win at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers , the start of an 11 match unbeaten run , including a 6 – 0 win against Leicester City . 
 = = = Ballet on Ice = = = 
 Midway through their unbeaten run , City faced Tottenham Hotspur at home in snowy conditions , in a match televised on Match of the Day . As the teams came out onto the frozen pitch , commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme called the Manchester City team as " the most exciting team in England " . Aided by a modification to the studs on their boots suggested by Tony Book , City produced one of their best footballing performances in their history . One Spurs player was quoted as saying , " It was extraordinary . City moved like Olympic speed skaters while we were falling around like clowns on a skid patch . " Tottenham took an early lead through Jimmy Greaves , but Bell equalised before half @-@ time , and in the second half City besieged Tottenham , scoring three more times to win 4 – 1 . After the match City trailed the league leaders by only a single point . 
 The match was named as Match of the Day 's " Match of the Season " , and as the only match at Maine Road that season to be recorded for television , is the foremost recorded example of the 1967 – 68 team in action . 
 The unbeaten run came to an end at Christmas , with back @-@ to @-@ back defeats in matches against West Bromwich Albion causing the club to fall to fourth place . The team commenced 1968 with a seven match unbeaten run , starting with consecutive 3 – 0 wins at Nottingham Forest and Sheffield United , and culminating in a 5 – 1 defeat of Fulham to go top of the table . The run came to an end with a defeat at Don Revie 's Leeds United , which also meant City were overtaken at the top of the table by local rivals Manchester United . A visit to United 's Old Trafford ground then followed . United took an early lead , but City rallied to win 3 – 1 . 
 In late April , after City won 1 – 0 against Sheffield Wednesday and title rivals Manchester United lost to West Bromwich Albion , City were in a position where winning their final three games would all but guarantee the championship . In the first of the three , a home match against Everton , City won 2 – 0 in a match featuring Tony Book 's first league goal for the club . Next was Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane . City took a 3 – 0 lead before half time , eventually winning 3 – 1 . 
 = = = Title decider at Newcastle = = = 
 Going into the final match , City were level on points with neighbours Manchester United , with City holding the advantage in goal average – the first decider if teams finished level on points – but needing to win to be sure of staying above their cross @-@ city rivals . Liverpool were three points behind , but had a game in hand , so could still win the title if both City and United faltered . City faced tenth @-@ placed Newcastle United at St James ' Park ; United were at home to bottom @-@ half Sunderland . Bookmakers made United slight favourites for the title . 
 Mike Summerbee opened the scoring on 13 minutes , but Newcastle soon equalised . Neil Young made it 2 – 1 , but again Newcastle equalised . A second strike by Young was disallowed for offside , and at half @-@ time the score was 2 – 2 . Straight after half @-@ time Young scored again , and Francis Lee scored a fourth on 63 minutes . A late Newcastle goal set up a nervy finish , but City held on to win 4 – 3 and secure the title . The win was compounded by a 2 – 1 victory by Sunderland over Manchester United , giving City the title . Liverpool won one of their remaining games but lost the other , missing their chance to leapfrog United into second by one point . 
 = = = Matches = = = 
 P 
 = Matches played ; W = 
 Matches won ; D 
 = Matches drawn ; L = 
 Matches lost ; F 
 = Goals for ; A = 
 Goals against ; Pts = Points 
 = = = Results summary = = = 
 N.B. Points awarded for a win : 2 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 As a top @-@ flight side , Manchester City entered the FA Cup in the third round , and were drawn at home to Reading of the Third Division . With City unusually wearing their maroon change kit , the match finished goalless , with Tony Coleman missing a penalty . The replay at Elm Park was a one @-@ sided affair . City won 7 – 0 , Mike Summerbee scoring a hat @-@ trick . In the fourth round , another home tie finished 0 – 0 , this time against Leicester City . In the replay Manchester City squandered a 2 – 0 lead and lost 4 – 3 . 
 = = League Cup = = 
 Manchester City 's League Cup run saw two notable debuts for young players . In the Second round against Leicester City , Stan Bowles scored twice in a 4 – 0 win . In the next round against Blackpool , Joe Corrigan made the first of his 605 appearances for the club . City progressed after a replay . Fulham were the opponents in the Fourth round , meaning City visited Craven Cottage for the second time in as many weeks . However , they could not replicate their league win , and lost 3 – 2 . 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 = = = Squad = = = 
 Appearances for competitive matches <unk> : 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The league championship was Manchester City 's first trophy since the 1956 FA Cup . The triumph was the first of the most successful period in the club 's history . Under Mercer and Allison the club went on to win the FA Cup in 1969 , and the League Cup and European Cup Winners ' Cup in 1970 . The Mercer @-@ Allison partnership changed in October 1971 , with Allison taking the manager 's role , and came to an end in June 1972 when Mercer left to take charge of Coventry City . 
 As a result of the title win , Manchester City entered European competition for the first time . However , Malcolm Allison 's prediction that the club would " terrify Europe " proved inaccurate , with the club losing to Fenerbahçe in the first round of the European Cup . 
 = Star Trek : The Next Generation ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation commenced airing in broadcast syndication in the United States on November 21 , 1988 , and concluded on July 17 , 1989 , after airing 22 episodes . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. Season two featured changes to the main cast , following the departure of Gates McFadden . Diana Muldaur was cast as Dr. Katherine Pulaski for a single season before the return of McFadden in season three . Academy Award winner Whoopi Goldberg also joined the cast after pursuing a role from the producers . 
 There were significant changes backstage to the writing team . Maurice Hurley became head writer , and following extensive re @-@ writes to " The Royale " and " Manhunt " , Tracy Tormé left the writing team . Likewise , following the submission of a script for " Blood and Fire " , David Gerrold allowed his contract to run out due to issues with Gene Roddenberry and Leonard Maizlish , Roddenberry 's lawyer . Other departing writers included Leonard <unk> and Scott Rubenstein , while Melinda M. Snodgrass , Hans Beimler and Richard Manning joined the team . At the end of the season , Hurley also left the team . Production designer Herman F. Zimmerman left the show and was replaced by Richard James , who remained with the show for the rest of the series . 
 The 1988 Writers Guild of America strike caused the season to be shortened to 22 episodes , and was later blamed for the lack of quality of the first few episodes . The strike also resulted in the writing team using an unused script from the aborted Star Trek : Phase II to open the season , entitled " The Child " . Budgetary changes allowed for individual episode funding to be carried between episodes , but this resulted in a lack of funding towards the end of the season which the crew attempted to solve by creating a clip show , " Shades of Grey " . 
 " The Child " opened to 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , and ratings peaked with both " A Matter of Honor " and " The Measure of a Man " , which were watched by 11 @.@ 3 million . Although a decrease in viewers saw the lowest number of viewers for a first @-@ run episode in the series in " Manhunt " , the show became the third most @-@ watched series in its timeslot . Critics praised the episodes " The Measure of a Man " and " Q Who " , but found " Shades of Grey " to be one of the worst episodes of the entire Star Trek franchise . The season was first released on DVD on May 7 , 2002 on Region 1 , and was subsequently released on Regions 2 and 3 . The region @-@ free Blu @-@ ray releases came in December 2012 , with " The Measure of the Man " and " Q Who " receiving a limited theatrical release . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The second season saw Maurice Hurley being promoted to head writer after the departure of Robert Lewin . Hurley had been brought on board during the first season . His prior experience had been with shows such as The Equalizer and Miami Vice , and he later explained that he took the position because it challenged him . The 1988 Writers Guild of America strike had caused problems at the end of the first season , and these continued as the development of season two started , resulting in a shortened season . Executive producer Rick Berman blamed a decrease in quality at the start of season two on the lack of time available for proper development due to the writer 's strike . Hurley felt that the writing on the show managed to get into a rhythm during the second half of the first season , and that the strike stopped that and resulted in his eventually leaving the series . He also criticised the lack of character arcs in the series , saying that " I did some good , some bad , some mediocre , but it 's not a show that I could continue to do . It 's not where I come from . " 
 Hurley had objected to the violent and gory scenes seen in the first season episode " Conspiracy " , written by Tracy Tormé , and Tormé continued to feel alienated by Hurley . Tormé stepped down from his role as co @-@ executive story editor , taking credit instead as a creative consultant . Following Hurley 's modifications to Tormé 's scripts for " The Royale " and " Manhunt " , Tormé elected to be credited under a pseudonym only . At one point , Roddenberry had thought that Tormé would become eventual showrunner , but the writer left due to the re @-@ writes required under Hurley 's tenure . Hannah Louise Shearer also left the team between seasons , due to differences with Hurley , but contributed stories in later seasons . Other writers joined the team during the second season , including The Tears of the Singers author Melinda M. Snodgrass , who sold the script for " The Measure of a Man " . Hans Beimler and Richard Manning were hired in the newly created positions of executive script consultants . They had both been story editors for the final eight episodes of the first season . Snodgrass later explained that , " Once I came on board there suddenly seemed to be this climate of discussion among the writers about what we wanted to do with the show . My impression was that this was a new phenomenon . We were a little bit more on the same wavelength . " She was hired as a story editor following the submission of her first episode , alongside Leonard <unk> and Scott Rubenstein . The other two editors left after four more episodes , with Snodgrass remaining as the sole story editor for the rest of the season . 
 = = = = " Blood and Fire " = = = = 
 Another writer who left the show during season two was David Gerrold . He wrote an episode for The Original Series called " The Trouble with Tribbles " and came on @-@ board The Next Generation before the pilot and wrote the first version of the bible for the series . Rick Berman stated in an early memo that the new series was intended to be an issues @-@ based show in the same mold as the original . Creator Gene Roddenberry concurred , and under questioning from fans at a convention which Gerrold also attended , Roddenberry agreed that it was time for a homosexual character to appear in Star Trek . Roddenberry told his staff that " Times have changed and we have got to be aware of it . " This resulted in Gerrold pitching a story called " Blood and Fire " , which included two homosexual crew members and an AIDS allegory . Roddenberry cleared the idea to be produced into a script , and Gerrold went off to appear on a Star Trek cruise having received a telegram telling him that everyone in the office was pleased with the new story . 
 Upon his return , he found that the story was not going to be used in the current form . Gerrold later said that " I was told that Gene 's lawyer did not like the script and felt that this was not a good episode , and so on his advice , it seems , the script was cancelled . That 's what I was told by someone who was in a position to know . I don 't have any proof in writing , so I have to qualify it by saying someone told me . " Official sources stated that Paramount became involved , and that the company felt the story was inappropriate for younger viewers in the syndicated marketplace and that complaints would be received from parents . The script was given to Herbert Wright to re @-@ write . Roddenberry gave Wright a number notes on the script , who accidentally handed over notes on the script to Gerrold which were written by Roddenberry 's lawyer , Leonard Maizlish . Due to the workload on Wright at the time , Gerrold offered to make a first attempt at the re @-@ write with the intention of removing the homosexual characters . However , after initially clearing that with Roddenberry , Wright later received a phone call from him telling Wright not to let Gerrold work on it . Shortly after , Wright received a second call from Maizlish to reinforce the message that Gerrold must not be allowed to work on the script . 
 After numerous revisions by Wright , including a version called " Blood and Ice " , the script was eventually dropped from the schedule . Gerrold asked for his contract not to be renewed following the problems with the episode . Ernie Over , Roddenberry 's personal assistant at the time , later said that the claims were blown out of proportion by Gerrold , that " Blood and Fire " was simply a bad script . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The series bible stated the intention to create new villains for the new show , but after the failure of the Ferengi , the Romulans were introduced in the final episode of the first season and continued to be featured throughout season two . The cybernetic Borg were introduced in the episode " Q Who " , modified from the insectoid race that Hurley had intended to introduce in a longer version of the season one finale " The Neutral Zone " . The Borg returned sporadically throughout the rest of the series , appearing in five further episodes . But unlike other alien adversaries created for The Next Generation , they became the only one to transition into films with Star Trek : First Contact . A further change seen in season two , which increased later in the season , was an increased focus on the trio of Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard , Commander William T. Riker and Lt Cmdr. Data , reminiscent of Captain James T. Kirk , Dr. Leonard McCoy and Commander Spock in Star Trek : The Original Series . This relegated the other cast members to background roles for the majority of episodes . 
 Paramount changed the way that individual episodes were funded , with overspending on some episode budgets allowed on the proviso that it would be recouped by a reduction in others . Due to the effects of the writer 's strike , the writing staff searched the scripts from Star Trek : Phase II , a series which was cancelled before being filmed ; the first planned episode had been developed into Star Trek : The Motion Picture . From those scripts , one was identified with potential for season two ; it resulted in the opening episode " The Child " . The role of Lt. Ilia was rewritten in the story to become a part for Marina Sirtis as Counselor Deanna Troi . Sirtis praised this development , as she felt she had been overlooked during the first season due to the presence of both McFadden and Denise Crosby . 
 Episodes were developed to touch on social issues in the same manner as The Original Series . " The Child " featured a brief debate on abortion , " Up the Long Ladder " discussed cloning , and " Loud as a Whisper " was about accepting the legitimacy of sign language for the deaf . Problems arose when the estate of Arthur Conan Doyle threatened to sue the producers if the show used Sherlock Holmes once more following the episode " Elementary , Dear Data " . Budgetary reasons resulted in the season ending with the episode " Shades of Grey " , a clip show consisting mostly of footage of earlier episodes . That episode was filmed over three days instead of the usual seven , and was agreed by the production staff to be one of the worst episodes of any Star Trek series . 
 = = = Make @-@ up and set design = = = 
 Following issues with his make @-@ up throughout the first season , Michael Dorn 's Klingon prosthetics were modified . Michael Westmore made the headpiece simpler , and Dorn took to wearing a headband under the headpiece to reduce a skin rash on his forehead . The headpiece was then glued down around the edges . 
 The bridge set was moved from Stage 6 to the larger Stage 8 on the Paramount lot between season 1 and 2 , and in the process was re @-@ assembled slightly asymmetrically , an error no one noticed despite remaining that way through the rest of the series . Other modifications made to the bridge set included redesigned rear bridge stations so that LeVar Burton 's character Geordi La Forge , in his new role as Chief Engineer , could have a work station on the bridge , and modifications to several chairs to fit the actors better . A viewscreen was added to the observation lounge and a new set was created to represent the Ten @-@ Forward lounge . The lounge was the final set to be designed for The Next Generation by Herman Zimmerman . He explained that " Ten @-@ Forward became the place where ordinary crew and the officers could co @-@ mingle , and where aliens who were not allowed on the bridge could interact with other crew @-@ members . It was a very important set for the telling of stories . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Before the second season , there was a change to the main cast . Gates McFadden , who portrayed Dr. Beverly Crusher , was fired from the show and replaced with Diana Muldaur , who played a new character called Dr. Katherine Pulaski . Rick Berman later said that " There were those who believed at the end of the first season that they didn 't like the way her character was developing , vis @-@ a @-@ vis Gates ' performance , and managed to convince Mr. Roddenberry of that " . He said that he did not agree with the decision . Roddenberry decided to write Crusher out rather than killing the character to allow for McFadden 's return in the future . Keith DeCandido later suggested that it was Maurice Hurley who wanted McFadden out of the show , and after he left at the end of the season , the door was open for her to return . Pulaski was intended to be reminiscent of Dr. Leonard McCoy from The Original Series . Muldaur had appeared twice in The Original Series , first as Dr. Anne <unk> in " Return to Tomorrow " and later as Dr. Miranda Jones in " Is There in Truth No Beauty ? " . She had also appeared in a Roddenberry @-@ led pilot , Planet Earth . 
 Christina Pickles had also been considered for the part , and Berman stated that she was the second choice for the role . Muldaur was offered a main cast credit , but declined in favor of a " special guest appearance " credit , and went into the role expecting only to be in the show for a single season . Muldaur left after season two , with McFadden returning as Crusher for season three . Muldaur said that " People have tried to create some kind of something out of it , but she played one part and I played a totally different part ... it would not have been good to have continued very much longer , even though everyone was really lovely " . 
 Another actress to join the show was Academy Award winner Whoopi Goldberg , who had been a long @-@ time Star Trek fan . She credited Nichelle Nichols as Uhura in The Original Series as an inspiration , saying " Well , when I was nine years old Star Trek came on , I looked at it and I went screaming through the house , ' Come here , mum , everybody , come quick , come quick , there 's a black lady on television and she ain 't no maid ! ' I knew right then and there I could be anything I wanted to be . " To appear on the show , Goldberg contacted the producers initially through LeVar Burton . The producers did not believe her as they felt that a movie star such as Goldberg would not want to appear in Star Trek , and ignored calls from her agent , until Goldberg called them personally . A meeting was arranged between her and Rick Berman , and she agreed to appear in six episodes of season two . Her character , Guinan , was named after Mary " Texas " Guinan , a prohibition @-@ era speakeasy owner . 
 Guest stars in season two included Teri Hatcher , who appeared in the episode " The Outrageous <unk> " before she gained the role of Lois Lane in the Superman television series Lois and Clark . She was not credited for the role as transporter chief B.G. Robinson after the majority of her scenes were cut from the final episode , resulting in her requesting that the credit be removed . That episode also featured a guest appearance by Billy Campbell , who had been the second choice in the original casting for Commander William Riker . He gained the role in the episode after contacting casting agent Junie Lowry and asking to be in an episode . Musician Mick Fleetwood made a cameo as an <unk> ambassador in the episode " Manhunt " , although he did not have any lines . Robert O 'Reilly , who appeared in " Manhunt " , later gained the part of the Klingon Gowron in season three . His character became Klingon Chancellor , and he appeared in several more TNG episodes as well as having a recurring role in Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . O 'Reilly 's final appearance in Star Trek was as yet another character , in the Star Trek : Enterprise episode " Bounty " . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Following work on Star Trek V : The Final Frontier , production designer Herman F. Zimmerman elected to leave the franchise . He had intended to pursue a career in design for films , but after working on Black Rain , he returned to Star Trek with Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country and took on the role of production designer for Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . For The Next Generation , he recommended Richard James as his successor . James took the position as an interim measure while a permanent candidate was looked for . He ended up staying with The Next Generation as lead production designer for the rest of the series , and afterwards joined Star Trek : Voyager in the same role . John M. Dwyer left with Zimmerman , and Jim Mees was brought in to replace him . Andrew Probert , the designer of the Enterprise @-@ D , left his role as principal illustrator to join The Walt Disney Company . He was replaced by Rick Sternbach , who was supervised by James in his new role . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 By the end of season one , The Next Generation had become the highest @-@ rated first @-@ run hour @-@ long syndicated series , and the third highest @-@ rated syndicated show overall , behind only Wheel of Fortune and Jeopardy . The first episode of season two , " The Child " , aired on November 21 , 1988 to Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 9 million . After an initial slight decrease in viewers over the next five episodes , the season broke the 11 million mark with " Unnatural Selection " and then peaked as the next two episodes , " A Matter of Honor " and " The Measure of a Man " , were both watched by 11 @.@ 3 million viewers . After this , the ratings decreased gradually until " Manhunt " , watched by 8 @.@ 9 million and receiving the lowest ratings for a first @-@ run broadcast of a Next Generation episode . " Shades of Grey " closed the season on July 17 , 1989 , watched by 9 @.@ 8 million viewers . Despite the higher ratings seen in the earlier part of the season , it was only from " Q Who " onwards that The Next Generation rose to become the third most @-@ viewed series in its timeslot . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Keith DeCandido for Tor.com said that second season was the one on which the rest of the series was based , with characters taking long @-@ term roles such as Geordi La Forge as Chief Engineer and Worf at the Tactical station . DeCandido said that the addition of Goldberg as Guinan was " delightful " , but that Diana Muldaur as Dr. Pulaski " didn 't entirely work as a character " . In his view , the episodes during season two were varied in quality . He gave " Q Who " ten out of ten , while he gave " Shades of Grey " a zero . It was the first time he awarded the top score to an episode ; none of the first season had qualified . He gave the season an overall mark of seven out of ten and said that " Far too many people say that TNG didn 't come into its own until the third season , and frankly , I think that that estimation comes a year too late . " 
 Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " gave full marks of four out of four to both " The Measure of a Man " and " Q Who " . His highlight of the former was the performance of Patrick Stewart as Picard in the courtroom setting , while of the latter , he said that it was the " most absolutely necessary episode of TNG 's second season " . Like DeCandido , Epsicokhan gave " Shades of Grey " a score of zero and described it as " the most pointless episode of TNG ever made " . IGN 's Scott Collura thought that season two was an improvement over the roughness of season one and was the first time that the show stepped out from the shadow of The Original Series . He stated that several of the more memorable elements of Star Trek were introduced in this season , such as the Borg . He said that " The Measure of a Man " was the highlight of the season , while he described " Shades of Grey " as " Riker 's Cheap @-@ Ass Trip Down Memory Lane " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Episodes in season two of The Next Generation were nominated for eight Emmy Awards . " Q Who " was nominated in three categories , winning two : Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series . These were the only Emmy Awards won by the show ; the other episodes nominated were " Elementary , Dear Data " in two categories , while " A Matter of Honor " , " The Child " and " Unnatural Selection " were each nominated once . For the second year in a row , Wil Wheaton was nominated for a Youth in Film Awards , this time for Best Young Actor in a Family Syndicated Show . This year marked his first and only win , out of three nominations . The show also won the award for Best Syndicated Family Drama or Comedy . Melinda M. Snodgrass received the only nomination for the series at the Writers Guild of America Awards for Best Episodic Drama for the episode " The Measure of a Man " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The following actors and actresses appear in the season : 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , episodes are listed by the order in which they aired . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The Blu @-@ ray release of season two includes an extended version of " The Measure of a Man " , using cut footage that writer Melinda M. Snodgrass had kept on VHS . The released version includes a hybrid version with both the remastered high @-@ definition footage interspersed with the footage from the VHS tape . The additional twelve minutes of footage is raw , and features no music or special effects , but it was the first episode of The Next Generation to receive an extended cut . The Blu @-@ ray releases of seasons one and two of The Next Generation were awarded the Saturn Award for Best Television Series release at the 2013 awards . 
 " The Measure of a Man " and " Q Who " received a limited theatrical release for one night on November 29 , 2012 . The version of " The Measure of a Man " shown was the extended version . It was the second cinema release for episodes of The Next Generation , as " Where No One Has Gone Before " and " Datalore " had been released to promote the Blu @-@ ray release of the first season . 
 = Turkey vulture = 
 The turkey vulture ( Cathartes aura ) , also known in some North American regions as the turkey buzzard ( or just buzzard ) , and in some areas of the Caribbean as the John crow or carrion crow , is a vulture that is the most widespread of the New World vultures . One of three species in the genus Cathartes of the family Cathartidae , the turkey vulture ranges from southern Canada to the southernmost tip of South America . It inhabits a variety of open and semi @-@ open areas , including subtropical forests , shrublands , pastures , and deserts . 
 Like all New World vultures , it is not closely related to the Old World vultures of Europe , Africa , and Asia . The two groups strongly resemble each other because of convergent evolution ; natural selection often leads to similar body plans in animals that adapt independently to the same conditions . 
 The turkey vulture is a scavenger and feeds almost exclusively on carrion . It finds its food using its keen eyes and sense of smell , flying low enough to detect the gases produced by the beginnings of the process of decay in dead animals . In flight , it uses thermals to move through the air , flapping its wings infrequently . It roosts in large community groups . Lacking a syrinx — the vocal organ of birds — its only vocalizations are grunts or low hisses . It nests in caves , hollow trees , or thickets . Each year it generally raises two chicks , which it feeds by regurgitation . It has very few natural predators . In the United States , the vulture receives legal protection under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The turkey vulture received its common name from the resemblance of the adult 's bald red head and its dark plumage to that of the male wild turkey , while the name " vulture " is derived from the Latin word vulturus , meaning " tearer , " and is a reference to its feeding habits . The word buzzard is used by North Americans to refer to this bird , yet in the Old World that term refers to members of the genus Buteo . The generic term Cathartes means " purifier " and is the Latinized form from the Greek kathartēs / καθαρτης . The turkey vulture was first formally described by Linnaeus as Vultur aura in his Systema Naturae in 1758 , and characterised as V. <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( " brown @-@ gray vulture , with black wings and a white beak " ) . It is a member of the family Cathartidae , along with the other six species of New World vultures , and included in the genus Cathartes , along with the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture and the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture . Like other New World vultures , the turkey vulture has a diploid chromosome number of 80 . 
 The taxonomic placement of the turkey vulture and the remaining six species of New World vultures has been in flux . Though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world . Some earlier authorities suggested that the New World vultures were more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintained their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . 
 However , recent genetic studies have made it clear that neither New World or Old World vultures are close to falcons , nor are New World vultures close to storks . Both are basal members of the clade <unk> , with Old World vultures comprising several groups within the family Accipitridae , also containing eagles , kites , and hawks , while New World vultures in Cathartiformes are a sister group to <unk> ( containing the osprey and <unk> along with Accipitridae ) . 
 There are five subspecies of turkey vulture : 
 C. a. aura is the nominate subspecies . It is found from Mexico south through South America and the Greater Antilles . This subspecies occasionally overlaps its range with other subspecies . It is the smallest of the subspecies but is nearly indistinguishable from C. a. meridionalis in color . 
 C. a. <unk> , the Chilean turkey vulture , is larger , browner , and slightly paler than C. a. ruficollis . The secondary feathers and wing coverts may have gray margins . 
 C. a. meridionalis , the western turkey vulture , is a synonym for C. a. <unk> . C. a. <unk> was identified as a subspecies by Friedman in 1933 , but in 1964 Alexander Wetmore separated the western birds , which took the name meridionalis , which was applied earlier to a migrant from South America . It breeds from southern Manitoba , southern British Columbia , central Alberta and Saskatchewan south to Baja California , south @-@ central Arizona , southeast New Mexico , and south @-@ central Texas . It is the most migratory subspecies , migrating as far as South America , where it overlaps the range of the smaller C. a. aura . It differs from the eastern turkey vulture in color , as the edges of the lesser wing coverts are darker brown and narrower . 
 C. a. ruficollis is found in Panama south through Uruguay and Argentina . It is also found on the island of Trinidad . It is darker and more black than C. a. aura , with brown wing edgings which are narrower or absent altogether . The head and neck are dull red with yellow @-@ white or green @-@ white markings . Adults generally have a pale yellow patch on the crown of the head . 
 C. a. septentrionalis is known as the eastern turkey vulture . The eastern and western turkey vultures differ in tail and wing proportions . It ranges from southeastern Canada south through the eastern United States . It is less migratory than C. a. meridionalis and rarely migrates to areas south of the United States . 
 = = Description = = 
 A large bird , it has a wingspan of 160 – 183 cm ( 63 – 72 in ) , a length of 62 – 81 cm ( 24 – 32 in ) , and weight of 0 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 3 kg ( 1 @.@ 8 to 5 @.@ 1 lb ) . Birds in the northern limit of the species ' range average larger in size than the vulture from the <unk> . 124 birds from Florida averaged 2 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 lb ) while 65 and 130 birds from Venezuela were found to average 1 @.@ 22 and 1 @.@ 45 kg ( 2 @.@ 7 and 3 @.@ 2 lb ) , respectively . It displays minimal sexual dimorphism ; sexes are identical in plumage and in coloration , although the female is slightly larger . The body feathers are mostly brownish @-@ black , but the flight feathers on the wings appear to be silvery @-@ gray beneath , contrasting with the darker wing linings . The adult 's head is small in proportion to its body and is red in color with few to no feathers . It also has a relatively short , hooked , ivory @-@ colored beak . The irises of the eyes are gray @-@ brown ; legs and feet are pink @-@ skinned , although typically stained white . The eye has a single incomplete row of eyelashes on the upper lid and two rows on the lower lid . 
 The two front toes of the foot are long and have small webs at their bases . Tracks are large , between 9 @.@ 5 and 14 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 and 5 @.@ 5 in ) in length and 8 @.@ 2 and 10 @.@ 2 cm ( 3 @.@ 2 and 4 @.@ 0 in ) in width , both measurements including claw marks . Toes are arranged in the classic , <unk> pattern . The feet are flat , relatively weak , and poorly adapted to grasping ; the talons are also not designed for grasping , as they are relatively blunt . In flight , the tail is long and slim . The black vulture is relatively shorter @-@ tailed and shorter @-@ winged , which makes it appear rather smaller in flight than the turkey vulture , although the body masses of the two species are roughly the same . The nostrils are not divided by a septum , but rather are perforate ; from the side one can see through the beak . It undergoes a molt in late winter to early spring . It is a gradual molt , which lasts until early autumn . The immature bird has a gray head with a black beak tip ; the colors change to those of the adult as the bird matures . Captive longevity is not well known . As of 2015 there are two captive birds over 40 years old : the Gabbert Raptor Center on the University of Minnesota campus is home to a turkey vulture named Nero with a confirmed hatch year of 1974 , and another female bird , named Richard , lives at the Lindsay Wildlife Museum in Walnut Creek , CA . Richard hatched in 1974 and arrived at the museum later that year . The oldest wild captured banded bird was 16 years old . 
 <unk> ( sometimes mistakenly called " albino " ) turkey vultures are sometimes seen . 
 The turkey vulture , like most other vultures , has very few vocalization capabilities . Because it lacks a syrinx , it can only utter hisses and grunts . It usually hisses when it feels threatened , or when fighting with other vultures over a carcass . Grunts are commonly heard from hungry young and from adults in their courtship display . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The turkey vulture has a large range , with an estimated global occurrence of 28 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . It is the most abundant vulture in the Americas . Its global population is estimated to be 4 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 individuals . It is found in open and semi @-@ open areas throughout the Americas from southern Canada to Cape Horn . It is a permanent resident in the southern United States , though northern birds may migrate as far south as South America . The turkey vulture is widespread over open country , subtropical forests , shrublands , deserts , and foothills . It is also found in pastures , grasslands , and wetlands . It is most commonly found in relatively open areas which provide nearby woods for nesting and it generally avoids heavily forested areas . 
 This bird with its crow @-@ like aspect gave foot to the naming of the Quebrada de los Cuervos ( Crows Ravine ) in Uruguay , where they dwell together with the lesser yellow @-@ headed vulture and the black vulture . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The turkey vulture is gregarious and roosts in large community groups , breaking away to forage independently during the day . Several hundred vultures may roost communally in groups which sometimes even include black vultures . It roosts on dead , leafless trees , and will also roost on man @-@ made structures such as water or microwave towers . Though it nests in caves , it does not enter them except during the breeding season . The turkey vulture lowers its night @-@ time body temperature by about 6 degrees Celsius to 34 ° C ( 93 ° F ) , becoming slightly hypothermic . 
 This vulture is often seen standing in a spread @-@ winged stance . The stance is believed to serve multiple functions : drying the wings , warming the body , and baking off bacteria . It is practiced more often following damp or rainy nights . This same behavior is displayed by other New World vultures , by Old World vultures , and by storks . Like storks , the turkey vulture often defecates on its own legs , using the evaporation of the water in the feces and / or urine to cool itself , a process known as urohidrosis . It cools the blood vessels in the unfeathered tarsi and feet , and causes white uric acid to streak the legs . The turkey vulture has few natural predators . Adult , immature and fledging vultures may fall prey to great horned owls , red @-@ tailed hawks , golden eagles and bald eagles , while eggs and nestlings may be preyed on by mammals such as raccoons and opossums . Foxes can occasionally ambush an adult but species that can climb are more likely to breach and predate nests than adults . Its primary form of defense is regurgitating semi @-@ digested meat , a foul @-@ smelling substance which deters most creatures intent on raiding a vulture nest . It will also sting if the predator is close enough to get the vomit in its face or eyes . In some cases , the vulture must rid its crop of a heavy , undigested meal in order to take flight to flee from a potential predator . Its life expectancy in the wild ranges upward of 16 years , with a captive life span of over 30 years being possible . 
 The turkey vulture is awkward on the ground with an ungainly , hopping walk . It requires a great deal of effort to take flight , flapping its wings while pushing off the ground and hopping with its feet . While soaring , the turkey vulture holds its wings in a shallow V @-@ shape and often tips from side to side , frequently causing the gray flight feathers to appear silvery as they catch the light . The flight of the turkey vulture is an example of static soaring flight , in which it flaps its wings very infrequently , and takes advantage of rising thermals to stay soaring . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The turkey vulture feeds primarily on a wide variety of carrion , from small mammals to large grazers , preferring those recently dead , and avoiding carcasses that have reached the point of putrefaction . They may rarely feed on plant matter , shoreline vegetation , pumpkin , coconut and other crops , live insects and other invertebrates . In South America , turkey vultures have been photographed feeding on the fruits of the introduced oil palm . They rarely , if ever , kill prey themselves . The turkey vulture can often be seen along roadsides feeding on roadkill , or near bodies of water , feeding on washed @-@ up fish . They also will feed on fish or insects which have become stranded in shallow water . Like other vultures , it plays an important role in the ecosystem by disposing of carrion which would otherwise be a breeding ground for disease . 
 The turkey vulture forages by smell , an ability that is uncommon in the avian world , often flying low to the ground to pick up the scent of ethyl mercaptan , a gas produced by the beginnings of decay in dead animals . The olfactory lobe of its brain , responsible for processing smells , is particularly large compared to that of other animals . This heightened ability to detect odors allows it to search for carrion below the forest canopy . King vultures , black vultures , and condors , which lack the ability to smell carrion , follow the turkey vulture to carcasses . The turkey vulture arrives first at the carcass , or with greater yellow @-@ headed vultures or lesser yellow @-@ headed vultures , which also share the ability to smell carrion . It displaces the yellow @-@ headed vultures from carcasses due to its larger size , but is displaced in turn by the king vulture and both types of condor , which make the first cut into the skin of the dead animal . This allows the smaller , weaker @-@ billed turkey vulture access to food , because it cannot tear the tough hides of larger animals on its own . This is an example of mutual dependence between species . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The breeding season of the turkey vulture varies according to latitude . In the southern United States , it commences in March , peaks in April to May , and continues into June . In more northerly latitudes , the season starts later and extends into August . Courtship rituals of the turkey vulture involve several individuals gathering in a circle , where they perform hopping movements around the perimeter of the circle with wings partially spread . In the air , one bird closely follows another while flapping and diving . 
 Eggs are generally laid in the nesting site in a protected location such as a cliff , a cave , a rock crevice , a burrow , inside a hollow tree , or in a thicket . There is little or no construction of a nest ; eggs are laid on a bare surface . Females generally lay two eggs , but sometimes one and rarely three . The eggs are cream @-@ colored , with brown or lavender spots around their larger end . Both parents incubate , and the young hatch after 30 to 40 days . Chicks are altricial , or helpless at birth . Both adults feed the chicks by regurgitating food for them , and care for them for 10 to 11 weeks . When adults are threatened while nesting , they may flee , or they may regurgitate on the intruder or feign death . If the chicks are threatened in the nest , they defend themselves by hissing and regurgitating . The young fledge at about nine to ten weeks . Family groups remain together until fall . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The turkey vulture is sometimes accused of carrying anthrax or hog cholera , both livestock diseases , on its feet or bill by cattle ranchers and is therefore occasionally perceived as a threat . However , the virus that causes hog cholera is destroyed when it passes through the turkey vulture 's digestive tract . This species also may be perceived as a threat by farmers due to the similar black vulture 's tendency to attack and kill newborn cattle . The turkey vulture does not kill live animals but will mix with flocks of black vultures and will scavenge what they leave behind . Nonetheless , its appearance at a location where a calf has been killed gives the incorrect impression that the turkey vulture represents a danger to calves . The droppings produced by turkey vultures and other vultures can harm or kill trees and other vegetation . The turkey vulture can be held in captivity , though the Migratory Bird Treaty Act prevents this in the case of uninjured animals or animals capable of returning to the wild . In captivity , it can be fed fresh meat , and younger birds will gorge themselves if given the opportunity . 
 The turkey vulture species receives special legal protections under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 in the United States , by the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds in Canada , and by the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds and Game Mammals in Mexico . In the US it is illegal to take , kill , or possess turkey vultures , and violation of the law is punishable by a fine of up to $ 15 @,@ 000 and imprisonment of up to six months . It is listed as a species of Least Concern by the IUCN Red List . Populations appear to remain stable , and it has not reached the threshold of inclusion as a threatened species , which requires a decline of more than 30 percent in ten years or three generations . 
 = Jimmy Lavender = 
 James Sanford " Jimmy " Lavender ( March 25 , 1884 – January 12 , 1960 ) was an American professional baseball player who played in Major League Baseball as a pitcher from 1912 to 1917 . He played a total of five seasons with the Chicago Cubs of the National League from 1912 to 1916 ; after being traded to the Philadelphia Phillies , he played an additional season in 1917 . During his playing days , his height was listed at 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) , his weight as 165 pounds ( 75 kg ) , and he batted and threw right @-@ handed . Born in Barnesville , Georgia , he began his professional baseball career in minor league baseball in 1906 at the age 22 . He worked his way through the system over the next few seasons , culminating with a three @-@ season stint with the Providence Grays of the Eastern League from 1909 to 1911 . 
 Lavender primarily threw the spitball , and used it to win 16 games as a 28 @-@ year @-@ old rookie in 1912 . In July 1912 , he defeated Rube Marquard , ending Marquard 's consecutive win streak at 19 games , which at the time tied the record for the longest win streak for a pitcher in MLB history . Lavender 's early success as a rookie soon turned to mediocrity as his career progressed , winning no more than 11 games in any season afterward . On August 31 , 1915 , he threw a no @-@ hitter against the New York Giants . 
 He was traded to the Phillies before the 1917 season , and he played one season for the team , winning six games before retiring from major league baseball . Lavender returned to Georgia , worked on his farm in Montezuma , Georgia , and played professional baseball in an independent league . He died in Cartersville , Georgia at the age of 75 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Sanford Lavender was born on March 25 , 1884 in Barnesville , Georgia into a wealthy family . He attended public schools until the age of 15 , when he was enrolled at Gordon College , a military academy located in Barnesville . He played little baseball while there , but he did enjoy participating in football . He later attended Georgia Tech and studied mechanical engineering ; he played a few games for his class ' baseball team as well . 
 = = Minor league career = = 
 In 1906 , at the age of 22 , he began his professional baseball career with the <unk> team in the class @-@ D Georgia State League . The following season , he was promoted to the Danville Red Sox of the class @-@ C Virginia League . On May 15 , he pitched the Red Sox to a 6 – 2 victory over the Portsmouth Truckers , allowing just one hit . With Danville , he had a 13 – 16 win – loss record in 307 innings pitched . It was during this time period that a scout who worked for Connie Mack discovered Lavender , who then sent him through a training camp and assigned him to the Holyoke Papermakers of the class @-@ B Connecticut League in 1908 ; he finished with a 21 – 17 win – loss record . From 1909 to 1911 , he played with the Providence Grays of the class @-@ A Eastern League for three seasons , winning a career @-@ high 19 games in 1911 . 
 It was reported on September 1 , 1911 that Lavender was drafted by the Chicago Cubs in the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) draft . Charles Murphy , the Cubs ' owner , drafted him with intent of then trading him to a Montreal minor league team as compensation for an earlier trade that brought Ward Miller to the Cubs . The Providence team owner , Frank Navin ( who also owned the Detroit Tigers of the American League ( AL ) ) , appealed the transaction to the National Commission , forerunner to the modern @-@ day Commissioner of Baseball . The commission ruled that Murphy had to either keep Lavender for one year , or return him to Providence . Murphy chose to keep Lavender , and his contract was approved on February 9 , 1912 by NL president Thomas Lynch . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 = = = = 1912 – 1913 seasons = = = = 
 Lavender made his MLB debut on April 23 , 1912 as a relief pitcher in a 5 – 3 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates . On June 28 , versus the Pirates , he threw a one @-@ hit shutout in a 3 – 0 win , and collected three hits as a hitter . On July 1 , he shutout Pittsburgh once more , this time in a 12 @-@ inning , 1 – 0 victory . He threw his third consecutive complete game shutout on July 5 , a 4 – 0 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals . Lavender took a 33 @-@ inning consecutive scoreless inning streak into his next start , a home game against the New York Giants and pitcher Rube Marquard . He gave up five hits and defeated the Giants 7 – 2 , ending Marquard 's consecutive win streak at 19 games , which at the time tied the record for the longest streak in baseball history . The loss appeared to affect Marquard for the remainder of the season , though he regained his form in the 1912 World Series . During the 1913 season , upon the ending of an 11 @-@ game winning streak by Washington Senators pitcher Joe <unk> , Marquard commented , " I know just how <unk> feels . I know how I felt after Lavender beat me in Chicago last year after I had won nineteen straight , and I can sympathize with the Washington youngster . " Lavender would have continued success against the Giants throughout his career . 
 Lavender 's primary pitch was the spitball , and his method of preparation was to lick the ball . In a game on July 19 , Lavender was about to load the ball when he smelled a liniment on the ball . He reported this to the home plate umpire , who then ejected the Phillies manager , Red Dooin , from the game . Dooin had been caught doing this to another spitballer , Marty O 'Toole , a few days earlier . On September 26 , Lavender and the Cubs were ahead 9 – 0 in the top half of the ninth inning versus Cincinnati , when the Reds scored 10 runs against Lavender and two other pitchers to take the lead 10 – 9 . The Cubs ultimately prevailed and gained the victory by scoring two runs in the bottom half of the ninth . Lavender started just one more game in 1912 , a 3 – 2 victory on October 5 against St. Louis . Following the season , the Cubs played a series of exhibition games with the Chicago White Sox of the American League called the City Series . Lavender started the first game against Ed Walsh , and the game ended after nine innings with a scoreless tie . Lavender gave six hits and Walsh just one . After the two teams played to a 12 @-@ inning tie two days later , Lavender pitched the Cubs to victory in game three . Two additional victories gave the Cubs a 3 – 0 series lead , but the White Sox were able to win four straight games , twice defeating Lavender , including in the series finale . He completed his rookie season with his career @-@ high 16 victories , against 13 losses , and a 3 @.@ 04 earned run average ( ERA ) in <unk> ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 To begin the 1913 season , Lavender was the team 's opening day starting pitcher in a 5 – 3 loss to St. Louis on April 12 . After his successful rookie season , he was largely ineffective in the first half of 1913 season ; so much so that manager Johnny Evers was contemplating putting Lavender on waivers if he had not regained his form from the previous season . Lavender showed signs of improvement , surrendering just three hits in a 12 – 2 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates on June 30 , followed by a 5 – 1 win over the Reds on July 3 . This rebound was short @-@ lived , however ; Chicago lost his next four starts before a 6 – 5 win over the Boston Braves on July 27 . He pitched in 40 games , half of which were in relief , and had a 10 – 14 win – loss record . His ERA increased to 3 @.@ 66 , and he led the NL in hit batsmen with 13 . 
 = = = = 1914 – 1916 seasons = = = = 
 His initial appearance of the 1914 season was in relief on April 17 , a game in which he pitched 42 ⁄ 3 innings , and gave up three runs in 6 – 5 victory over the Reds . He followed that with two consecutive strong games as the starting pitcher , allowing just one unearned run in each game ; the second was a complete game against the Reds . On June 12 , he started the game against New York , only to be injured in the third inning when he was hit in the hand by a ball batted by Fred Merkel , and had to leave the game . The injury did not cause Lavender to lose much playing time . He pitched a four @-@ inning relief appearance on June 19 , followed by a complete game shutout on June 27 against the Reds . On August 17 , he pitched a second shutout during the season , a 3 @-@ 0 victory over the Brooklyn Robins . 
 Lavender created a controversy in a game on September 23 , when he was caught altering the baseball by rubbing it against an <unk> board that he had attached to his uniform 's pant leg , an illegal act . At the time , the fine for such an infraction was a five @-@ dollar fine . The Phillies players noticed that the pitcher was constantly scratching the side of his leg . They asked the umpire to search the pitcher . Lavender refused to be searched and ran into the outfield , and the umpire refused to chase Lavender . Eventually , a particularly fast Phillies player , Hans Lobert , was able to catch up with him and grab the offending item . As a result of this incident , AL president , Ban Johnson , decreed that any pitcher in his league caught using sandpaper to alter the baseball , would be suspended for 30 days and fined $ 100 . This rule became the <unk> of the rule banning other pitches as well , including the spitball . In his 37 games pitched in 1914 , 28 were as the starting pitcher . His win – loss record was 11 – 11 , and he lowered his ERA down to 3 @.@ 07 in <unk> ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 Lavender got off to quick start in 1915 , pitching a complete game victory against St. Louis on April 16 . He then missed time due to suffering a broken rib attempting to climb out of a bathtub . His next appearance was not until May 7 , when he pitched two innings in relief . He regained his starting role on May 21 , hurling his second complete game victory of the season , this time against Boston . In the first game of a doubleheader on August 31 , Lavender threw a no @-@ hitter against the New York Giants , a 2 – 0 victory . He struck out eight batters and walked just one . At the conclusion of the season , the Cubs played the Chicago White Sox of the American League in an exhibition series . Lavender pitched a shutout in game two , but the White Sox were declared victors after winning four games to the Cubs ' one . His totals for the 1915 season included 41 games pitched , a 10 – 16 win – loss record , a career @-@ low 2 @.@ 58 ERA , and a career @-@ high 117 strikeouts . 
 Though Lavender seemed to pitch well to begin the 1916 season , his record of 1 – 6 though June 10 was a direct contrast to his low 2 @.@ 89 ERA . In his next start , against the Giants on June 14 , he allowed only an infield single to Benny <unk> . The New York Sun noted that <unk> 's single was as a result of a ground ball that took a bad hop and bounced away from the fielder . Lavender continued to pitch well throughout the season , both starting and in relief , culminating with a complete game shutout against Pittsburgh on September 9 , his fourth shutout of the season . However , in his last four appearances , he was credited with the loss in three , and his ERA rose from 2 @.@ 05 to 2 @.@ 83 . His season win – loss record was 10 – 14 in 36 games and 188 innings pitched . 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = 
 = = = = 1917 season = = = = 
 On December 19 , 1916 , it was reported that during the NL meetings , Chicago had traded Lavender 's rights to the Phillies for pitcher Al <unk> . However , it was not official until April 2 , 1917 , with Chicago sending an additional $ 5 @,@ 000 to complete the deal . In March , Lavender signed with Philadelphia . He made his Philadelphia debut on April 27 , pitching a complete game victory against the Giants , allowing five hits and one run . Lavender faced his former club , the Cubs , for the first time on May 19 , and pitched the last three innings for the victory . At this point in the season , he was pitching well , his ERA was 1 @.@ 57 and he had a 2 – 1 win – loss record . 
 He soon began to falter , giving up four earned runs in four innings against the Cubs on May 22 and losing consecutive starts against New York and Pittsburgh . Then in a start against Cincinnati , he surrendered 15 hits and seven earned runs ; his ERA had now risen to 3 @.@ 29 . He had regained his form over the course of the months of July and August , lowering his ERA to 2 @.@ 69 after his game on September 8 . He lost much of his effectiveness later , however , allowing 14 hits and 10 earned runs against Boston on September 10 , and three more runs against Brooklyn in five relief innings on September 13 . After a short one @-@ inning appearance on September 25 , he started the game on October 3 against the Giants . He gave up five earned runs in five innings pitched and received the loss . It was his last major league appearance . In his one season with Philadelphia , he pitched in 28 games , and had a 6 – 8 record . His final career record was 63 @-@ 76 , with a 3 @.@ 09 ERA and 547 strikeouts in 1 @,@ 207 innings pitched . 
 During the off @-@ season , Philadelphia planned to trade or sell Lavender , even though he had earlier announced his retirement from the game . Philadelphia 's asking price for his rights was $ 1 @,@ 000 , but they received no offers . Christy Mathewson , manager of the Reds , was reported to have had interest in Lavender , the pitcher 's success against the Giants still fresh in Mathewson 's mind . Though Philadelphia had a meeting with Cincinnati , Mathewson was unable to attend , and no trade discussions materialized . The San Francisco Seals of the Pacific Coast League expressed interest in Lavender , but he stressed that he was retired and that he would only consider a trade to Atlanta of the Southern Association so that he could be near his farm in Montezuma . In 1922 , it was reported that he signed with Atlanta after playing well for an independent team in Dawson , Georgia . 
 = = Post @-@ baseball life = = 
 After his playing career ended , Lavender returned to Georgia and worked on his farm in Montezuma , Georgia . He died on January 12 , 1960 , at the age of 75 , in Cartersville , Georgia , and is interred at Felton Cemetery in Montezuma . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Author Vincent Starrett , who penned The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes , created a series of short stories featuring a gentlemanly , cultured detective named " Jimmie Lavender " . Starrett stated that the name was perfect for his character , and received permission from the former pitcher for use of the name . A collection of these stories were featured in the 1944 book The Case Book of Jimmie Lavender . 
 = Byron McLaughlin = 
 Byron Scott McLaughlin ( born September 29 , 1955 ) is an American retired professional baseball player , alleged counterfeit shoes manufacturer , and convicted money launderer . His baseball career spanned nine seasons , four of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) with the Seattle Mariners ( 1977 – 1980 ) , and the California Angels ( 1983 ) . McLaughlin , a right @-@ handed pitcher used primarily in relief , compiled a major league record of 16 – 25 with a 5 @.@ 11 earned run average , five complete games , 14 saves , and 74 strikeouts in <unk> ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 After his career , McLaughlin allegedly worked in the counterfeit consumer goods industry in Mexico making knock @-@ off athletic footwear , which included shoes designed to look like Converse , Vans , and Adidas . In 1990 , he was arrested for trafficking the counterfeit shoes and money laundering . He pleaded guilty to the money laundering charges , and proceeded to post bail . Before being sentenced , McLaughlin fled and his current whereabouts are unknown . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McLaughlin was born on September 29 , 1955 in Van Nuys , California . He attended Santa Monica High School in Santa Monica , California and Los Angeles Valley College . He played high school baseball at Santa Monica , and played the position of outfielder in his last three years . 
