 There are also less challenging hikes that are equally scenic , yet better suited for families with young children . Popular objectives include Glen Ellis Falls , a waterfall on the Ellis River , and Square Ledge , with an impressive view of Mount Washington for modest effort . 
 = = = Skiing = = = 
 The area also has many opportunities for both alpine and Nordic skiing . The bowl of Tuckerman Ravine is famous for its extremely steep backcountry skiing . Long lines are common during the peak spring @-@ skiing season of April and May . Wildcat Mountain offers groomed ski trails and lifts , and is a better choice for less @-@ experienced skiers . The centerpiece of the ski @-@ area is the gondola , which runs during the summer , and offers views of the Presidentials with no expended effort . 
 For Nordic skiing , Great Glen Trails offers a large , groomed trail system that also includes the lower half of the Auto Road . Several warming huts are scattered around the trail system , including scenic Great Angel Cabin , with views of the Great Gulf and surrounding peaks . Great Glen also permits biking on the trails during the summer , and is the only mountain bike facility in the notch . Another cross @-@ country trail system exists in the town of Jackson , extending as far as the summit of Wildcat Mountain . 
 = Shriya Saran = 
 Shriya Saran ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ( born as Shriya Saran Bhatnagar on 11 September 1982 ) , also known by the mononym Shriya , is an Indian film actress and model . She has acted in Telugu , Tamil , and Hindi language films , as well as a few films in English , Malayalam and Kannada . 
 Saran was born in Dehradun and spent most of her childhood in Haridwar . In 2001 , her dance master gave her the opportunity to appear in <unk> Nathan 's debut music video " <unk> Kyun Hawa " , which brought Saran to the attention of many Indian filmmakers . 
 Although Saran aspired to become a well @-@ known dancer , she was rather offered a leading role . Thus , Saran made her film debut in 2001 with the Telugu film Ishtam , and had her first commercial success with <unk> ( 2002 ) . She subsequently appeared in several more Telugu films , while making in @-@ roads in the Hindi and Tamil film industries . In 2007 , Saran starred in Sivaji , the highest @-@ grossing Tamil film at that time . She also gained critical acclaim for her role in the 2007 Bollywood film <unk> . In 2008 , Saran played the lead role in her first English film , the American @-@ Indian co @-@ production The Other End of the Line . Her following projects included popular films such as Kanthaswamy ( 2009 ) in Tamil , and Pokkiri Raja ( 2010 ) in Malayalam , her roles in which established her as one of the leading actresses in the South Indian film industries . In 2012 , she was cast in the British @-@ Canadian film Midnight 's Children under the direction of Deepa Mehta , based on Salman Rushdie 's Booker Prize @-@ winning novel of the same name , for which she received international critical acclaim . She achieved further commercial success by starring in films such as Pavitra ( 2013 ) and Chandra ( 2013 ) . In 2014 , Shriya Saran starred in the critically acclaimed Telugu film Manam , which she received accolades for her performance . 
 In addition to her work in films , Saran has been the brand ambassador for several brands across India , endorsing beauty and health products . Among other philanthropic activities , she has volunteered for a number of charity organizations , and in 2011 she opened a spa employing exclusively visually challenged people . She also was the brand ambassador Celebrity Cricket League for its two first seasons . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Shriya Saran Bhatnagar was born on 11 September 1982 in the Haridwar in Northern India , to <unk> Saran Bhatnagar and <unk> Saran Bhatnagar . Her father worked for Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited and her mother was a Chemistry teacher in Delhi Public School , <unk> in Haridwar and Delhi Public School , Mathura Road , New Delhi . Saran completed her schooling from both schools where her mother had taught . She has an elder brother named <unk> who lives in Mumbai . Her family lived in the small town of BHEL colony in Haridwar when she was growing up . She later studied at Lady Shri Ram College in Delhi and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in literature . Saran is an accomplished dancer . She was first trained as a child by her mother in Kathak and Rajasthani folk dance , and later trained in Kathak style by <unk> Narayan . She was involved with many dance teams in college and with her teacher . They would incorporate social issues into their dance routines . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 2001 – 03 ) = = = 
 While in her sophomore year at the <unk> College in Delhi , Saran got her first opportunity to appear in front of the camera for a video shoot . Following her dance teacher 's recommendation , she was invited to appear in the music video of <unk> Nathan 's " <unk> Kyun Hawa " . Shot in Banaras , the video was seen by Ramoji Films who offered her the lead role of Neha in their film Ishtam . Saran accepted the part , and even before it was released she was signed to four more films , including <unk> <unk> , in which she played a millionaire 's daughter who falls for a middle class man . In 2002 , she starred in Santosham , co @-@ starring Nagarjuna , Prabhu Deva and Gracy Singh , which was her first commercial success . The film took the Nandi Award for Best Feature Film and Filmfare Best Film Award ( Telugu ) . Saran played a girl who lets someone she loves go with another , but wins him back later in life . For her performance , she earned a nomination for the CineMAA Award for Best <unk> Female , giving her a good foothold in the Telugu industry in the early part of her career . 
 In 2003 , Saran acted a supporting role in her first Hindi film , Tujhe Meri Kasam , starring debutants Ritesh Deshmukh and Genelia D 'Souza in leading roles . She also performed the lead female role in several Telugu films including Tagore , which was screened at the International Indian Film Academy Awards , and was a commercial success . She followed it with her Tamil film debut in Enakku 20 <unk> 18 , alongside Tarun and Trisha Krishnan , which was simultaneously shot in Telugu as Nee <unk> Naaku <unk> , in which she played a football coach . Though she acted in films in three languages that year , overall eight of the first ten films of her career were in Telugu . 
 = = = Career fluctuations ( 2004 – 07 ) = = = 
 In 2004 , Saran acted in two Telugu and two Hindi films , including <unk> , where she played a student in classical singing . She had ten 2005 releases , nine of which were Telugu films , the most notable for her being <unk> . There she appeared opposite Prabhas , and earned her first nomination for the Filmfare Best Telugu Actress Award . A reviewer for <unk> said that as an action film , Saran 's character of the lead 's love interest was not well developed ; that she was there primarily for the songs . Meanwhile , she tried to make her comeback in Tamil with <unk> , a remake of the Telugu film <unk> . Neither the movie nor her performance were received well . Also in 2005 , she appeared as one of only three characters in the film Mogudu <unk> O <unk> , which was about a married couple 's first night together , and made a guest appearance in a children 's film called <unk> , which won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu . Saran 's only lead role in 2006 , excluding three special appearances , was in the Tamil film Thiruvilayadal <unk> . 
 In 2007 , she was chosen to play the lead female role opposite Rajinikanth in S. Shankar 's Sivaji : The Boss , which was the most expensive Indian film at that time . R. G. Vijayasarathy wrote in his review for Rediff that aside from her beauty , Saran " proves that she can act too " . Her performance earned her a South Scope Style Award for Best Tamil Actress , her first award win , and a nomination at the Vijay Awards . The role also made her a star in the south Indian film industry . During this phase of her career , she made several special appearances in item numbers , including in the films Devadasu , Munna , and <unk> . 
 Also in 2007 , Saran made her comeback in Hindi cinema with <unk> , which was a joint production between India and Pakistan , and in which she played a Muslim girl and had to learn Urdu . This was her fourth Hindi film , but the others had failed to make any impact . Sanjay Ram , writing for Business of Cinema , gave the film 2 @.@ 5 of 5 stars , and said that Saran provided a brief but compelling performance . Saran later said that the film strengthened her conviction that all religions are equal . Later that year she appeared in one more Tamil film , <unk> Tamil Magan opposite Vijay . Though critics exalted her looks , her performance received mixed reviews , with one reviewer , <unk> <unk> of Rediff , going so far as to say that her " acting is as bad as her looks are good " . That same year Saran made a special appearance in a scene in the Kannada film Arasu . In all she appeared in six films in 2007 , in four different languages . 
 = = = American cinema debut ( 2008 – 12 ) = = = 
 In 2008 , Saran then made her American cinema debut in Ashok Amritraj 's The Other End of the Line . She played the role of Priya Sethi who works as a telephone operator in an Indian call centre , while acting alongside Jesse Metcalfe , <unk> Kher and Tara Sharma . Shriya 's performance was praised by critics , particularly her on @-@ screen chemistry with Jesse Metcalfe . John Anderson , writing for Variety magazine , said it was " a winning Stateside debut for beautiful Indian actress Shriya Saran . " 
 Saran acted in the Hindi film Mission <unk> with Zayed Khan , Vivek Oberoi and Shabbir Ahluwalia also in 2008 . She played the character of Anjali Sagar which was inspired by the character of <unk> Dutta played by Preity Zinta in the film Lakshya ; a journalist who desires to have a child with her husband , which leads to their separation , since he is reluctant . Bollywood Hungama critics said that her character was wasted , as again she gets very little screen time . However , she did pick up the Stardust Exciting New Face Award . 
 Her most important 2009 release was the commercially successful Tamil film Kanthaswamy , alongside Vikram . She earned a nomination at the Vijay Awards . Vikram himself said in an interview that her role was on par with his , and she easily stole the show on most occasions . Of her character in the film , Saran said that it was the best she has done so far . Also that year she appeared as the female lead in <unk> . A reviewer said that her glamour and the songs were the only high points of the film . For <unk> and Kanthaswamy together , she received her third award win , the Amrita Mathrubhumi Award for Best Actress . She then appeared in another English film , Cooking with Stella , which is a comedy , but also takes a look at the serious nature of relationships between servants and employers . It was selected to the Toronto International Film Festival , which Saran attended . 
 In 2010 , Saran made her Malayalam debut with Pokkiri Raja , in which she appeared opposite Mammootty and Prithviraj . The film was declared a super hit in the first week , breaking the record in Malayalam cinema for opening week gross income , though it was not received well critically , and it was said of Saran that all she had to do was look pretty . She then enacted her first lead role in a Telugu film after five years , in the commercially successful action @-@ comedy film Don Seenu opposite Ravi Teja , where she plays the sister of a mobster . In the opinion of some critics , she stole the show with her dances and romantic scenes . The year 2010 was her second busiest after 2005 , having appeared in eight films in all , this time in four languages . 
 In 2011 , Saran appeared in <unk> , where she worked with Tamil actor Jeeva for the first time . The film received fairly low reviews . Although some reviews said that Saran was not given much opportunity to show her acting skills , mainly just adding a romantic touch to a mostly violent film , she was referred to by another as the pivot around which the film revolves . Her performance earned her Best Actress Award at the International Tamil Film Awards . Her only other film in 2011 was a special appearance in a song for Tamil film Rajapattai . 
 Saran 's first release of 2012 was her second Malayalam project , <unk> , co @-@ starring Mohanlal and directed by <unk> <unk> . The movie was delayed many times , and it was rumored that Saran would leave the project , but in October 2010 , the producer of the film announced that shooting would commence in Dubai with Shriya Saran among the cast . It was released on 26 January . Her next release was in Gali Gali Mein Chor Hai , from director <unk> <unk> , which began shooting in September 2011 , and released on 3 February . She then was seen in the critically average comedic <unk> film <unk> Nena with actors Allari Naresh and <unk> , followed by Sekhar Kammula 's much delayed Life is Beautiful . 
 Saran has starred in Deepa Mehta 's long delayed English project Midnight 's Children , which is based on Salman Rushdie 's highly acclaimed novel of the same name . It was filmed under the working title of Winds of Change . It was screened at several film festivals in late 2012 in Canada and finally made its general release in India on February 1 , 2013 . 
 = = = 2013 – present = = = 
 In early 2013 , Saran appeared in an item number in the film <unk> Ghaziabad . This was her first item number in a Hindi film . On 7 June Saran 's Pavitra was released , in which she played a prostitute . At a press conference in Hyderabad , she said that the film is very special for her , and that she was touched by the sensitivity that director / writer <unk> Maharshi gave to the topic . According to a review from The Times of India , the most cinematic part of the film is a sensual number " <unk> Ra Ra ... " in which the camera shows in the curves of the main character . He summed up the review saying , " Besides Shriya Saran 's curves there is nothing in this movie that 's worth watching per se . " Her bi @-@ lingual film Chandra directed by Roopa Iyer was simultaneously made in Kannada and Tamil languages . She played the role of a princess in the film opposite Kannada actor Prem Kumar . The film released in Kannada on 27 June 2013 , and in Tamil on 14 February 2014 . It became a moderate success at the Kannada box office . The film marked Saran 's return to Tamil cinema after more than five years . 
 Saran 's first film of 2014 , released May 23 , was the Telugu family comedy Manam , which was a success in India and America . Saran 's first film of 2015 was Gopala Gopala , a remake of Bollywood blockbuster Oh , My God , released in the January festive season . She will next appear in director Karan <unk> 's Hindi film Valmiki Ki <unk> , which is currently under production . She appeared opposite Ajay Devgan in Drishyam , a remake of the Malayalam film of the same name , which turned to be a box office success . In mid January 2016 , she made a special appearance in Nagarjuna 's Oopiri , while also signing her next Hindi film <unk> opposite Nana Patekar . In May 2016 , she was selected as a female lead in Balakrishna 's 100th film <unk> Satakarni . 
 = = Other works = = 
 In 2003 , Saran hosted the 50th Filmfare South Award with actor R. Madhavan . She was a part of Tamil director Mani Ratnam 's stage show , Netru , Indru , Naalai , an event which sought to raise funds for " The Banyan " , a voluntary organisation which rehabilitates homeless women with mental illness in Chennai . She was one of the guests alongside actor Surya Sivakumar at the season 3 finale of TV dance show <unk> <unk> . 
 Saran was the first actress , and the third celebrity after Shah Rukh Khan and Aamir Khan to deliver a lecture to students at the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad ( IIM @-@ A ) on 12 February 2010 . She said that , " The Indian media and entertainment industry is the fastest growing sector at present , so considering this IIM Ahmedabad had started a new program CFI – Contemporary Film Industry – A Business Perspective . I was there to give a lecture to 2nd year students of CFI and did a lot of research for the lecture for nearly five days . " She held a lecture on marketing and branding of a film . In 2011 , she gave a lecture to students at the Indian Institutes of Technology ( IIT ) Madras on the history of films , and films as a medium of cultural exchange . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Saran started her modelling career by acting in a Pond 's Creams advertisement . She then did a Coca @-@ Cola advertisement alongside Tamil actor Vijay which was directed by prominent director Rajiv Menon . She also starred in a Fair & Lovely creams advertisement during her early career . Shriya Saran is also appointed brand ambassador for Pantene Shampoo . In 2007 , she became the brand ambassador of <unk> Stores . She is now the brand ambassador of the Lux and Head & Shoulders . Saran was also signed as brand ambassador along with actor Saif Ali Khan for Brooke Bond Taj Mahal Tea . Saran says no to soft drinks advertisements because she feels that soft drinks may harm children 's health . In 2011 , Saran was appointed as the promotional model for McVitie 's by United Biscuits along with actress Bipasha Basu . In 2013 , Saran was appointed as brand ambassador for Colgate Active Salt Healthy White toothpaste , along with Bollywood actress Kareena Kapoor . In 2014 , she was signed as brand ambassador for Karnataka Milk Federation ( KMF ) . 
 = = = CCL ( Celebrity Cricket League ) = = = 
 On the sports front , Saran is brand ambassador of Celebrity Cricket League ( CCL ) , a concept that mixes two passions in India , film and cricket . In April 2010 , she danced with Shah Rukh Khan at the fourth season opening ceremony of the Indian Premier League ( IPL ) , another cricket league . 
 In 2007 , Saran launched the first issue of Galatta Cinema and has been featured on its cover many times . In 2008 , she was featured in , and appeared on the cover of the June issue of Maxim India . Editor Anup Kutty said , " We had been thinking of getting someone who bridges this strange divide we have between the North , South and the West ... Shreya fit the bill perfectly . " She has appeared on various other magazine covers over the years , including Jade and South Scope . In 2012 , she again did a photoshoot for Maxim India . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Saran is very reluctant to talk about her private life , and usually denies that reported <unk> are romantic in nature . She is Hindu . 
 Saran is well known for her charity work . She describes herself as someone used to " sharing time and resources with the underprivileged since childhood . " She says that " celebrities can show the way by sensitising people to social issues , campaigning for causes or being part of fund @-@ raisers . " Her family has always encouraged her to think of the needy . 
 Saran is a brand ambassador for the <unk> Foundation , and for the Save A Child 's Heart Foundation ( <unk> ) , which works for the benefit of poor children and people affected by natural calamities . She helps finance a Prevention of Aids foundation . In 2009 , Saran joined with other eminent personalities to promote ' The Joy of Giving Week ' , to encourage people from all walks of life to engage in acts of giving . She regularly participates in carnivals and campaigns that associate with children benefits . She is associated with animal welfare and the Blue Cross of India . She is also associated with an NGO called World Vision that finds parents for deprived kids , and works for Apollo ’ s RDF to raise funds for underprivileged children . 
 In 2011 , she opened a Spa which exclusively employs the visually challenged . It is called Shree Spa , and is located in Mumbai . Saran has said " When I studied in DPS Mathura Road in Delhi , there was a school for blind exactly opposite to our school . I used to go there every week and spend time seeing how these students played cricket and did other things normally . That is what inspired me to do something for these people " . In an interview to TOI , the actress said , " We feel sympathetic towards them but we never employ them . We are scared because we have not grown up with them . While these people might be visually impaired , their other senses are very strong . So they can effectively give foot and back massages and treatments like reflexology . It 's important to understand that you are not doing a favour on them but they are doing a favour on you " . 
 In January 2008 , Saran was the subject of a controversy , when a Hindu organisation in Chennai lodged a police complaint against Saran , objecting to the outfit worn by her during the 175th day celebration of her film , Sivaji : The Boss . In a complaint , the Hindu Makkal Katchi ( <unk> ) alleged that Shriya 's outfit had " offended Hindu culture " . Shriya publicly apologised to Tamilians and Hindus , saying it was a mistake , and that she had " great respect for the tradition and culture of Tamil Nadu [ ... ] I was shooting for a Hindi film in Thanjavur . I came to the function directly from the shooting , [ ... ] I was unaware of the repercussions because of the attire I wore during the function . " 
 On working in different regional film industries in India she has stated , " I don ’ t consider Kollywood or Bollywood as separate entities . For me , there ’ s only a single category , the Indian film industry , which is extremely rich owing to its diverse genres and languages . " She is fluent in Hindi , English , and can understand Telugu and Tamil well . On 19 January 2013 , she quit Twitter due to derogatory comments from her followers . However , she rejoined Twitter with a new account on 27 January 2015 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As Actress 
 = = Awards = = 
 Honours and recognitions 
 2010 – T. <unk> Reddy Lalitha Kala <unk> Awards for Contributions to Telugu Cinema 
 2010 – Featured in a poll conducted by Rediff about woman achievers in Indian entertainment , ranking her among the top actresses 
 2014 – <unk> Women 's Award 
 Rankings on The Times of India 's list of " 50 Most Desirable Women " : 13th in 2010 , 15th in 2011 , 18th in 2012 , 7th in 2013 , 5th in 2014 and 6th in 2015 
 Rankings on Hyderabad Times most desirable woman for south , 3rd in 2013 , 2nd in 2014 , 2nd in 2015 
 Brand Ambassador for SIIMA AWARDS in 2013 , 2014 and 2015 
 = Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Soviet Union ) = 
 The Ministry of External Relations ( MER ) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) ( Russian : Министерство <unk> <unk> СССР ) , formed on 16 July 1923 , was one of the most important government offices in the Soviet Union . It was known as the People 's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs ( Russian : Народный комиссариат <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , or <unk> , until 1946 . The Ministry was known as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Russian : Министерство <unk> <unk> ) , or MFA , from 1946 to 1991 . The MER , at the all @-@ Union level , was established on 6 July 1923 , after the signing of the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR , and was based upon the People 's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) , formed in 1917 . The Ministry was led by a Commissar prior to 1946 , a Minister of Foreign Affairs prior to 1991 , and a Minister of External Relations in 1991 . Every leader of the Ministry was nominated by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , and was a member of the Council of Ministers . 
 The Ministry of External Relations negotiated diplomatic treaties , handled Soviet foreign affairs along with the International Department of the Central Committee and aided in the guidance of international communism and anti @-@ imperialism , both strong themes of Soviet policy . Before Mikhail Gorbachev became General Secretary , the organisational structure of the MER mostly stayed the same . As many other Soviet agencies , the MER had an inner @-@ policy group known as the Collegium , made up of the minister , the two first deputy ministers and nine deputy ministers , among others . Each deputy minister usually headed his own department . 
 = = Duties and responsibilities = = 
 The primary duty of the foreign ministry was directing the general line of Soviet foreign policy . The MER represented the country abroad and participated in talks with foreign delegations on behalf of the Soviet government . It also appointed diplomatic officers , with the exception of Soviet ambassadors , who were appointed by the Council of Ministers . The MER was responsible for taking care of the USSR 's economic and political interests abroad , although economic interests were also the joint responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Trade . The State Committee of the Council of Ministers on Cultural Links with Foreign Nations and the Ministry of Culture worked jointly with the MER in regards to the protection of Soviet citizens abroad , the exercise of overall Soviet consular relations abroad and the promotion of Soviet culture abroad . A less visible duty of the MER was its role in the coordination of Soviet intelligence operations abroad . 
 Exit visas were issued by the federal MER , but also by its all @-@ union foreign affairs ministries and by the Ministry of Internal Affairs . The same was true for the civilian external passports that were issued to Soviet citizens . 
 = = Organisation and structure = = 
 The inner policy making group of the ministry was the Collegium . The members of the Collegium were usually the minister , the two first deputy ministers , the nine deputy ministers , a chief of the general secretariat and fourteen other members . In total there were 27 members of the Collegium in 1990 . Each deputy minister was responsible for a department . The remaining members controlled either a department or an administrative body of the ministry . A Collegium in the USSR was , in many ways , the same as collective leadership . The Collegium coordinated decision making regarding the allocation of specific tasks on the basis of the MER 's policy . This body was expected to review new directives ordered by the minister and note their successes and failures . Mikhail Gorbachev 's " new thinking " abroad was made official in the Collegium in 1988 , such as by setting goals for improving diplomatic relations and creating " decent , human , material and spiritual living conditions for all nations " . Furthermore , the Collegium noted that the improvements in international efforts " to save the world " was the best " class notion of socialism . " It believed that if socialism could create a more peaceful world , socialism would truly have carried out a " world revolution . " 
 The federal Ministry of External Relations and its local all @-@ union affiliates would regularly convene at the federal Council of Ministers and its Union Republics branches to discuss the policy , duties and responsibilities of the MER . This joint gathering led to more participation from the union republics on foreign policy implementation , elaboration and coordination . This organ also discussed international problems and solved such problems in the international arena . 
 Because the communist regimes of Eastern Europe collapsed in 1989 , there was no longer any distinction between the Eastern and Western European departments . A separate administration body known as " embassy affairs " existed for servicing the Soviet diplomatic corps abroad . In 1986 , the Soviet government created new MER departments to deal with arms control and disarmament . The MER also created new regional departments , such as the Department of the Pacific . This was a radical change , since the MER 's structure had mostly remained unchanged since the Russian Empire . A Soviet textbook describes MER 's organisation and structure as follows : 
 An important branch of the central apparatus , from the point of view of day @-@ to @-@ day operational diplomatic guidance , is the executive diplomatic division . The nature of activities engaged in by these divisions is determined by their territorial and functional characteristics . Territorial departments handle questions of foreign relations with specific groups of states . These groups of countries are divided by regions . 
 The reorganisation efforts that took place in 1986 and the beginning of 1987 led to the replacement of many senior diplomats . The government also introduced a new principle which stated , " Once an ambassador has been at the same post for 4 or 5 years , he loses the edge of his <unk> . The optimum period of service in one and the same post is three years as a maximum . " 
 = = Ideology and policy @-@ making = = 
 Ideology was a key component of Soviet foreign policy . Soviet diplomacy was built on the ideas of Marxism @-@ Leninism ; Vladimir Lenin understood that compromise is an important element in foreign diplomacy and was a proponent of peaceful coexistence with the capitalist powers . A primary goal of the emphasis placed on coexistence and compromise was to “ prevent the imperialist states from attacking the USSR while it was restoring the Russian economy following the Civil War and , later , while it was undertaking industrial development . Therefore , " certain agreements with the imperialist countries in the interest of socialism " could sometimes be reached . The relationship between policy and ideology remained an active issue until the dissolution of the Soviet Union . According to an unknown former director of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations , all successful diplomatic activities by the Soviet side were based on the principles of Marxism @-@ Leninism and the Soviet evaluation of other countries in certain fields , such as social development . The Directorate for Planning Foreign Policy Measures , an organ of the MER , analysed international relations and tried to predict future events , although it never actually planned the policy of the MER . Soviet foreign affairs minister Eduard Shevardnadze claimed that Soviet foreign policy , and the " new thinking " approach laid out by Gorbachev , had become the cornerstone of maintaining stable diplomatic relations throughout the world . 
 There are many examples of rivalry between party and state in Soviet history . In foreign policy the state was represented by the MER , while the International Department ( ID ) represented the party . The ID 's foreign policy approach was more ideological than the MER 's , which followed a policy of détente , literally meaning the easing of strained relations with the First World . Historian Jan Adams explained the conflict in the following manner : 
 " Deeply embedded and seemingly inescapable conflict between these two major Soviet foreign policy institutions and their missions . On the other hand , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs seeks to cultivate formal state to state relationships ; on the other hand the ID pursues the party 's dream of building a communist world at the expense of capitalism . " 
 The MER used much more of its human and financial resources for propaganda purposes and so @-@ called " active measures " than other non @-@ Soviet affiliated foreign ministries . This included dissemination of views supported by the Soviet government , harassment , censorship , radio jamming , forgeries and general disinformation . Disinformation had become an important component of day @-@ to @-@ day operations in Soviet foreign affairs . Because of this , during most of its lifespan the Soviet MER had a much higher budget than its counterpart non @-@ Soviet ministries , especially when comparing the MER to the foreign ministries of the Western Bloc . Shevardnadze claimed that the Soviet government used an estimate of 700 billion rubles alone on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( known as such until 1991 ) to support " ideological confrontations " with the First World . 
 = = History = = 
 The People 's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) was established in 1917 . The Commissar was a member of the Council of the People 's Commissars . The People 's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs replaced the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Empire after the October Revolution . In 1946 the Council of People 's Commissars was renamed the Council of Ministers and the People 's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs was renamed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 
 As Soviet foreign minister , Andrei Gromyko noted in his memoirs that working with Nikita Khrushchev was not always an easy task . As Gromyko tells it , " Khrushchev would constantly throw new ideas back and forth . " His ideas were not always supported , but , as Gromyko noted , Khrushchev had a positive impact on Soviet foreign policy . Leonid Brezhnev , according to Gromyko , was a man much easier to do business with because he compensated for his lack of skills by discussing subjects openly within the Politburo . While he was easier to do business with in some areas , Brezhnev 's slowness and lack of knowledge in certain fields made him hard to discuss foreign policy with . However , Gromyko noted that his disease should be taken in consideration . Mikhail Gorbachev 's " new thinking " led to friendlier foreign relations with the Western countries , but his domestic policies destabilised the country , and in 1991 the Soviet Union dissolved . In 1991 , before the country 's dissolution , the Ministry was renamed the Ministry of External Relations . The ministry was succeeded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation in 1992 after Russia declared itself the legal successor to the USSR . 
 = = Commissars and ministers = = 
 The following persons headed the Commissariat / Ministry as commissars ( narkoms ) , ministers , and deputy ministers during the Soviet era : 
 = Keeps Gettin ' Better = 
 " Keeps Gettin ' Better " is a song by American singer Christina Aguilera , taken from her first greatest hits album , Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits ( 2008 ) . It was released on September 9 , 2008 , by RCA Records as the only single from the album . The song was written and produced by Linda Perry , with additional songwriting from Aguilera . After giving birth to her son Max , she looked to " come up with something new and fresh " , developing a " futuristic " era of her career . " Keeps Gettin ' Better " is an electroclash and electropop song , and was inspired by the likes of Andy Warhol and Goldfrapp . Its lyrics portray Aguilera as a superhero . 
 Upon its release , " Keeps Gettin ' Better " received generally mixed reviews from music critics . At a time when dance music was becoming increasingly prominent , the song was criticized for its lack of originality , but was deemed " catchy " and a welcome change from Aguilera 's fifth studio album Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . It became Aguilera 's highest debut on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number seven . The song additionally topped the US Hot Dance Club Play chart . Elsewhere , it peaked at number four in Canada , while charting inside the top twenty in Austria , Germany , Ireland , Italy , Japan , Slovakia and the United Kingdom . 
 The accompanying music video , directed by Peter Berg , features Aguilera in an editing room , producing the music video on a green screen . Using the equipment there , she creates several characters , including a blonde 1960 's inspired hippie character , another based on Catwoman and a futuristic blue @-@ haired version of herself . Aguilera debuted the song during a live performance at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards . Wearing a catsuit , she sang a remixed version of her debut single " Genie in a Bottle " ( 1999 ) , before performing " Keeps Gettin ' Better " . Aguilera also performed the song during a promotional tour for the album , and as part of a medley of her greatest hits on the 36th Annual American Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Keeps Gettin ' Better " was released almost a year after Aguilera gave birth to her first son , Max . She told MSN that " Growing into being a woman , a mother , it 's a very different time in my life , and also where I 'm at musically " . Throughout her career , Aguilera has been noted for her reinventions . She stated that with " Keeps Gettin ' Better " , she wished to " come up with something new and fresh " , calling the new redefined era of her music " futuristic " . Aguilera said that the development of new songs featured on Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits was influenced by artists such as Blondie , Velvet Underground and Nico . Visually , artists Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein were credited as influences for the album . After stating the theme of the record was futuristic , she said to MTV News that the era has a " very pop @-@ art feel visually " . Aguilera also stated that she had been " diving deep " into " electro in particular " at the time , noting that she had started connections to collaborate with prominent dance artists Goldfrapp and Ladytron . While talking to MTV News , Aguilera discussed the influence behind the track and the album , and said : 
 I wanted to give [ fans ] a little sneak preview of what 's to come [ with the VMA performance ] . The vein of the new material is a futuristic take on what is inspiring me at the moment ... and it 's got a very pop @-@ art feel , visually . [ There 's a ] throwback to Andy Warhol and all the colors and vividness and bright boldness that was in that artwork . I 'm a big collector of pop art and graffiti art at this point , too — D * Face and Banksy , also Roy Lichtenstein ... and it 's been very fun venturing off into that zone . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Keeps Gettin ' Better " was written by Aguilera and Linda Perry , while production was done by the latter . It is an electropop song , written in the key of F minor . Aguilera 's vocals in the track span from the note of F3 to the note of C5 . Meanwhile , Shahryar Rizvi from the Dallas Observer described it as electroclash . The song has also been noted by The Times as an " electro @-@ glam " number . Described as a " muscular , percussive arena @-@ ready " track , the song garnered comparisons to Goldfrapp 's Supernature album and Britney Spears ' song " Womanizer " . An " instantly engaging " electropop beat begins the track ; it additionally features " space @-@ age sounds " in response to its futuristic concept , with a " throbbing " synth line . Lyrically , themes of female empowerment and being a superhero are dominant on the track . Aguilera sings , " Some days I 'm a super bitch " . The lyrics derive from Aguilera 's experience as a mother . While talking to MSN , she said : 
 After having my own child , it 's pretty amazing what females are capable of . We 're Supergirl , we do it all : we give the love , we give the milk . On the other hand , I 'm running a business . I 'm running my career . That comes with being labeled a bitch . If that 's what I 'm gonna be called by being assertive and knowing who I am and what I want out of life , then so be it . I will wear that label proudly . For me it 's about turning that word into a positive . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Chris Willman from Entertainment Weekly responded to the new additions of the compilation saying , " The singer has banished melisma and belting from these electronic confections , and her chops sound just as hot set on simmer . " Nick Butler from Sputnikmusic positively received the song and " Dynamite " saying " Christina the pop singer is dead , long live Electro Christina " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy called the song a " welcome change " from Aguilera 's 2006 Back to Basics album , but stated that the song is not one of Aguilera 's best singles . Fraser McAlpine from BBC wrote a mixed review for the song , recognizing Aguilera 's maturity in the lyrics . However , he confessed that this could easily be a song by Pink , who might have made a better job of making it her own . Allmusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that the singer was instantly overshadowed by fellow singer Britney Spears , but " Keeps Gettin ' Better " proves that no other teen pop singer of her era has a better track than Aguilera , concluding that if the new songs are any indication , the title of the hits compilation [ Keeps Gettin ' Better : A Decade of Hits ] is no lie either . 
 Gavin Martin from The Mirror gave a mixed response , as he said : " Nothing dates as quickly as pop that dares to call itself futuristic " . Martin awarded the song 3 / 5 and concluded with " It 's not that this new number from the forthcoming Greatest Hits set is bad – but it 's a whole lot more routine than it pretends to be . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented on the possibly outdated dance theme . Responding to the new additions of the record including " Keeps Gettin ' Better " , he noted : " Not exactly what one would call original , but if it 's true the singer 's next studio album will reprise this electro @-@ pop sound , Aguilera deserves credit for refusing to play it safe . " Bill Lamb from About.com awarded the track three stars . He noted Aguilera 's dance @-@ inspired effort , at a time of dance dominance in the industry , negatively and stated that " the catchy electro @-@ pop vibe isn 't enough to make it one of her more memorable efforts . " Rolling Stone noted that in the compilation , Aguilera 's old singles are " weighed down by four bland attempts at 2008 's trendy , Lady Gaga @-@ jacking electropop " . Paul Thompson and Amy Phillips from Pitchfork Media said that the track was " basically a ripoff " of Goldfrapp 's " Ooh La La " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Keeps Gettin ' Better " sold 143 @,@ 895 legal downloads in its first week dated September 30 , 2008 , debuting at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 a few weeks later . This has become Aguilera 's highest debut on the chart and became her first top ten hit since " Ain 't No Other Man " in 2006 . As of August 2014 , it has sold 1 @.@ 156 million digital copies in the US . The song has performed well on the Canadian Hot 100 chart ; it debuted at number 16 , and a week later the song became the " Greatest Airplay , Sales Gainer " , peaking at number four . However , the track only spent one week within the top ten . It debuted and peaked at number 21 in Swedish Singles Chart , and reached number 14 in the United Kingdom . On September 21 , 2008 , the song debuted and peaked on the Australian ARIA Charts at number 26 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Directed by Peter Berg , the music video for the song is said to have been influenced by films Minority Report and the James Bond series , and was conceived to show Aguilera " through time and fashion in an homage to her 10 @-@ year career " according to a statement by her label . Popjustice saw the music video in progress on October 22 , 2008 , in the edit they reported that the music video was produced on a green screen , but the concept of the video was to be Aguilera in an edit suite pressing various flashing buttons , editing what was her own music video . Aguilera herself discussed the production of the video , saying " I really enjoyed making the video for ' Keeps Gettin ' Better ' , being an artist who likes to play around with different looks , it was a lot of fun to portray various characters within the same shoot . " The music video debuted on iLike , an online music service on October 27 , 2008 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video starts with multi colored , digital waves which then merge into a scene where Aguilera is sat in an editing suite overlooking a sound and edit board . Pressing flashing buttons , multiple large screens stand in front of the desk and correspond to her choice of button selected . The first images shown on the screens feature Aguilera as Catwoman , a futuristic blue haired character , and a 1960s influenced hippie before focusing on the 60 's inspired character . The blond character is shown to be holding an old fashioned handheld video camera filming scenes of high rise buildings , all the while showing shots of Aguilera editing the on screen projection . The blond hippie inspired character is then seen in a second setting , riding a bicycle through a grassy field at times performing dance movements to the song and lip @-@ synching . 
 Aguilera then takes a touch screen Nokia 5800 <unk> phone from her pocket with an image of a futuristic blue haired character , after producing a scene of a convertible car , she inputs the character from the phone onto the screen and into the car and the blue haired character is then shown driving . Aguilera then produces silhouettes of a catwoman style figure , until Aguilera as the catwoman character is shown , wearing a leather catsuit with cat ears , lighting bolts shoot from her hands until another scene featuring the same character shows her alongside a black motorbike holding a gun . Shots of both the blue haired character and catwoman lead to a scene featuring a blond Aguilera moving inside of the screens accompanied by multi @-@ colored digital waves , before shots of the catwoman style character on a motorbike , shooting the gun are presented . Shots of the different scenes including one of Aguilera at the desk accompanied by a toy robot are shown finishing as Aguilera turns the screens off . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Gil Kaufman from MTV News called the video " <unk> " . Popjustice also gave the video a positive review , saying : " The video 's a riot of costume changes , makeovers , multiple ' scenarios ' and Christina even seems to look like she 's having fun . We 'd sort of forgotten the single was even coming out , but the video makes it all seem quite exciting . " The Sun commented that " has done the impossible – made the blue rinse sexy " . Anna Pickard from The Guardian heavily compared Aguilera to Britney Spears in the video , saying : " We 're at a final count of four <unk> to five <unk> . [ ... ] We can 't be seen to have achieved a perfect Xtina / Britney balance . [ ... ] We 'd probably need a guest appearance from Madonna for that " . She also felt that " the 30 @-@ second Target advert is better than the whole video . But still : any release that makes it compulsory to type ' Christina Aguilera Keeps Getting Better ' is surely a clever ploy " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 At a press conference in Paramount Studios in Los Angeles , Aguilera confirmed that she would be performing at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards on September 7 , 2008 . She discussed about allowing her newly born son , Max , to watch the performance , saying : " This will be his first time watching me perform on television , but only for a little while because he 's not really allowed to watch television yet . I 'll make an exception for the VMAs . " Aguilera discussed the concept of the performance beforehand saying : " You 're going to get a first look and a first listen at my new image and my new sound . The last album , the style and sound was about vintage glam — this one is all about the future " . The performance began with Aguilera standing in a tower of neon @-@ lit boxes , singing " Genie 2 @.@ 0 " while wearing second @-@ skin leather catsuit accessorized with silver armbands , a black @-@ leather cat mask , black cape and platinum @-@ blond hair . Then , she began performing " Keeps Gettin ' Better " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy called the performance " sassy , slickly @-@ choreographed " . 
 Aguilera made an appearance at the <unk> Africa Rising at the London 's Royal Albert Hall , where she performed several old hits and " Keeps Gettin ' Better " . She also performed the song as part of the tour in Kiev , Ukraine , on October 20 and 21 . The last date was held on October 24 in Abu Dhabi , at the Emirates Palace Hotel . On November 23 , Aguilera promoted her greatest hits album by performing at the 36th Annual American Music Awards . She opened the show with a seven @-@ minute medley including six of her greatest hits . Los Angeles Times ' Todd Martens commented about the performance : " Things get started in familiar territory , with an Aguilera medley , the first of what is sure to be many whiplash @-@ inducing musical performances this evening . But unlike her MTV VMA run @-@ down , Aguilera backs into " Genie in a Bottle " rather than opening with it . [ ... ] Opening with the ballad allowed Aguilera to flex her vocal muscles , but the zipping between songs never allowed her - or her background dancers - to catch a groove " . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = No. 1 Aircraft Depot RAAF = 
 No. 1 Aircraft Depot ( No. 1 AD ) was a maintenance unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Formed in July 1921 at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , it moved to the nearby RAAF Laverton in March 1926 . As well as servicing aircraft and other equipment , in its early years the depot supported survey flights in Australia and the Pacific region . Its strength increased from 350 staff in the 1930s to over 2 @,@ 000 during World War II , when it assembled , tested and repaired aircraft ranging from Tiger Moths to Spitfires to B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses . The depot also engaged in aircraft research and development . Shortly after the war it introduced the first jets into RAAF service . In 1961 , No. 1 AD ceased airframe maintenance , but continued to service aero engines . By the 1970s its main focus was ground @-@ based equipment , though it still handled some aircraft components . The depot was disbanded in December 1994 , its functions having been taken over by other units and private contractors . At the time of its disbandment , it was the oldest RAAF unit in continuous operation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ war years = = = 
 No. 1 Aircraft Depot ( No. 1 AD ) was one of the first units formed by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) after the new service was established ( as the Australian Air Force ) on 31 March 1921 . The original components of No. 1 AD became known as such in April 1921 , though the unit did not formally come into existence until July . Prior to this it comprised two elements in Melbourne , one at Spotswood handling the aircraft and equipment of the Imperial Gift , and another at North Fitzroy responsible for motor vehicle repair . When No. 1 AD was officially established at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , on 1 July , the Spotswood component was dissolved , while North Fitzroy continued to operate as a detachment . The unit 's inaugural commanding officer was Squadron Leader Bill Anderson , who was in overall charge of Point Cook . 
 In January 1922 the depot was organised into a headquarters with stores , aircraft repair , and engine repair sections . The vehicle repair section at North Fitzroy was transferred to Point Cook that April . Point Cook 's corrosive seaside atmosphere was however deemed an unsuitable long @-@ term location for aircraft maintenance . In September 1921 , the government purchased land at Laverton , near a railway station eight kilometres inland from Point Cook , for the express purpose of constructing a dedicated home for No. 1 AD as the " warehouse of the Air Force " . The depot , staffed by eight officers and seventy @-@ seven other ranks , relocated to the new base on 1 March 1926 . It occupied a large hangar that included an administration block , which along with living quarters and ancillary buildings had cost £ 300 @,@ 000 to build . 
 As well as receiving , assembling , testing and maintaining RAAF equipment , No. 1 AD was responsible for supporting research flights . In July 1927 , it was the departure point for the Northern Survey Flight , comprising a De Havilland DH.50 and two DH.9s , which reconnoitered northern and central Australia under the command of the Chief of the Air Staff , Wing Commander ( later Air Marshal Sir ) Richard Williams . The following month , No. 1 AD formed a Papuan Survey Flight , consisting of two Supermarine Seagull III amphibious biplanes under the command of Flight Lieutenant ( later Air Vice Marshal ) Ellis Wackett , to photograph the Papuan and New Guinean coasts as far north as Aitape . Wing Commander Bill Anderson returned to command the depot from April to August 1929 , handing over to Wing Commander Adrian Cole , who served in the post until December 1932 . 
 By the mid @-@ 1930s , No. 1 AD comprised some 350 staff , servicing a range of aircraft that included the Westland Wapiti , Bristol Bulldog , Hawker Demon , De Havilland Dragon Rapide , Avro Cadet , Avro Anson , and North American NA @-@ 16 . The NA @-@ 16 was later augmented by the purchase of the more advanced North American NA @-@ 33 , which was licensed and built in Australia by the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation as the CAC Wirraway . No. 1 AD 's commanding officers during this decade included Wing Commanders Frank McNamara ( February 1933 to April 1936 ) , Frank Lukis ( April 1936 to January 1938 ) , and Arthur Murphy ( January 1938 to May 1940 ) . To cope with a new policy of rapid expansion of the RAAF , a Recruit Training Section was formed under the depot 's auspices in March 1935 ; it was reorganised as Recruit Training Squadron on 1 September 1936 . On 3 May 1937 , Recruit Training Squadron acquired its own sub @-@ unit , the Communications and Survey Flight , utilising Tugan Gannets and Dragon Rapides for ongoing photographic survey work . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Although many squadrons were raised at RAAF Station Laverton during World War II , the base 's prime focus continued to be its aircraft depot . Following the outbreak of hostilities in September 1939 , No. 1 AD began expanding to handle the RAAF 's growing number of training and combat aircraft , among them De Havilland Tiger Moths , CAC Wirraways , Lockheed Hudsons , Hawker Hurricanes , and Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . The depot assembled and tested new aircraft , and ferried them to operational areas such as northern Australia and New Guinea . It was also responsible for the maintenance of in @-@ service aircraft , including their engines , instruments , and armament . As well as RAAF equipment , No. 1 AD repaired damaged US aircraft such as B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses . The depot undertook research and development on various types , including Supermarine Spitfires , CAC Boomerangs , and Wackett <unk> . It also ran comparative performance studies on Spitfires , Boomerangs , Kittyhawks , Brewster Buffalos , and Mitsubishi Zeros . 
 In the case of the Boomerang , for example , 105 CA @-@ 12s were delivered to No. 1 AD for testing between July 1942 and June 1943 . As soon as the aircraft started arriving , the depot commenced handling and armament trials that continued for six months , identifying and overcoming such issues as the aircraft 's guns freezing at high altitudes , and unusual levels of carbon monoxide in the cockpit . Fighter aces Alan Rawlinson and Wilfred Arthur , along with a United States Army Air Forces pilot , conducted comparative trials between a Boomerang , a Kittyhawk , a Buffalo , and a Bell Airacobra . The depot began despatching the Boomerangs to their operational units in March 1943 , and the following month performance tested a turbocharged version of the CA @-@ 14 , though this model never entered production . No. 1 AD 's Special Duties and Performance Flight was responsible for conducting performance trials during the early war years ; in December 1943 it became a separate organisation , No. 1 Aircraft Performance Unit , which would evolve into the Aircraft Research and Development Unit ( ARDU ) in 1947 . Among the depot 's wartime commanding officers was Wing Commander John Lerew , who held the post from December 1942 until November 1943 . During his tenure , after investigating the crash of a Vultee Vengeance , he designed a clip to prevent the accidental release of the pilot 's safety harness , which was later adopted for all such harnesses . By January 1945 , No. 1 AD 's strength had increased to its highest level of 2 @,@ 339 staff . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 A Gloster Meteor jet made its first flight in Australia from Laverton in 1946 . By May 1947 , No. 1 AD had assembled the first De Havilland Vampire jet in Australia for its maiden flight . In October the same year , the first helicopter in RAAF service , a Sikorsky S @-@ 51 , arrived at the depot . In 1950 , No. 1 AD received the sole high @-@ performance piston @-@ engined CAC CA @-@ 15 to be built , which had been sent to be " converted to components " ( scrapped ) . The depot took delivery of the first Australian @-@ built English Electric Canberra jet bomber in July 1953 . Shortly afterwards , it modified the three Canberras of No. 1 Long Range Flight prior to the unit taking part in the 1953 London @-@ to @-@ Christchurch air race . In September that year , the first Australian @-@ built Sabre jet fighter was delivered . 
 By 1961 , when all airframe maintenance at Laverton was transferred to Nos. 2 and 3 Aircraft Depots , No. 1 AD had serviced forty @-@ two different aircraft types throughout its existence . It continued to maintain aero engines , and began supporting telecommunications equipment as well . The engine repair facilities at No. 1 AD were closed down in 1968 . Staff were transferred to No. 3 Aircraft Depot at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , to prepare for the introduction of the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber to Australian service and concentrate on maintaining the new aircraft 's engines . No. 1 AD 's focus thereafter shifted to ground equipment that supported navigational aids , air traffic control , telecommunications and motor transport for the Air Force and other sections of defence and government . 
 No. 1 AD was presented with a Queen 's Colour on 6 November 1981 . By September the following year its strength was down to 235 staff , but it pioneered the support of various new technologies for the Air Force , in fields such as electroplating , fibre optics , and electronics . It was also responsible for developing and testing components for the F @-@ 111 , Macchi MB @-@ 326 and McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet jets . From 1986 , restructuring and outsourcing began to impact heavily upon the RAAF 's technical services . By the 1990s , No. 1 AD 's functions had largely been taken over by other units and private contractors , and it was disbanded on 2 December 1994 . It was , at the time , the oldest RAAF unit in continuous operation and , according to the RAAF Historical Section , the oldest continuously operating maintenance depot of any air force . 
 = Murder of Dwayne Jones = 
 Dwayne Jones was a Jamaican 16 @-@ year @-@ old who was killed by a violent mob in Montego Bay in 2013 , after he attended a dance party dressed in women 's clothing . The incident attracted national and international media attention and brought increased scrutiny to the status of LGBT rights in Jamaica . 
 Perceived as effeminate , Jones was bullied in school and , at the age of 14 , was forced out of his family home by his father . He moved into a derelict house in Montego Bay with transgender friends . On the evening of 21 July 2013 , they went to the Irwin area of the city and attended a dance party . When some men at the party discovered that the cross @-@ dressing Jones was not a woman , they confronted and attacked him . Jones was beaten , stabbed , shot , and run over by a car ; he died in the early hours of the morning . Police investigated the murder but did not arrest or charge anyone for the crime , which remains unsolved . 
 The event made newspaper headlines in Jamaica and was reported on in the United Kingdom and the United States . While voices on social media accused Jones of provoking his killers by cross @-@ dressing in public , the murder was condemned by Jamaican educators and the country 's Justice Minister . In the wake of the attack , both domestic and international organisations devoted to LGBT rights and human rights – among them Human Rights Watch , Jamaicans for Justice , and the Jamaica Forum for Lesbians , All @-@ Sexuals & Gays – asked the Jamaican authorities for a proper investigation and for legal recognition of LGBT rights on the island . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Jones ' biography = = = 
 Raised in an impoverished slum in Montego Bay , a city in northwest Jamaica , Jones faced bullying at high school from students who perceived his behaviour as effeminate . When Jones was 14 , his father ejected him from the family home and encouraged neighbours to chase him out of the neighbourhood . After a period sleeping in bushes and on beaches , he began squatting in a derelict house in the hills above Montego Bay with two transgender friends , Keke and Khloe , both 23 at the time of Jones ' death . Jones was known among friends as " Gully Queen " , a reference to the storm drainage systems which many homeless LGBT Jamaicans live in . Friends noted that Jones desired to become a teacher or to work in the tourist industry . He also wanted to become a performer like the American pop star Lady Gaga , and had won a local dancing competition . Khloe described him as " a diva " who was " always very feisty and joking around " . 
 = = = Anti @-@ LGBT sentiment in Jamaica = = = 
 In 2006 , Time magazine asked whether Jamaica was " the most homophobic place on Earth " , and answered that it " may be the worst offender " . The country 's laws criminalising same @-@ sex activity between males were introduced in 1864 , during the British colonial administration . According to the Sexual Offences Act of 2009 , any man convicted under these laws must register as a sex offender . These laws have been cited as contributing to wider homophobic attitudes among the Jamaican populace , including the view that gay people are criminals regardless of whether or not they have committed any crime . Anti @-@ LGBT perspectives have been furthered by the island 's conservative Christian churches . Many reggae and dancehall songs , among them Buju Banton 's " Boom Bye Bye " , call for the killing of gays . Writing for the International Business Times in the summer of 2013 , the journalist Palash Gosh noted that while Jamaica was " awash in crime and violence , gays and lesbians are particularly prominent targets of wanton brutality . " In the mid @-@ 2000s , two of Jamaica 's best @-@ known LGBT rights activists , Brian Williamson and Steve Harvey , were murdered . In the summer of 2013 , Human Rights Watch carried out five weeks of fieldwork among Jamaica 's LGBT community , reporting that over half of those interviewed had experienced violence as a result of their sexual orientation or gender identity , sometimes on more than one occasion . 
 = = Murder = = 
 On the evening of 21 July 2013 – when Jones was 16 – he dressed in female clothing and attended a dance party with Keke and Khloe called <unk> Sundays , held at a bar in the Irwin area . They arrived by taxi at around 2 am . Jones successfully passed as a girl at the party , and several males danced with him . Although he initially kept his biological sex a secret from others at the party , fearing homophobic persecution , he revealed his identity to a girl he had previously been to church with . The girl informed her male friends , who accosted him outside the venue , demanding to know , " Are you a woman or a man ? " One of the men used a lantern to examine Jones ' feet , claiming that they were too large to be those of a biological woman . Discovering his sex , they started calling him " batty boy " and other homophobic epithets . Khloe tried to get him to avoid confrontation , whispering in his ear , " Walk with me , walk with me " , but Jones refused , instead insisting to those assembled that he was female . 
 When someone pulled on Jones ' bra strap , he ran away , and the crowd pursued and attacked him further down the road . He was beaten , stabbed , shot and run over by a car . He slipped in and out of consciousness for two hours before another attack finally killed him . There were no reports of anyone trying to help him during the altercation . Khloe was also attacked and almost raped , but escaped by hiding first in a church and then in neighbouring woods . Khloe commented , " When I saw Dwayne 's body , I started shaking and crying . It was horrible . " Police arrived at the scene at 5 am to find the body dumped in bushes along Orange Main Road . They launched an investigation into the homicide , inviting friends and family of the victim to contact them . Jones ' family declined to claim the body , and his father refused to talk to the press about the incident . 
 On 14 August , Deputy Superintendent of Police Steve Brown announced that fourteen statements had been collected and that the investigation was progressing . As of May 2014 , however , no one had been arrested or charged , and in August 2015 the crime was still considered unsolved . In October 2013 , a group of men set fire to the place Jones had lived in as a squatter , forcing its four occupants to flee , in what was also believed to be an anti @-@ LGBT hate crime . <unk> Morgan , an officer at the St James Public Health Department , requested that police provide protection for the four youths made homeless by the arson attack , but they declined to do so . Meanwhile , a charity named Dwayne 's House was set up in Jones ' memory to aid homeless LGBT youth in Jamaica . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = In Jamaica = = = 
 Jones ' murder made headline news across Jamaica . Jamaica 's Justice Minister , Senator Mark Golding , condemned the killing and called for an end to " depraved acts of violence " in Jamaica . He added that " all well @-@ thinking Jamaicans " should embrace " the principle of respect for the basic human rights of all persons " and express tolerance towards minority groups such as the LGBT community . Annie Paul , the Publications Officer of the Jamaican campus of the University of the West Indies ( UWI ) , stated that on the basis of comments provided on social media , she thought that most Jamaicans believed that Jones provoked his own murder by cross @-@ dressing within a society that did not tolerate such behaviour . Newton D. Duncan , the UWI Professor of Paediatric Surgery , similarly noted that the " overwhelming majority " of Jamaicans believed that cross @-@ dressers are homosexuals and deserve punishment . He added that this was a common misconception , because the majority of cross @-@ dressers were heterosexual . He condemned the attack and compared it to the lynching of an African @-@ American man in Harper Lee 's novel To Kill a Mockingbird , drawing links between the anti @-@ LGBT violence of Jamaica and the anti @-@ black violence of the mid @-@ 20th century United States . 
 Writing in the Jamaican broadsheet The Gleaner , Carolyn Cooper , Professor of Literary and Cultural Studies at UWI , condemned the group who committed Jones ' murder . She blamed their behaviour on the selective use of the Bible , noting that while many Jamaicans embrace those Biblical passages which condemn same @-@ sex sexual activity and cross @-@ dressing , they are themselves typically guilty of many other Biblical sins , such as adultery and murder . She commented that Jones had been killed just for being himself and expressed the hope that his killers face legal prosecution for their crime . The following week she published a follow @-@ up article in which she responded to several emails that she had received which claimed that the real victims of the scenario were the men whom Jones deceived when he was dancing with them . She reiterated her condemnation of Jones ' killers , remarking that rather than retaliating violently , they should have brushed it off with a humorous comment . 
 <unk> Nelson , an HIV / AIDS campaigner and human rights advocate , also published an article on the subject in The Gleaner . He noted that his initial reaction was to question why Jones had gone to the dance party and why he wasn 't satisfied in attending Jamaica 's underground gay parties . He added that he had subsequently realised that adopting this viewpoint was rooted in " the culture of violence " by which a victim is blamed for what happened to them . He called on Jamaicans to be tolerant of LGBT individuals , and to focus on " rebuilding this great nation on the principles of inclusivity , love , equality and respect with no distinctions whatsoever " . Also in The Gleaner , Sheila <unk> Martínez , a law professor at the University of Pittsburgh , condemned the murder as " alarming evidence " of the high rates of homophobia in Jamaican society . 
 On 25 July , the Jamaica Forum for Lesbians , All @-@ Sexuals & Gays ( J @-@ FLAG ) , an LGBT rights organisation , issued a public statement expressing their " deep concern " regarding the case , and offering their condolences to Jones ' friends and family . They encouraged local people to aid the police in locating the perpetrators of the attack , which they asserted was an affront to Jamaica 's democracy . J @-@ FLAG 's director Dane Lewis later commented that despite an increase in homophobic violence , Jamaican society was becoming more tolerant toward LGBT people ; he attributed this to the actions of individuals like Jones , who have helped improve the public visibility of LGBT people in Jamaican society . Another LGBT rights organisation , Quality of Citizenship Jamaica , issued a press release calling for the government and churches to engage with LGBT organisations to establish common ground which could be undergirded by the principle of " true respect for all , " found in the nation 's National Anthem . Human rights organisation Jamaicans for Justice called on Prime Minister Portia Simpson @-@ Miller and religious leaders to condemn the murder , also commenting on what they saw as a lack of media coverage and public outrage about the incident , adding that " we must ask ourselves what this says about us as a people . " 
 = = = Internationally = = = 
 News of Jones ' murder attracted international media attention , resulting in condemnation of the killing by human rights groups . Graeme Reid , the LGBT Rights Program director at Human Rights Watch in New York , issued a statement that the Jamaican government should send an " unequivocal message " that there would be " zero tolerance " of anti @-@ LGBT violence . Reid noted that Jamaica 's Prime Minister had vowed to decriminalise same @-@ sex sexual activity in her 2011 election campaign but had yet to implement that promise . He encouraged the Jamaican authorities to take action to investigate Jones ' murder and to promote respect for the country 's LGBT citizens . 
 In a February 2014 briefing , the US Department of State Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy , Human Rights , and Labor , <unk> <unk> , cited Jones ' case as well as the torture and murder of Cameroonian HIV / AIDS activist Eric <unk> <unk> as examples of the " troubling acts of violence " against LGBT individuals that had happened across the globe in the previous year . 
 In the United Kingdom , a black LGBT organization , the Out and Proud Diamond Group ( <unk> ) , in association with the Peter Tatchell Foundation , organised a protest outside Jamaica 's London embassy on 28 August . Talking to press , the <unk> 's Marvin <unk> condemned Jones ' murder and called for supporters to actively oppose the persecution of LGBT people in both Jamaica and elsewhere . Peter Tatchell later asserted that the lack of action by Simpson @-@ Miller and the police was tantamount to colluding with those guilty of an anti @-@ LGBT hate crime . 
 In her introduction to an academic study of " queerness and children 's literature " , Laura Robinson , an Associate Professor of English at the Royal Military College of Canada , cited Jones ' murder alongside the 2013 Russian LGBT propaganda law as an example in which youth issues intersected with LGBT issues . She added that Jones was a " child who did not end up having what Judith Butler calls a ' livable life ' . " 
 = Bhale Bhale Magadivoy = 
 Bhale Bhale Magadivoy ( English : You are an interesting man ) is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language romantic comedy film written and directed by Maruthi Dasari . Jointly produced by Bunny Vasu , V. Vamsi Krishna Reddy , and Pramod <unk> under their production companies <unk> Pictures and UV Creations , Bhale Bhale Magadivoy features Nani and Lavanya Tripathi in the lead roles , and Murli Sharma , Ajay , Naresh , Sithara , and Vennela Kishore in supporting roles . The film revolves around Lucky , an absent @-@ minded plant scientist and his efforts to hide his inherent memory @-@ related flaws from Nandana , a benevolent kuchipudi dancer with whom he is in a relationship . 
 The title Bhale Bhale Magadivoy was borrowed from a song of the same name composed by M. S. Viswanathan for K. Balachander 's 1978 Telugu film Maro Charitra . Gopi Sunder composed the film 's soundtrack and background score . Production commenced in March 2013 , and the film 's principal photography was completed in July 2015 . Including post @-@ production tasks , the film was completed in seven months . Though mostly shot in and around Hyderabad , one of the songs was filmed in Goa . 
 Produced on a budget of around ₹ 70 — 90 million , Bhale Bhale Magadivoy was released on 4 September 2015 in 700 screens across the globe . It received positive reviews from critics and was a box office success , grossing over ₹ 550 million globally in its full run . It also became the fourth @-@ highest grossing Telugu film of all time at the United States box office , where it was released in 115 screens . The production of the film 's Kannada remake , Gandu <unk> Gandu , commenced in February 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lucky is an absent @-@ minded junior botanist who is easily distracted by other tasks while working on his current research . His father arranges his marriage with the daughter of Panduranga Rao , a senior botanist . Rao decides to break the alliance after learning about Lucky 's mental condition and warns him not to show up again . On his way to donate blood to his boss , Lucky falls in love with Nandana , a kuchipudi dance teacher , and gets diverted . He creates a positive impression by unknowingly donating blood to one of her students . 
 In their frequent meetings , Lucky keeps forgetting things ( such as going out without his shoes , giving away his motorbike keys to a beggar , etc . ) , but manages to hide this shortcoming from Nandana by claiming he is a philanthropist . He is unaware of the fact that Nandana is Rao 's daughter , the young woman whom he was supposed to marry before . Rao 's friend 's son Ajay , a police inspector , also falls in love with Nandana , while she is waiting for Lucky 's proposal . When he tries to propose on her birthday , Lucky ends up taking Nandana 's pregnant sister @-@ in @-@ law , who is experiencing labour pains , to a nearby hospital . After the delivery , Nandana proposes to Lucky , and they become a couple . 
 Nandana informs Lucky that her father has accepted their proposal and wants to meet him . Lucky and Rao meet as strangers when Rao insults Lucky after an incident with a little girl who was about to fall into a pond . Lucky later realises that Nandana is Rao 's daughter and flees . Lucky and Nandana plan to meet later . Lucky makes a friend of his pose as Nandana 's lover , and joins Rao as an apprentice . 
 When Nandana 's relatives attend the naming ceremony of the new born child , Rao 's nephew assumes Lucky 's friend is her potential lover , and all the others assume Lucky is Nandana 's suitor . Rao 's nephew becomes further confused when Lucky visits a sick Nandana to spend some quality time with her . Days later , Rao wants Lucky to escort Nandana and her relatives to Srisailam . Lucky , driving , misses a turn and reaches the outskirts of Bangalore . He takes them to a nearby temple and explains that it is a very special and historically significant temple . 
 Ajay , who is confused about the identity of Nandana 's lover ( as Lucky and his friend keep changing places depending on who is around at the moment ) manages to get a video of Lucky romancing Nandana . When they all arrive back home , Ajay reveals Lucky 's mental condition to Nandana , and they break up . On the day of Nandana 's engagement with Ajay , Rao , who has become aware of the sincerity of Lucky 's love , advises her to choose Lucky over Ajay . When Ajay makes it clear he intends to marry Nandana by force , Rao challenges Lucky to stop it , this time without forgetting . 
 Rao meets Lucky and reveals that he has been aware of his love for Nandana since the moment she and Lucky met at the hospital , and that , since then , he has been watching to see how Lucky 's amnesia might affect his relationship with Nandana . Lucky visits the temple where the marriage is scheduled to take place but ends up forgetting , instead buying a lemon soda . However , this turns out to be a trick , as he wants to lure Ajay 's henchmen into a false sense of security . He reaches the original marriage venue ( actually an aluminium factory ) in time with help from Ajay 's henchmen and marries Nandana there after a duel with Ajay . 
 A week later , Rao visits Nandana and Lucky , and during their conversations , Rao says that Ajay has been missing for a week and his father is concerned . Lucky remembers that he tied Ajay with a rope at the factory . When he reaches the spot , and Ajay asks why he did not release him , Lucky replies , " Sorry boss , I forgot ! " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 V. Vamsi Krishna Reddy and Pramod <unk> signed Maruthi Dasari to direct a film starring Nani and Lavanya Tripathi under their banner UV Creations . The film , as yet untitled , was formally announced in February 2015 , before the release of Nani 's <unk> Subramanyam . Maruthi wanted to tell the story of a person who has a shortcoming that makes him think he is not worthy of being loved . Bunny Vasu co @-@ produced the film under the banner <unk> Pictures , a sub @-@ division of Geetha Arts , with Allu Aravind as the film 's presenter , making it a joint venture with UV Creations . The film was officially launched on 2 March 2015 at Hyderabad and was titled Bhale Bhale Magadivoy after a song of the same name composed by M. S. Viswanathan for K. Balachander 's Maro Charitra ( 1978 ) . Gopi Sunder composed the film 's music . Nizar Shafi and S. B. Uddhav were the film 's cinematographer and editor respectively . 
 Nani played the role of <unk> , called Lucky , an <unk> young man who often forgets the task he is currently performing when he is distracted by something else . He initially wanted to turn down Maruthi 's proposal due to the latter 's previous risqué films . After listening to the script , he liked the absence of irrelevant comedy tracks . Tripathi plays the role of Nandana , an innocent kuchipudi dancer . Regarding her looks , Tripathi said that the emphasis was on " graceful attires , simple accessories and kohl @-@ rimmed eyes " . She was previously trained in kathak , and two teachers assisted her with the dance as a part of her preparation for the character . Murli Sharma plays the role of Tripathi 's conservative father ; he said he found the role difficult to portray as most of his previous roles were more aggressive in nature . Vennela Kishore was selected to play a supporting role . Naresh and Sithara play Nani 's parents , and Ajay , Praveen , and Srinivasa Reddy play supporting roles in the film . 
 Principal photography commenced on 3 March 2015 , and Nani joined the set two days later . The song " Endaro " was filmed as a montage number with scenes featuring the humorous consequences of the protagonist 's poor memory and his girlfriend 's reactions to them . By late May 2015 , the filming of talkie portions was almost done and a few song sequences were filmed at Ramoji Film City . For one particular scene , Nani delivered eight pages of dialogue in a single take . The song " Hello Hello " was filmed in Goa during the rains , which was a spontaneous decision by the filmmakers . The principal photography was completed on 28 July 2015 at <unk> Studios in <unk> , Hyderabad . Including post @-@ production tasks , the film was completed in seven months . Singer Chinmayi , who dubbed for Tripathi in her Telugu debut <unk> <unk> ( 2012 ) , also dubbed for her character in this film . Tripathi said that she wanted Chinmayi to dub for her lines because she had a good understanding of the character and the situations and had a voice similar to hers . 
 = = Music = = 
 Gopi Sunder composed the film 's soundtrack , which consisted of five songs . The lyrics were written by Ramajogayya Sastry , Sri Mani , and Bhaskarabhatla . The tune of " Endaro <unk> " , one of Tyagaraja 's <unk> Kriti , was adapted for the song " Endaro " , which was composed in classical fusion style , and the lyrics were tweaked to suit the situation . Renuka Arun provided the vocals . She was recommended to Sunder by a guitarist in his group when the former intended to select a singer who " has a strong inclination towards Carnatic music but with an exposure to fusion music " . Sachin Warrier , who sang for <unk> Subramanyam ( 2014 ) , the Telugu version of Sunder 's Malayalam musical <unk> <unk> ( 2012 ) , was selected to sing the song " Motta <unk> " . He initially recorded the song 's raw cut intended to be used while filming . Warrier was chosen to sing for the final version as well , since the film 's team found his voice apt . He was helped by its lyricist Ramajogayya Sastry and an assistant director in <unk> the words correctly . Karthik provided the vocals for three songs : " Bhale Bhale Magadivoy " , " How How " , and " Hello Hello " . The first of the three was released on 12 August 2015 at a FM station in Hyderabad . The rest of the soundtrack album was released three days later at a promotional event held in Hyderabad , with actor Allu Arjun attending as guest of honour . Lahari Music marketed the soundtrack album . 
 Reviewing the song " Bhale Bhale Magadivoy " , Karthik Srinivasan of The Hindu stated that Sunder " ups the ante for the phrase 's use with a super bouncy tune , going one up on Mickey J. Meyer 's African @-@ style remake of the original " , adding that Karthik and Mohana <unk> " are in lively form singing this one " . The Hindu stated that Sunder treated the song " Endaro " like a " classic rock song , with drums and violin dominating impressively , even as Renuka is in scintillating form , bringing classical chops to what is treated as a complex , contemporary pop song " , adding that it is " less ambitious and sticks faithfully " to the original . 
 <unk> Joseph of The Times of India gave the soundtrack album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and called it an album that " has something in it for everyone and it sure to be a hit " . Joseph called " Endaro " an " absolute fusion masterpiece as Gopi Sunder wonderfully fuses Carnatic , rock and Jazz elements as Renuka Arun 's voice sounds majestic and takes the song to the next level " . Behindwoods gave the soundtrack album 3 out of 5 stars and stated that the it is " one of the most melodious albums released in Telugu over the recent times " and that Sunder " sure knows how to blend modernity with rock steady classical music ! " . 
 Track listing 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Bhale Bhale Magadivoy was released on 4 September 2015 in 700 screens across the globe , competing with Dynamite and <unk> , the Telugu dubbed version of <unk> Puli . CineGalaxy Inc. acquired the film 's overseas theatrical distribution rights . The film was released in 115 screens across the United States . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Bhale Bhale Magadivoy received positive reviews from critics . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu found the film to be a " laugh riot " and stated that Bhale Bhale Magadivoy " puts logic aside but there 's plenty of situational humour where you 'll find yourself laughing aloud and having a good time . And these laughs are with [ rather ] than at the protagonist " . N. <unk> of the Bangalore Mirror called the film a " fresh breeze " and stated that the film " reasserts that Nani is a talent to watch " and that Maruthi " has indeed surprised us with a clean family entertainer " . Sify called the film a " cool entertainer " and stated that it is a " neatly packaged romcom about a mini Ghajini 's travails " . 
 Pranita Jonnalagedda of The Times of India gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated that Bhale Bhale Magadivoy comes across as a " breath of fresh air " because it " successfully keeps itself away from the regular formula of romantic comedies [ and is ] devoid of the oh @-@ so @-@ overused cliches " and is a " delight for anyone looking for wholesome entertainment " . Suresh Kavirayani of the Deccan Chronicle also gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated that the film can be watched for " some hilarious scenes and Nani 's brilliance performance [ sic ] " . Behindwoods gave the film 2 @.@ 75 out of 5 stars and called it a " fun ride that will entertain you throughout " and added , " What amazes the most is the film doesn 't resort to a predictable narration . The movie is filled with plenty of twists to keep the audience hooked from the scratch to finish line and it is the primary USP of the film " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Bhale Bhale Magadivoy collected US $ 70 @,@ 132 from the premier shows at the United States and US $ 164 @,@ 459 on the first day , taking its total to US $ 234 @,@ 591 ( ₹ 15 @.@ 6 million ) , which trade analyst Taran Adarsh called a " smashing start " . The first weekend figures at the United States box office stood at US $ 718 @,@ 378 ( ₹ 48 million ) . It grossed ₹ 140 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 90 million in its first weekend at the global box office . The film grossed ₹ 230 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 110 million in its first week at the global box office , recovering production costs . It collected US $ 1 @,@ 034 @,@ 228 at the United States box office in eight days and became the 15th Telugu film to cross the US $ 1 million mark there . It also became the fifth @-@ highest grossing Telugu film of 2015 at the United States box office . 
 The film collected US $ 265 @,@ 376 from 84 screens at the United States box office in its second weekend , taking its ten @-@ day total to $ 1 @.@ 2 million ( ₹ 87 @.@ 1 million ) . It collected US $ 1 @,@ 356 @,@ 673 ( ₹ 89 @.@ 1 million ) in 17 days , and US $ 1 @,@ 426 @,@ 527 ( ₹ 92 @.@ 4 million ) in 38 days at the United States box office , thus becoming the fourth @-@ highest grossing Telugu film of all time after Baahubali : The Beginning , <unk> , and Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) . The film grossed more than ₹ 550 million globally in its lifetime , and the United States box office figures stood at approximately ₹ 100 million . It was one of the few small @-@ budget Telugu films to cross the US $ 1 million mark and also the first blockbuster in Nani 's career . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Remakes = = 
 Bhale Bhale Magadivoy is being remade into Kannada as Gandu <unk> Gandu by Ramesh Arvind ; Ganesh and Shanvi Srivastava reprise the roles of Nani and Tripathi from the original . It is jointly produced by Allu Aravind and Rockline Venkatesh . A Tamil remake with G. V. Prakash Kumar as the protagonist was announced in October 2015 . 
 = Agung = 
 The agung is a set of two wide @-@ rimmed , vertically suspended gongs used by the Maguindanao , Maranao , Sama @-@ Bajau and Tausug people of the Philippines as a supportive instrument in kulintang ensembles . The agung is also ubiquitous among other groups found in Palawan , Panay , Mindoro , Mindanao , Sabah , Sulawesi , Sarawak and Kalimantan as an integral part of the agung orchestra . 
 = = Description = = 
 The agung is a large , heavy , wide @-@ rimmed gong shaped like a kettle <unk> of the agung produces a bass sound in the kulintang orchestra and weighs between 13 and 16 pounds , but it is possible to find agungs weigh as low as 5 pounds or as high as 20 or 30 pounds each , depending on the metal ( bronze , brass or iron ) used to produce them . 
 Though their diameters are smaller than the gandingan ’ s , at roughly 22 inches ( 560 mm ) to 24 inches ( 610 mm ) in length , they have a much deeper turned @-@ in <unk> ( rim ) than the latter , with a width of 12 to 13 inches ( 330 mm ) including the knob . 
 They are hung vertically above the floor at or a bit below the waist line , suspended by ropes fastened to structures like strong tree limb , beam of a house , ceiling , or gong stand . 
 The larger , lower pitched gong of the two is called the pangandungan by the Maguindanao and the p <unk> @-@ an by the Maranao . Played on the musician 's right , it provides the main part , which it predominantly played on the accents of the rhythmic structure . 
 The smaller , higher pitched gong , the thicker of the two , is called the <unk> by the Maguindanao and the p <unk> or <unk> by the Maranao . Found on the player ’ s left , it is mainly played on the weaker double and triple beats of the rhythmic structure , in counterpoint to the pangandungan 's part . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Scholars seem to agree that the origins of the agung are in Indonesia , noting that the word agung / <unk> is derived from the Malay <unk> and Indonesian / Javanese <unk> . 
 Further evidence of this comes from a British explorer , Thomas Forrest , who in the 1770s wrote Filipinos were “ fond of musical gongs which came from <unk> on Java and have round knobs on them . ” 
 = = Technique = = 
 The agung is usually performed while standing beside the instrument , holding the upper edge of its flange between the thumb and other fingers with the left hand while striking the knob with the right hand . The mallets , called balu , are made from short sticks about half a foot in length and padded with soft but tough material such as rubber at one end . Using these <unk> , players handle the agung similar to the way a brass tom @-@ tom is played . 
 A series of solid , fast decaying sounds are produced using dampening techniques . The desired effect is produced after striking the knob , by leaving one ’ s hand or knee or the mallets themselves on it . When one player is using two gongs , the assistant holding the lower @-@ pitched gong positions it at an angle and dampens its surface using their hands . 
 Recently , new ways of handling the agung have emerged , including grasping a portion of the boss rather than the flange to dampen or using regular strokes upon the <unk> while striking the surrounding gong surface with the opposite , wooden end of the beater . The latter technique , called <unk> , is used by downriver musicians to produce metallic sounds during kulintang performances . 
 Different combinations of players , gongs and mallets can be used for playing the agung : two players with each assigned their own gong or just one . When playing alone , the agung player could either play both gongs with the player holding the higher @-@ pitched gongs face @-@ to @-@ face , with the lower one held at an angle by an assistant for stability , or just one gong . The latter style , common among downriver <unk> in <unk> , who consider this style an old one , uses only the higher @-@ pitch gong for it , unlike the lower @-@ pitched gong , is considered the lead gong , therefore having primary importance . An example of this is when single gong agungs are used during a tagunggo piece . 
 The number of mallets used by the player could also vary as well . For most occasions , only one mallet is used but for other techniques , the player could use two mallets , one in each hand . An even more interesting technique uses only one balu but requires the player to play the agung in reverse order of pitches . Called <unk> , this technique and the one with two mallets are normally reserved only for competition and exhibition instances . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Kulintang ensemble = = = 
 The main use for the agung in Maguindanao and Maranao society is as a supportive / accompanying instrument of an orthodox kulintang ensemble . Using basic patterns and interlocking rhythms , a player would use the agung to complement the melody played by the kulintang . The patterns players use are normally considered freer than either the <unk> or the dabakan ; players could manipulate the patterns freely as long as they conform , reaffirm , reinforce and even generate the rhythmic mode of the piece . The length of the patterns themselves may vary depending on how they fit into the melodic improvisation . Rapid style is useful especially during exhibition of playing skills . 
 Among both the Maguindanao and the Maranao , the agung embodies all that is masculine and thus the agung is traditionally considered a masculine instrument . To be considered a good player , one must possess strength , stamina ( playing extremely fast tempos with no mistakes ) and endurance . Players must also exhibit improvisation skills for different patterns to be considered as having quality musicianship — lest the audience considers the patterns played repetitions and mundane . 
 Because of the highly skilled nature required for playing the agung , it is not uncommon to see agung players have friendly rivalries during a performance , using tricks in an attempt to throw others off @-@ beat . For instance , if the p ’ nanggisa ’ s elaborations are so elusive that the p ’ <unk> has a hard time ornamenting or if the reversed happens and the p ’ <unk> ornaments to the point the p ’ nanggisa ’ s performance is engulfed , the player that cannot keep up is usually embarrassed , becoming the butt of jokes . Normally agung players switch off after each piece , but during instances like this where one player cannot handle the part being played , players either remain at their gongs or switch during the performance . It is also possible for agung players to switch places with the dabakan after two pieces . Even though the players compete , they still understand they are a single entity , closely accompanying the melody , employ different variations without destroying the music ’ s basic patterns . 
 = = = Interactions with the opposite sex = = = 
 There was also a secondary motive for men , especially young males , for learning the agung : the ability to interact with young , unmarried women . Both Maranao and Maguindanao cultures traditionally adhere to Islamic customs which prohibit dating or causal conversation between the opposite sexes ( unless married to or related to by blood ) and therefore performances such as kulintang music provided the opportunity for such a connection . Among the Maguindanao , the rhythmic modes of <unk> and <unk> a kamamatuan allowed agung players to serenade the young , unmarried women on the kulintang . <unk> , the other rhythmic mode , could also be used but players rarely use this for serenading since the kulintang player is usually an older woman . 
 = = = Contest = = = 
 The latter mode actually is reserved specifically for solo agung contest . Unlike other Southern Filipino groups who participate in group contest , the Maguindanao are unique in that they also hold solo agung contest to find out who in the community is the best <unk> ( expert agung player ) . <unk> is prefect for such contest since the agung is often the focus of attention , the focal point during the ensemble during this mode . Players normally perform two or more versions playing the three types of techniques discussed above . 
 = = = Signaling and the supernatural = = = 
 Other than its use in the kulintang ensemble , the agung also had other non @-@ ensemble uses among the Maguindanao and Maranao . The agung has been used to warn others of impending danger , announcing the time of day and other important occasions . For instance , long ago the sultan would beat the agung repeatedly to announce the onset of a meeting or during the fasting month of Ramadhan , the agung would ring either at three in the morning to indicate the signal to eat ( <unk> ) or at sunset , to mark the end for fasting that day . And supposedly due to the deep , loud sound the agung produces , people believed that it possessed supernatural powers . For instance , during an earthquake , the locals of Maguindanao would strike the agung in a fast , loud rhythm called baru @-@ baru , believing its vibrations would either lessen or even halt the jolt of an earthquake . 
 = = Similar agung instruments = = 
 = = = Kulintang ensembles = = = 
 In the Sulu Archipelago , the kulintang orchestra uses not two but three low @-@ sounding agungs , which serve as accompaniment in Tausug , Samal and Yakan ensembles . For the Tausug and Samal , the largest of the agungs with a wide turned @-@ in rim is called the <unk> or <unk> , which provides slow , regular beats , similar to the <unk> pangandungan and Maranao p ’ nanggisa @-@ an . The smaller pair of agungs , the <unk> , <unk> with the <unk> / <unk> . These are further classified : the wider @-@ rimmed <unk> is called the <unk> and the narrower one is called the <unk> or <unk> by the Tausug and <unk> by the Samal . 
 = = = In agung ensembles = = = 
 <unk> also play a major role in agung orchestras — ensembles composed of large hanging , suspended or held , knobbed gongs which act as drones without any accompanying melodic instrument like a kulintang . Such orchestras are prevalent among Indigenous Philippine groups ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Mangyan , Palawan , <unk> , <unk> , T ’ boli , <unk> , <unk> and the Tiruray ) , regions in Kalimantan and Indonesia ( Iban , <unk> , Murut ) and Sabah and Sarawak in Malaysia ( Bidayuh , Iban , Kadazan @-@ Dusun , <unk> , Kayan ) , places where agung orchestras take precedence over kulintang @-@ like orchestras . The composition and tuning of these orchestras vary widely from one group to another . For instance , the <unk> of Mindoro have a small agung ensemble consisting of only two light gongs played by two musicians on the floor in a simple duple rhythm while the <unk> have an ensemble ( called an <unk> ) consisting of 10 small agungs hung vertically on a triangular frame . It includes three musicians : one standing up , playing the melody , and the rest sitting . The <unk> is divided by purpose , with the higher @-@ pitched gongs ( <unk> ) carrying the melody , three to four lower @-@ pitched gongs ( gandingan ) playing melodic ostinato figures , and the lowest @-@ pitched gong ( bandil ) setting the tempo . 
 The Tiruray call their agung ensemble a <unk> @-@ agung , <unk> , or karatung . It is made up of five shallow bossed gongs of graduating size , each played by one person . The smallest , the <unk> , is used as the lead instrument , providing a steady beat . The <unk> <unk> ensemble follows a similar format , consisting of five small gongs , each held by one musician playing a unique pattern with rubber mallets , interlocking with other parts . The T ’ boli and Palawan have similar agung ensembles : the T ’ boli ensemble is composed of three to four agungs with two to three of them collectively called <unk> which play variations , and the other agung , tang , providing a steady beat . The Palawan call their ensemble , composed of four gongs , a basal . It includes one to two large humped , low @-@ sounding agungs and a pair of smaller humped , higher @-@ pitched <unk> which produce metallic sounds . The <unk> also have an agung ensemble similar to the Tiruray karatung , called a <unk> sua . 
 Both the <unk> and the B ’ <unk> refer to their agung ensemble as a tagunggo , a set of eight metal gongs suspended on a harness , which is played by two , three , or more people . Seven of the smaller @-@ sized gongs produce a running melody with the eighth , largest gong playing syncopation with the other gongs to produce a particular rhythm . The <unk> also have an agung ensemble similar to the tagunggo , called a <unk> . 
 The Kadazan @-@ Dusun , located on the western coast of Sabah , refer to their agung ensemble as a <unk> or bandil , which consists of six to seven large gongs in shoreline groups and 7 – 8 large gongs for those in interior valleys . In southwestern Sarawak , Bidayuh agung ensembles consist of nine large gongs divided into four groups ( <unk> , <unk> , bandil , and <unk> ) , while among the Iban of <unk> , Brunei , Kalimantan , agung ensembles are smaller in comparison . 
 Such ensembles can either perform alone or with one or two drums , played with the hands or wooden sticks , as accompaniment . They play either <unk> or in an interlocking fashion with the gongs . These agung orchestras often perform at many types of social events , including agriculture rituals , weddings , victory celebrations , curing rites , rituals for the dead , entertainment for visitors , and other community rituals . 
 Historically among the main lowland Philippine groups ( Tagalog , Visayan , Kapampangan , Ilocano ) agung orchestras similar to the ones found today among non @-@ <unk> indigenous groups in the country , were among the main instrumental ensembles used up until the 17th century , as evidenced by the agung ensemble encountered by <unk> in Cebu in the 16th century , similar in set up ( two <unk> , two agung and one gimbal ) to the basal ensemble of the Palawan people . 
 = Bahadur Shah I = 
 Bahadur Shah ( Urdu : <unk> شاه <unk> — <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( 14 October 1643 – 27 February 1712 ) , the seventh Mughal emperor of India , ruled from 1707 until his death in 1712 . Born Mu 'azzam , Shah was the third son of Aurangzeb with his Muslim Rajput wife Nawab Bai and the grandson of Shah Jahan . In his youth , he conspired to overthrow his father and ascend to the throne a number of times . Shah 's plans were intercepted by the emperor , who imprisoned him several times . From 1696 to 1707 , he was governor of <unk> ( later known as Agra ) , Kabul and Lahore . 
 After Aurangzeb 's death Shah 's brother , Muhammad Azam Shah , declared himself successor before his defeat in the Battle of Jajau . During his reign , Shah <unk> annexed the Rajput states of Jodhpur and Amber and sparked controversy in the khutba by inserting the declaration of Ali as wali . His reign was also disturbed by the Sikh leader Banda Singh Bahadur , who led a rebellion against him . Bahadur Shah was buried in the Moti Masjid at Mehrauli in Delhi . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mu 'azzam was born on 14 October 1643 in Burhanpur to the sixth Mughal emperor , Aurangzeb , and his wife Begum Nawab Bai . 
 = = = Life during the reign of Shah Jahan = = = 
 During his grandfather 's reign Muzzam was appointed <unk> of Lahore from 1653 @-@ 1659 . In 1663 , when he was twenty years old , Mu 'azzam was made the governor of the Deccan province . The most important issue in front of him was to curb the rise of Shivaji , who was on the ascendant in the area , and had carved out his own kingdom . 
 = = = = Campaign against Pune = = = = 
 In 1663 itself , Mu 'azzam attacked Pune which was Shivaji 's base at that time . However , the Mughal army was defeated and Muazzam himself was captured . He spent seven years as a prisoner of the <unk> his grandfather Shah Jahan died at Agra fort Prince Muzzam was sent to Agra to by orders his father Muzzam buried his grandfather to Taj Mahal . 
 Mu 'azzam 's imprisonment was not severe , and indeed he was kept in the lap of luxury by his captors . This was the custom with regard to high @-@ born and potentially useful captives , and it was quite normal for captive and captor to become friends and even allies . Shivaji 's own son , Sambhaji , was at roughly the same time a prisoner of the Mughals . 
 = = = During the reign of Aurangzeb = = = 
 In 1670 , Mu 'azzam organised an insurgency to overthrow Aurangzeb and proclaim himself the Mughal emperor . This plan may have been hatched at the instigation of the Marathas , and Mu 'azzam 's own inclinations and sincerity are difficult to gauge . Anyway , Aurangzeb learned about the plot and sent Mu 'azzam 's mother Begum Nawab Bai ( a Hindu Rajput princess by birth ) to dissuade Mu 'azzam from rebellion . Nawab Bai brought Mu 'azzam back to the Mughal court , where he spent the next several years under Aurangzeb 's supervision . However , Mu 'azzam revolted in 1680 on the pretext of protesting Aurangzeb 's treatment of Rajput chiefs . Once again , Aurangzeb followed his previous policy to dissuade Mu 'azzam with gentleness and then to place him under greater vigilance . 
 For the next seven years , from 1681 to 1687 , Mu 'azzam was a " grudgingly obedient son " . 
 = = = = Treason = = = = 
 In 1681 , he was sent by Aurangzeb to the Deccan to crush a revolt raised by his step @-@ brother Sultan Muhammad Akbar . According to the historian Munis <unk> , Mu 'azzam deliberately failed in his mission . In 1683 , he was ordered by Aurangzeb to march to the Konkan region to prevent the still rebellious Akbar from fleeing the country , but again Mu 'azzam 's " half @-@ hearted " mission failed to achieve the assigned goal . Nevertheless , the emperor still persisted in entrusting his son with responsibilities , and in 1687 , Aurangzeb ordered Mu 'azzam to march against the sultanate of Golconda . Within weeks , the emperor 's spies intercepted treasonous messages exchanged between Mu 'azzam and Abul Hasan , the ruler of Golconda . This was something which could not be mistaken for incompetence ; it was clearly treason . Aurangzeb charged Mu 'azzam with treason and imprisoned him ; his harem was " shipped off to faraway Delhi " , and the ladies were also charged with treason . Mu 'azzam 's loyal servants were moved by his father into the imperial service , and the remaining servants were sacked . Aurangzeb forbade Mu 'azzam to cut his nails or hair for six months , gave orders depriving him of " good food or cold water . " He was not to meet anybody without his father 's prior consent . 
 Around 1694 , Aurangzeb rehabilitated Mu 'azzam and allowed him " to rebuild his household " , rehiring some of his servants who had been dismissed . Aurangzeb continued to spy on his son , appointing his men to Mu 'azzam 's household , sending informants to his harem and choosing his representatives at the imperial court . Mu 'azzam and his sons were transferred from the Deccan to north India , and were forbidden to lead military expeditions in that region for the rest of Aurangzeb 's reign . In 1695 , Aurangzeb sent Mu 'azzam to the Punjab region to fight the chieftains and subdue a rebellion by the Sikh Guru Gobind Singh . Although the commander imposed " heavy taxation " on the rajas , he thought it necessary to leave the Sikhs undisturbed in their fortified city of <unk> and refused to wage war against them out of " genuine respect " for their religion . That year Mu 'azzam was appointed governor of <unk> , and in 1696 he was transferred to Lahore . After the death of Amin Khan ( governor of Kabul ) he assumed that position in 1699 , holding it until his father 's death in 1707 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = War of succession = = = 
 Without appointing a crown prince , Aurangzeb died in 1707 when Mu 'azzam was governor of Kabul and his half @-@ brothers ( Muhammad Kam Bakhsh and Muhammad Azam Shah ) were the governors of the Deccan and Gujarat respectively . All three sons intended to win the crown , and Kam Bakhsh began minting coins in his name . Azam prepared to march to Agra and declare himself successor , but was defeated by Mu 'azzam at the Battle of Jajau in June 1707 . Azam and his son , Ali Tabar , were killed in the battle . Mu 'azzam ascended the Mughal throne at age 63 on 19 June 1707 , with the title of Bahadur Shah I. 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = = Amber = = = = 
 With his predecessors unable to make significant gains in Rajputana , after ascending the throne , Shah made plans to annexe cities of the region to the Mughal empire . On 10 November Shah began his march to Amber ( in Rajputana , present day Rajasthan state of India ) , visiting the tomb of Salim Chishti in Fatehpur Sikri on 21 November . In the meantime , Shah 's aid Mihrab Khan was ordered to take possession of Jodhpur . Shah reached Amber on 20 January 1708 . Though the monarch of the kingdom was Jai Singh , his brother Bijai Singh resented his rule . Shah ruled that because of the dispute , the region would become part of the Mughal empire and the city was renamed as Islamabad . Jai Singh 's goods and properties were confiscated on the pretext that he supported Shah 's brother Azam Shah during the war of Shah 's succession and Bijai Singh was made the governor of Amber on 30 April 1708 . Shah gave him the title of Mirza Rajah , and he received gifts valued at 100 @,@ 000 rupees . Amber passed into Mughal hands without a war . 
 = = = = Jodhpur = = = = 
 Jaswant Singh was the leader of the Rathore in Jodhpur ( in Rajputana , in present @-@ day Indian state Rajasthan ) during Aurangzeb 's reign . During a war of succession Singh sided with Aurangzeb 's older brother Dara Shikoh , who was killed by Aurangzeb . Singh was pardoned , became titular ruler of the region and was appointed governor of the province of Kabul before his death on 18 December 1678 . After his death , Aurangzeb ordered Singh 's widows and his son Ajit Singh to be brought to Delhi and with plans of forcefully absorbing Ajit Singh in the Mughal army in the future . Though <unk> Rathore of the Rathore clan who was <unk> of conquering Jodhpur from the Mughals , took advantage of this opportunity and fought a war to prevent Aurangzeb getting hold of Ajit , he faced defeat but the widows and Singh managed to flee from Delhi to Jodhpur . After Aurangzeb 's death , during Shah 's half brother Muhammad Azam Shah 's rule Singh marched to Jodhpur and took it from Mughal rule . 
 In Amber he announced his intention to march to Jodhpur when Mihrab Khan defeated Ajit Singh at <unk> , and he reached the town on 21 February 1708 . His men were sent to bring Singh to the city for an interview with him , where Singh received " special robes of honour " and a jewelled scarf . Then , he headed towards Ajmer ( in Rajputana , in present @-@ day Indian state Rajasthan ) and reached the city on 24 March , where he visited the Dargah Sharif . 
 = = = = Udaipur = = = = 
 The city of Udaipur ( in Rajputana , present day Indian state of Rajasthan ) was annexed to the Mughal empire by Akbar in 1567 . However the city was lost to the <unk> during the reign of his grandson Shah Jahan . Shah also had intention of recapturing Udaipur . 
 In Jodhpur , Bahadur Shah got the news that the Maharana Amar Singh II had fled from Udaipur to the hills . His messengers gave him the message that Singh got " afraid " by the happenings in Amber and Jodhpur and thought that his kingdom would also be annexed by the emperor . According to the Bahadur Shah Nama chronicle , because of this incident the emperor called Amar Singh an " unbeliever " . Bahadur Shah waged war against the king until his brother Muhammad Kam Bakhsh 's insurgency diverted him southward . 
 = = = Rajput Rebellion = = = 
 While the emperor was on his way to Deccan to punish Muhammad Kam Bakhsh the three Rajput Raja 's of Amber , Udaipur and Jodhpur made a joint resistance to the Mughals . The Rajputs first expelled the commandants of Jodhpur and <unk> @-@ <unk> and recovered Amber by a night attack . They next killed Sayyid Hussain Khan <unk> , the commandant of <unk> and many other officers ( September , 1708 ) . The emperor , then in the Deccan had to patch up a truce by restoring Ajit Singh and Jai Singh to the Mughal Service . 
 = = = Kam Bakhsh 's uprising = = = 
 = = = = Court rivalry = = = = 
 His half @-@ brother , Muhammad Kam Bakhsh , marched to Bijapur in March 1707 with his soldiers . When the news of Aurangzeb 's death spread through the city , the city 's monarch , King Sayyid <unk> Khan surrendered the fort to him without a fight . Ascending the throne , Kam Bakhsh made Ahsan Khan , who served in the army as the <unk> ( general of the armed forces ) , and made his advisor Taqarrub Khan as chief minister and gave himself the title of <unk> Kam Bakhsh @-@ i @-@ <unk> ( Emperor Kam Bakhsh , Protector of Faith ) . He then conquered <unk> and <unk> . 
 Rivalry developed between Taqarrub Khan and Ahsan Khan . Ahsan Khan had developed a marketplace in Bijapur where , without permission from Kam Bakhsh , he did not tax the shops . Taqarrub Khan reported it to Kam Bakhsh , who ordered the practise stopped . In May 1707 , Kam Bakhsh sent Ahsan Khan to conquer the states of Golkonda and Hyderabad . Although the king of Golconda refused to surrender , Subahdar of Hyderabad Rustam Dil Khan did so . 
 Taqarrub Khan made a conspiracy to eliminate Ahsan Khan , alleging that meetings of Ahsan Khan , Saif Khan ( Kam Bakhsh 's archery teacher ) , <unk> Khan , Ahmad Khan , Nasir Khan and Rustam Dil Khan ( all of them Kam Bakhsh 's former teachers and members of the then court ) to discuss public business were a conspiracy to assassinate Kam Bakhsh " while on his way to the Friday prayer at the great mosque " . After informing Kam Bakhsh of the matter , he invited Rustam Dil Khan for dinner ; arrested en route , Rustam Dil Khan was killed by being crushed under the feet of an elephant . Saif Khan 's hands were amputated , and Arshad Khan 's tongue was cut off . Ahsan Khan ignored warnings by close friends that Kam Bakhsh would arrest him , but he was imprisoned and his property seized . In April 1708 , Shah 's envoy <unk> Khan came to Kam Bakhsh 's court . When Taqarrub Khan told Kam Bakhsh that <unk> Khan intended to dethrone him , Kam Bakhsh invited the envoy and his entourage to a feast and executed them . 
 = = = = March to South India = = = = 
 In May 1708 , the emperor wrote a letter to Kam Bakhsh which he hoped would " be a warning " against proclaiming himself an independent sovereign and began a journey to the Tomb of Aurangzeb to pay his respects to his father . Kam Bakhsh thanked him in a letter , " without either explaining or justifying [ his actions ] " . 
 When he reached Hyderabad on 28 June 1708 , he learned that Kam Bakhsh had attacked <unk> to seize over three million rupees ' worth of treasure hidden in its fort . The subahdar of the province , Jan <unk> Khan , refused to hand over the money . Enraged , Kam Bakhsh confiscated his properties and ordered the recruitment of four thousand soldiers for the attack . In July , the garrison at the <unk> fort declared their independence and garrison leader <unk> Khan <unk> " reported his desertion from Kam Bakhsh " . On 5 November 1708 Shah 's camp reached Bidar , 67 miles ( 108 km ) north of Hyderabad . Historian William Irvine wrote that as his " camp drew nearer desertions from Kam Bakhsh became more and more frequent " . On 1 November , Kam Bakhsh captured Pam Naik 's ( zamindar , the landlord of <unk> ) holdings after Naik abandoned his army . 
 According to Irvine , more soldiers deserted as the emperor 's group neared . When Kam Bakhsh 's general told him that his failure to pay his soldiers was the reason for their desertion , he replied : " What need have I of enlisting them ? My trust is in God , and whatever is best will happen . " 
 Thinking that Kam Bakhsh might flee to Persia , the emperor ordered his prime minister Zulfiqar Khan Nusrat Jung to agree with Madras Presidency governor Thomas Pitt to pay him 200 @,@ 000 rupees for Kam Bakhsh 's capture . On 20 December , Kam Bakhsh was reported to have a cavalry of 2 @,@ 500 and an infantry of 5 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Death of Kam Bakhsh = = = = 
 On 20 December 1708 , the emperor marched towards <unk> @-@ i @-@ Mir <unk> , on the outskirts of Hyderabad , with " three hundred camels , [ and ] twenty thousand rockets " for war with Shah . He made his son Jahandar Shah commander of the advance guard , later replacing him with Khan Zaman . On 12 January 1709 , Bahadur Shah reached Hyderabad and prepared his troops . Although Kam Bakhsh had little money and few soldiers left , the royal astrologer had predicted that he would " miraculously " win the battle . 
 At sunrise the following day , the Mughal army charged towards Kam Bakhsh . His 15 @,@ 000 troops were divided into two bodies : one led by Mumin Khan , assisted by Rafi @-@ ush @-@ Shan and Jahan Shah , and the second under Zulfiqar Khan Nusrat Jung . Two hours later Kam Bakhsh 's camp was surrounded , and Zulfiqar Khan impatiently attacked him with his " small force " . 
 With his soldiers outnumbered and unable to resist the attack , Kam Bakhsh joined the battle and shot two quivers of arrows at his opponents . According to Irvine , when he was " weakened by loss of blood " , Bahadur Shah took him and his son <unk> prisoner . A dispute arose between Mumin Khan and <unk> Khan Nusrat Jung over who had captured them , with Rafi @-@ us @-@ Shan ruling in favour of the latter . Kam Bakhsh was brought by palanquin to the emperor 's camp , where he died the next morning . 
 = = Sikh rebellion = = 
 Unlike previous Mughal rulers who divided power between Mughal and Rajput chiefs , during Bahadur Shah 's reign all power resided with him . The Sikh <unk> ( army ) , under the leadership of Banda Singh Bahadur , and their army defeated the Mughals in battle at Samana , Sirhind and <unk> and captured the cities of Samana , Sirhind , <unk> , Saharanpur , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Jalandhar from 1709 to 1712 . With an army of eighty thousand soldiers , he also besieged the city of Jalalabad in present @-@ day Afghanistan . 
 = = = Efforts at suppression = = = 
 He signed peace treaties with Ajit Singh of Jodhpur and Man Singh of Amber before fighting him . He also ordered the Nawab of Awadh Asaf @-@ ud @-@ Daula , provincial governor Khan @-@ i @-@ Durrani , Moradabad <unk> Muhammad Amin Khan Chin , Delhi subahdar Asad Khan and Jammu <unk> <unk> Khan to accompany him into battle . Shah left Ajmer for the Punjab on 17 June 1710 , mobilising groups opposed to Bahadur on the way . When he learned about Shah 's plans , Bahadur unsuccessfully appealed to Ajit Singh and Man Singh for help . In the meantime , Shah had reoccupied <unk> , Kaithal and Panipat en route . In October , his commander Feroze Khan wrote to him that he had " chopped three hundred heads of rebels " ; Khan sent them to the emperor , who displayed them mounted on spears . 
 On 1 November 1710 the emperor reached the city of Karnal , where Mughal <unk> Rustam Dil Khan gave him a map of <unk> and Sirhind . Six days later , a small group of Sikhs were defeated at <unk> and <unk> . The city of Sirhind fell to the Mughals on 7 December ; its besieger , general Mohammad Amin Khan Bahadur , gave him a golden key ring commemorating the victory . After failing to recapture <unk> he marched towards <unk> , where Bahadur was hiding . On 30 November he attacked the <unk> fort , capturing three guns , matchlocks and three trenches from the rebels . With little ammunition left , Bahadur and a " few hundred of his followers fled " . His follower , Gulab Singh ( who was " dressed like " Bahadur ) , entered the fight and was killed . The emperor issued orders to the rulers of Kumaon and Srinagar that if Bahadur tried to enter their province , he should be " sent to the Emperor " . 
 Suspecting that Bahadur was allied with <unk> Prakash , the king of Nahan , the emperor has Prakash imprisoned in January 1711 ; his mother begged in vain for his release . After she sent him captured followers of Bahadur he ordered that " ornaments worth 100 @,@ 000 rupees should be manufactured " for her , and Prakash was released a month later . <unk> Khan Bahadur and <unk> Diler Khan were sent to Lahore to end Bahadur 's rebellion , and their unsuccessful attempt was reinforced by a garrison of five thousand soldiers . Shah also pressed Rustam Dil Khan and Muhammad Amin Khan to join them . 
 Bahadur was hiding in <unk> , 7 miles ( 11 km ) from Lahore . When Mughal workers came to repair a bridge in the village , his followers <unk> them that he was preparing to attack Delhi via Ajmer . Bahadur received soldiers from village ruler Ram Chand for his march against the Mughals , and besieged <unk> in April 1711 . After learning from messenger Rustan Jung that he crossed the Ravi River , the emperor attacked with artillery led by Isa Khan . In the July battle , Bahadur was defeated and fled to the Jammu hills . Forces led by Isa Khan and Muhammad Amin Khan followed , but failed to capture him . The emperor issued an edict to the zamindars ( landlord ) of Jammu to take the Sikh captive if possible . 
 Bahadur was attacked by Muhammad Amin Khan at the river <unk> , escaping to the Garhwal hills . Finding him " invincible " , the emperor went to Ajit Singh and Jai Singh for help . In October 1711 , a joint Mughal @-@ Rajput force marched towards <unk> . Bahadur escaped the ensuing siege , this time taking refuge at <unk> in present @-@ day Himachal Pradesh . 
 = = = <unk> controversy = = = 
 After ascending the throne , Bahadur Shah altered the public prayer ( or khutba ) for the monarch said every Friday by giving the title wali to Ali — the fourth Sunni and the first Shia caliph . Because of this , the citizens of Lahore resented reciting the khutba . 
 To solve the problem , he went to Lahore in September 1711 and had discussions with Haji Yar Muhammad , Muhammad Murad and " other well @-@ known men " . At their meeting , he read " books of authority " to justify using the word <unk> . He had a heated argument with Yar Muhammad , saying that martyrdom by a king was the only thing he wanted . Yar Muhammad ( supported by the emperor 's son , Azim @-@ ush @-@ Shan ) recruited troops against Shah , but no war was <unk> he held the khatib ( chief reciter ) at the Badshahi Mosque responsible for the matter , and had him arrested . On 2 October , although the army was deployed at the mosque the old khutba ( which did not call Ali " <unk> " ) was read . 
 = = Death = = 
 According to historian William Irvine , the emperor was in Lahore in January 1712 when his " health failed " . On 24 February he made his final public appearance , and died during the night of 27 – 28 February ; according to Mughal noble <unk> Khan , he died of " enlargement of the spleen " . On 11 April , his body was sent to Delhi under the supervision of his widow Mihr @-@ <unk> and Chin <unk> Khan . He was buried on 15 May in the courtyard of the Moti Masjid ( Pearl Mosque ) in Mehrauli , which he built near the dargah of <unk> <unk> Kaki . He was succeeded by his son Jahandar Shah who ruled until 1713 . 
 = = Coins = = 
 He issued gold , silver and copper coins , although his predecessors ' coins were also used to pay government officials and in commerce . Copper coins from Aurangzeb 's reign were re @-@ minted with his name . Unlike the other Mughal emperors , his coins did not use his name in a couplet ; poet <unk> Khan composed two lines for the coins , but they were not approved . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Name , title and lineage = = = 
 His full name , including his titles , was " Abul @-@ <unk> Sayyid Qutb @-@ ud @-@ din Muhammad Shah Alam Bahadur Shah Badshah " . After his death , contemporary historians began calling him " <unk> @-@ Manzil " ( Departed to Paradise ) . He was the only Mughal emperor to have the title Sayyid , used by descendants of the prophet Muhammad . According to William Irvine , his maternal grandfather was Sayyid Shah Mir ( whose daughter , Begum Nawab Bai , married Aurangzeb ) . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Source : Irvine , pp. 143 – 144 
 = A Flash Flood of Colour = 
 A Flash Flood of Colour is the third studio album by English rock band Enter Shikari , and was produced by Dan Weller . The album was recorded in May and June 2011 at Karma Sound Studios in Bang <unk> , Thailand , and at the Fortress in London , United Kingdom . It was released internationally on 16 January 2012 by Ambush Reality , the band 's record label in the United Kingdom , and Hopeless Records in North America . 
 Lyrically , the album deals with current affairs ( primarily the Great Recession ) . It confronts flaws in government action to end the global recession , also touching on the political situation in Israel and climate change . A Flash Flood of Colour demonstrated Enter Shikari 's continued fusion of electronic and rock music influences . The album 's cover depicts an inverted social hierarchy . 
 A Flash Flood of Colour received generally positive reviews from music critics and an average Metacritic score of 75 out of 100 . It debuted at number four on the UK Albums Chart after a band @-@ led campaign to get the album to number one , and appeared on several album @-@ of @-@ the @-@ year lists . To promote the album , Enter Shikari made A Flash Flood of Colour World Tour . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Enter Shikari took a different lyrical direction with the release of their 2009 album Common Dreads , which focused on financial meltdown , economic collapse and widespread discontent . Journalists such as Ian Winwood credited the band 's lyrical direction as a reaction to the evolution of politics since their 2007 debut album , Take to the Skies ; there is now " ongoing Orwellian overseas conflicts , riots in England 's major cities , endless austerity programmes the end date of which stretch years into the distance " . The change in lyrics began with Reynolds ' belief that music is an effective way of conveying political ideas . 
 The record was produced by former <unk> guitarist Dan Weller , who helped with guitar production on Common Dreads , and sound engineer Tim Morris . Enter Shikari recorded the album in May and June 2011 , primarily at Karma Sound Studios in Bang <unk> , Thailand . Its recording began at Weller 's Old Street London @-@ based recording studio . When he told the band that a friend owned a recording studio in Thailand , it became a running joke that they would record there instead . Eventually , they decided that it would be financially , logistically and artistically advantageous to record at Karma Sound . The studio in Thailand was described by drummer Rob Rolfe as " four walls in a little compound in the middle of the jungle " an hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half drive south of Bangkok and a " fantastic studio in paradise " . The band recorded the album 's music before adding the vocals , since Reynolds knew the album 's themes and that it would be " uniting and empowering " . The album was mixed in Vancouver by Mike Fraser . 
 Within the first 10 days of recording , the album 's most @-@ complete songs were its most aggressive — particularly the tentatively @-@ titled " Tyrannosaurus " ( later known as " Hello Tyrannosaurus , Meet Tyrannicide " ) . During its production , the album went through several changes ; " Stalemate " was intended as an acoustic introduction , and " System Meltdown " was intended to be a single song . Recording was completed within a month . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 A Flash Flood of Colour is noted for its fusion of genres : electronic music , rock music , hip @-@ hop music and hardcore punk . The album is considered to " contain at least two or three different genres within each track " , blending elements of other styles ( alternative rock , dubstep , drum and bass , industrial , techno , trance , electro , British hip hop , grime and metalcore ) into post @-@ hardcore and metal . Fusing electronic music with heavy rock music has led to the album 's style being described as <unk> . 
 The theme of A Flash Flood of Colour is politically progressive . The album 's treatment of current affairs and environmental issues takes aim " at the failings of capitalism , the hypocrisy of modern politics and the blatant disregard of human health and happiness " and has been compared to the calculated approach of the Occupy movement , rather than an ensuing class conflict . Despite its political themes , Reynolds denied that the album was politically motivated : " This album is anti @-@ politics . We say that politics is an outdated system . It is time that we embrace technological developments and no longer have to rely on a rule . Our lives should develop according to scientific findings . " He described A Flash Flood of Colour 's recurring theme as " perspective " : " We 're not trying to think subjectively . " The Real News , Democracy Now ! and journalist John Pilger have all influenced Reynolds ' political views . 
 = = = Tracks = = = 
 A Flash Flood of Colour opens with the trance @-@ like , spoken @-@ word introduction to " System ... " , featuring synthesised strings , a " battle cry " buildup and an outline of the album 's lyrical themes ( metaphorically comparing Britain 's economy to an eroded cliff @-@ top house ) . The next track , " ... Meltdown " , opens with a dubstep @-@ influenced breakdown . Both songs " surf a plateau musically " , highlighting the album 's diversity and acting as a " paean to internationalist idealism " . " <unk> " mixes jungle music " fury " , thrash metal guitar riffing , an electro interlude and a catchy chorus ; Reynolds also noted drum @-@ and @-@ bass and hardcore @-@ punk influences . " <unk> " focuses on partying more than politics ; Reynolds said about the song , " It ’ s hard to write positive songs with everything going on in the world , but this track is basically one full @-@ on party — it 's about cherishing your friendships and living compassionately . " 
 The title of " Arguing with Thermometers " refers to climate @-@ change deniers . " Stalemate " is a ballad about war profiteering , condemning Israel 's use of white phosphorus in Palestine and noting that wars " make <unk> out of billionaires " . The song 's combination of acoustic guitar , vocal harmonies and rock drumming produces a " radio @-@ friendly hook " . 
 With its " furious , anarchist edge " , " Gandhi Mate , Gandhi " focuses on the distinction between social and economic stability , summarising capitalism as " a long outdated system ... that does nothing but divide and segregate us " . The song has been seen as supporting the Occupy London movement ; Reynolds called it a " very frustrated and confused song " reflecting the current Zeitgeist : " People know we have the resources , the creativity , and the ingenuity to do better than what we have at the moment and are struggling to come to terms with the short term love of money over the long @-@ term stability and progression of our species . " The song focuses on two characters ; Reynolds ' vocals supply a revolutionary perspective , and Rory Clewlow 's are those of a person in power . " Gandhi mate , Gandhi " has unconventional lyrics for its characters ; " <unk> <unk> do one , son " was described by Reynolds as the product of a drunken MC battle , and during the song the other band members pause and urge Reynolds to calm down . Reynolds described " Gandhi mate , Gandhi " as a " lively electro influenced dubstep " and a " rap rock pileup " textured over " wobbly dubstep bass " . 
 " Warm Smiles Do Not Make You Welcome Here " incorporates stadium rock into Enter Shikari 's typical style . Reynolds described " Hello Tyrannosaurus , Meet Tyrannicide " as a critique of certain democracies which are " polite dictatorships " , specifically referring to those in the Arab Spring movement . The album closes with " Constellations " , a " rallying call about the future of the human race " . With a " swirling " string quartet resembling " System ... " ' s , the anthemic song has a post @-@ rock sound . 
 = = Cover and packaging = = 
 The title of A Flash Flood of Colour was intended to describe the album 's music , and Reynolds noted its colourful blend of musical genres . He said that the band wanted a title with a " big sound " which was positive and forward @-@ thinking , and it derives from the lyrics of " Warm Smiles Do Not Make You Welcome Here " . 
 The cover art is a reversal of society 's hierarchical structure based on social stratification . Although it was introduced to Enter Shikari as a set design for their live shows , they thought it would be a " solid symbol " for the album . Guitarist Rory Clewlow described the cover art : " Our society is often depicted as a pyramid , with the few at the top with all the wealth and the masses at the bottom with no wealth , but supporting the pyramid for the few at the top . Our upside down triangle represents this system being flipped on [ its ] head . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Enter Shikari released two non @-@ album singles , " Destabilise " and " <unk> Surprise " , before A Flash Flood of Colour 's release . Although " <unk> Surprise " ( released on 19 May 2011 ) was intended as the first single from the new album , it was later decided that it ( like " Destabilise " ) would be a stand @-@ alone track . They were included as bonus tracks on selected versions of A Flash Flood of Colour . 
 The album 's first single , " <unk> " , was released on 20 September 2011 . On 5 December " Gandhi Mate , Gandhi " was released as a preview of the album . On 5 January 2012 Enter Shikari released the studio version of " Arguing with Thermometers " on their YouTube page , and it was played on Lowe 's show as his " Hottest Record in the World " . On 4 January 2013 , the band released an animated music video for " Hello Tyrannosaurus , Meet Tyrannicide " on their YouTube page . 
 When it was released , A Flash Flood of Colour was one of two new entries in the United Kingdom 's top 20 mainstream album chart ( the other was Tribes ' début album , Baby ) . The album reached number one halfway through its first week , with over 2 @,@ 500 copies sold ( rivalling Adele , Bruno Mars and Ed Sheeran ) . After the announcement of the midweek chart , Rou Reynolds called A Flash Flood of Colour 's success a victory for " independent music , for socially conscious music and for alternative music " in a blog post on the Enter Shikari website . Although the album fell to fourth behind 21 , + and Mylo Xyloto , it reached number one on the UK Rock Chart and number two on the UK independent album charts and sold over 19 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Tour and performances = = = 
 As a " first big test " Enter Shikari introduced songs from A Flash Flood of Colour at Soundwave in Australia , and they were pleased by the positive reaction to their new music . When the band was touring at the time of the album 's release , they distributed leaflets with interviews answering questions they are not usually asked . On 12 February 2012 they played a subdued , well @-@ attended show at the Bull and Gate , a Kentish Town pub , which was filmed for Scuzz . The show , filmed and edited by Stand Your Ground Media , aired on 31 March at 5 pm . Enter Shikari played three small shows in the UK to celebrate the album 's release : 16 January 2012 ( its release date ) at the Borderline in London , 17 January at the Hippodrome in Kingston and 18 January at the Cockpit in Leeds . The shows were sponsored by HMV , Banquet Records , Jumbo Records and Crash Records ; those pre @-@ ordering from these sources received tickets to the shows . 
 After the album 's release , Enter <unk> toured Europe , North America and Australasia with a full production and light show . The band 's touring schedule , and their confidence , expanded across the United States and they played with two- or three @-@ band bills to play longer sets . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 A Flash Flood of Colour received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received a score of 75 based on 13 reviews ( categorised as " generally favorable reviews " ) . Drew Beringer of AbsolutePunk praised the album in an eight @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten review : " The quartet has a much bigger goal than just getting kids to dance to their breakdowns , rather they focus on putting a lot of substance into each track , hoping to inspire this generation to take a stand and make change amongst the broken systems throughout the world " . 
 Ian Winwood gave the album four out of five " Ks " for the British magazine Kerrang ! , an " excellent " review . He called the music far more upbeat than Enter Shikari 's serious message : " This 11 @-@ song set is a good deal of fun to listen to , even if its lyrics ' subject matters are the exact opposite . " Winwood also reviewed the album favourably for BBC Music , comparing its lyrics to The King Blues ' Punk & Poetry and calling Enter Shikari " the only other mainstream @-@ breaching British rock band concerning itself with the news of the world " . Johnny Firecloud gave the album an eight @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten rating on CraveOnline : " Enter Shikari have found a balance while honing a voice of rebellion – at a time where tearing down boundaries and <unk> the current structure is more vital and valuable than ever before in our lives . " Iain Moffat of The Fly said of the album that ' <unk> should always be this spellbinding . ' In NME , Dan Martin gave the album an eight @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten rating : " All of that surface tension lands Enter Shikari in a pretty powerful position for their third – and , as the title promises fabulously , they respond to the challenge in explosive style to deliver something like their defining statement . " <unk> writer Ryan Bird gave the album a nine @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten score , praising the band for their emotional cultural and sonic development and noting the importance of their message : " In a world edging ever closer to complete and utter destruction , Enter Shikari remain fearless and uncompromising leaders in a field of one . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Jon O 'Brien of Allmusic gave the album three stars out of five , saying that the album 's " rebellious stance rarely transcends " Beginners Guide to Politics " territory " and considering its music a " hyperactive Wall of Sound " . O 'Brien summarised his review by calling the album " a demanding and often exhausting listen , [ however ] it 's a call to arms which the flagging U.K. guitar band scene could do with more of . " John Calvert of Drowned In Sound gave the album a five @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten rating , calling its sound " sports metal " and noting a decline in Enter Shikari 's music : " Forward rewind to 2011 and it 's all Nero @-@ grade dubstep , amateurish drum 'n'bass and mid @-@ twenties pot bellies . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Roughton " Rou " Reynolds , all music composed by Enter Shikari . 
 Limited edition bonus DVD 
 DVD bonus dell <unk> <unk> 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Enter Shikari 
 Roughton " Rou " Reynolds – lead vocals , MC , growls , electronics , acoustic guitar , celesta , piano , brass and string arrangements , lyrics 
 Liam " Rory " Clewlow – guitar , backing vocals , co @-@ lead vocals on " <unk> " , " Gandhi Mate , Gandhi " and " Destabilise " 
 Chris Batten – bass , backing vocals , co @-@ lead vocals on " ... Meltdown " , " Search Party " , " Gandhi Mate , Gandhi " and " Pack of Thieves " 
 Rob Rolfe – drums , percussion , backing vocals , co @-@ lead vocals on " Gandhi Mate , Gandhi " 
 Additional personnel 
 Dan Weller – producer 
 Tim Morris – engineer 
 Bobo <unk> – engineer 
 Mike Fraser – mixing 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Susianna Kentikian = 
 Susianna " Susi " <unk> Kentikian ( Armenian : <unk> <unk> , born <unk> <unk> on September 11 , 1987 ) is a German @-@ Armenian professional boxer now residing in Germany . She was born in Yerevan , Armenian SSR , but she left the country with her family at the age of five because of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . Kentikian has lived in Hamburg since 1996 and began boxing when she was twelve years old . Following a successful amateur career , she turned professional in 2005 when she signed with the Hamburg boxing promoter Spotlight Boxing . Kentikian won her first world championship fight in February 2007 , and she is a former World Boxing Association ( WBA ) , World Boxing Organization ( WBO ) and Women 's International Boxing Federation ( WIBF ) World Flyweight Champion , and is considered Top Female fighter pound for pound . 
 Kentikian was undefeated , having won 16 of her first 30 professional fights by knockout . The German television station ZDF broadcasts her fights since July 2009 . She had previously headlined fight cards for the television station ProSieben from 2007 to 2009 . Kentikian has gained minor celebrity status in Germany and she hopes to reach a popularity similar to that of the retired German female boxing star Regina Halmich . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Susianna Kentikian was born in Yerevan , Armenian SSR , the daughter of veterinary doctor Levon Kentikian and his wife <unk> . At the age of five , she left Armenia with her parents and her nine @-@ year @-@ old brother , Mikael , because her father was called up to serve in the military during the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh War . In 1992 , the family first moved to Berlin , Germany and stayed at asylum seekers ' homes . However , due to the violence at these facilities and their poor knowledge of the German language , they left Berlin and moved to Moldova and later to Russia , where Kentikian went to school for a short period of time . The family returned to Germany in 1996 and relocated in Hamburg , again living in government facilities for asylum seekers . Kentikian 's residence status remained uncertain for almost a decade . Several times , she and her family were taken to the airport for deportation , but the intervention of local friends such as her amateur trainer , Frank <unk> , who called lawyers , the media and local politicians , prevented their final expulsion . Her family received a permanent residence permit in 2005 when she signed a three @-@ year professional boxing contract that established a stable income . 
 At the age of 16 , Kentikian began working as a cleaner in a local fitness center to help her family financially . She graduated from high school ( Realschule ) in the summer of 2006 and she eventually became a German citizen in June 2008 . She has applied for dispensation to be allowed to retain her Armenian citizenship . Kentikian now lives with her family in an apartment near her Hamburg boxing gym . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Kentikian discovered her enthusiasm for boxing when she was twelve years old after accompanying her brother to his boxing training . She started with regular training herself and stated that boxing had allowed her to forget the difficulties of her life for a short time : " I could let everything out , my whole energy . If you have so many problems like our family , you need something like that . " 
 Kentikian won the Hamburg Championships for juniors from 2001 to 2004 . She also won the Northern German Championships for juniors in 2003 and 2004 , and in October 2004 , she had her biggest amateur success by winning the International German Women 's Amateur Championships in the featherweight division for juniors . Kentikian found it increasingly difficult to find opponents in the amateur ranks , as few boxers wanted to face her in the ring , and her status as an asylum seeker did not allow her to box outside Hamburg . Kentikian 's final amateur record stood at 24 wins and one loss . She later blamed overeagerness for her single loss , having fought despite health problems at the time . Her aggressive style and fast combinations , and her ambition to always attack until she knocked out the opponent earned her the nickname " Killer Queen " ; she has often used the identically @-@ named song by the English rock band Queen as her entrance music . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Kentikian was discovered as a professional boxer at an exhibition fight during qualifications for the World Amateur Boxing Championships . At the beginning of 2005 , she signed a three @-@ year contract with the Hamburg boxing promoter Spotlight Boxing , a joint venture of Universum Box @-@ Promotion , focusing on young athletes . Since then , she has been coached by Universum trainer <unk> <unk> . Kentikian started her professional career on January 15 , 2005 , with a win by unanimous decision over <unk> <unk> of Bulgaria on the undercard of German female boxing star Regina Halmich . Over the next 14 months , Kentikian won nine of her eleven fights by knockout . Her unusually high knockout percentage , rarely seen in lower female weight classes , began to draw attention . On July 25 , 2006 , she won her first belt , the International German flyweight title , against Daniela Graf by unanimous decision . In her first international title fight on September 9 , 2006 , Kentikian beat Maribel Zurita from the United States with a fourth round technical knockout for the WIBF InterContinental Flyweight title ; the fight was stopped when Zurita was cut over the left eyebrow . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 In her 15th professional bout , Kentikian fought for her first world championship in Cologne , Germany , on February 16 , 2007 ; it was also her first time headlining a fight card . She won by a ninth round technical knockout against Carolina Alvarez of Venezuela , thereby winning the vacant WBA Flyweight title . Alvarez took unanswered punches in most of the rounds and was bleeding heavily from her nose and the referee eventually stopped the fight in round nine in concern for Alvarez 's health . Six weeks later , on March 30 , 2007 , Kentikian made her first title defense . Before a crowd of 19 @,@ 500 in the <unk> , she fought on the undercard of the popular exhibition bout between German comedian Stefan Raab and WIBF World Champion Regina Halmich . Kentikian beat María José Núñez from Uruguay with a third round technical knockout . Núñez was knocked down in round two and Kentikian finished the fight one round later with a right cross followed up by combinations that left Núñez defenseless on the ropes , causing the referee to step in . 
 Kentikian next faced Nadia Hokmi of France in her second title defense on May 25 , 2007 . Hokmi , using her height and reach advantage , proved to be the first test of Kentikian 's professional career and both boxers fought a competitive bout . While Hokmi started out slower , she managed to win several of the later rounds by landing repeated combinations . Kentikian won through a split decision for the first time in her career . The fight was voted among the five " Top Fights of the Year " by <unk> On September 7 , 2007 , Kentikian defended her title against <unk> Martin from the United Kingdom , winning by a third round technical knockout . Kentikian controlled her opponent from the opening bell and the referee stopped the fight after Martin was knocked down from a straight right hand in round three . 
 Following the retirement of long @-@ standing WIBF belt holder Regina Halmich , Kentikian unified the WBA and vacant WIBF Flyweight titles in her hometown of Hamburg on December 7 , 2007 . She met Nadia Hokmi in a rematch of their contest six months earlier . The French boxer again proved to be a tough opponent and the fight developed very similarly to their first encounter . Once more , Kentikian had the better start , but Hokmi scored during the second half of the fight , again making it a close bout . This time however , Kentikian was ahead on all three of the judges ' scorecards , winning by unanimous decision . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Kentikian successfully defended her titles against Sarah Goodson of the Philippines by a third round technical knockout on February 29 , 2008 . Goodson , who had fought almost exclusively in lower weight classes before , was overpowered by Kentikian and the referee ended the fight after a series of body punches in round three . In her next title defense on May 10 , 2008 , Kentikian beat Mary Ortega from the United States with a first round technical knockout . Ortega , who had previously fought against well @-@ known opponents such as Elena Reid and Hollie Dunaway , was knocked down twice by straight right hands during the first 90 seconds of the fight . When Kentikian had Ortega pinned against the ropes again , the referee stepped in shortly before the end of round one . The quick stoppage came as a surprise to many , including television commentator Regina Halmich , who had expected a hard @-@ fought bout . 
 In her next title defense on August 29 , 2008 , Kentikian met Hager Finer of Israel , Halmich 's last opponent before retiring . Following a close opening round , the boxing match turned into a brawl and Finer scored during the first half of the fight . From round five onwards , Kentikian managed to take over the bout by landing the cleaner punches and she won by unanimous decision . On December 5 , 2008 , Kentikian faced Anastasia <unk> of Russia , the reigning GBU Flyweight Champion , although the GBU title was not on the line . During the uncharacteristic tactical fight , Kentikian managed to control her opponent from the middle of the ring in most of the rounds . The three judges all scored the bout in favor of Kentikian . In December 2008 , she was named Germany 's female boxer of the year for the first time . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Kentikian retained her WIBF and WBA belts with a unanimous decision win over Elena Reid from the United States on March 20 , 2009 . Reid , who was well known in Germany after two controversial bouts with Halmich in 2004 and 2005 , remained largely passive from the opening bell and Kentikian controlled her through the majority of the fight . Reid did not win a single round on the official scorecards . On July 4 , 2009 , Kentikian fought the Interim WBA Super Flyweight Champion Carolina Gutierrez <unk> of Argentina . Kentikian used her speed and combinations to dominate her opponent through the ten rounds , winning every round on the judges ' scores . Kentikian ended 2009 by fighting the undefeated Turkish @-@ German Julia Sahin ( 20 – 0 ) on 10 October for the vacant WBO Female Flyweight title . Kentikian overwhelmed Sahin with her higher work rate early on . Sahin spent most of the fight covering up from Kentikian 's many flurries . Kentikian gave Sahin a ten @-@ round beating and won a unanimous decision to become the new WBO Female Flyweight Champion . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 Kentikian , now the WIBF , WBA and WBO Female Flyweight Champion , made the first defense of all her titles against Nadia <unk> on 24 April 2010 . The bout was very close , with Kentikian landing more cleaner and harder shots , yet <unk> finding much success as well . After ten close rounds , Kentikian won via split decision . 
 On 17 July , Susi Kentikian defended all of her titles once again against Mexico 's <unk> <unk> . In a disappointing turn of events , the bout was stopped in the third round after an accidental clash of heads left Kentikian with an injury , leaving her unable to continue . The fight was declared a no contest . Up until the stoppage , Kentikian was giving <unk> problems with her fast combinations , in and out attacks and power shots . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 Kentikian retained her WIBF Flyweight title against Ana <unk> on 26 March 2011 . It was an action packed ten round fight , with Susi winning almost every round on her way to a unanimous decision victory . <unk> was docked a point in round six for a low blow . Kentikian finished the year by scoring another unanimous decision win , this time against Thai <unk> <unk> , to retain her WIBF , WBA and WBO Female Flyweight titles . Kentikian won every round on every scorecard ( 100 @-@ 90 , 100 @-@ 90 , 100 @-@ 90 ) . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 Kentikian attempted to defend her WIBF and WBO Female Flyweight titles next on 16 May 2012 in Frankfurt , Germany against Melissa McMorrow . Kentikian lost via controversial majority decision with scores of 95 @-@ 95 , 94 @-@ 96 and 94 @-@ 96 . McMorrow had won the early rounds , but Kentikian dominated the remainder of the fight . Months later , Kentikian defend WBA Female title against Carina Moreno , but lost a close split decision . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 On February 1 , 2013 , Kentikian defeated Sanae Jah and won the Interim WBA Female Flyweight title . On June 7 , 2013 , Kentikian defeated Carina Moreno and won WBA Female Flyweight title . On December 7 , 2013 , Kentikian defeated Simona Galassi and defended the WBA Female Flyweight title . 
 = = = 2014 = = = 
 On May 31 , 2014 , Kentikian defeated Dan @-@ Bi Kim and defended the WBA Female Flyweight title . On November 8 , 2014 , Kentikian defeated Naoko Fujioka ( Japan ) and again defended the WBA Female Flyweight title . 
 = = In the media = = 
 At the beginning of her professional career , Kentikian was primarily featured in the local media in Hamburg and occasionally in national German newspapers ; in particular , her difficult childhood and her long @-@ time uncertain asylum status sparked interest in the press and led to comparisons with the boxing film Million Dollar Baby . Her height of 1 @.@ 54 m ( 5 ft 1 in ) also drew attention , and she was dubbed " Germany 's smallest professional boxer " . Early on , Kentikian was considered one of the big talents in German boxing and the media mentioned her as the potential successor of record world champion Regina Halmich , a goal she had also set out for herself . 
 In 2007 , Kentikian was introduced to a much larger audience due to cooperation between German television station ProSieben and her promoter Spotlight Boxing . In addition to live broadcasts of her fights during so @-@ called " ProSieben Fight Nights , " she appeared several times on the popular television show TV total . She also took part in a four @-@ round sparring session with the show 's host , Stefan Raab , and participated in the competitive entertainment event World Wok Championships , where she teamed with Sven Hannawald , Christina Surer and Markus Beyer to win the four @-@ person competition . Her first world title defense , fighting María José Núñez on the undercard of the popular Raab vs. Halmich exhibition bout , was seen by 4 @.@ 69 million television viewers — her most watched fight to date . A camera crew visited her for one year prior to her first world championship fight against Carolina Alvarez ; the documentary aired in June 2007 on the German public broadcaster Das Erste . A shortened version with commentary in English was aired by the German international broadcaster Deutsche Welle in October 2007 . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 On 24 November 2010 it was announced Susi Kentikian is the patron of an organization called <unk> für <unk> ( Tree of Life for Armenia ) , whose aim is to plant 300 @,@ 000 trees in Armenia and to create jobs in Kentikian ´ s homeland . 
 = = Boxing championships and honors = = 
 Amateur titles 
 Hamburg Champion for juniors – 2001 to 2004 
 Northern German Champion for juniors – 2003 and 2004 
 International German Amateur Featherweight Champion for juniors – 2004 
 Professional titles 
 International German Flyweight Title – won July 25 , 2006 ( later vacated ) 
 WIBF InterContinental Flyweight Title – won September 9 , 2006 ( later vacated ) 
 WBA World Flyweight Champion – won February 16 , 2007 
 WIBF World Flyweight Champion – won December 7 , 2007 
 WBO World Flyweight Champion – won October 10 , 2009 
 WBA World Flyweight Champion – won July 6 , 2013 
 Awards 
 Hamburg 's sportswoman of the year – 2007 
 WBA Best Female Boxer – 2007 / 2008 
 Germany 's female boxer of the year – 2008 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = Canadian National Vimy Memorial = 
 The Canadian National Vimy Memorial is a memorial site in France dedicated to the memory of Canadian Expeditionary Force members killed during the First World War . It also serves as the place of commemoration for First World War Canadian soldiers killed or presumed dead in France who have no known grave . The monument is the centrepiece of a 100 @-@ hectare ( 250 @-@ acre ) preserved battlefield park that encompasses a portion of the ground over which the Canadian Corps made their assault during the initial Battle of Vimy Ridge offensive of the Battle of Arras . 
 The Battle of Vimy Ridge was the first occasion on which all four divisions of the Canadian Expeditionary Force participated in a battle as a cohesive formation , and it became a Canadian national symbol of achievement and sacrifice . France ceded to Canada perpetual use of a portion of land on Vimy Ridge on the understanding that Canada use the land to establish a battlefield park and memorial . Wartime tunnels , trenches , craters , and unexploded munitions still honeycomb the grounds of the site , which remains largely closed off for reasons of public safety . Along with preserved trench lines , a number of other memorials and cemeteries are contained within the park . 
 The memorial took designer Walter Seymour Allward 11 years to see built . King Edward VIII unveiled it on 26 July 1936 in the presence of French President Albert Lebrun and more than 50 @,@ 000 Canadian and French veterans and their families . Following an extensive multi @-@ year restoration , Queen Elizabeth II re @-@ dedicated the monument on 9 April 2007 at a ceremony commemorating the 90th anniversary of the battle . The site is maintained by Veterans Affairs Canada . This Vimy Memorial and the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial are the only two National Historic Sites of Canada outside of Canada . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Vimy Ridge is a gradually rising escarpment on the western edge of the Douai Plains , eight kilometres northeast of Arras . The ridge gradually rises on its western side , dropping more quickly on the eastern side . The ridge is approximately seven kilometres in length and culminates at an elevation of 145 metres ( 476 ft ) above sea level , or 60 metres ( 200 ft ) above the Douai Plains , providing a natural unobstructed view for tens of kilometres in all directions . 
 = = = Early conflicts on site = = = 
 The ridge fell under German control in October 1914 , during the Race to the Sea , as the Franco @-@ British and German forces continually attempted to outflank each other through northeastern France . The French Tenth Army attempted to dislodge the Germans from the region during the Second Battle of Artois in May 1915 by attacking their positions at Vimy Ridge and Notre Dame de Lorette . During the attack , the French 1st Moroccan Division briefly captured the height of the ridge , where the Vimy memorial is currently located , but was unable to hold it owing to a lack of reinforcements . The French made another attempt during the Third Battle of Artois in September 1915 , but were once again unsuccessful in capturing the top of the ridge . The French suffered approximately 150 @,@ 000 casualties in their attempts to gain control of Vimy Ridge and surrounding territory . 
 The British XVII Corps relieved the French Tenth Army from the sector in February 1916 . On 21 May 1916 , the German infantry attacked the British lines along a 1 @,@ 800 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 000 yd ) front in an effort to force them from positions along the base of the ridge . The Germans captured several British @-@ controlled tunnels and mine craters before halting their advance and entrenching their positions . Temporary Lieutenant Richard Basil Brandram Jones was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his ultimately unsuccessful defence of the <unk> Crater during the attack . British counter @-@ attacks on 22 May did not manage to change the situation . The Canadian Corps relieved the British IV Corps stationed along the western slopes of Vimy Ridge in October 1916 . 
 = = = Battle of Vimy Ridge = = = 
 The Battle of Vimy Ridge was the first instance in which all four Canadian divisions participated in a battle together , as a cohesive formation . The nature and size of the planned Canadian Corps assault necessitated support and resources beyond its normal operational capabilities . Consequently , the British 5th Infantry Division and supplementary artillery , engineer and labour units reinforced the four Canadian divisions already in place . The 24th British Division of I Corps supported the Canadian Corps along its northern flank while the XVII Corps did so to the south . The ad hoc Gruppe Vimy formation , based under I Bavarian Reserve Corps commander General der Infanterie Karl Ritter von <unk> , was the principal defending formation with three divisions responsible for manning the frontline defences opposite the Canadian Corps . 
 The attack began at 5 : 30 am on Easter Monday , 9 April 1917 . Light field guns laid down a barrage that advanced in predetermined increments , often 91 metres ( 100 yd ) every three minutes , while medium and heavy howitzers established a series of standing barrages against known defensive systems further ahead . The 1st , 2nd , and 3rd Canadian Divisions quickly captured their first objectives . The 4th Canadian Division encountered a great deal of trouble during its advance and was unable to complete its first objective until some hours later . The 1st , 2nd , and 3rd Canadian Division captured their second objective by approximately 7 : 30 am . The failure of the 4th Canadian Division to capture the top of the ridge delayed further advances and forced the 3rd Canadian Division to expend resources establishing a defensive line to its north . Reserve units from the 4th Canadian Division renewed the attack on the German positions on the top of the ridge and eventually forced the German troops holding the southwestern portion of Hill 145 to withdraw . 
 On the morning of 10 April , Canadian Corps commander Lieutenant @-@ General Julian Byng moved up three fresh brigades to support the continued advance . The fresh units leapfrogged units already in place and captured the third objective line , including Hill 135 and the town of Thélus , by 11 : 00 am . By 2 : 00 pm both the 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions reported capturing their final objectives . By this point the " Pimple " , a heavily defended knoll west of the town of Givenchy @-@ en @-@ Gohelle , was the only German position remaining on Vimy Ridge . On 12 April , the 10th Canadian Brigade attacked and quickly overcame the hastily entrenched German troops , with the support of artillery and the 24th British Division . By nightfall on 12 April , the Canadian Corps was in firm control of the ridge . The Canadian Corps suffered 10 @,@ 602 casualties : 3 @,@ 598 killed and 7 @,@ 004 wounded . The German Sixth Army suffered an unknown number of casualties , and around 4 @,@ 000 men became prisoners of war . 
 Although the battle is not generally considered Canada 's greatest military achievement , the image of national unity and achievement imbued the battle with considerable national significance for Canada . According to Pierce , " the historical reality of the battle has been reworked and reinterpreted in a conscious attempt to give purpose and meaning to an event that came to symbolize Canada 's coming of age as a nation . " The idea that Canada 's identity and nationhood were born out of the battle is an opinion that is widely held in military and general histories of Canada . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Selection = = = 
 In 1920 , the Government of Canada announced that the Imperial War Graves Commission had awarded Canada eight sites — five in France and three in Belgium — on which to erect memorials . Each site represented a significant Canadian engagement and the Canadian government initially decided that each battlefield be treated equally and commemorated with identical monuments . In September 1920 , the Canadian government formed the Canadian Battlefields Memorials Commission to discuss the process and conditions for holding a memorial competition for the sites in Europe . The commission held its first meeting on 26 November 1920 and during this meeting decided that the architectural design competition would be open to all Canadian architects , designers , sculptors , and artists . The jury consisted of Charles Herbert Reilly representing the Royal Institute of British Architects , Paul Philippe Cret representing the Société centrale des <unk> français and Frank Darling representing the Royal Architectural Institute of Canada . Each jury member was a leader in the architectural field ; Reilly was training students in design and development of war memorials and Cret had been selected by the United States to design national monuments in Europe . Interested parties submitted 160 design drawings and the jury selected 17 submissions for consideration , commissioning each finalist to produce a plaster maquette of their respective design . The jury recommended in a 10 September 1921 report to the commission that two of the designs be executed . In October 1921 , the commission formally selected the submission of Toronto sculptor and designer Walter Seymour Allward as the winner of the competition and that of Frederick Chapman <unk> as runner @-@ up . The complexity of Allward 's design precluded the possibility of duplicating the design at each site . The approach of selecting one primary memorial ran counter to the recommendation of Canadian Battlefields Memorials Commission architectural advisor Percy Erskine Nobbs , who had consistently expressed his preference for a series of smaller monuments . The consensus however went in Allward 's favour with his design receiving both public and critical approval . The commission revised its initial plans and decided to build two distinctive memorials — those of Allward and <unk> — and six smaller identical memorials . 
 At the outset , members of the commission debated where to build Allward 's winning design . The jury 's assessment was that Allward 's submission was best suited to a " low hill rather than to a continuous and lofty bluff or cliff like Vimy Ridge " . The commission committee initially took the position of placing the monument in Belgium on Hill 62 , near the location of the Battle of Mont Sorrel , as the site provided an imposing view . This however ran counter to the desires of the Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King who , while speaking in the House of Commons of Canada in May 1922 , argued in favour of placing the memorial at Vimy Ridge . King 's position received unanimous support of the House and , in the end , the commission selected Vimy Ridge as the preferred site . The government announced its desire to acquire a more considerable tract of land along the ridge after the commission selected Vimy Ridge as the preferred location for Allward 's design . In the interval between the 1st and 2nd session of the 14th Canadian Parliament , Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons Rodolphe Lemieux went to France to negotiate the acquisition of more land . On 5 December 1922 , Lemieux concluded an agreement with France in which France granted Canada " freely and for all time " the use of 100 hectares ( 250 acres ) of land on Vimy Ridge , in recognition of Canada 's war effort . The only condition placed on the donation was that Canada use the land to erect a monument commemorating Canadian soldiers killed during the First World War and assume the responsibility for the maintenance of the memorial and the surrounding battlefield park . 
 = = = Memorial construction = = = 
 Following the competition , Allward spent the remainder of 1921 and the Spring of 1922 preparing for his move to Europe . After selling his home and studio , Allward finally departed for Belgium on 6 June 1922 and spent a number of months seeking a suitable studio in Belgium and then Paris , though Allward eventually set up a studio in London , England . 
 Allward had initially hoped to use white marble for the memorial 's facing stone , but Percy Nobbs suggested this would be a mistake because marble was unlikely to weather well in northern France and the memorial would have a " ghost like " appearance . Allward undertook a tour of almost two years to find stone of the right colour , texture , and luminosity . He found it in the ruins of the Diocletian 's Palace at Split , Croatia ; he observed that the palace had not weathered over the years , which Allward took as evidence of the stone 's durability . His choice — Seget limestone — came from an ancient Roman quarry located near Seget , Croatia . The difficulties with the quarrying process , coupled with complicated transportation logistics , delayed delivery of the limestone and thus construction of the memorial . The first shipment did not arrive at the site until 1927 and the larger blocks , intended for the human figures , did not begin to arrive until 1931 . 
 On Allward 's urging the Canadian Battlefields Memorials Commission hired Oscar Faber , a Danish structural engineer , in 1924 to prepare foundation plans and provide general supervision of the foundation work . Faber had recently designed the substructure for the Menin Gate at Ypres and he selected a design that employed cast @-@ in @-@ place reinforced concrete to which the facing stone would be bonded . Major Unwin Simson served as the principal Canadian engineer during the construction of the memorial and oversaw much of the daily operations at the site . Allward moved to Paris in 1925 to supervise construction and the carving of the sculptures . Construction commenced in 1925 and took eleven years to complete . The Imperial War Graves Commission concurrently employed French and British veterans to carry out the necessary roadwork and site landscaping . 
 While awaiting the first delivery of stone , Simson noticed that the battlefield landscape features were beginning to deteriorate . Seeing an opportunity to not only preserve a portion of the battlefield but also keep his staff occupied , Simson decided to preserve a short section of trench line and the Grange Subway more accessible . Labourers rebuilt and preserved sections of sandbagged trench wall , on both the Canadian and German sides of the Grange crater group , in concrete . The workforce also built a new concrete entrance for the Grange Subway and , after excavating a portion of the tunnel system , installed electric lighting . 
 Allward chose a relatively new construction method for the monument : limestone bonded to a cast concrete frame . A foundation bed of 11 @,@ 000 tonnes of concrete , reinforced with hundreds of tonnes of steel , served as the support bed for the memorial . The memorial base and twin pylons contained almost 6 @,@ 000 tonnes of Seget limestone . Sculptors carved the 20 human figures on site from large blocks of stone . The carvers used half @-@ size plaster models produced by Allward in his studio , now on display at the Canadian War Museum , and an instrument called a pantograph to reproduce the figures at the proper scale . The carvers conducted their work year @-@ round inside temporary studios built around each figure . The inclusion of the names of those killed in France with no known grave was not part of the original design and Allward was unhappy when the government asked him to include them . Allward argued that the inclusion of names was not part of the original commissioning . Through a letter to Canadian Battlefields Memorials Commission in October 1927 , Allward indicated his intention to relegate the names of the missing to pavement stones around the monument . The collective dismay and uproar of the commission forced Allward to relent and incorporate the names of the missing on the memorial walls . The task of inscribing the names did not begin until the early 1930s and employed a typeface that Allward designed for the monument . 
 = = = Pilgrimage and unveiling = = = 
 In 1919 , the year after the war ended , around 60 @,@ 000 British tourists and mourners made pilgrimages to the Western Front . The transatlantic voyage was however longer and more expensive from Canada . Many attempts to organize large pilgrimages failed , and journeys overseas were largely made individually or in small , unofficial groups . The delegates of the 1928 national convention of the Canadian Legion passed a unanimous resolution asking that a pilgrimage be organized to the Western Front battlefields . A plan began to take form wherein the Legion aimed to coordinate the pilgrimage with the unveiling of the Vimy memorial , which at the time was expected to be completed in 1931 or 1932 . Due to construction delays with the memorial , it was not until July 1934 that the Canadian Legion announced a pilgrimage to former battlefield sites in conjunction with the unveiling of the memorial . Although the exact date of the memorial unveiling was still not set , the Legion invited former service members to make tentative reservations with their headquarters in Ottawa . The response from veterans and their families was enthusiastic — 1 @,@ 200 inquiries by November 1934 . The Legion <unk> announced that the memorial would be unveiled on Dominion Day , 1 July 1936 , even though the government still did not know when it would be completed . 
 For event planning purposes the Legion and the government established areas for which each was responsible . The government was responsible for selection of the official delegation and the program for the official unveiling of the memorial . The Legion was responsible for the more challenging task of organizing the pilgrimage . For the Legion this included planning meals , accommodations and transportation for what was at the time the largest single peacetime movement of people from Canada to Europe . The Legion took the position that the pilgrimage would be funded by its members without subsidies or financial aid from Canadian taxpayers , and by early 1935 they had established that the price of the 3 ½ <unk> trip , inclusive of all meals , accommodation , health insurance , and sea and land transportation would be CA $ 160 per person ( $ 2 @,@ 779 @.@ 18 in present terms ) . Indirect assistance came in a number of forms . The government waived passport fees and made a special Vimy passport available to pilgrims at no extra cost . The government and a number of private sector firms also provided paid leave for their participating employees . It was not until April 1936 that the government was prepared to publicly commit to an unveiling date , 26 July 1936 . On 16 July 1936 , the five transatlantic liners , escorted by HMCS Champlain and HMCS Saguenay , departed the Port of Montreal with approximately 6 @,@ 200 passengers and arrived in Le Havre on 24 and 25 July . The limited accommodation made it necessary for the Legion to lodge pilgrims in nine cities throughout northern France and Belgium and employ 235 buses to move the pilgrims between various locations . 
 On 26 July 1936 , the day of the ceremony , pilgrims spent the morning and early afternoon exploring the landscape of the memorial park before congregating at the monument . For the ceremony , sailors from HMCS Saguenay provided the guard of honour . Also present were The Royal Canadian Horse Artillery Band , French army engineers , and French @-@ Moroccan cavalry who had fought on the site during the Second Battle of Artois . The ceremony itself was broadcast live by the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission over shortwave radio , with facilities of the British Broadcasting Corporation transmitting the ceremony to Canada . Senior Canadian , British , and European officials , including French President Albert Lebrun , and over 50 @,@ 000 Canadian , British , and French veterans and their families attended the event . Absent , however , was Canadian Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King , it being well understood that he was generally not comfortable around veterans and felt it more appropriate for a war veteran in Cabinet to act as minister in attendance . 
 Before the ceremony began , King Edward VIII , present in his capacity as king of Canada , inspected the guard of honour , was introduced to the honoured guests , and spent approximately half an hour speaking with veterans in the crowd . Two Royal Air Force and two French Air Force squadrons flew over the monument and dipped their wings in salute . The ceremony itself began with prayers from chaplains representing the Church of England , the United Church of Canada , and the Roman Catholic Church . Ernest Lapointe , Canadian Minister of Justice , spoke first , followed by Edward VIII , who , in both French and English , thanked France for its generosity and assured those assembled that Canada would never forget its war missing and dead . The King then pulled the Royal Union Flag from the central figure of Canada Bereft and the military band played the Last Post . The ceremony was one of the King 's few official duties before he abdicated the throne . The pilgrimage continued , and most participants toured Ypres before being taken to London to be hosted by the British Legion . One @-@ third of the pilgrims left from London for Canada on 1 August , while the majority returned to France as guests of the government for another week of touring before going home . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In 1939 , the increased threat of conflict with Nazi Germany amplified the Canadian government 's level of concern for the general safety of the memorial . Canada could do little more than protect the sculptures and the bases of the pylons with sandbags and await developments . When war did break out , the British Expeditionary Force deployed to France and assumed responsibility for the Arras sector , which included Vimy . In late May 1940 , following the British retreat after the Battle of Arras , the status and condition of the memorial became unknown to Allied forces . The Germans took control of the site and held the site 's caretaker , George Stubbs , in an <unk> internment camp for Allied civilians in St. Denis , France . The rumoured destruction of the Vimy Memorial , either during the fighting or at the hands of the Germans , was widely reported in Canada and the United Kingdom . The rumours led the German Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda to formally deny accusations that Germany had damaged or desecrated the memorial . To demonstrate the memorial had not been desecrated Adolf Hitler , who reportedly admired the memorial for its peaceful nature , was photographed by the press while personally touring it and the preserved trenches on 2 June 1940 . The undamaged state of the memorial was not confirmed until September 1944 when the Welsh Guards recaptured Vimy Ridge . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 Immediately following the Second World War very little attention was paid to the Battle of Vimy Ridge or the Vimy Memorial , having been overshadowed by more contemporary events . The Winnipeg Free Press and The Legionary , the magazine of the Canadian Legion , were the only publications to note the 35th anniversary of the battle in 1952 . The 40th anniversary in 1957 received even less notice with only the Halifax Herald making any mention . Interest in commemoration remained low in the early 1960s but increased in 1967 with the fiftieth anniversary of the battle , paired with the Canadian Centennial . A heavily attended ceremony at the memorial in April 1967 was broadcast live on television . Commemoration of the battle decreased once again throughout the 1970s and only returned in force with the 125th anniversary of Canadian Confederation and the widely covered 75th anniversary of the battle in 1992 . The 1992 ceremony at the memorial was attended by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and at least 5 @,@ 000 people . Subsequent smaller @-@ scale ceremonies were held at the memorial in 1997 and 2002 . 
 = = = Restoration and rededication = = = 
 By the end of the century , the large number of repairs undertaken since the memorial 's construction had left a patchwork of materials and colours , and a disconcerting pattern of damage from water intrusion at the joints . In May 2001 , the Government of Canada announced the Canadian Battlefield Memorials Restoration Project , a major $ 30 million Canadian dollar restoration project to restore Canada 's memorial sites in France and Belgium , in order to maintain and present them in a respectful and dignified manner . In 2005 , the Vimy memorial closed for major restoration work . Veterans Affairs Canada directed the restoration of the memorial in cooperation with other Canadian departments , the Commonwealth War Graves Commission , consultants and specialists in military history . 
 Time , wear , and severe weather conditions led to many identified problems , the single most pervasive being water damage . In building a memorial made of cast concrete covered in stone , Allward had failed to take into account how these materials would shift over time . The builders and designer failed to incorporate sufficient space between the concrete and stones , which resulted in water infiltrating the structure through its walls and platforms , dissolving lime in the concrete foundation and masonry . As the water exited , it deposited the lime on exterior surfaces , obscuring many of the names inscribed thereon . Poor drainage and water flows off the monument also caused significant deterioration of the platform , terrace , and stairs . The restoration project intended to address the root causes of damage and included repairs to the stone , walkways , walls , terraces , stairs , and platforms . In order to respect Allward 's initial vision of a seamless structure , the restoration team were required to remove all foreign materials employed in patchwork repairs , replace damaged stones with material from the original quarry in Croatia , and correct all minor displacement of stones caused by the freeze @-@ thaw activity . Underlying structural flaws were also corrected . 
 Queen Elizabeth II , escorted by Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , rededicated the restored memorial on 9 April 2007 in a ceremony commemorating the 90th anniversary of the battle . Other senior Canadian officials , including Prime Minister Stephen Harper , and senior French representatives , Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin among them , attended the event , along with thousands of Canadian students , veterans of the Second World War and of more recent conflicts , and descendants of those who fought at Vimy . The crowd attending the rededication ceremony was the largest crowd on the site since the 1936 dedication . 
 = = Site = = 
 The Canadian National Vimy Memorial site is located approximately eight kilometres north of Arras , France , near the towns of Vimy and Neuville @-@ Saint @-@ Vaast . The site is one of the few places on the former Western Front where a visitor can see the trench lines of a First World War battlefield and the related terrain in a preserved natural state . The total area of the site is 100 hectares ( 250 acres ) , much of which is forested and off limits to visitors to ensure public safety . The site 's rough terrain and unearthed unexploded munitions make the task of grass cutting too dangerous for human operators . Instead , sheep graze the open meadows of the site . 
 The memorial site was established to honour the memory of the Canadian Corps , but it also contains a number of other memorials . These include memorials dedicated to the French Moroccan Division , Lions Club International , and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Mike Watkins . There are also two Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries on site : Canadian Cemetery No. 2 and Givenchy Road Canadian Cemetery . Beyond being a popular location for battlefield tours , the site is also an important location in the burgeoning field of First World War battlefield archaeology , because of its preserved and largely undisturbed state . The site 's interpretive centre helps visitors fully understand the Vimy Memorial , the preserved battlefield park , and the history of the Battle of Vimy within the context of Canada 's participation in the First World War . The Canadian National Vimy Memorial and Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial sites comprise close to 80 percent of conserved First World War battlefields in existence and between them receive over one million visitors each year . 
 = = = Vimy memorial = = = 
 Allward constructed the memorial on the vantage point of Hill 145 , the highest point on the ridge . The memorial contains a large number of stylized features , including 20 human figures , which help the viewer in contemplating the structure as a whole . The front wall , normally mistaken for the rear , is 7 @.@ 3 metres ( 24 ft ) high and represents an impenetrable wall of defence . There is a group of figures at each end of the front wall , next to the base of the steps . The Breaking of the Sword is located at the southern corner of the front wall while Sympathy of the Canadians for the Helpless is located at the northern corner . Collectively , the two groups are The Defenders and represent the ideals for which Canadians gave their lives during the war . There is a cannon barrel draped in laurel and olive branches carved into the wall above each group , to symbolize peace . In Breaking of the Sword , three young men are present , one of whom is crouching and breaking his sword . This statue represents the defeat of militarism and the general desire for peace . This grouping of figures is the most overt image to pacifism in the monument , the breaking of a sword being extremely uncommon in war memorials . The original plan for the sculpture included one figure crushing a German helmet with his foot . It was later decided to dismiss this feature because of its overtly militaristic imagery . In Sympathy of the Canadians for the Helpless , one man stands erect while three other figures , stricken by hunger or disease , are crouched and kneeling around him . The standing man represents Canada 's sympathy for the weak and oppressed . 
 The figure of a cloaked young female stands on top and at the centre of the front wall and overlooks the Douai Plains . The woman has her head bowed , her eyes cast down , and her chin resting in one hand . Below her at ground level is a sarcophagus , bearing a Brodie helmet , a sword and draped in laurel branches . The saddened figure of Canada Bereft , also known as Mother Canada , is a national personification of the young nation of Canada , mourning her dead . The statue , a reference to traditional images of the Mater Dolorosa and presented in a similar style to that of Michelangelo 's Pietà , faces eastward looking out to the dawn of the new day . Unlike the other statues on the monument , stonemasons carved Canada Bereft from a single 30 tonne block of stone . The statue is the largest single piece in the monument and serves as a focal point . The area in front of the memorial was turned into a grassed space , which Allward referred to as the amphitheatre , that fanned out from the monument 's front wall for a distance of 270 feet ( 82 m ) while the battle damaged landscape around the sides and back of the monument were left untouched . 
 The twin pylons rise to a height 30 metres above the memorial 's stone platform ; one bears the maple leaf for Canada and the other the fleur @-@ de @-@ lis for France and both symbolize the unity and sacrifice of the two countries . At the top of the pylons is a grouping of figures known collectively as the Chorus . The most senior figures represent Justice and Peace ; Peace stands with a torch upraised , making it the highest point in the region . The pair is in a style similar to Allward 's previously commissioned statues of Truth and Justice , located outside the Supreme Court of Canada in Ottawa . The remainder of the Chorus is located directly below the senior figures : Faith , Hope and Truth on the eastern pylon ; and Honour , Charity and Knowledge on the western pylon . Around these figures are shields of Canada , Britain , and France . Large crosses adorn the outside of each pylon . The First World War battle honours of the Canadian regiments and a dedicatory message to Canada 's war dead in both French and English are located at the base of the pylons . The Spirit of Sacrifice is located at the base between the two pylons . In the display , a young dying soldier is gazing upward in a crucifixion @-@ like pose , having thrown his torch to a comrade who holds it aloft behind him . In a lightly veiled reference to the poem In Flanders Fields , by John McCrae , the torch is passed from one comrade to another in an effort to keep alive the memory of the war dead . 
 The Mourning Parents , one male and one female figure , are reclining on either side of the western steps on the reverse side of the monument . They represent the mourning mothers and fathers of the nation and are likely patterned on the four statues by Michelangelo on the Medici Tomb in Florence , Italy . Inscribed on the outside wall of the monument are the names of the 11 @,@ 285 Canadians killed in France and whose final resting place is unknown . Most Commonwealth War Graves Commission memorials present names in a descending list format in a manner that permits the modification of panels as remains are found and identified . Allward instead sought to present the names as a seamless list and decided to do so by inscribing the names in continuous bands , across both vertical and horizontal seams , around the base of the monument . As a consequence , as remains were discovered it was not possible to remove commemorated names without interrupting the seamless list and as a consequence there are individuals who have a known grave but are commemorated on the memorial . The memorial contains the names of four posthumous Victoria Cross recipients ; Robert Grierson Combe , Frederick Hobson , William Johnstone Milne , and Robert Spall . 
 = = = Moroccan Division Memorial = = = 
 The Moroccan Division Memorial is dedicated to the memory of the French and Foreign members of the Moroccan Division , killed during the Second Battle of Artois in May 1915 . The monument was raised by veterans of the division and inaugurated on 14 June 1925 , having been built without planning permission . Excluding the various commemorative plaques at the bottom front facade of the Memorial ; Campaign battles are inscribed on the left and right hand side corner view of the memorial . The veterans of the division later funded the April 1987 installation of a marble plaque that identified the Moroccan Division as the only divisions where all subordinate units had been awarded the Legion of Honour . 
 The Moroccan Division was initially raised as the Marching Division of Morocco . The division comprised units of varying origins and although the name would indicate otherwise , did not in fact contain any units originating from Morocco . Moroccans were part of the Marching Regiment of the Foreign Legion which was formed from the merger of the 2nd Marching Regiment of the 1st Foreign Regiment with 2nd Marching Regiment of the 2nd Foreign Regiment , both also part of the Moroccan Division Brigades . The division contained Tirailleurs and Zouaves , of principally Tunisian and Algerian origin and most notably Legionnaires from the 2nd Marching Regiment of the 1st Foreign Regiment and the 7th Algerian Tirailleurs Regiment . The French Legionnaires came , as attested to by a plaque installed on the memorial , from 52 different countries and included amongst them American , Polish , Russian , Italian , Greek , German , Czech , Swedish and Swiss volunteers , such as writer Blaise Cendrars . 
 In the battle , General Victor d <unk> , commander of the French Tenth Army , sought to dislodge the Germans from the region by attacking their positions at Vimy Ridge and Notre Dame de Lorette . When the attack began on 9 May 1915 , the French XXXIII Army Corps made significant territorial gains . The Moroccan Division , which was part of the XXXIII Army Corps , quickly moved through the German defences and advanced 4 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) into German lines in two hours . The division managed to capture the height of the ridge , with small parties even reaching the far side of the ridge , before retreating due to a lack of reinforcements . Even after German counter @-@ attacks , the division managed to hold a territorial gain of 2 @,@ 100 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 yd ) . The division did however suffer heavy casualties . Those killed in the battle and commemorated on the memorial include both of the division 's brigade commanders , Colonels Gaston Cros and Louis Augustus Theodore Pein . 
 = = = Grange Subway = = = 
 The First World War 's Western Front included an extensive system of underground tunnels , subways , and dugouts . The Grange Subway is a tunnel system that is approximately 800 metres ( 870 yd ) in length and once connected the reserve lines to the front line . This permitted soldiers to advance to the front quickly , securely , and unseen . A portion of this tunnel system is open to the public through regular guided tours provided by Canadian student guides . 
 The Arras @-@ Vimy sector was conducive to tunnel excavation owing to the soft , porous yet extremely stable nature of the chalk underground . As a result , pronounced underground warfare had been a feature of the Vimy sector since 1915 . In preparation for the Battle of Vimy Ridge , five British tunnelling companies excavated 12 subways along the Canadian Corps ' front , the longest of which was 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) in length . The tunnellers excavated the subways at a depth of 10 metres to ensure protection from large calibre howitzer shellfire . The subways were often dug at a pace of four metres a day and were often two metres tall and one metre wide . This underground network often incorporated or included concealed light rail lines , hospitals , command posts , water reservoirs , ammunition stores , mortar and machine gun posts , and communication centres . 
 = = = Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Mike Watkins memorial = = = 
 Near the Canadian side of the restored trenches is a small memorial plaque dedicated to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Mike Watkins MBE . Watkins was head of Explosive Ordnance Disposal at the Directorate of Land Service Ammunition , Royal Logistic Corps , and a leading British explosive ordnance disposal expert . In August 1998 , he died in a roof collapse near a tunnel entrance while undertaking a detailed investigative survey of the British tunnel system on the grounds of the Canadian National Vimy Memorial site . Watkins was no stranger to the tunnel system at Vimy Ridge . Earlier the same year , he participated in the successful disarming of 3 tonnes of deteriorated ammonal explosives located under a road intersection on the site . 
 = = = Visitors ' centre = = = 
 The site has a visitors ' centre , staffed by Canadian student guides , which is open seven days a week . During the memorial restoration , the original visitors ' centre near the monument was closed and replaced with a temporary one , which remains in use today . The visitors ' centre is now near the preserved forward trench lines , close to many of the craters created by underground mining during the war and near the entrance of the Grange Subway . Construction of a new CA $ 5 million visitors ' centre is expected to be completed by April 2017 , in advance of the 100th anniversary of the battle . 
 = = Sociocultural influence = = 
 The Canadian National Vimy Memorial site has considerable sociocultural significance for Canada . The idea that Canada 's national identity and nationhood were born out of the Battle of Vimy Ridge is an opinion that is widely published in military and general histories of Canada . Historian Denise Thomson suggests that the construction of the Vimy memorial represents the culmination of an increasingly assertive nationalism that developed in Canada during the interwar period . Hucker suggests that the memorial transcends the Battle of Vimy Ridge and now serves as an enduring image of the whole First World War , while expressing the enormous impact of war in general . Hucker also suggest that the 2005 restoration project serves as evidence of a new generation 's determination to remember Canada 's contribution and sacrifice during the First World War . The Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada recognized the importance of the site by recommending its designation as a National Historic Site of Canada ; it was so designated , one of only two outside of Canada , in 1997 . The other is the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Newfoundland Memorial , also in France . Remembrance has also taken other forms : the Vimy Foundation , having been established to preserve and promote Canada 's First World War legacy as symbolized by the victory at the Battle of Vimy Ridge , and Vimy Ridge Day , to commemorate the deaths and casualties during the battle . Local Vimy resident Georges <unk> spent 13 years until his death in 2009 offering car rides to Canadian tourists to and from the memorial at no charge , as a way of paying tribute to the Canadians who fought at Vimy . The memorial is not without its critics . Alana Vincent has argued that constituent parts of the monument are in conflict and as a result the message conveyed by the monument is not unified . Visually , Vincent argues there is a dichotomy between the triumphant pose of the figures at the top of the pylons and the mourning posture of those figures at the base . <unk> , she argues the inscription text celebrating the victory at the Battle of Vimy Ridge strikes a very different tone to the list of names of the missing at the base of the monument . 
 The memorial is regularly the subject or inspiration of other artistic projects . In 1931 , Will Longstaff painted Ghosts of Vimy Ridge , depicting ghosts of men from the Canadian Corps on Vimy Ridge surrounding the memorial , though the memorial was still several years away from completion . The memorial has been the subject of stamps in both France and Canada , including a French series in 1936 and a Canadian series on the 50th anniversary of the Armistice of 11 November 1918 . The Canadian Unknown Soldier was selected from a cemetery in the vicinity of the Canadian National Vimy Memorial and the design of the Canadian Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is based upon the stone sarcophagus at the base of the Vimy memorial . The Never Forgotten National Memorial was intended to be a 24 @-@ metre ( 79 ft ) statue inspired by the Canada Bereft statue on the memorial , before the project was cancelled in February 2016 . A 2001 Canadian historical novel The Stone Carvers by Jane Urquhart involves the characters in the design and creation of the memorial . In 2007 , the memorial was a short @-@ listed selection for the Seven Wonders of Canada . The Royal Canadian Mint released commemorative coins featuring the memorial on a number of occasions , including a 5 cent sterling silver coin in 2002 and a 30 dollar sterling silver coin in 2007 . The Sacrifice Medal , a Canadian military decoration created in 2008 , features the image of Mother Canada on the reverse side of the medal . A permanent bas relief sculpted image of the memorial is presented in the gallery of the grand hall of the Embassy of France in Canada to symbolize the close relations between the two countries . The memorial is featured on the reverse of the Frontier Series Canadian polymer $ 20 banknote , which was released by the Bank of Canada on 7 November 2012 . 
 = At Newport 1960 = 
 At Newport 1960 is a live album by Muddy Waters performed at Newport Jazz Festival in Newport , Rhode Island , with his backing band , consisting of Otis Spann ( piano , vocals ) , Pat Hare ( guitar ) , James Cotton ( harmonica ) , Andrew Stevens ( bass ) and Francis Clay ( drums ) , on July 3 . Waters 's performances across Europe in the 1950s and at Newport helped popularize blues to a broader audience , especially to whites . The album is said to be one of the first live blues albums . 
 The album was released in the US on November 15 that year , featuring eight songs , including " I Got My Brand on You " to " Goodbye Newport Blues " . In 2001 , Chess Records released a remastered version , which includes three bonus tracks recorded in Chicago in June . At Newport 1960 never charted , but it received critical acclaim and was influential for future bands . It was ranked on several music lists , including at number 348 on Rolling Stone 's " 500 Greatest Albums of all Time " in 2003 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After releasing his debut album The Best of Muddy Waters ( 1958 ) , a greatest hits collection , and Sings Big Bill Broonzy ( 1960 ) , a collection of covers of songs by the blues musician Big Bill Broonzy , Waters performed at the Newport Jazz Festival . Waters had already been a well @-@ known blues musician across Europe and the United States in the ' 50s . His successful performances with his electric blues band , consisting of his half @-@ brother Otis Spann ( piano , vocals ) , Pat Hare ( guitar ) , James Cotton ( harmonica ) , Andrew Stevens ( bass ) and Francis Clay ( drums ) , increasingly popularized the blues in mainstream music in the United States and Europe , especially among white audiences . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The gig was scheduled on July 3 , Sunday afternoon . The day before , performances by Ray Charles and singing group Lambert , Hendricks and Ross were met with crowd rushes . About 300 drunken hipsters made an uproar during Charles ' performance caused by poor police security . The policemen attacked with teargas and water hoses . The riots became so out of control that the National Guard was called in at midnight to calm the crowd . When Waters and his band arrived on the scheduled day , they intended to drive back on the next day , until driver James Cotton saw John Lee Hooker standing at a corner , his guitar on his back without a guitar case . Cotton said Hooker should get into his car to get the musicians out of harm 's way . At the same time , the city council decided to cancel the concert , but concert promoter George Wein convinced them when he said that the United States Information Agency ( USIA ) planned to film the festival to teach American culture in other countries . 
 Before Waters ' performance , his band backed Otis Spann , who was the band leader , and John Lee Hooker . At about 17 p.m. , Waters entered the stage , wearing black , while the rest of the band wore white formal dress . At Newport 1960 opens with then @-@ unreleased " I Got My Brand on You " , which was recorded one month prior , and " ( I 'm Your ) Hoochie Coochie Man " , both written by Willie Dixon . Next are the Big Joe Williams cover " Baby Please Don 't Go " , Oden 's " Soon Forgotten " , Dixon 's " Tiger in Your Tank " and Broonzy 's " I Feel So Good " . During the latter he performed hip swings , and during " I 've Got My Mojo Working " , which he played a second time , he performed Elgin movements , then a foxtrot with Cotton . At the end he did a jitterbug ; when he returned to the microphone and performed the move a second time , he received massive cheers from the audience . At the end of this song , every bluesman gathered at the stage to perform medleys of blues standards . Jazz poet and directorate of Newport Langston Hughes spontaneously wrote a finishing song , the slow " Goodbye Newport Blues " , this time Spann with as singer , as Waters was too exhausted to perform . 
 The album was released in the United States in November 15 , the same year they performed their concert in Newport , on the MCA label , and produced by Leonard Chess . A CD version was released in 1987 , but one <unk> already released a different version in the early 90s . It was digitally remastered in 2001 by MCA , with a significantly better quality in bass and singing . The remastered version contains three bonus tracks recorded in Chicago in June 1960 . 
 = = Album cover = = 
 The album cover depicts Muddy Waters at the Newport Jazz Festival holding a semi @-@ acoustic guitar . When the photographer , Burt Goldblatt , asked him to pose for the cover , Waters left his Fender Telecaster ( which he played during the concert ) on the stage and instead held the semi @-@ acoustic guitar , belonging to his friend John Lee Hooker . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Newport 1960 received positive critical reception . It was generally praised for the powerful and fizzy performance by Waters and his band . Cub Koda , writing for Allmusic , said that Waters " lays it down tough and cool with a set that literally had [ the audience ] dancing in the aisles by the set close " . Furthermore , he remarked that the opening track , " I Got My Brand on You " , " positively burns the relatively tame " . Matthew Oshinsky , in 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , praised the " merciless refrain " in " Hoochie Coochie Man " and the " unvarnished moaning " in " Baby Please Don 't Go " . He also enjoyed Muddy 's powerful baritone , Cotton 's harmonica playing , Spann 's " pub piano " – like playing and the overall danceable music . 
 Chris Smith , in 101 Albums That Changed Popular Music , praised Waters 's " growly vocal presentation , energetic stage presence , and electrifying ( literally and figuratively ) performances . " The album was ranked number 348 on Rolling Stone 's " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " in 2003 , in which the band 's playing was described as " tough , tight and in the groove " and Cotton 's harmonica jams were mentioned as " a special treat . " In Vibe ' magazine 's " 100 Essential Albums of the 20th Century " , a critic called the album " immortal . " The album is mentioned in The Rough Guide to Blues 100 Essential CDs . 
 Many musicians and bands , such as the Rolling Stones , Jimi Hendrix , AC / DC and Led Zeppelin , have been influenced by his electric sound and used this and his greatest hits album in creating a hard rock sound . At Newport 1960 was one of the first live blues albums . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " I Got My Brand on You " ( Willie Dixon ) – 4 : 24 
 " I 'm Your Hoochie Coochie Man " ( Dixon ) – 2 : 50 
 " Baby , Please Don 't Go " ( McKinley Morganfield ) – 2 : 52 
 " Soon Forgotten " ( James Oden ) – 4 : 08 
 " Tiger in Your Tank " ( Dixon ) – 4 : 12 
 " I Feel So Good " ( Bill Broonzy ) – 2 : 48 
 " Got My Mojo Working " ( Preston Foster ) – 4 : 08 
 " Got My Mojo Working , Part 2 " ( Foster ) – 2 : 38 
 " Goodbye Newport Blues " ( Langston Hughes , Morganfield ) – 4 : 38 
 = = = 2001 remastered issue bonus tracks = = = 
 " I Got My Brand on You " ( Dixon ) – 2 : 22 
 " Soon Forgotten " ( Oden ) – 2 : 41 
 " Tiger in Your Tank " ( Dixon ) – 2 : 17 
 " <unk> Woman " ( Morganfield ) – 2 : 18 
 Tracks 1 , 2 , 7 , 8 were credited to McKinley Morganfield on the original LP . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = John Stossel = 
 John Frank Stossel ( born March 6 , 1947 ) is an American consumer television personality , author , and libertarian pundit . In October 2009 , Stossel left his long @-@ time employment at ABC News to join the Fox Business Channel and Fox News Channel . He is the host of a weekly news show on Fox Business , Stossel , which was first broadcast on December 10 , 2009 . Stossel also regularly provides analysis , appearing on various Fox News programs , which include weekly appearances on The O 'Reilly Factor . He also writes a Fox News Blog , " John Stossel 's Take " . Stossel has also been a nationally syndicated newspaper columnist since February 2011 . Stossel was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2016 . 
 Stossel 's style combines reporting and commentary . It reflects a libertarian political philosophy and views on economics which are largely supportive of the free market . He began his journalism career as a researcher for KGW @-@ TV , was a consumer reporter at WCBS @-@ TV in New York City , and then joined ABC News as a consumer editor and reporter on Good Morning America . Stossel went on to be an ABC News correspondent , joining the weekly news magazine program 20 / 20 , going on to become co @-@ anchor . 
 As a reporter , Stossel has received numerous honors including 19 Emmy Awards , and he has been honored five times for excellence in consumer reporting by the National Press Club . Stossel has written three books recounting how his experiences in journalism shaped his socioeconomic views , Give Me a Break in 2004 , Myths , Lies , and Downright Stupidity in 2007 , and No They Can 't ! Why Government Fails but Individuals Succeed in 2012 . ABC said : " His reporting goes against the grain of the established media and offers the network something fresh and different ... [ but ] makes him a target of the groups he offends . " Stossel has also served as a spokesman for the <unk> Foundation of America . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John F. Stossel was born on March 6 , 1947 , in Chicago Heights , Illinois , the younger of two sons , to Jewish parents who left Germany before Hitler rose to power . They joined a Congregationalist church in the U.S. , and Stossel was raised Protestant . He grew up on Chicago 's affluent North Shore and graduated from New Trier High School . Stossel characterizes his older brother , Tom , as " the superstar of the family " , commenting , " While I partied and played poker , he studied hard , got top grades , and went to Harvard Medical School . " Stossel characterizes himself as having been " an indifferent student " while in college , commenting , " I <unk> through half my classes at Princeton , and applied to grad school only because I was ambitious , and grad school seemed like the right path for a 21 @-@ year @-@ old who wanted to get ahead . " Although he had been accepted to the University of Chicago 's School of Hospital Management , Stossel was " sick of school " and thought taking a job would inspire him to embrace graduate studies with renewed vigor . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Stossel intended to go work at Seattle Magazine , but it had gone out of business by the time he graduated . His contacts there , however , got him a job at KGW @-@ TV in Portland , Oregon , where Stossel began as a newsroom gofer , working his way up to researcher and then writer . After a few years , the news director told Stossel to go on the air and read what he wrote . Stossel , who confesses to having been frightened of being on the air , has expressed embarrassment at watching videos of his early performances . Nonetheless , Stossel says his fear spurred him to improve , examining broadcasts of David Brinkley and Jack Perkins to imitate them . Stossel also struggled with a stuttering problem he had harbored since childhood . After a few years of on @-@ air reporting , Stossel was hired by WCBS @-@ TV in New York City , by Ed Joyce , the same news director who hired Arnold Diaz , Linda Ellerbee , Dave Marash , Joel Siegel and Lynn Sherr . Stossel was disappointed at CBS , feeling that the journalism was of a lower quality than in Portland , and disliking the lesser quantity of time devoted to research there . Stossel cites union work rules that discouraged the extra work that Stossel felt allowed employees to be creative , which he says represented his " first real introduction to the deals made by special interests " . Stossel also " hated " Joyce , who he felt was " cold and critical " , though Stossel credits Joyce with allowing him the freedom to pursue his own story ideas , and with recommending the Hollins Communications Research Institute in Roanoke , Virginia , that largely cured Stossel 's stuttering problem . 
 Stossel grew continuously more frustrated with having to follow the assignment editor 's vision of what was news . Perhaps because of his stuttering , he had always avoided covering what others covered , feeling he could not succeed if he was forced to compete with other reporters by shouting out questions at news conferences . However , this led to the unexpected realization for Stossel that more important events were those that occurred slowly , such as the women 's movement , the growth of computer technology , and advancements in contraception , rather than daily events like government pronouncements , elections , fires or crime . One day , Stossel bypassed the assignment editor to give Ed Joyce a list of story ideas the assignment editor had rejected . Joyce agreed that Stossel 's ideas were better , and approved them . 
 = = = 20 / 20 = = = 
 In 1981 Roone Arledge offered Stossel a job at ABC News , as a correspondent for 20 / 20 and consumer reporter for Good Morning America . His " Give Me a Break " segments for the former featured a skeptical look at subjects from government regulations and pop culture to censorship and unfounded fear . The series was spun off into a series of one @-@ hour specials with budgets of half a million dollars that began in 1994 . They include : 
 " Give Me a Break " – regular segment 
 You Can 't Even Talk About It – 2009 
 <unk> and Bull ( in association with <unk> ) – 2009 
 Age of Consent – 2009 
 John Stossel 's Politically Incorrect Guide to Politics – 2008 
 Sex in America – 2008 
 Sick in America , Whose Body Is It Anyway ? – 2007 
 Cheap In America – 2007 
 Myths , Lies and Downright Stupidity – 2007 
 Cheap in America – 2006 
 Stupid in America : How We Cheat Our Kids – 2006 
 Privilege in America : Who 's Shutting You Out ? – 2006 
 War on Drugs : A War on Ourselves – 2002 
 <unk> – 2001 
 John Stossel Goes to Washington – Spring 2001 
 Is America # 1 ? – 1999 
 Greed – 1999 
 Nuts for Nintendo – 1988 
 Common Sense – 1995 
 Are We Scaring Ourselves to Death ? 
 Junk Science : What You Know That May Not Be So 
 Boys and Girls Are Different 
 You Can 't Say That ! 
 The Power of Belief 
 During the course of his work on 20 / 20 , Stossel discovered Reason magazine , and found that the libertarian ideas of its writers made sense to him . Stossel was named co @-@ anchor of 20 / 20 in May 2003 , while he was writing his first book , Gimme a Break : How I Exposed Hucksters , Cheats , and Scam Artists and Became the Scourge of the Liberal Media , which was published in 2004 . In it , he details his start in journalism and consumer reporting , and how he evolved to harbor libertarian beliefs . 
 = = = Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network = = = 
 In September 2009 , it was announced that Stossel was leaving Disney 's ABC News and joining News Corp. ' s Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network . In addition to appearing on The O 'Reilly Factor every Tuesday night , he now hosts a one @-@ hour weekly program for Fox Business Network and a series of one @-@ hour specials for Fox News Channel , as well as making regular guest appearances on Fox News programs . 
 The program , entitled Stossel , debuted December 10 , 2009 , on Fox Business Network . The program looks at consumer @-@ focused topics , such as civil liberties , the business of health care , and free trade . His blog , " Stossel ’ s Take " , is published on both <unk> and <unk> 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Stossel has written three books . Give Me a Break : How I Exposed Hucksters , Cheats , and Scam Artists and Became the Scourge of the Liberal Media is a 2005 autobiography from Harper Perennial documenting his career and philosophical transition from liberalism to libertarianism . It describes his opposition to government regulation , his belief in free market and private enterprise , support for tort reform , and advocacy for shifting social services from the government to private charities . It was a New York Times bestseller for 11 weeks . Myths , Lies , and Downright Stupidity : Get Out the Shovel – Why Everything You Know Is Wrong , which was published in 2007 by Hyperion , questions the validity of various conventional wisdoms , and argues that the belief he is conservative is untrue . On April 10 , 2012 , Threshold Editions , an imprint of Simon & Schuster , published Stossel 's third book No , They Can 't : Why Government Fails – But Individuals Succeed . It argues that government policies meant to solve problems instead produce new ones , and that free individuals and the private sector perform tasks more efficiently than the government does . 
 With financial support from the libertarian Palmer R. <unk> Fund , Stossel and ABC News launched a series of educational materials for public schools in 1999 entitled " Stossel in the Classroom " . It was taken over in 2006 by the Center for Independent Thought and releases a new DVD of teaching materials annually . In 2006 , Stossel and ABC released Teaching Tools for Economics , a video series based on the National Council of Economics Education standards . 
 Since February 2011 , Stossel has written a weekly newspaper column for Creators Syndicate . His articles appear in such online publications as <unk> , Reason , and Townhall . 
 = = Political and personal beliefs = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Stossel 's news reports and writings attempt to debunk popular beliefs . His Myths and Lies series of 20 / 20 specials challenges a range of widely held beliefs . He also hosted The Power of Belief ( October 6 , 1998 ) , an ABC News Special that focused on assertions of the paranormal and people 's desire to believe . Another report outlined the belief that opposition to DDT is misplaced and that the ban on DDT has resulted in the deaths of millions of children , mostly in poor nations . 
 = = = Libertarianism = = = 
 As a libertarian , Stossel says that he believes in both personal freedom and the free market . He frequently uses television airtime to advance these views and challenge viewers ' distrust of free @-@ market capitalism and economic competition . He received an Honoris Causa Doctorate from Francisco Marroquin University , a libertarian university in Guatemala , in 2008 . He told The Oregonian , on October 26 , 1994 : 
 I started out by viewing the marketplace as a cruel place , where you need intervention by government and lawyers to protect people . But after watching the regulators work , I have come to believe that markets are magical and the best protectors of the consumer . It is my job to explain the beauties of the free market . 
 I 'm a little embarrassed about how long it took me to see the folly of most government intervention . It was probably 15 years before I really woke up to the fact that almost everything government attempts to do , it makes worse . 
 Stossel argues that individual self @-@ interest , or " greed " , creates an incentive to work harder and to innovate . He has promoted school choice as a way to improve American schools , believing that when people are given a choice , they will choose the schools best suited for their children . Referring to educational tests that rank American students lower than others he says : 
 The people who run the international tests told us , " the biggest predictor of student success is choice . " Nations that " attach the money to the kids " and thereby allow parents to choose between different public and private schools have higher test scores . This should be no surprise ; competition makes us better . 
 Stossel has criticized government programs for being inefficient , wasteful , and harmful . He has also criticized the American legal system , opining that it provides lawyers and vexatious <unk> the incentive to file frivolous lawsuits indiscriminately . Stossel contends that these suits often generate more wealth for lawyers than for deserving clients , stifle innovation and personal freedoms , and cause harm to private citizens , taxpayers , consumers and businesses . Although Stossel concedes that some lawsuits are necessary in order to provide justice to people genuinely injured by others with greater economic power , he advocates the adoption in the U.S. of the English rule as one method to reduce the more abusive or frivolous lawsuits . 
 Stossel opposes corporate welfare , bailouts and the war in Iraq . He also opposes legal prohibitions against pornography , marijuana , recreational drugs , gambling , ticket scalping , prostitution , polygamy , homosexuality , and assisted suicide , and believes most abortions should be legal . He advocates lower and simpler taxes , and has endorsed or explored various ideas in his specials and on his TV series for changing the tax system , including switching to a flat tax , and replacing the income tax with the FairTax . 
 When the Department of Labor reissued federal guidelines in April 2010 governing the employment of unpaid interns under the Fair Labor Standards Act based on a 1947 Supreme Court decision , Stossel criticized the guidelines , appearing in a police uniform during an appearance on the Fox News program America Live , commenting , " I ’ ve built my career on unpaid interns , and the interns told me it was great – I learned more from you than I did in college . " Asked why he did not pay them if they were so valuable , he said he could not afford to . 
 = = = Agnosticism = = = 
 In the 16 December 2010 episode of Stossel titled “ Skeptic or Believer , ” Stossel identified himself as an agnostic , explaining that although he had no belief in God , he did not believe God was an impossibility . 
 = = Praise and criticism = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Stossel has won 19 Emmy Awards . He was honored five times for excellence in consumer reporting by the National Press Club , has received a George Polk Award for Outstanding Local Reporting and a Peabody Award . According to Stossel , when he was in favor of government intervention and skeptical of business , he was deluged with awards , but in 2006 he stated , " They like me less ... Once I started applying the same skepticism to government , I stopped winning awards . " On April 23 , 2012 , Stossel was awarded the Chapman University Presidential Medal , by the current president , James <unk> , and chancellor , Danielle <unk> . The award has been presented to only a handful of people over the past 150 years . Stossel received an honorary doctorate from Universidad Francisco Marroquín . 
 = = = Praise = = = 
 The Nobel Prize – winning Chicago School monetarist economist Milton Friedman lauded Stossel , stating : " Stossel is that rare creature , a TV commentator who understands economics , in all its subtlety . " Steve Forbes , the editor of Forbes magazine , described Stossel as riveting and " one of America ’ s ablest and most courageous journalists . " P. J. O 'Rourke , best @-@ selling author of Eat the Rich and Parliament of Whores praised Stossel , stating : 
 ... about John Stossel 's fact @-@ finding . He seeks the truths that destroy truisms , wields reason against all that 's unreasonable , and ... puncture ( s ) sanctimonious idealism .... He makes the maddening mad . And Stossel ’ s tales of the outrageous are outrageously amusing . 
 An article published by the libertarian group Advocates for Self Government notes praise for Stossel . Independent Institute Research Analyst Anthony Gregory , writing on the libertarian blog , LewRockwell.com , described Stossel as a " heroic rogue ... a media maverick and proponent of freedom in an otherwise statist , conformist mass media . " Libertarian investment analyst Mark Skousen said Stossel is " a true libertarian hero " . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 Progressive organizations such as Fairness and Accuracy In Reporting ( FAIR ) and Media Matters for America ( <unk> ) have criticized Stossel 's work , for what they perceived as a lack of balance of coverage and distortion of facts . For example , Stossel was criticized for a segment on his October 11 , 1999 , show during which he argued that AIDS research has received too much funding , " 25 times more than on Parkinson 's , which kills more people . " FAIR responded that AIDS had killed more people in the United States in 1999 , but Stossel was speaking in more broad terms than a single country over a single year . 
 In a February 2000 Salon.com feature on Stossel entitled " Prime @-@ time propagandist " , David <unk> wrote that Stossel has a conflict of interest in donating profits from his public speaking engagements to , among others , a non @-@ profit called " Stossel in the Classroom " which includes material for use in schools , some of which uses material made by Stossel . 
 University of Texas economist James K. Galbraith has alleged that Stossel , in his September 1999 special Is America # 1 ? , used an out @-@ of @-@ context clip of Galbraith to convey the notion that Galbraith advocated the adoption by Europe of the free market economics practiced by the United States , when in fact Galbraith actually advocated that Europe adopt some of the United States ' social benefit transfer mechanisms such as Social Security , which is the economically opposite view . Stossel denied any misrepresentation of Galbraith 's views and stated that it was not his intention to convey that Galbraith agreed with all of the special 's ideas . However , he re @-@ edited that portion of the program for its September 2000 repeat , in which Stossel paraphrased , " Even economists who like Europe 's policies , like James Galbraith , now acknowledge America 's success . " 
 = = = = Organic vegetables = = = = 
 A February 2000 story about organic vegetables on 20 / 20 included statements by Stossel that tests had shown that neither organic nor conventional produce samples contained any pesticide residue , and that organic food was more likely to be contaminated by E. coli bacteria . The Environmental Working Group objected to his report , mainly questioning his statements about bacteria , but also managed to determine that the produce had never been tested for pesticides . They communicated this to Stossel , but after the story 's producer backed Stossel 's recollection that the test results had been as described , the story was rebroadcast months later , uncorrected , and with a postscript in which Stossel reiterated his claim . Later , after a report in The New York Times confirmed the Environmental Working Group 's claims , ABC News suspended the producer of the segment for a month and reprimanded Stossel . Stossel apologized , saying that he had thought the tests had been conducted as reported . However , he asserted that the gist of his report had been accurate . 
 = = = = Frederick K. C. Price = = = = 
 In a March 2007 segment about finances and lifestyles of televangelists , 20 / 20 aired a clip of Apostle Frederick K. C. Price , a TV minister , that was originally broadcast by the Lifetime Network in 1997 . Price alleged that the clip portrayed him describing his wealth in extravagant terms , when he was actually telling a parable about a rich man . ABC News twice aired a retraction and apologized for the error . In August 2010 , a lower court 's dismissal of the minister 's defamation suit against ABC , Price v. Stossel , was overturned by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals . 
 = = = = “ Sick Sob Stories ” = = = = 
 In an opinion piece published in The Wall Street Journal in September 2007 called " Sick Sob Stories " , Stossel described the case of Tracy and Julie Pierce that was explored in Michael Moore ’ s film , Sicko . Julie Pierce criticized Stossel , saying her husband would have been saved by the Canadian health care system , and she thought Stossel should have interviewed her and her doctor before writing about them . Stossel expressed sympathy , but said she had been misled to believe the treatment was routinely available in Canada . He said that the treatment is also considered “ experimental ” in Canada , and is provided there even more rarely than in the United States . 
 Stossel did not title the piece “ Sick Sob Stories ” ; that title was given to the piece by The Wall Street Journal . 
 = = = = Global warming = = = = 
 Stossel challenges the notion that man @-@ made global warming would have net negative consequences , pointing to <unk> warmer periods in human history . Central to his argument is the idea that groups and individuals get much more public attention , donations , and government funding when they proclaim " this will be terrible " than groups that say " this is nothing to worry about . " He points to groups like the World Wildlife Fund , Greenpeace , the Environmental Defense Fund , the Natural Resources Defense Council , and to activists such as Rachel Carson and former U.S. Vice President Al Gore as examples of environmental <unk> . 
 In 2001 , the media watchdog organization FAIR criticized Stossel 's reportage of global warming in his documentary , <unk> with Nature , for using " highly selective ... information " that gave " center stage to three dissenters from among the 2 @,@ 000 members of the UN 's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , which recently released a report stating that global temperatures are rising almost twice as fast as previously thought . " 
 Stossel groups supporters of the scientific consensus on climate change with astrologers and psychics in his second book , Myths , Lies and Downright Stupidity . He claims that proposals surrounding the proposed solutions to reduce global warming are " myths , " which will not only not solve the problem but will " restrict freedom . " 
 = = = = David Schultz incident = = = = 
 On December 28 , 1984 , during an interview for 20 / 20 on professional wrestling , wrestler David Schultz struck Stossel after Stossel stated that he thought professional wrestling was " fake " . Stossel stated that he suffered from pain and buzzing in his ears eight weeks after the assault . Stossel sued and obtained a settlement of $ 425 @,@ 000 from the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . In his book , Myths , Lies , and Downright Stupidity , he writes that he has come to regret doing so , having adopted the belief that lawsuits harm many innocent people . Schultz maintains that he attacked Stossel on orders from Vince McMahon , the head of the then @-@ WWF . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stossel lives in New York City , in the apartment building The Beresford , with his wife , Ellen Abrams . They have two children , Lauren , and Max . They also own a home in Massachusetts . 
 Stossel came to embrace his Jewish heritage after marrying his wife , who is Jewish , and their children have been raised in that tradition . Stossel identified himself as an agnostic in the December 16 , 2010 , episode of Stossel , explaining that he had no belief in God but was open to the possibility . 
 Stossel 's brother , Thomas P. Stossel , is a Harvard Medical School professor and co @-@ director of the Hematology Division at Boston 's Brigham and Women 's Hospital . He has served on the advisory boards of pharmaceutical companies such as Merck and Pfizer . Stossel 's nephew is journalist and magazine editor Scott Stossel . 
 On April 20 , 2016 , Stossel , who stated that he had never smoked , revealed that he had lung cancer which was caught early and given an excellent prognosis . 
 = = Books = = 
 Give Me a Break : How I Exposed Hucksters , Cheats , and Scam Artists and Became the Scourge of the Liberal Media ... ( Paperback ed . ) . Harper Paperbacks . 2005 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Myths , Lies and Downright Stupidity : Get Out the Shovel – Why Everything You Know is Wrong ( Paperback ed . ) . Hyperion . 2007 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7868 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 No , They Can 't : Why Government Fails – But Individuals Succeed . Threshold Editions . 2012 . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Biographies and articles about Stossel = = = 
 ABC News Biography 
 Johnson , Peter . " Stossel 's evolution from activist to contrarian angers some of his fans " , USA Today , April 30 , 2006 
 " John Stossel : Myth @-@ Buster " , <unk> 
 <unk> , Jacob . " Risky Journalism : ABC 's John Stossel bucks a fearful establishment " Reason , April 1997 . 
 = = = Articles by Stossel = = = 
 John Stossel 's 20 / 20 Web Page 
 John Stossel 's Newspaper Columns 
 John Stossel 's contributions to Reason Magazine 
 " Confessions of a Welfare Queen : How rich bastards like me rip off taxpayers for millions of dollars " is an excerpt from his first book . 
 John Stossel 's Column on <unk> 
 = Evan Lorne = 
 Major Evan Lorne , USAF is a fictional character in the Canadian – American Sci @-@ Fi Channel television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 and Stargate Atlantis , two military science fiction shows about military teams exploring the galaxy via a network of alien transportation devices . Played by Kavan Smith , Evan Lorne was first introduced as a recurring character in the seventh season of Stargate SG @-@ 1 , holding the military rank of Major in the United States Air Force . He joins the Atlantis expedition after " The Siege " as one of the personnel on the Daedalus class battlecruiser . 
 Lorne was a recurring character in seasons seven and ten in Stargate SG @-@ 1 and season two – season five in Stargate Atlantis . Smith was originally supposed to play another character in Stargate Atlantis , but the producers eventually decided to keep Lorne , since he was popular with the fans according to Smith himself . He appears in a total of 29 episodes . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Lorne first appears in Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode " Enemy Mine " . Lorne reappears as a part of the new personnel sent after the Wraith siege by the Daedalus and serves as Atlantis ' military second @-@ in @-@ command under Lieutenant Colonel John Sheppard . In " Runner " , he assists Sheppard , Teyla Emmagan , and Rodney McKay in the search for Aiden Ford . Lorne possesses the ATA gene , but it has never been revealed whether his gene is natural or artificial . He is seen piloting a Puddle Jumper in several episodes including " Condemned " and " The Hive " . 
 Lorne is one of the Atlantis Expedition members in " This Mortal Coil " that the Replicators take the form of , but they are all killed by Oberoth . In an alternate timeline shown in the episode " The Last Man " , Lorne is a Major General and appears to be in command of the Stargate Command ( SGC ) . Lorne also appears as the team leader of the SG @-@ 1 unit in an alternate universe in the SG @-@ 1 season 10 episode " The Road Not Taken " . 
 In " <unk> " , Lorne threatens Sheppard while sleepwalking , believing him to be a Replicator . Lorne is stunned by Ronon Dex , and while being questioned by Dr. Kate <unk> says that he " hadn 't had a sleepwalking incident since he was ten . " Lorne 's mother , an art teacher , taught him how to paint on weekends when he was growing up , and Lorne rekindles this muse during his stay on Atlantis . In " Tabula Rasa " , Lorne , while being <unk> , takes a severe overdose of a delaying medicine that is supposed to hold back the illness . This causes him ( and all of his team ) to become paranoid , aggressive and confused and they resort to shooting with stunners everyone they see even if they are not affected by the sickness . Eventually , though , a picture of Sheppard convinced him to assist Ronon treat the sick . He later apologised to Sheppard . Originally from San Francisco , California , Lorne also has a sister who has two young boys . He loves ice cream . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 The character was introduced in the Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode " Enemy Mine " . Kavan Smith had formed a close relationship with director Peter DeLuise before being cast . When the development of the episode was finished , there were no plans of expanding Lorne 's role in the franchise . Smith himself felt the part would not " necessarily " lead anywhere big . Sometime after shooting " Enemy Mine " , the producers wanted to talk to Smith about the possibility of having him return to the spin off series , Stargate Atlantis . After the talk , Smith auditioned for a part , he won and received a different character . According to Smith , this character was more of a " military guy " , but the producers eventually decided to give Smith back his old character , Lorne . 
 When talking about season two of Stargate Atlantis , staff writer , Martin Gero said Lorne had become the most notable recurring character of the series . In an interview with Smith , it was revealed that Lorne 's first name was decided to be " Evan " , later confirmed by executive producer , Joseph Mallozzi . While fans on the other hand , have given him the first name , Marcus ( or , alternately , Nick ) , the producers or writers have not responded to this . In the episode " Spoils of War " , a character was going to call him " Uncle Evan " , this scene was cut off , because of time constraints . 
 At first , plot information about the episode , " Coup D 'etat " was a bit scarce . Many fans speculated that they were going to kill Lorne off the show . Smith went and had a brief talk with the writing staff , responding to his worries that it was a part of a " cliffhanger " . According to Smith , the only reason for making Lorne a recurring character was the positive feedback from fans . " Sunday " became the first episode to reveal information about Lorne 's backstory . Smith described Lorne as " that sort of faithful , loyal guy that everybody kind of knows , " and representing a " steady constant . " On his own weblog , Joseph Mallozzi said that Lorne as a character would become more active during season 5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cynthia from Sci Fi Universe commented that Kavan Smith played a character who had the " same name " as the character he originally portrayed in Stargate SG @-@ 1 , but was " not really the same guy " . Concluding her review saying she reacted positive towards the evolution of the character . When talking about science fiction fandom , Smith said that he was " shocked " about the fan response to his character , further stating that this could only be possible in a science fiction television series . In the interview , Smith said that his " character seems to be developing ... I feel like his career is sort of moving ahead . " In an interview , Smith said he had evolved a strong fanbase , which started with his more obscure earlier work and has since followed him throughout his career . Because of the strong fan response , Smith has started to attend various Stargate conventions . 
 = Good Cop Bad Dog = 
 " Good Cop Bad Dog " is the 22nd episode of the American comedy television series Modern Family 's second season and the 46th episode overall . The episode originally aired on May 11 , 2011 on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . The episode was written by Abraham Higginbotham & Jeffrey Richman and was guest directed by former child star Fred Savage . It guest starred Lin @-@ Manuel Miranda as Guillermo , the Grocery Store worker who tries to convince Jay to invest with him . 
 In the episode , Jay advises a dog trainer , while Phil and Claire switch parenting duties to the kids ' chagrin . Mitchell has an extra Lady Gaga ticket when Cameron ends up sick . The episode introduces the Pritchett 's new dog that will appear for the rest of the season and for a majority of the third . 
 " Good Cop Bad Dog " received positive reviews from critics with many praising Ty Burrell 's performance . The episode was viewed by more than 10 million viewers and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 11 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , marking an 8 percent rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Mother 's Day " . The episode was also the highest @-@ rated scripted program of the original week it aired among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . Burrell eventually received an Emmy for his performance in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Dunphy household , Alex ( Ariel Winter ) and Haley ( Sarah Hyland ) are furious at Manny ( Rico Rodriguez ) and Luke ( Nolan Gould ) for barging into their room while they were changing . This leads to their mother , Claire ( Julie Bowen ) to yell at them , while their dad , Phil ( Ty Burrell ) attempts to push himself away from Claire 's anger behind her back . Annoyed , Claire confronts Phil about how he always makes her play the ' bad cop ' role in their family and keeps the ' good cop ' role for himself . He reluctantly agrees to switch roles with her . Claire takes Manny and Luke go @-@ carting ( although Phil had been quite keen to go ) , while Phil has to stay and make the girls clean their bathroom . The go @-@ carting goes horribly as Luke gets sick from drinking a milkshake he did not want . Meanwhile , Phil goes berserk when the girls lie to him about cleaning the bathroom and jump on their car to stop them from leaving , before forcing them to clean the bathroom under his direct supervision and then he had them clean his bathroom . That evening , Phil and Claire admit that they cannot handle each other 's natural parent roles , and agree to go back to normal . 
 Meanwhile , Gloria ( Sofía Vergara ) wants to help a grocery @-@ store worker , Guillermo ( Lin @-@ Manuel Miranda ) , so she convinces Jay ( Ed O 'Neill ) to let Guillermo pitch him a business idea : a dog @-@ training system labeled " The Good @-@ doggy / Bad @-@ doggy Training System " , which consists of two sets of dog treats , one of them being bland and the other a tastier one with bacon . The pitch goes wrong when Guillermo 's dog , Stella ( Brigitte ) , chews on Jay 's pillow and seems to prefer the bad doggy treat . Seeing that Gloria 's blind encouragement is doing him no favours , Jay adopts a firm , frank tone with Guillermo and tells him that , while he has obvious skill , enthusiasm and charisma , his idea is not good . Guillermo , who had invested five years of his life in this idea , leaves in tears . Gloria follows him to apologize , but Guillermo admits that he found Jay 's honesty refreshing , and has decided to reorganize his life , which means moving back in with his sister to go back to school , but it also means that he must give the dog away . Gloria allows the dog to stay with them much to Jay 's anger , which is increased when Manny walks in and believes the dog is a present for him . Jay drives the dog to the pound but Stella 's sweet face makes him take her back home . 
 Mitchell ( Jesse Tyler Ferguson ) has bought tickets to a Lady Gaga concert , but his plans go south when Cameron ( Eric Stonestreet ) gets sick . This causes Mitchell to be torn on whether he should stay with Cameron or go to the concert . He eventually tries to be supporting and attempts to subtly persuade Cameron to let him go , as Claire has advised him to do . Mitchell tries to sneak away after noticing that Cameron has drunk most of a cough syrup that would " put down a Grizzly " , but he is caught when Cam wakes up . Mitchell then gives a speech about how selfish he has been to Cameron , before realizing Cameron has fallen asleep once more . He then sneaks off to the concert and comes back before Cameron wakes up again . When Cameron does wake up , Mitchell acts as if he never went out , unaware that his glow stick is still visible underneath his shirt . As Cameron returns to bed , he pleasantly informs Mitchell that his glow @-@ stick is still flashing , and switches off the light to reveal it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Good Cop Bad Dog " was written by Abraham Higginbotham and Jeffrey Richman , the former receiving third writing credit for the series having previously written " The Kiss " and " Regrets Only " and the latter receiving his fourth writing credit for the series . Higginbotham received a story credit for the episode , as well . The episode was directed by guest director Fred Savage , best known for his performance in The Wonder Years . 
 The episode was filmed on March 3 , and March 4 , 2011 . The episode features a guest appearance by Puerto Rican @-@ American composer and singer Lin @-@ Manuel Miranda . The episode marks the introduction of the Pritchett 's new dog , a French Bulldog played by <unk> . According to Rico Rodriguez , who plays Manny on the show , " She 'll probably be in the last three episodes of the season and then in multiple episodes next year [ ... ] [ She ] has fit in very well " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 11 , 2011 , " Good Cop Bad Dog " was viewed by an estimated 10 @.@ 113 million households and received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 11 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked an 8 percent rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Mother 's Day " . In its timeslot , " Good Cop Bad Dog " was outperformed by Fox reality television series , American Idol which received a 6 @.@ 9 rating / 20 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . However the series defeated CBS crime drama Criminal Minds which received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 8 % share , a rerun of NBC reality series , Minute to Win It which received a 0 @.@ 9 rating / 2 % share and The CW reality series , America 's Next Top Model with received a 0 @.@ 8 rating / 2 % share . " Good Cop Bad Dog " was the most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 , and the twenty @-@ third most @-@ watched show among all viewers . Added with the DVR viewers , the episode received a 6 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , adding a 2 @.@ 2 rating to the original viewership . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics with many commenting on Ty Burrell 's performance . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer <unk> Savage praised the episode 's theme commenting that " while tonight 's theme of switching roles definitely wasn 't subtle , it was still clever . " She named Burrell the " MVP " saying that " When he jumped onto the roof of their car , I nearly died " . 
 The A.V. Club 's Donna Bowman wrote that the episode showed " flashes of brilliance in this half hour that were equally due to the situations set up by the writers and to the talents of the cast " . Despite the mainly positive review , she criticized the Mitchell and Cameron plot for not having " much warmth " . She ultimately gave the episode a B + while readers of the article gave it a B. 
 New York writer Rachael Maddux praised the episode for " revealing new sides of several personalities " commenting that " our favorite moments over the last twenty @-@ something Modern Family episodes have almost entirely involved learning something new about these characters " . 
 CNN reviewer Henry Hanks wrote , " Wednesday night 's Modern Family was an example of the series at the top of its game . " He also called Burrell the " this week 's MVP " . 
 TV Squad writer Joel Keller praised Phil and Claire 's plot for recycling a standard television trope while still having " the biggest laughs " . Keller criticized the Mitchell and Cam subplot " because Cam 's personality was tamped down by sickness " and later wrote , " Yes , I just said you can rehash stuff if done well . This one wasn 't done well . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Christine Ziemba of Paste called the episode " uneven " , but wrote that " it still had its moments " . She praised Ty Burrell 's performance calling him " the episode ’ s scene stealer " . She ultimately gave the episode a 6 @.@ 9 / 10 calling it " respectable " . 
 Sam Morgan of Hollywood.com complimented the writers for attempting to write a " classic MF episode " but concluded , " It had some very funny bits , but that heart it searched far and wide for just wasn ’ t there " . 
 = Spanish general election , 1936 = 
 Legislative elections were held in Spain on 16 February 1936 . At stake were all 473 seats in the unicameral Cortes Generales . The winners of the 1936 elections were the Popular Front , a left @-@ wing coalition of the Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( PSOE ) , Republican Left ( Spain ) ( IR ) , Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya ( ERC ) , Republican Union Party ( UR ) , Communist Party ( PCE ) , <unk> Catalana ( AC ) and other parties . They commanded a narrow lead in terms of the popular vote , but a significant lead over the main opposition party , Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right ( CEDA ) , of the political right in terms of seats . The election had been prompted by a collapse of a government led by Alejandro Lerroux , and his Radical Republican Party . Manuel Azaña would replace Manuel Portela Valladares , caretaker , as prime minister , after what were widely considered fair elections – although limited cases of electoral fraud did occur . They were the last of three elections held during the Spanish Second Republic , coming three years after the 1933 general election which had brought the first of Lerroux 's governments to power . The poor result for the political right would help bring about the July coup , and the ensuing civil war . The right @-@ wing military coup initiated by Generals Sanjurjo and Franco ultimately brought about the end of parliamentary democracy in Spain until the 1977 general election . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the 1933 election , the Radical Republican Party ( RRP ) lead a series of governments , with Alejandro Lerroux as a moderate Prime Minister . On 26 September 1935 , the CEDA announced it would no longer support the RRP 's minority government ; it was replaced by a RRP cabinet , led by Lerroux once more , that included three members of the CEDA . The concession of posts to CEDA prompted the Asturian miners ' strike of 1934 . Some time later , Robles once again prompted a cabinet collapse , and five members of Lerroux 's new government were conceded to CEDA , including Robles himself . Since the 1933 elections , farm workers ' wages had been halved , and the military purged of republican members and reformed ; those loyal to Robles had been promoted . However , since CEDA 's entry into the government , no constitutional amendments were ever made ; no budget was ever passed . 
 In 1935 , Manuel Azaña Díaz and Indalecio Prieto started to unify the left , and combat its extreme elements , including the staging of large , popular rallies , in what would become the Popular Front . Lerroux 's Radical government collapsed after two significant scandals , including the <unk> affair . However , president Niceto Alcalá Zamora did not allow the CEDA to form a government , and called elections . Zamora had become disenchanted with Robles 's obvious desire to do away with the republic and establish a corporate state , and his air of pride . He was looking to strengthen a new centre party in place of the Radicals , but the election system did not favour this . Portela Valladares was thus chosen to form a caretaker government in the meantime . The Republic had , as its opponents pointed out , faced twenty @-@ six separate government crises . Portela failed to get the required support in the parliament to rule as a majority . The government was dissolved on 4 January ; the date for elections would be 16 February . 
 In common with the 1933 election , Spain was divided into multi @-@ member constituencies ; for example , Madrid had 17 representatives . However , each member of the electorate could vote for somewhat less than that – in Madrid 's case , 13 . This favoured coalitions , as in Madrid in 1933 when the Socialists won 13 members and the right , with only 5 @,@ 000 votes less , secured only the remaining 4 . 
 = = Election = = 
 The campaigning for the election was generally in accordance with the law and peaceful , with few problems . Certain press restrictions were lifted . The political right repeatedly warned of the risk of a ' red flag ' – communism – over Spain ; the Radical Republican Party , led by Lerroux , concentrated on <unk> the Centre Party . CEDA , which continued to be the main party of the political right , struggled to gain the support of the monarchists , but managed to . Posters , however , had a distinctly fascist appeal , showing leader Gil @-@ Robles alongside various autocratic slogans . Whilst few campaign promises were made , a return to autocratic government was implied . Funded by considerable donations from large landowners , industrialists and the Catholic Church – which had suffered under the previous Socialist administration – the Right printed millions of leaflets , promising a ' great Spain ' . In terms of manifesto , the Popular Front proposed going back to the sort of reforms its previous administration , including important agrarian reforms , and those to do with the treatment of strikes . It would also release political prisoners , helping to secure the votes of the CNT and FAI , although as organisations they remained outside the growing Popular Front ; the Popular Front had the support of votes from anarchists . The Communist Party campaigned under a series of revolutionary slogans ; however , they were strongly supportive of the Popular Front government . " Vote Communist to save Spain from Marxism " was a Socialist joke at the time . Devoid of strong areas of working class support , already taken by syndicalism and anarchism , they concentrated on their position within the Popular Front . 
 34 @,@ 000 members of the Civil Guards and 17 @,@ 000 Assault Guards enforced security on election day , many freed from their regular posts by the <unk> . Six people were killed during the elections , and perhaps another 30 injured . Ballots were generally fair and in accordance with the 1931 constitution , although three cases of electoral fraud occurred . The first was in Galicia , in north @-@ west Spain , and orchestrated by the incumbent government ; there also , in A Coruña , by the political left . The voting in Granada was forcibly ( and unfairly ) dominated by the government . In some villages , the police stopped anyone not wearing a collar from voting . Wherever the Socialists were poorly organised , farm workers continued to vote how they were told by their bosses or caciques . Similarly , some right @-@ wing voters were put off from voting in strongly socialist areas . However , such instances were comparatively rare . The first results to be released , in the evening of the 14 , from urban areas , were encouraging for the Popular Front . 
