 = = Outcome = = 
 Just under 10 million people voted , with an abstention rate of 28 percent , a level of apathy higher than might be suggested by the ongoing political violence . A small number of coerced voters and anarchists formed part of the abstainers . The elections of 1936 were narrowly won by the Popular Front , with vastly smaller resources than the political right , who followed Nazi propaganda techniques . The exact numbers of votes differ among historians ; Brenan assigns the Popular Front 4 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 votes , the Right around 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and the centre 450 @,@ 000 . It was a comparatively narrow victory in terms of votes , but Paul Preston describes it as a ' triumph of power in the Cortes ' – the Popular Front won 267 deputies and the Right only 132 , and the imbalance caused by the nature of Spain 's electoral system since the 1932 election law came into force . The same system had benefited the political right in 1933 . The political centre did badly . Lerroux 's Radicals , incumbent until his government 's collapse , were electorally devastated ; many of their supporters had been pushed to the right by the increasing instability in Spain . Portela Valladares had formed the Centre Party , but had not had time to build it up . Worried about the problems of a minority party losing out due to the electoral system , he made a pact with the right , but this was not enough to ensure success . Leaders of the centre , Lerroux , <unk> and <unk> Álvarez , failed to win seats . The Falangist party , under José Antonio Primo de Rivera received only 46 @,@ 000 votes , a very small fraction of the total cast . This seemed to show little appetite for a takeover of that sort . The allocation of seats between coalition members was a matter of agreement between them . The official results ( Spanish : <unk> ) were recorded on 20 February . The Basque Party , who had not at the time of the election been part of the Popular Front , would go on to join it . In 20 seats , no alliance or party had secured 40 % of the vote ; 17 were decided by a second vote on 3 March . In these runoffs , the Popular Front won 8 , the Basques 5 , the Right 5 and the Centre 2 . In May , elections were <unk> in two areas of Granada where the new government alleged there had been fraud ; both seats were taken from the national Right victory in February by the Left . 
 Despite a relatively small mandate in terms of votes , some socialists took to the streets to free political prisoners , without waiting for the government to do so officially . There were claims of an imminent socialist or anarchist takeover . The right had firmly believed , at all levels , that they would win . Portela would , a year later , claim that Gil @-@ Robles and General Francisco Franco had approached him within days to the election to propose a military takeover . Portela resigned , even before a new government could be formed . However , the Popular Front , which had proved an effective election tool , did not translate into a Popular Front government . Largo Caballero and other elements of the political left were not prepared to work with the republicans , although they did agree to support much of the proposed reforms . Manuel Azaña Díaz was called upon to form a government , but would shortly replace Zamora as president . The right began to conspire as to how to best overthrow the republic , rather than taking control of it . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Seats = = = 
 = USS Portland ( CA @-@ 33 ) = 
 USS Portland ( CL / CA – 33 ) , the lead ship of her class of cruiser , was the first ship of the United States Navy named after the city of Portland , Maine . Launched in 1932 , she saw a number of training and goodwill cruises in the interwar period . In World War II , she saw extensive service beginning at the 1942 Battle of Coral Sea , where she escorted the aircraft carrier Yorktown and picked up survivors from the sunken carrier Lexington . She screened for Yorktown again in the Battle of Midway , picking up her survivors as well . She then supported the carrier Enterprise during the initial phase of the Guadalcanal Campaign later that year , and was torpedoed during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . The torpedo inflicted heavy damage which put her out of action for six months as she was repaired in Sydney , Australia and later San Diego , California . 
 Returning to action in mid @-@ 1943 , she saw action in many of the major campaigns of the Pacific War , conducting shore bombardments in support of campaigns at the Aleutian Islands , Gilbert and Marshall Islands , Mariana Islands , and New Guinea . She was involved in the October 1944 Battle of Leyte Gulf , engaging Japanese ships in the decisive Battle of Surigao Strait . She then conducted shore bombardments at Lingayen Gulf and Corregidor Island , and in 1945 supported landings during the Battle of Okinawa until the end of the war . 
 Following World War II , Portland accepted the Japanese surrender in the Caroline Islands and then undertook several Operation Magic Carpet cruises to bring U.S. troops home . She was decommissioned in 1946 and scrapped by 1962 . In her extensive service she accrued 16 battle stars , making her one of the most decorated ships in the U.S. fleet . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Portland was the lead ship of the third class of " treaty cruisers " to be constructed by the United States Navy following the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 , following the two vessels of the Pensacola @-@ class ordered in 1926 and the six vessels of the Northampton @-@ class ordered in 1927 . Ordered for the U.S. Navy in Fiscal Year 1930 . Portland was originally designated as a light cruiser , because of her thin armor , and given the hull classification symbol CL @-@ 33 . She was reclassified a heavy cruiser , because of her 8 @-@ inch guns , with the symbol CA @-@ 33 on 1 July 1931 , in accordance with the London Naval Treaty . 
 Portland was designed for a standard displacement of 10 @,@ 258 long tons ( 10 @,@ 423 t ) , and a full @-@ load displacement of 12 @,@ 755 long tons ( 12 @,@ 960 t ) . However , Portland only displaced 9 @,@ 800 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) when completed . In 1943 , a light tripod was added forward of the second funnel on the ship , and a prominent fire @-@ control director was installed aft . 
 Her four Parsons GT geared turbines each drove a propeller shaft using steam provided by eight Yarrow boilers . Portland 's power plant generated 107 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 80 @,@ 000 kW ) and she had a designed maximum speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . The ship reached , however , 32 @.@ 7 knots ( 60 @.@ 6 km / h ; 37 @.@ 6 mph ) on sea trials . She rolled badly until fitted with bilge keels . Portland was designed for a range of 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of nine Mark 9 8 " / 55 caliber guns arrayed in three triple mounts , a superfiring pair forward and one aft . She was armed with eight 5 " / 25 caliber guns for anti @-@ aircraft defense , and she also had two QF 3 pounder Hotchkiss saluting guns . In 1945 , her anti @-@ aircraft defenses were upgraded , receiving twenty four Bofors 40 mm guns which were arranged in four quad mounts and four twin mounts . Portland was also upgraded with seventeen Oerlikon 20 mm cannons . 
 She was originally designed with 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of armor for deck and side protection , but during construction her armor was increased . As completed , the ship was protected with 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 83 mm ) of belt armor which increased to 5 inches ( 130 mm ) around the magazines . Her armor was between 2 inches ( 51 mm ) and 5 @.@ 75 inches ( 146 mm ) thick on the transverse bulkheads , while armor on her main deck was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick . Armor on her barbettes was 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick , armor on her gunhouses was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick , and armor on her conning tower was 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) thick . 
 Additionally , the Portland @-@ class cruisers were designed with space to be outfitted as fleet flagships , with accommodations for an Admiral and his staff to operate . The class also featured two aircraft catapult amidships , and she could carry four aircraft which were stored in a hangar . Her total crew complement varied , with a regular designed crew complement of 848 , a wartime complement of 952 , and a complement 1 @,@ 229 when the cruiser was operating as a fleet flagship . 
 Portland was laid down by Bethlehem Steel at its Quincy Shipyard on 17 February 1930 . The machinery was provided by the builders . Portland was launched on 21 May 1932 and commissioned on 23 February 1933 . She was the first ship named for the city of Portland , Maine , and sponsored by the daughter of Ralph D. Brooks of Portland , and with Captain Herbert F. Leary as her first commander . Her sailors would later nickname her " Sweet Pea . " 
 = = Service history = = 
 Departing Boston on 1 April 1933 , the cruiser arrived Gravesend Bay , New York late in the day on 3 April . The next evening , she was dispatched on her first assignment to the scene of the airship Akron , which had crashed at sea . Thirty six minutes after receiving the message , she was underway and on route to the crash site . She was the first naval vessel on scene , and began coordinating the search and rescue effort with other ships arriving . In spite of her efforts , 73 were killed in the crash , including Admiral William Moffett , Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics . 
 Portland steamed from San Diego , California on 2 October 1935 along with Houston , which was carrying President Franklin D. Roosevelt . The president spent much of his trip fishing with his party . After visiting Panama and several other ports , the two ships steamed to Charleston , South Carolina , where the President disembarked . Portland spent the remainder of the interwar era with the Scouting Force , Cruiser Division 5 and later in the United States Pacific Fleet conducting peacetime training and a number of goodwill missions . She crossed the equator for the first time on 20 May 1936 during fleet maneuvers . 
 When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 , Portland was two days away , en route to Midway Atoll as part of a carrier group escorting aircraft carrier Lexington . From December 1941 to 1 May 1942 , she operated between the West Coast , Hawaii , and Fiji on patrol . 
 = = = Battle of Coral Sea = = = 
 Portland joined Task Force 17 ( TF 17 ) , commanded by Rear Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher and centered around the carrier Yorktown escorted by Portland as well as cruisers Astoria and Chester plus the destroyers Hammann , Anderson , Perkins , Morris , Russell , and Sims and oiler Neosho and Tippecanoe . TF 17 departed Tongatabu on 27 April en route to the Coral Sea . On the morning of 1 May , TF 17 joined with Task Force 11 ( TF 11 ) about 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) northwest of New Caledonia . TF 17 completed refueling the next day , but TF 11 reported that they would not be finished fueling until 4 May . Fletcher elected to take TF 17 northwest towards the Louisiades . 
 At 17 : 00 on 3 May , Fletcher was notified that a force of Japanese troops had been sighted at Tulagi the day before , approaching the southern Solomons . TF 17 changed course and proceeded at 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) towards Guadalcanal to launch airstrikes against the Japanese forces at Tulagi the next morning . On 4 May , from a position 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) south of Guadalcanal ( 11 ° 10 ′ S 158 ° 49 ′ E ) , TF 17 launched airstrikes against Japanese forces off Tulagi After recovering its aircraft late in the evening of 4 May , TF17 retired towards the south . The next morning , TF 17 rendezvoused with TF 11 and Task Force 44 ( TF 44 ) at a predetermined point 320 nmi ( 370 mi ; 590 km ) south of Guadalcanal ( 15 ° S 160 ° E ) . Prompted by reports the Japanese would attack Port Moresby , the force moved to the Louisiades to engage the Japanese the next day . Portland was assigned to Task Group 17 @.@ 2 under Rear Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid together with cruisers Minneapolis , New Orleans , Astoria , Chester , and five destroyers from Destroyer Squadron One . She screened for Yorktown throughout the operation , including during Japanese air attacks on the two carriers on 8 May . Following the battle , she was to escort the damaged Lexington , but after fires on that carrier became uncontrollable she was abandoned and sunk . Portland took on 722 of her survivors . She suffered no casualties herself , though at least four of her sailors were transferred to the Neosho shortly before the battle and were lost when that ship was sunk . 
 = = = Battle of Midway = = = 
 After brief repairs at Tongatabu , Portland took on a new commander , Captain Laurence DuBose . She then steamed for Pearl Harbor escorting Yorktown , before heading to Midway Atoll to set a trap for Japanese forces attacking there . On 4 June , after Dive @-@ Bombers from carriers Yorktown and Enterprise had sunk three Japanese carriers , aircraft from Japanese carrier Hiryū responded with an attack on Yorktown that afternoon . Portland was to her port , providing anti @-@ aircraft defense along with cruisers Pensacola and Vincennes . A Japanese air attack came at 14 : 00 and another after 16 : 30 , and Yorktown was struck several times with torpedoes . With increasing damage , the carrier was abandoned and its survivors picked up by five destroyers and then transferred to Portland . In all , 2 @,@ 046 of Yorktown 's crew transferred to the cruiser . She then steamed toward Pearl Harbor and met the submarine tender Fulton and transferred the Yorktown survivors aboard her on 6 June . During 7 June she searched for downed naval aviators and the next day joined the group of carrier Saratoga . They steamed for the Aleutian Islands to counter a Japanese force there but were recalled to Pearl Harbor two days later . 
 = = = Guadalcanal campaign = = = 
 Portland accompanied the invasion fleet to Guadalcanal , escorting Enterprise . She remained off the coast protecting the landings at Tulagi and Guadalcanal from 7 – 9 August . In this duty , she missed the Battle of Savo Island and withdrew two days later following Enterprise . She then remained in the area to support the Guadalcanal operations and to protect communications lines for the attacking forces . 
 Remaining with Enterprise , she later participated in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons . On 24 August she was posted to air defense to the port of Enterprise , and though she and her sisters were able to down a number of Japanese aircraft , the carrier was hit at 18 : 34 . She continued to protect the carrier through 25 August , when Allied forces prevented reinforcement of Japanese units in the Solomons by a large naval armada under Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto . Following the battle she escorted Enterprise to Pearl Harbor and was then ordered on a secret mission to the Gilbert Islands to conduct a raid on Tarawa with light cruiser San Juan . She took aboard Rear Admiral Mahlon S. Tisdale and was designated Task Unit 16 @.@ 9 @.@ 1 . Between 14 : 10 and 14 : 51 on 15 October she attacked Japanese ships near the island , damaging a transport and a destroyer and suffering one damaged aircraft before she withdrew and rejoined the Enterprise task group near the Solomons . 
 She then steamed south to take part in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands as one of the escorts for Enterprise . The carrier came under heavy air attack at 10 : 12 on 24 October , and Portland suffered her first wartime damage as one of her 1 @.@ 1 @-@ inch ( 28 mm ) guns exploded in firing and again when one of her AA guns depressed too low and damaged the splinter shield , injuring 19 officers and enlisted men . In heavy fighting Enterprise was hit once but Portland and the task group shot down several aircraft . At 11 : 53 the bridge lost control of steering , and before it could regain control , a Japanese submarine was spotted . The submarine struck Portland with three torpedoes , but all three did not detonate , likely because the submarine had fired too close and they had no time to arm . 
 Two weeks later , she participated in the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal from 12 – 15 November , which resulted in heavy damage to both forces but broke up the determined Japanese effort to disrupt the landing of 6 @,@ 000 American troops on Guadalcanal , to bombard Henderson Field , and to land 7 @,@ 000 reinforcements of their own . At the outbreak of the battle , Portland was escorting a convoy traveling to Guadalcanal from New Caledonia as part of Task Force 67 . After a four @-@ day journey they arrived and began to offload supplies on 12 November and were countered by a Japanese air attack of 46 aircraft . That night , she was among a force of five cruisers and eight destroyers under Daniel J. Callaghan which steamed to counter an approaching Japanese force . They spotted a Japanese force of two battleships , one cruiser and eleven destroyers and immediately opened fire , sinking the Japanese destroyer Akatsuki . Shortly thereafter , Portland was struck by a torpedo fired by either the destroyer Inazuma or the destroyer Ikazuchi at 01 : 58 , causing heavy damage to her stern . The torpedo struck the starboard side , which blew off both inboard propellers , jammed the rudder five degrees to starboard , and jammed her Number Three turret in train and elevation . A four degree list was quickly corrected by shifting ballast , but the steering problem could not be overcome and the ship was forced to steam in circles to starboard . The blast disrupted her steering column , forcing her to steer in a circle . At the end of her first circle , she fired on Japanese battleship Hiei , with her forward turrets . The Japanese ship returned fire , but all salvos passed over the cruiser . In the four six @-@ gun salvos returned by Portland , she succeeded in starting fires in the Japanese ship . At dawn , she was one of three U.S. ships still too damaged to withdraw on her own power . Then again at 06 : 30 , still circling , Portland opened fire on the abandoned hulk of Japanese destroyer <unk> at a range of 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . After the sixth salvo , <unk> exploded , rolled over , and sank within five minutes . She was eventually able to correct the steering problem and withdraw on her own power . She later received a Meritorious Unit Commendation for her actions in the battle . She suffered 18 killed , 17 wounded in the battle . 
 With the assistance of Higgins boats , a YP , and a tug , Portland anchored at Tulagi on 14 November . From there , she was towed to Sydney , Australia by the tugboat Navajo and escorted by the destroyers Meade and Zane for preliminary repairs prior to overhaul in the United States . She arrived at Sydney 30 November but did not enter drydock until 24 December after Chester and New Orleans were repaired . During this time the crew was given extended shore leave . Two of the ship 's sailors died in accidents during this leave . She left Australia after preliminary repairs , escorted by destroyer HMAS Warramunga . Following short stops at Samoa and Pearl Harbor , the ship arrived at Mare Island Navy Yard on 3 March 1943 . 
 = = = 1943 – 1944 = = = 
 After operational training in southern Californian waters , Portland steamed for the Aleutians late in May , arriving on 11 June and bombarding Kiska on 26 July . After covering a reconnaissance landing on Little Kiska on 17 August , she called at Pearl Harbor on 23 September , there to San Francisco in early October , then back to Pearl Harbor in mid @-@ October . From November 1943 to February 1944 , Portland participated in the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaigns . She bombarded Tarawa on 20 November supporting landings there for several days . She was lightly damaged by a friendly depth charge when a nearby destroyer erroneously detected a Japanese submarine . In December 1943 she moved to the Marshall Islands escorting the new Essex @-@ class carrier Lexington . While Lexington came under air attack , none of the Japanese planes came within range of Portland and she did not open fire . She returned to Pearl Harbor on 25 December , and went into drydock to repair her rudder and propellers . 
 After repairs , she joined Task Group 51 under Rear Admiral Harry W. Hill for an attack on <unk> , steaming for that island on 23 January and arriving 30 January . After shelling the island for 30 minutes , it was discovered no Japanese were ashore . She then moved to support operations on Eniwetok Atoll on 8 February , providing shore bombardment on Parry Island ahead of landings which took place on 19 February . She then screened carriers conducting airstrikes at Palau , Yap , Ulithi , and Woleai between 30 March and 1 April . She then joined with a carrier force assigned to cover the landings around Hollandia and Tanahmerah on New Guinea , which took place from 21 – 24 April . She steamed northward with the carrier force and struck Truk with five other cruisers and destroyers . Portland then bombarded Satawan in the <unk> Group . Following this series of operations , Portland returned to Mare Island for a more extensive overhaul , which was completed in August . She returned to the western Pacific for shore bombardments of Peleliu from 12 – 14 September . The cruiser supported the landing on Peleliu on 15 September , providing artillery to support the advance of Allied forces . She provided gunfire support at Peleliu through 29 September , and then steamed for Seeadler Harbor , Manus Island in the Admiralties . 
 = = = Battle of Leyte Gulf = = = 
 Portland next joined Cruiser Division 4 for the next major campaign against the Philippines . She arrived off Leyte on 17 October , entering the Gulf the next day , and began two days of shore bombardments to prepare for the troop landings there . On the night of 24 October , a strong Japanese force consisting of two battleships , one heavy cruiser , and four destroyers headed for Surigao Strait with the apparent intent of raiding shipping in Leyte Gulf . The Japanese force advanced in rough column up the narrow strait during darkness , but was met with a large U.S. force of cruisers , destroyers and battleships , including Portland . She and her sisters steamed across the top of the strait , crossing the T of the Japanese force . The Japanese were first met by PT boats , then in succession by three coordinated destroyer torpedo attacks , and finally by devastating gunfire from American battleships and cruisers disposed across the northern end of the strait . Portland took the Japanese cruiser Mogami under fire , scoring three hits on her at 04 : 02 , striking the compass platform and AA defense center . She continued firing on the Mogami for ten minutes She continued to fire on the stranded Mogami until 05 : 30 , striking several hits , including on the ship 's bridge . The Battle of Surigao Strait was a decisive defeat for the Japanese force , with most of its ships being destroyed . 
 = = = 1945 = = = 
 From 3 January to 1 March 1945 , Portland participated in the operations at Lingayen Gulf and Corregidor . Arriving off Lingayen Gulf on 5 January , and bombarding the vicinity of Cape <unk> , she entered the Gulf the same day and commenced bombardment of the eastern shore but discontinued immediately when a large wave of Japanese kamikaze planes approached . Portland entered Manila Bay on 15 February , and bombarded the south shore of Corregidor in preparation for landings there . She returned to Leyte Gulf on 1 March for repairs and replenishment , having seen five months of continuous action . 
 From 26 March to 20 April , she conducted shore bombardments of Okinawa in support of the Allied landings during the Okinawa campaign . Portland endured twenty @-@ four air raids , shot down four Japanese aircraft , and assisted in downing two others . From 8 May to 17 June , she supported ground forces on Okinawa providing artillery support for ground forces , departing on 17 June for maintenance at Leyte before returning to Buckner Bay on 6 August , where she remained conducting shore bombardments until the end of the war . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 With the termination of hostilities , Portland was designated flagship of Vice Admiral George D. Murray , Commander Mariana Islands , who was to accept the surrender of the Carolines . The ship steamed to Truk Atoll and there Murray , acting for Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz , accepted the formal capitulation of the senior Japanese military and civilian officials in ceremonies aboard Portland . She was then selected for Operation Magic Carpet duty , and returned to Pearl Harbor from 21 – 24 September embarking 600 troops for transportation to the United States . She crossed the Panama Canal on 8 October and arrived at Portland , Maine for Navy Day celebrations on 27 October . She then conducted two trans @-@ Atlantic crossings in November and December , bringing troops home from the European Theater . She reported on 11 March 1946 to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard for inactivation and assignment to the Reserve Fleet . She decommissioned at Philadelphia Navy Yard on 12 July 1946 and was maintained in the United States Reserve Fleet . While she was identified as one of the few ships that fought through the entire war and not missed any major battle , no attempt was made to save her as a museum ship at either Portland Maine , or Portland Oregon . She was struck from the Navy List on 1 March 1959 and sold to Union Minerals and Alloys Corp. in New York on 6 October . She was scrapped at Wainwright Shipyard in Panama City , Florida during 1961 and 1962 . 
 Her tripod mast was preserved at Fort Allen Park , Portland . She received 16 battle stars for World War II service , making her among the most decorated US ships of World War II . 
 = Battle of Shiloh = 
 The Battle of Shiloh , also known as the Battle of Pittsburg Landing , was a major battle in the Western Theater of the American Civil War , fought April 6 – 7 , 1862 , in southwestern Tennessee . A Union army under Major General Ulysses S. Grant had moved via the Tennessee River deep into Tennessee and was encamped principally at Pittsburg Landing , Tennessee on the west bank of the river , where Confederate forces under Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and Pierre G. T. Beauregard launched a surprise attack on Grant 's army . Johnston was killed in action during the fighting ; Beauregard , who thus succeeded to command of the army , decided against pressing the attack late in the evening . Overnight Grant was reinforced by one of his own divisions stationed further north and was joined by three divisions from another Union army under Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell . This allowed them to launch an unexpected counterattack the next morning which completely reversed the Confederate gains of the previous day . 
 On April 6 , the first day of the battle , the Confederates struck with the intention of driving the Union defenders away from the river and into the swamps of Owl Creek to the west . Johnston hoped to defeat Grant 's Army of the Tennessee before the anticipated arrival of General Don Carlos Buell 's Army of the Ohio . The Confederate battle lines became confused during the fierce fighting , and Grant 's men instead fell back to the northeast , in the direction of Pittsburg Landing . A Union position on a slightly sunken road , nicknamed the " Hornet 's Nest , " defended by the men of Brig. Gens . Benjamin M. Prentiss 's and William H. L. Wallace 's divisions , provided critical time for the remainder of the Union line to stabilize under the protection of numerous artillery batteries . Wallace was mortally wounded when the position collapsed , while several regiments from the two divisions were eventually surrounded and surrendered . General Johnston was shot in the leg and bled to death while personally leading an attack . Beauregard , his second in command , acknowledged how tired the army was from the day 's exertions and decided against assaulting the final Union position that night . 
 Tired but <unk> and well @-@ organized men from Buell 's army and a division of Grant 's army arrived in the evening of April 6 and helped turn the tide the next morning , when the Union commanders launched a counterattack along the entire line . Confederate forces were forced to retreat from the area , ending their hopes of blocking the Union advance into northern Mississippi . The Battle of Shiloh was the bloodiest battle in American history up to that time , although it was superseded the next year by the Battle of Chancellorsville and , soon after , the three @-@ day Battle of Gettysburg , which would prove to be the bloodiest of the war . 
 = = Background and plans = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 After the losses of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson in February 1862 , Confederate General Albert Sidney Johnston withdrew his forces into western Tennessee , northern Mississippi , and Alabama to reorganize . Johnston established his base at Corinth , Mississippi , the site of a major railroad junction and strategic transportation link between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mississippi River , but left the Union troops with access into southern Tennessee and points farther south via the Tennessee River . 
 In early March , Union Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck , then commander of the Department of the Missouri , ordered Grant to remain at Fort Henry , and on March 4 turned field command of the expedition over to a subordinate , Brig. Gen. C. F. Smith , who had recently been nominated as a major general . ( Various writers assert that Halleck took this step because of professional and personal animosity toward Grant ; however , Halleck shortly restored Grant to full command , perhaps influenced by an inquiry from President Abraham Lincoln . ) Smith 's orders were to lead raids intended to capture or damage the railroads in southwestern Tennessee . Brig. Gen. William T. Sherman 's troops arrived from Paducah , Kentucky , to conduct a similar mission to break the railroads near Eastport , Mississippi . Halleck also ordered Grant to advance his Army of West Tennessee ( soon to be known by its more famous name , the Army of the Tennessee ) on an invasion up the Tennessee River . Grant left Fort Henry and headed upriver ( south ) , arriving at Savannah , Tennessee , on March 14 , and established his headquarters on the east bank of the river . Grant 's troops set up camp farther upriver : five divisions at Pittsburg Landing , Tennessee , and a sixth at Crump 's Landing , four miles from Grant 's headquarters . 
 Meanwhile , Halleck 's command was enlarged through consolidation of Grant 's and Buell 's armies and renamed the Department of the Mississippi . With Buell 's Army of the Ohio under his command , Halleck ordered Buell to concentrate with Grant at Savannah . Buell began a march with much of his army from Nashville , Tennessee , and headed southwest toward Savannah . Halleck intended to take the field in person and lead both armies in an advance south to seize Corinth , Mississippi , where the Mobile and Ohio Railroad linking Mobile , Alabama , to the Ohio River intersected the Memphis and Charleston Railroad . The railroad was a vital supply line connecting the Mississippi River at Memphis , Tennessee to Richmond , Virginia . 
 = = Opposing forces and initial movements = = 
 = = = Union = = = 
 Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant 's Army of the Tennessee of 44 @,@ 895 men consisted of six divisions : 
 1st Division ( Maj. Gen. John A. McClernand ) : 3 brigades ; 
 2nd Division ( Maj. Gen. W. H. L. Wallace ) : 3 brigades ; 
 3rd Division ( Maj. Gen. Lew Wallace ) : 3 brigades ; 
 4th Division ( Brig. Gen. Stephen A. Hurlbut ) : 3 brigades ; 
 5th Division ( Brig. Gen. William T. Sherman ) : 4 brigades ; 
 6th Division ( Brig. Gen. Benjamin M. Prentiss ) : 2 brigades ; 
 Of the six divisions encamped on the western side of the Tennessee River in early April , only Lew Wallace 's 3rd Division was at Crump 's Landing ; the remainder were farther south ( upriver ) at Pittsburg Landing . Grant developed a reputation during the war for being more concerned with his own plans than with those of the enemy . His encampment at Pittsburg Landing displayed his most consequential lack of such concern — his army was spread out in bivouac style , with many of his men surrounding a small , log meetinghouse named Shiloh Church ( Shiloh is a Hebrew word meaning " place of peace " ) , passing the time waiting for Buell 's army with drills for his many raw troops , without establishing entrenchments or other significant defensive measures . 
 In his memoirs , Grant reacted to criticism of his lack of entrenchments : " Besides this , the troops with me , officers and men , needed discipline and drill more than they did experience with the pick , shovel and axe . ... under all these circumstances I concluded that drill and discipline were worth more to our men than fortifications . " Lew Wallace 's division was 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) downstream ( north ) from Pittsburg Landing , at Crump 's Landing , a position intended to prevent the placement of Confederate river batteries , to protect the road connecting Crump 's Landing to Bethel Station , Tennessee , and to guard the Union army 's right flank . In addition , Wallace 's troops could strike the railroad line connecting Bethel Station to Corinth , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south . 
 The portion of Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell 's Army of the Ohio that was engaged in the battle consisted of four divisions : 
 2nd Division ( Brig. Gen. Alexander M. McCook ) : 3 brigades ; 
 4th Division ( Brig. Gen. William " Bull " Nelson ) : 3 brigades ; 
 5th Division ( Brig. Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden ) : 2 brigades ; 
 6th Division ( Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Wood ) : 2 brigades ; 
 On April 5 , the eve of battle , the first of Buell 's divisions , under the command of Brig. Gen. William " Bull " Nelson , reached Savannah . Grant instructed Nelson to encamp there instead of immediately crossing the river . The remainder of Buell 's army , still marching toward Savannah with only portions of four of his divisions , totaling 17 @,@ 918 men , did not reach the area in time to have a significant role in the battle until its second day . Buell 's three other divisions were led by Brig. Gens . Alexander M. McCook , Thomas L. Crittenden , and Thomas J. Wood . ( Wood 's division appeared too late even to be of much service on the second day . ) 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 On the Confederate side , Johnston named his newly assembled force the Army of Mississippi . He concentrated almost 55 @,@ 000 men around Corinth , Mississippi , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) southwest of Grant 's troops at Pittsburg Landing . Of these men , 40 @,@ 335 departed from Corinth on April 3 , hoping to surprise Grant before Buell arrived to join forces . They were organized into four large corps , commanded by : 
 I Corps ( Maj. Gen. Leonidas Polk ) , with 2 divisions under Brig. Gen. Charles Clark and Maj. Gen. Benjamin F. Cheatham ; 
 II Corps ( Maj. Gen. Braxton Bragg ) , with 2 divisions under Brig. Gens . Daniel Ruggles and Jones M. Withers ; 
 III Corps ( Maj. Gen. William J. Hardee ) , with 3 brigades under Brig. Gens . Thomas C. Hindman , Patrick Cleburne , and Sterling A. M. Wood ; 
 Reserve Corps ( Brig. Gen. John C. Breckinridge ) , with 3 brigades under Cols . Robert Trabue and Winfield S. Statham , and Brig. Gen. John S. Bowen , and attached cavalry ; 
 = = = Comparison between Union and Confederate armies = = = 
 On the eve of battle , Grant 's and Johnston 's armies were of comparable size , but the Confederates were poorly armed with antique weapons , including shotguns , hunting rifles , pistols , flintlock muskets , and even a few pikes ; however , some regiments , notably the 6th and 7th Kentucky Infantry , had Enfield rifles . The troops approached the battle with very little combat experience ; Braxton Bragg 's men from Pensacola and Mobile were the best trained . Grant 's army included 32 out of 62 infantry regiments who had combat experience at Fort Donelson . One half of his artillery batteries and most of his cavalry were also combat veterans . 
 = = = Johnston 's plan = = = 
 Johnston 's plan was to attack Grant 's left , separate the Union army from its gunboat support and avenue of retreat on the Tennessee River , and drive it west into the swamps of Snake and Owl Creeks , where it could be destroyed . The attack on Grant was originally planned for April 4 , but it was delayed forty @-@ eight hours due to heavy rain . As a result , Johnston 's second in command , P. G. T. Beauregard , again feared that the element of surprise had been lost and recommended withdrawing to Corinth . But Johnston once more refused to consider retreat . Beauregard was concerned that the sounds of marching and the Confederate soldiers test @-@ firing their rifles after two days of rain had cost them the element of surprise . Beauregard urged Johnston not to attack Grant . 
 Johnston , who refused to accept Beauregard 's advice , made the decision to attack and then remarked , " I would fight them if they were a million . " Despite Beauregard 's well @-@ founded concern , most of the Union forces did not hear the marching army approach and were unaware of the enemy camps less than 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away . 
 = = Battle , April 6 ( first day : Confederate assault ) = = 
 = = = Early morning attack = = = 
 Before 6 a.m. on Sunday , April 6 , Johnston 's army was deployed for battle , straddling the Corinth Road . The army had spent the entire night bivouacking in order of battle within 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the Union camp near Sherman 's headquarters at Shiloh Church . Their approach and dawn assault achieved a strategic and tactical surprise . The Union army had sent out no scouts or regular patrols and did not have any vedettes in place for early warning . Grant telegraphed a message to Halleck on the night of April 5 , " I have scarcely the faintest idea of an attack ( general one ) being made upon us , but will be prepared should such a thing take place . " Grant 's declaration proved to be overstated . Sherman , the informal camp commander at Pittsburg Landing , did not believe the Confederates had a major assault force nearby ; he discounted the possibility of an attack from the south . Sherman expected that Johnston would eventually attack from the direction of Purdy , Tennessee , to the west . When Col. Jesse <unk> , 53rd Ohio Infantry , warned Sherman that an attack was imminent , the general angrily replied , " Take your damned regiment back to Ohio . There are no Confederates closer than Corinth . " 
 Around 3 a.m. , Col. Everett Peabody , commanding Brig. Gen. Benjamin Prentiss 's 1st Brigade , sent a patrol of 250 infantry men from the 25th Missouri and the 12th Michigan out on reconnaissance . The patrol , under the command of Maj. James P. Powell , met fire from Confederates who then fled into the woods . A short time later , 5 : 15 a.m. , they encountered Confederate outposts manned by the 3rd Mississippi Battalion , and a spirited fight lasted about an hour . Arriving messengers and sounds of gunfire from the skirmish alerted the nearest Union troops , who formed battle line positions before the Confederates were able to reach them ; however , the Union army command had not adequately prepared for an attack on their camps . By 9 a.m. Union forces at Pittsburgh Landing were either engaged or moving toward the front line . 
 The confusing alignment of the Confederate troops helped reduce the effectiveness of the attack , since Johnston and Beauregard had no unified battle plan . Earlier , Johnston had telegraphed Confederate President Jefferson Davis his plan for the attack : " Polk the left , Bragg the center , Hardee the right , Breckinridge in reserve . " His strategy was to emphasize the attack on his right flank to prevent the Union army from reaching the Tennessee River , its supply line and avenue of retreat . Johnston instructed Beauregard to stay in the rear and direct men and supplies as needed , while he rode to the front to lead the men on the battle line . This effectively ceded control of the battle to Beauregard , who had a different concept , which was simply to attack in three waves and push the Union army eastward to the river . The corps of Hardee and Bragg began the assault with their divisions in one line , nearly 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) wide and about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from its front to its rear column . As these units advanced , they became intermingled and difficult to control . Corps commanders attacked in line without reserves , and artillery could not be concentrated to effect a breakthrough . At about 7 : 30 a.m. , from his position in the rear , Beauregard ordered the corps of Polk and Breckinridge forward on the left and right of the line , diluting their effectiveness . The attack therefore went forward as a frontal assault conducted by a single linear formation , which lacked both the depth and weight needed for success . Command and control , in the modern sense , were lost from the onset of the first assault . 
 = = = Grant and his army rally = = = 
 The Confederate assault , despite its shortcomings , was ferocious , causing some of the numerous inexperienced Union soldiers in Grant 's new army to flee to the river for safety . Others fought well , but were forced to withdraw under strong pressure from the Confederates , and attempted to form new defensive lines . Many Union regiments fragmented entirely ; the companies and sections that remained on the field attached themselves to other commands . Sherman , who had been negligent in preparing for an attack , became one of its most important elements . He appeared everywhere along his lines , inspiring his raw recruits to resist the initial assaults , despite the staggering losses on both sides . Sherman received two minor wounds and had three horses shot out from under him . Historian James M. McPherson cites the battle as the turning point of Sherman 's life , helping him to become one of the North 's premier generals . Sherman 's division bore the brunt of the initial attack . Despite heavy fire on their position and their left flank crumbling , Sherman 's men fought stubbornly , but the Union troops slowly lost ground and fell back to a position behind Shiloh Church . McClernand 's division temporarily stabilized the position . Overall , however , Johnston 's forces made steady progress until noon , rolling up Union positions one by one . As the Confederates advanced , many threw away their flintlock muskets and grabbed rifles dropped by the fleeing Union troops . 
 Grant was about 10 miles ( 16 km ) downriver at Savannah , Tennessee , when he heard the sound of artillery fire . ( On April 4 , he had been injured when his horse fell and pinned him underneath . He was convalescing and unable to move without crutches . ) Before leaving Savannah , Grant ordered Bull Nelson 's division to march along the east side of the river , to a point opposite Pittsburg Landing , where it could be ferried over to the battlefield . Grant then took his steamboat , Tigress , to Crump 's Landing , where he gave Lew Wallace his first orders , which were to wait in reserve and be ready to move . Grant proceeded to Pittsburg Landing , arriving about 8 : 30 a.m. ; most of the day went by before the first of these reinforcements arrived . ( Nelson 's division arrived around 5 p.m. ; Wallace 's appeared about 7 p.m. ) Wallace 's slow movement to the battlefield would become particularly controversial . 
 = = = Lew Wallace 's division = = = 
 On the morning of April 6 , around 8 : 00 or 8 : 30 a.m. , Grant 's flagship stopped alongside Wallace 's boat moored at Crump 's Landing and gave orders for the 3rd Division to be held ready to move in any direction . Wallace concentrated his troops at Stoney Lonesome , although his westernmost brigade remained at Adamsville . He then waited for further orders , which arrived between 11 and 11 : 30 a.m. Grant ordered Wallace to move his unit up to join the Union right , a move that would have been in support of Sherman 's 5th Division , which was encamped around Shiloh Church when the battle began . The written orders , transcribed from verbal orders that Grant gave to an aide , were lost during the battle and controversy remains over their wording . Wallace maintained that he was not ordered to Pittsburg Landing , which was to the left rear of the army , or told which road to use . Grant later claimed that he ordered Wallace to Pittsburg Landing by way of the River Road ( also called the Hamburg – Savannah Road ) . 
 Around noon , Wallace began the journey along the Shunpike , a route familiar to his men . A member of Grant 's staff , William Rowley , found Wallace between 2 and 2 : 30 p.m. on the Shunpike , after Grant wondered where Wallace was and why he had not arrived on the battlefield , while the main Union force was being slowly pressed backward . Rowley told Wallace that the Union army had retreated , Sherman was no longer fighting at Shiloh Church , and the battle line had moved northeast toward Pittsburg Landing . If Wallace continued in the same direction , he would have found himself in the rear of the advancing Confederate troops . 
 Wallace had to make a choice : he could launch an attack and fight through the Confederate rear to reach Grant 's forces closer to Pittsburg Landing , or reverse his direction and march toward Pittsburg Landing via a crossroads to the River Road . Wallace chose the second option . ( After the war , Wallace claimed that his division might have attacked and defeated the Confederates if his advance had not been interrupted , but later conceded that the move would not have been successful . ) Rather than realign his troops so the rear guard would be in the front , Wallace made a controversial decision to countermarch his troops to maintain the original order , only facing in the other direction . The move further delayed Wallace 's troops as they marched north along the Shunpike road , then took a crossover to reach the River Road to the east , and headed south toward the battlefield . 
 Wallace 's division began arriving at Grant 's position about 6 : 30 p.m. , after a march of about 14 miles ( 23 km ) in seven hours over poor and muddy roads . It formed line on the battlefield about 7 p.m. , when the fighting was nearly over for the day . Although Grant showed no disapproval at the time , his later endorsement of Wallace 's battle report was negative enough to severely damage Wallace 's military career . Today , Wallace is better remembered as the author of Ben @-@ Hur . 
 = = = Hornet 's Nest = = = 
 On the main Union defensive line , starting around 9 a.m. , Prentiss 's and W. H. L. Wallace 's divisions established and held a position nicknamed the " Hornet 's Nest " , in a field along a road , now popularly called the " Sunken Road , " although there is little physical justification for that name . The Confederates assaulted the position for several hours rather than simply bypassing it , and suffered heavy casualties . Historians ' estimates of the number of separate charges range from 8 to 14 . The Union forces to the left and right of the Nest were forced back , making Prentiss 's position a prominent point in the line . Coordination within the Nest was poor , and units withdrew based solely on their individual commanders ' decisions . The pressure increased when W. H. L. Wallace , commander of the largest concentration of troops in the position , was mortally wounded . Union regiments became disorganized and companies disintegrated as the Confederates , led by Brig. Gen. Daniel Ruggles , assembled more than 50 cannons into " Ruggles 's Battery " to blast the line at close range . Confederates surrounded the Hornet 's Nest , and it fell after holding out for seven hours . Prentiss surrendered himself and the remains of his division to the Confederates . A large portion of the Union survivors , an estimated 2 @,@ 200 to 2 @,@ 400 men , were captured , but their sacrifice bought time for Grant to establish a final defense line near Pittsburg Landing . 
 While dealing with the Hornet 's Nest , the South suffered a serious setback with the death of their commanding general . Albert Sidney Johnston was mortally wounded at about 2 : 30 p.m. as he led attacks on the Union left through the Widow Bell 's cotton field against the Peach Orchard . Johnston was shot in his right leg , behind the knee . Deeming the leg wound to be insignificant , he sent his personal surgeon to care for wounded Confederates and the Union soldiers they had captured . In the doctor 's absence , Johnston bled to death within an hour from a torn popliteal artery that caused internal bleeding and blood to collect unnoticed in his riding boot . Jefferson Davis considered Johnston to be the most effective general they had ( this was two months before Robert E. Lee emerged as the pre @-@ eminent Confederate general ) . Johnston was the highest @-@ ranking officer from either side to be killed in combat during the Civil War . Beauregard assumed command , but his position in the rear , where he relied on field reports from his subordinates , may have given him only a vague idea of the disposition of forces at the front . Beauregard ordered Johnston 's body shrouded for secrecy to avoid damaging morale and resumed attacks against the Hornet 's Nest . This was likely a tactical error , because the Union flanks were slowly pulling back to form a semicircular line around Pittsburg Landing . If Beauregard had concentrated his forces against the flanks , he might have defeated the Union army at the landing , and then reduced the Hornet 's Nest position at his leisure . 
 = = = Defense at Pittsburg Landing = = = 
 The Union flanks were being pushed back , but not decisively . Hardee and Polk caused Sherman and McClernand on the Union right to retreat in the direction of Pittsburg Landing , leaving the right flank of the Hornet 's Nest exposed . Just after Johnston 's death , Breckinridge , whose corps had been in reserve , attacked on the extreme left of the Union line , driving off the understrength brigade of Col. David Stuart and potentially opening a path into the Union rear and the Tennessee River . However , the Confederates paused to regroup and recover from exhaustion and disorganization , then followed the sounds of the guns toward the Hornet 's Nest , and an opportunity was lost . After the Hornet 's Nest fell , the remnants of the Union line established a solid three @-@ mile ( 5 km ) front around Pittsburg Landing , extending west from the river and then north , up the River Road , keeping the approach open for the expected , although belated , arrival of Lew Wallace 's division . Sherman commanded the right of the line , McClernand took the center , and on the left , the remnants of W. H. L. Wallace 's , Hurlbut 's , and Stuart 's men mixed with thousands of stragglers who were crowding on the bluff over the landing . The advance of Buell 's army , Col. Jacob Ammen 's brigade of Bull Nelson 's division , arrived in time to be ferried over and join the left end of the line . The defensive line included a ring of more than 50 cannons and naval guns from the river ( the gunboats USS Lexington and USS Tyler ) . A final Confederate charge of two brigades , led by Brig. Gen. Withers , attempted to break through the line but was repulsed . Beauregard called off a second attempt after 6 p.m. , as the sun set . The Confederate plan had failed ; they had pushed Grant east to a defensible position on the river , not forced him west into the swamps . 
 = = = Evening lull = = = 
 The evening of April 6 was a dispiriting end to the first day of one of the bloodiest battles in American history . The cries of wounded and dying men on the fields between the armies could be heard in the Union and Confederate camps throughout the night . Exhausted Confederate soldiers bedded down in the abandoned Union camps . The Union troops were pushed back to the river and the junction of the River ( Hamburg – Savannah Road ) and the Corinth @-@ Pittsburg Landing Roads . Around 10 p.m. a thunderstorm passed through the area . Coupled with the continuous shelling from the Union gunboats Lexington and Tyler , it made the night a miserable experience for both sides . 
 A famous anecdote encapsulates Grant 's unflinching attitude to temporary setbacks and his tendency for offensive action . Sometime after midnight , Sherman encountered Grant standing under a tree , sheltering himself from the pouring rain and smoking one of his cigars , while considering his losses and planning for the next day . Sherman remarked , " Well , Grant , we 've had the devil 's own day , haven 't we ? " Grant looked up . " Yes , " he replied , followed by a puff . " Yes . Lick ' em tomorrow , though . " 
 Beauregard sent a telegram to President Davis announcing a complete victory . He later admitted , " I thought I had Grant just where I wanted him and could finish him up in the morning . " Many of his men were jubilant , having overrun the Union camps and taken thousands of prisoners and tons of supplies . Grant still had reason to be optimistic : Lew Wallace 's 5 @,@ 800 men ( minus the two regiments guarding the supplies at Crump 's Landing ) and 15 @,@ 000 of Don Carlos Buell 's army began to arrive that evening . Wallace 's division took up a position on the right of the Union line and was in place by 1 a.m. ; Buell 's men were fully on the scene by 4 a.m. , in time to turn the tide the next day . 
 Beauregard caused considerable historical controversy with his decision to halt the assault at dusk . Braxton Bragg and Albert Sidney Johnston 's son , Col. William Preston Johnston , were among those who bemoaned the so @-@ called " lost opportunity at Shiloh . " Beauregard did not come to the front to inspect the strength of the Union lines ; he remained at Shiloh Church . He also discounted intelligence reports from Col. Nathan Bedford Forrest ( and bluster from prisoner of war General Prentiss ) that Buell 's men were crossing the river to reinforce Grant . In defense of his decision , Beauregard 's troops were simply exhausted , there was less than an hour of daylight left , and Grant 's artillery advantage was formidable . In addition , he had received a dispatch from Brig. Gen. Benjamin Hardin Helm in northern Alabama that indicated Buell was marching toward Decatur and not Pittsburg Landing . 
 = = Battle , April 7 ( second day : Union counterattack ) = = 
 On Monday morning , April 7 , the combined Union armies numbered 45 @,@ 000 men ; the Confederates suffered as many as 8 @,@ 500 casualties the first day and their commanders reported no more than 20 @,@ 000 effectives due to stragglers and deserters . ( Buell disputed that figure after the war , stating that there were 28 @,@ 000 ) . The Confederates had withdrawn south into Prentiss 's and Sherman 's former camps , while Polk 's corps retired to the Confederate bivouac established on April 5 , which was 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of Pittsburg Landing . No line of battle was formed , and few if any commands were resupplied with ammunition . The soldiers were consumed by the need to locate food , water , and shelter for a much @-@ needed night 's rest . 
 Beauregard , unaware that he was now outnumbered , planned to continue the attack and drive Grant into the river . To his surprise , Union forces started moving forward in a massive counterattack at dawn . Grant and Buell launched their attacks separately ; coordination occurred only at the division level . Lew Wallace 's division was the first to see action , about 5 : 30 a.m. , at the extreme right of the Union line . Wallace continued the advance , crossing Tilghman Branch around 7 a.m. and met little resistance . Changing direction and moving to the southwest , Wallace 's men drove back the brigade of Col. Preston Pond . On Wallace 's left were the survivors of Sherman 's division , then McClernand 's , and W. H. L. Wallace 's ( now under the command of Col. James M. Tuttle ) . Buell 's army continued to the left with Bull Nelson 's , Crittenden 's , and McCook 's divisions . The Confederate defenders were so badly commingled that little unit cohesion existed above the brigade level . It required more than two hours to locate Gen. Polk and bring up his division from its bivouac to the southwest . By 10 a.m. , Beauregard had stabilized his front with his corps commanders from left to right : Bragg , Polk , Breckinridge , and Hardee . In a thicket near the Hamburg @-@ Purdy Road , the fighting was so intense that Sherman described in his report of the battle " the severest musketry fire I ever heard . " 
 On the Union left , Nelson 's division led the advance , followed closely by Crittenden 's and McCook 's men , down the Corinth and Hamburg @-@ Savannah roads . After heavy fighting , Crittenden 's division recaptured the Hornet 's Nest area by late morning , but the Crittenden and Nelson forces were repulsed by determined counterattacks from Breckinridge . Wallace 's and Sherman 's men on the Union right made steady progress , driving Bragg and Polk to the south . As Crittenden and McCook resumed their attacks , Breckinridge was forced to retire . By noon Beauregard 's line paralleled the Hamburg @-@ Purdy Road . 
 In early afternoon , Beauregard launched a series of counterattacks from the Shiloh Church area , aiming to control the Corinth Road . The Union right was temporarily driven back by these assaults at Water Oaks Pond . Crittenden , reinforced by Tuttle , seized the junction of the Hamburg @-@ Purdy and East Corinth roads , driving the Confederates into Prentiss 's old camps . Nelson resumed his attack and seized the heights overlooking Locust Grove Branch by late afternoon . Beauregard 's final counterattack was flanked and repulsed when Grant moved Col. James C. Veatch 's brigade forward . 
 = = = Confederate retreat = = = 
 Realizing that he had lost the initiative , was low on ammunition and food , and had more than 10 @,@ 000 of his men killed , wounded , or missing , Beauregard could go no further . He withdrew beyond Shiloh Church , leaving 5 @,@ 000 men under Breckinridge as a covering force , and massed Confederate batteries at the church and on the ridge south of Shiloh Branch . Confederate forces kept the Union men in position on the Corinth Road until 5 p.m. , then began an orderly withdrawal southwest to Corinth . The exhausted Union soldiers did not pursue much farther than the original Sherman and Prentiss encampments . Lew Wallace 's division crossed Shiloh Branch and advanced nearly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , but received no support from other units and was recalled . They returned to Sherman 's camps at dark . The battle was over . 
 For long afterwards , Grant and Buell quarreled over Grant 's decision not to mount an immediate pursuit with another hour of daylight remaining . Grant cited the exhaustion of his troops , although the Confederates were certainly just as exhausted . Part of Grant 's reluctance to act could have been the unusual command relationship he had with Buell . Although Grant was the senior officer and technically was in command of both armies , Buell made it quite clear throughout the two days that he was acting independently . 
 = = Fallen Timbers , April 8 = = 
 On April 8 , Grant sent Sherman south along the Corinth Road on a reconnaissance in force to confirm that the Confederates had retreated , or if they were regrouping to resume their attacks . Grant 's army lacked the large organized cavalry units that would have been better suited for reconnaissance and vigorous pursuit of a retreating enemy . Sherman marched with two infantry brigades from his division , along with two battalions of cavalry , and met Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Wood 's division of Buell 's army . Six miles ( 10 km ) southwest of Pittsburg Landing , Sherman 's men came upon a clear field in which an extensive camp was erected , including a Confederate field hospital . The camp was protected by 300 troopers of Confederate cavalry , commanded by Col. Nathan Bedford Forrest . The road approaching the field was covered by fallen trees for more than 200 yards ( 180 m ) . 
 As skirmishers from the 77th Ohio Infantry approached , having difficulty clearing the fallen timber , Forrest ordered a charge . The wild melee , with Confederate troops firing shotguns and revolvers and brandishing sabers , nearly resulted in Sherman 's capture . As Col. Jesse Hildebrand 's brigade began forming in line of battle , the Southern troopers started to retreat at the sight of the strong force , and Forrest , who was well in advance of his men , came within a few yards of the Union soldiers before realizing he was all alone . Sherman 's men yelled out , " Kill him ! Kill him and his horse ! " A Union soldier shoved his musket into Forrest 's side and fired , striking him above the hip , penetrating to near the spine . Although he was seriously wounded , Forrest was able to stay on horseback and escape ; he survived both the wound and the war . The Union lost about 100 men , most of them captured during Forrest 's charge , in an incident that has been remembered with the name " Fallen Timbers " . After capturing the Confederate field hospital , Sherman encountered the rear of Breckinridge 's covering force , but determined the enemy was making no signs of renewing its attack and withdrew back to the Union camps . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reactions and effects = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the battle , Northern newspapers vilified Grant for his performance during the battle on April 6 , especially for being surprised and unprepared . Reporters , many far from the battle , spread the story that Grant had been drunk , falsely alleging that this had resulted in many of his men being bayoneted in their tents because of a lack of defensive preparedness . Despite the Union victory , Grant 's reputation suffered in Northern public opinion . Many credited Buell with taking control of the broken Union forces and leading them to victory on April 7 . Calls for Grant 's removal overwhelmed the White House . President Lincoln replied with one of his most famous quotations about Grant : " I can 't spare this man ; he fights . " Although all of the Union division commanders fought well , Sherman emerged as an immediate hero after Grant and Halleck commended him especially . His steadfastness under fire and amid chaos atoned for his previous melancholy and his defensive lapses preceding the battle . In retrospect , however , Grant is recognized positively for the clear judgment he was able to retain under the strenuous circumstances , and his ability to perceive the larger tactical picture that ultimately resulted in victory on the second day . 
 = = = Subsequent events = = = 
 Nevertheless , Grant 's career suffered temporarily in the aftermath of Shiloh . Halleck combined and reorganized his armies , relegating Grant to the powerless position of second @-@ in @-@ command . In late April and May , the Union armies , under Halleck 's personal command , advanced slowly toward Corinth and captured it , while an amphibious force on the Mississippi River destroyed the Confederates ' River Defense Fleet and captured Memphis , Tennessee . Halleck was promoted to be general in chief of all the Union armies . With Halleck 's departure to the East , Grant was restored to command and eventually pushed down the Mississippi River to besiege Vicksburg , Mississippi . After the surrender of Vicksburg and the fall of Port Hudson in the summer of 1863 , the Mississippi River was under Union control and the Confederacy was cut in two . Command of the Army of Mississippi fell to Braxton Bragg , who was promoted to full general on April 6 , and during the fall of 1862 , he led it on an unsuccessful invasion of Kentucky , culminating in his retreat from the Battle of Perryville . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The two @-@ day battle of Shiloh , the costliest in American history up to that time , resulted in the defeat of the Confederate army and frustration of Johnston 's plans to prevent the two Union armies in Tennessee from joining together . Union casualties were 13 @,@ 047 ( 1 @,@ 754 killed , 8 @,@ 408 wounded , and 2 @,@ 885 missing ) ; Grant 's army bore the brunt of the fighting over the two days , with casualties of 1 @,@ 513 killed , 6 @,@ 601 wounded , and 2 @,@ 830 missing or captured . Confederate casualties were 10 @,@ 699 ( 1 @,@ 728 killed , 8 @,@ 012 wounded , and 959 missing or captured ) . The dead included the Confederate army 's commander , Albert Sidney Johnston ; the highest ranking Union general killed was W. H. L. Wallace . Both sides were shocked at the carnage . Three more years of such bloodshed remained and eight larger and bloodier battles were yet to come . Grant later came to realize that his prediction of one great battle bringing the war to a close would probably not occur . The war would continue , at great cost in casualties and resources , until the Confederacy succumbed or the Union was divided . Grant also learned a valuable personal lesson on preparedness that ( mostly ) served him well for the rest of the war . 
 = = Battlefield preservation = = 
 Shiloh 's importance as a Civil War battle , coupled with the lack of widespread agricultural or industrial development in the battle area after the war , led to its development as one of the first five battlefields restored by the federal government in the 1890s . Government involvement eventually proved insufficient to preserve the land on which the battle took place . ( The federal government had saved just over 2 @,@ 000 acres at Shiloh by 1897 , and consolidated those gains by adding another 1 @,@ 700 acres by 1954 . ) Preservation eventually slowed . Since 1954 , only 300 additional acres of the saved land had been preserved . Private preservation organizations stepped in to fill the void . The Civil War Trust became the primary agent of these efforts , preserving 1 @,@ 158 acres at Shiloh since its inception . The land preserved by the Trust at Shiloh included tracts over which Confederate divisions passed as they fought Grant 's men on the battle 's first day and their retreat during the Union counteroffensive on day two . A 2012 campaign focused in particular on a section of land which was part of the Confederate right flank on day one and on several tracts which were part of the Battle of Fallen Timbers . 
 Shiloh National Military Park is managed by the National Park Service . 
 = = Honors and commemoration = = 
 The United States Postal Service released a commemorative stamp on the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Shiloh , first issued through the Shiloh , Tennessee , Post Office on April 7 , 1962 . It was the second in a series of five stamps marking the Civil War Centennial . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Battle of Shiloh was depicted in the 1962 film How the West Was Won , directed by John Ford . The all @-@ star cast includes ( in alphabetical order ) Carroll Baker , Lee J. Cobb , Henry Fonda , Carolyn Jones , Karl Malden , Gregory Peck , George Peppard , Robert Preston , Debbie Reynolds , James Stewart , Eli Wallach , John Wayne , and Richard Widmark . The film is narrated by Spencer Tracy . 
 Simulation games The Battle of Shiloh was depicted in the wargame " Bloody April : The Battle of Shiloh , 1862 " , published in 1979 by SPI ( Simulation Publications Inc ) . The game is a grand @-@ tactical , regimental @-@ level simulation , and is the 2nd game in the SPI " Great Battles of the American Civil War " game system , following " Terrible Swift Sword " ( Gettysburg ) . With 1200 unit counters and two maps , the game is of unusual size and complexity . It is now out of print . 
 In May 2016 , " Bloody April " , a computer game based on the SPI title was released by <unk> Games , Ltd . ( Scotland ) , for iPhone / iPad / Mac platforms . This single @-@ player game ( with computer opponent ) presents several scenarios covering the two @-@ day battle . 
 = = = Memoirs and primary sources = = = 
 Grant , Ulysses S. Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant . 2 vols . Charles L. Webster & Company , 1885 – 86 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 67 @-@ 9 . 
 U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1880 – 1901 . 
 = I. M. Pei = 
 Ieoh Ming Pei ( born April 26 , 1917 ) , commonly known as I. M. Pei , is a Chinese American architect . In 1948 , Pei was recruited by New York real estate magnate William Zeckendorf . There he spent seven years before establishing his own independent design firm I. M. Pei & Associates in 1955 , which became I. M. Pei & Partners in 1966 and later in 1989 became Pei Cobb Freed & Partners . Pei retired from full @-@ time practice in 1990 . Since then , he has taken on work as an architectural consultant primarily from his sons ' architectural firm Pei Partnership Architects . His first major recognition came with the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado ; his new stature led to his selection as chief architect for the John F. Kennedy Library in Massachusetts . He went on to design Dallas City Hall and the East Building of the National Gallery of Art . 
 He returned to China for the first time in 1975 to design a hotel at Fragrant Hills , and designed Bank of China Tower , Hong Kong , a skyscraper in Hong Kong for the Bank of China fifteen years later . In the early 1980s , Pei was the focus of controversy when he designed a glass @-@ and @-@ steel pyramid for the Musée du Louvre in Paris . He later returned to the world of the arts by designing the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas , the Miho Museum in Japan , the Suzhou Museum in Suzhou , and the Museum of Islamic Art in Qatar . 
 Pei has won a wide variety of prizes and awards in the field of architecture , including the AIA Gold Medal in 1979 , the first Praemium Imperiale for Architecture in 1989 , and the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Cooper @-@ Hewitt , National Design Museum in 2003 . In 1983 , he won the Pritzker Prize , sometimes called the Nobel Prize of architecture . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Pei 's ancestry traces back to the Ming Dynasty , when his family moved from Anhui province to Suzhou . Finding wealth in the sale of medicinal herbs , the family stressed the importance of helping the less fortunate . Ieoh Ming Pei was born on April 26 , 1917 to <unk> Pei and Lien Kwun , and the family moved to Hong Kong one year later . The family eventually included five children . As a boy , Pei was very close to his mother , a devout Buddhist who was recognized for her skills as a flautist . She invited him , his brothers , and his sisters to join her on meditation retreats . His relationship with his father was less intimate . Their interactions were respectful but distant . 
 Pei 's ancestors ' success meant that the family lived in the upper echelons of society , but Pei said his father was " not cultivated in the ways of the arts " . The younger Pei , drawn more to music and other cultural forms than to his father 's domain of banking , explored art on his own . " I have cultivated myself " , he said later . 
 At the age of ten , Pei moved with his family to Shanghai after his father was promoted . Pei attended Saint Johns Middle School , run by Protestant missionaries . Academic discipline was rigorous ; students were allowed only one half @-@ day each month for leisure . Pei enjoyed playing billiards and watching Hollywood movies , especially those of Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin . He also learned rudimentary English skills by reading the Bible and novels by Charles Dickens . 
 Shanghai 's many international elements gave it the name " Paris of the East " . The city 's global architectural flavors had a profound influence on Pei , from the Bund waterfront area to the Park Hotel , built in 1934 . He was also impressed by the many gardens of Suzhou , where he spent the summers with extended family and regularly visited a nearby ancestral shrine . The <unk> Garden , built in the 14th century by a Buddhist monk , was especially influential . Its unusual rock formations , stone bridges , and waterfalls remained etched in Pei 's memory for decades . He spoke later of his fondness for the garden 's blending of natural and human @-@ built structures . 
 Soon after the move to Shanghai , Pei 's mother developed cancer . As a pain reliever , she was prescribed opium , and assigned the task of preparing her pipe to Pei . She died shortly after his thirteenth birthday , and he was profoundly upset . The children were sent to live with extended family ; their father became more consumed by his work and more physically distant . Pei said : " My father began living his own separate life pretty soon after that . " His father later married a woman named Aileen , who moved to New York later in her life . 
 = = Education and formative years = = 
 As Pei neared the end of his secondary education , he decided to study at an overseas university . He was accepted to a number of schools , but decided to enroll at the University of Pennsylvania . Pei 's choice had two roots . While studying in Shanghai , he had closely examined the catalogs for various institutions of higher learning around the world . The architectural program at the University of Pennsylvania stood out to him . The other major factor was Hollywood . Pei was fascinated by the representations of college life in the films of Bing Crosby , which differed tremendously from the academic atmosphere in China . " College life in the U.S. seemed to me to be mostly fun and games " , he said in 2000 . " Since I was too young to be serious , I wanted to be part of it ... You could get a feeling for it in Bing Crosby 's movies . College life in America seemed very exciting to me . It 's not real , we know that . Nevertheless , at that time it was very attractive to me . I decided that was the country for me . " 
 In 1935 Pei boarded the SS President Coolidge and sailed to San Francisco , then traveled by train to Philadelphia . What he found , however , differed vastly from his expectations . Professors at the University of Pennsylvania based their teaching in the Beaux @-@ Arts style , rooted in the classical traditions of Greece and Rome . Pei was more intrigued by modern architecture , and also felt intimidated by the high level of drafting proficiency shown by other students . He decided to abandon architecture and transferred to the engineering program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) . Once he arrived , however , the dean of the architecture school commented on his eye for design and convinced Pei to return to his original major . 
 MIT 's architecture faculty was also focused on the Beaux @-@ Arts school , and Pei found himself uninspired by the work . In the library he found three books by the Swiss @-@ French architect Charles @-@ Édouard Jeanneret @-@ Gris , better known as Le Corbusier . Pei was inspired by the innovative designs of the new International style , characterized by simplified form and the use of glass and steel materials . Le Corbusier visited MIT in November 1935 , an occasion which powerfully affected Pei : " The two days with Le Corbusier , or ' <unk> ' as we used to call him , were probably the most important days in my architectural education . " Pei was also influenced by the work of US architect Frank Lloyd Wright . In 1938 he drove to Spring Green , Wisconsin , to visit Wright 's famous Taliesin building . After waiting for two hours , however , he left without meeting Wright . 
 Although he disliked the Beaux @-@ Arts emphasis at MIT , Pei excelled in his studies . " I certainly don 't regret the time at MIT " , he said later . " There I learned the science and technique of building , which is just as essential to architecture . " Pei received his Bachelor of Architecture degree in 1940 . He planned to return to China immediately afterward , but the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War forced him to change his plans . Pei 's father urged him to remain in the United States , and he worked for two years at the Boston engineering firm of Stone & Webster . 
 While visiting New York City in the late ' 30s , Pei met a Wellesley College student named Eileen Loo . They began dating and they married in the spring of 1942 . She enrolled in the landscape architecture program at Harvard University , and Pei was thus introduced to members of the faculty at Harvard 's Graduate School of Design ( GSD ) . He was excited by the lively atmosphere , and joined the GSD in December 1942 . 
 Less than a month later , Pei suspended his work at Harvard to join the National Defense Research Committee , which coordinated scientific research into US weapons technology during World War II . Pei 's background in architecture was seen as a considerable asset ; one member of the committee told him : " If you know how to build you should also know how to destroy . " The fight against Germany was ending , so he focused on the Pacific War . The US realized that its bombs used against the stone buildings of Europe would be ineffective against Japanese cities , mostly constructed from wood and paper ; Pei was assigned to work on incendiary bombs . Pei spent two and a half years with the NDRC , but has revealed few details . 
 In 1945 Eileen gave birth to a son , T 'ing Chung ; she withdrew from the landscape architecture program in order to care for him . Pei returned to Harvard in the autumn of 1945 , and received a position as assistant professor of design . The GSD was developing into a hub of resistance to the Beaux @-@ Arts orthodoxy . At the center were members of the Bauhaus , a European architectural movement that had advanced the cause of modernist design . The Nazi regime had condemned the Bauhaus school , and its leaders left Germany . Two of these , Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer , took positions at the Harvard GSD . Their iconoclastic focus on modern architecture appealed to Pei , and he worked closely with both men . 
 One of Pei 's design projects at the GSD was a plan for an art museum in Shanghai . He wanted to create a mood of Chinese authenticity in the architecture without using traditional materials or styles . The design was based on straight modernist structures , organized around a central courtyard garden , with other similar natural settings arranged nearby . It was very well received ; Gropius , in fact , called it " the best thing done in [ my ] master class " . Pei received his master 's degree in 1946 , and taught at Harvard for another two years . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1948 – 56 : Early career with Webb and Knapp = = = 
 In the spring of 1948 Pei was recruited by New York real estate magnate William Zeckendorf to join a staff of architects for his firm of Webb and Knapp to design buildings around the country . Pei found Zeckendorf 's personality the opposite of his own ; his new boss was known for his loud speech and gruff demeanor . Nevertheless , they became good friends and Pei found the experience personally enriching . Zeckendorf was well connected politically , and Pei enjoyed learning about the social world of New York 's city planners . 
 His first project for Webb and Knapp was an apartment building with funding from the Housing Act of 1949 . Pei 's design was based on a circular tower with concentric rings . The areas closest to the supporting pillar handled utilities and circulation ; the apartments themselves were located toward the outer edge . Zeckendorf loved the design and even showed it off to Le Corbusier when they met . The cost of such an unusual design was too high , however , and the building never moved beyond the model stage . 
 Pei finally saw his architecture come to life in 1949 , when he designed a two @-@ story corporate building for Gulf Oil in Atlanta , Georgia . The building was demolished in February 2013 although the front facade will be retained as part of an apartment development . His use of marble for the exterior curtain wall brought praise from the journal Architectural Forum . Pei 's designs echoed the work of Mies van der Rohe in the beginning of his career as also shown in his own weekend @-@ house in Katonah in 1952 . Soon Pei was so inundated with projects that he asked Zeckendorf for assistants , which he chose from his associates at the GSD , including Henry N. Cobb and Ulrich Franzen . They set to work on a variety of proposals , including the Roosevelt Field Shopping Mall . The team also redesigned the Webb and Knapp office building , transforming Zeckendorf 's office into a circular space with teak walls and a glass clerestory . They also installed a control panel into the desk that allowed their boss to control the lighting in his office . The project took one year and exceeded its budget , but Zeckendorf was delighted with the results . 
 In 1952 Pei and his team began work on a series of projects in Denver , Colorado . The first of these was the Mile High Center , which compressed the core building into less than twenty @-@ five percent of the total site ; the rest is adorned with an exhibition hall and fountain @-@ dotted plazas . One block away , Pei 's team also redesigned Denver 's Courthouse Square , which combined office spaces , commercial venues , and hotels . These projects helped Pei conceptualize architecture as part of the larger urban geography . " I learned the process of development , " he said later , " and about the city as a living organism . " These lessons , he said , became essential for later projects . The hyperbolic paraboloid structure was removed when the Denver Pavilions facility was constructed . In 1982 , he returned to design the 16th Street Mall , essentially converting a street into a pedestrian only shopping district . 
 Pei and his team also designed a united urban area for Washington , D.C. , L 'Enfant Plaza ( named for French @-@ American architect Pierre Charles L 'Enfant ) . Pei 's associate <unk> <unk> was the lead architect for the plaza 's North Building ( 955 L 'Enfant Plaza SW ) and South Building ( 490 L 'Enfant Plaza SW ) . Vlastimil Koubek was the architect for the East Building ( L 'Enfant Plaza Hotel , located at 480 L 'Enfant Plaza SW ) , and for the Center Building ( 475 L 'Enfant Plaza SW ; now the United States Postal Service headquarters ) . The team set out with a broad vision that was praised by both the Washington Post and Washington Star ( which rarely agreed on anything ) , but funding problems forced revisions and a significant reduction in scale . 
 In 1955 Pei 's group took a step toward institutional independence from Webb and Knapp by establishing a new firm called I. M. Pei & Associates . ( The name changed later to I. M. Pei & Partners . ) They gained the freedom to work with other companies , but continued working primarily with Zeckendorf . The new firm distinguished itself through the use of detailed architectural models . They took on the Kips Bay residential area on the east side of Manhattan , where Pei set up Kips Bay Towers , two large long towers of apartments with recessed windows ( to provide shade and privacy ) in a neat grid , adorned with rows of trees . Pei involved himself in the construction process at Kips Bay , even inspecting the bags of concrete to check for consistency of color . 
 The company continued its urban focus with the Society Hill project in central Philadelphia . Pei designed the Society Hill Towers , a three @-@ building residential block injecting cubist design into the 18th @-@ century milieu of the neighborhood . As with previous projects , abundant green spaces were central to Pei 's vision , which also added traditional townhouses to aid the transition from classical to modern design . 
 From 1958 to 1963 Pei and Ray Affleck developed a key downtown block of Montreal in a phased process that involved one of Pei 's most admired structures in the commonwealth , the cruciform tower known as the Royal Bank Plaza ( Place Ville Marie ) . According to the Canadian Encyclopedia " its grand plaza and lower office buildings , designed by internationally famous US architect I. M. Pei , helped to set new standards for architecture in Canada in the 1960s ... The tower 's smooth aluminum and glass surface and crisp unadorned geometric form demonstrate Pei 's adherence to the mainstream of 20th @-@ century modern design . " 
 Although these projects were satisfying , Pei wanted to establish an independent name for himself . In 1959 he was approached by MIT to design a building for its Earth science program . The Green Building continued the grid design of Kips Bay and Society Hill . The pedestrian walkway at the ground floor , however , was prone to sudden gusts of wind , which embarrassed Pei . " Here I was from MIT , " he said , " and I didn 't know about wind @-@ tunnel effects . " At the same time , he designed the Luce Memorial Chapel in at <unk> University in Taichung , Taiwan . The soaring structure , commissioned by the same organisation that had run his middle school in Shanghai , broke severely from the cubist grid patterns of his urban projects . 
 The challenge of coordinating these projects took an artistic toll on Pei . He found himself responsible for acquiring new building contracts and supervising the plans for them . As a result , he felt disconnected from the actual creative work . " Design is something you have to put your hand to , " he said . " While my people had the luxury of doing one job at a time , I had to keep track of the whole enterprise . " Pei 's dissatisfaction reached its peak at a time when financial problems began plaguing Zeckendorf 's firm . I. M. Pei and Associates officially broke from Webb and Knapp in 1960 , which benefited Pei creatively but pained him personally . He had developed a close friendship with Zeckendorf , and both men were sad to part ways . 
 = = = = NCAR and Related Projects = = = = 
 Pei was able to return to hands @-@ on design when he was approached in 1961 by Walter Orr Roberts to design the new Mesa Laboratory for the National Center for Atmospheric Research outside Boulder , Colorado . The project differed from Pei 's earlier urban work ; it would rest in an open area in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains . He drove with his wife around the region , visiting assorted buildings and surveying the natural environs . He was impressed by the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs , but felt it was " detached from nature " . 
 The conceptualization stages were important for Pei , presenting a need and an opportunity to break from the Bauhaus tradition . He later recalled the long periods of time he spent in the area : " I recalled the places I had seen with my mother when I was a little boy — the mountaintop Buddhist retreats . There in the Colorado mountains , I tried to listen to the silence again — just as my mother had taught me . The investigation of the place became a kind of religious experience for me . " Pei also drew inspiration from the Mesa Verde cliff dwellings of the Ancient Pueblo Peoples ; he wanted the buildings to exist in harmony with their natural surroundings . To this end , he called for a rock @-@ treatment process that could color the buildings to match the nearby mountains . He also set the complex back on the mesa overlooking the city , and designed the approaching road to be long , winding , and indirect . 
 Roberts disliked Pei 's initial designs , referring to them as " just a bunch of towers " . Roberts intended his comments as typical of scientific experimentation , rather than artistic critique ; still , Pei was frustrated . His second attempt , however , fit Roberts ' vision perfectly : a spaced @-@ out series of clustered buildings , joined by lower structures and complemented by two underground levels . The complex uses many elements of cubist design , and the walkways are arranged to increase the probability of casual encounters among colleagues . 
 Once the laboratory was built , several problems with its construction became apparent . Leaks in the roof caused difficulties for researchers , and the shifting of clay soil beneath caused cracks in the buildings which were expensive to repair . Still , both architect and project manager were pleased with the final result . Pei refers to the NCAR complex as his " breakout building " , and he remained a friend of Roberts until the scientist died in March 1990 . 
 The success of NCAR brought renewed attention to Pei 's design acumen . He was recruited to work on a variety of projects , including the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University , the <unk> terminal at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City , and dormitories at New College of Florida . 
 = = = = Kennedy Library = = = = 
 After President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 , his family and friends discussed how to construct a library that would serve as a fitting memorial . A committee was formed to advise Kennedy 's widow Jacqueline , who would make the final decision . The group deliberated for months and considered many famous architects . Eventually , Kennedy chose Pei to design the library , based on two considerations . First , she appreciated the variety of ideas he had used for earlier projects . " He didn 't seem to have just one way to solve a problem , " she said . " He seemed to approach each commission thinking only of it and then develop a way to make something beautiful . " Ultimately , however , Kennedy made her choice based on her personal connection with Pei . Calling it " really an emotional decision " , she explained : " He was so full of promise , like Jack ; they were born in the same year . I decided it would be fun to take a great leap with him . " 
 The project was plagued with problems from the outset . The first was scope . President Kennedy had begun considering the structure of his library soon after taking office , and he wanted to include archives from his administration , a museum of personal items , and a political science institute . After the assassination , the list expanded to include a fitting memorial tribute to the slain president . The variety of necessary inclusions complicated the design process and caused significant delays . 
 Pei 's first proposed design included a large glass pyramid that would fill the interior with sunlight , meant to represent the optimism and hope that Kennedy 's administration had symbolized for so many in the US . Mrs. Kennedy liked the design , but resistance began in Cambridge , the first proposed site for the building , as soon as the project was announced . Many community members worried that the library would become a tourist attraction , causing particular problems with traffic congestion . Others worried that the design would clash with the architectural feel of nearby Harvard Square . By the mid @-@ 70s , Pei tried proposing a new design , but the library 's opponents resisted every effort . These events pained Pei , who had sent all three of his sons to Harvard , and although he rarely discussed his frustration , it was evident to his wife . " I could tell how tired he was by the way he opened the door at the end of the day , " she said . " His footsteps were dragging . It was very hard for I. M. to see that so many people didn 't want the building . " 
 Finally the project moved to Columbia Point , near the University of Massachusetts Boston . The new site was less than ideal ; it was located on an old landfill , and just over a large sewage pipe . Pei 's architectural team added more fill to cover the pipe and developed an elaborate ventilation system to conquer the odor . A new design was unveiled , combining a large square glass @-@ enclosed atrium with a triangular tower and a circular walkway . 
 The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum was dedicated on October 20 , 1979 . Critics generally liked the finished building , but the architect himself was unsatisfied . The years of conflict and compromise had changed the nature of the design , and Pei felt that the final result lacked its original passion . " I wanted to give something very special to the memory of President Kennedy , " he said in 2000 . " It could and should have been a great project . " Pei 's work on the Kennedy project boosted his reputation as an architect of note . 
 = = = = " Pei Plan " in Oklahoma City = = = = 
 The Pei Plan was an urban redevelopment initiative designed for downtown Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , in the 1960s and 1970s . It is the informal name for two related commissions by Pei – namely the Central Business District General Neighborhood Renewal Plan ( design completed 1964 ) and the Central Business District Project I @-@ A Development Plan ( design completed 1966 ) . It was formally adopted in 1965 , and implemented in various public and private phases throughout the 1960s and 1970s . 
 The plan called for the demolition of hundreds of old downtown structures in favor of renewed parking , office building , and retail developments , in addition to public projects such as the Myriad Convention Center and the Myriad Botanical Gardens . It was the dominant template for downtown development in Oklahoma City from its inception through the 1970s . The plan generated mixed results and opinion , largely succeeding in re @-@ developing office building and parking infrastructure but failing to attract its anticipated retail and residential development . Significant public resentment also developed as a result of the destruction of multiple historic structures . As a result , Oklahoma City 's leadership avoided large @-@ scale urban planning for downtown throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , until the passage of the Metropolitan Area Projects ( MAPS ) initiative in 1993 . 
 = = = = Dallas City Hall = = = = 
 Kennedy 's assassination led indirectly to another commission for Pei 's firm . In 1964 the acting mayor , Erik Jonsson , began working to change the community 's image . Dallas was known and disliked as the city where the president had been killed , but Jonsson began a program designed to initiate a community renewal . One of the goals was a new city hall , which could be a " symbol of the people " . Jonsson , a co @-@ founder of Texas Instruments , learned about Pei from his associate Cecil Howard Green , who had recruited the architect for MIT 's Earth Sciences building . 
 Pei 's approach to the new Dallas City Hall mirrored those of other projects ; he surveyed the surrounding area and worked to make the building fit . In the case of Dallas , he spent days meeting with residents of the city and was impressed by their civic pride . He also found that the skyscrapers of the downtown business district dominated the skyline , and sought to create a building which could face the tall buildings and represent the importance of the public sector . He spoke of creating " a public @-@ private dialogue with the commercial high @-@ rises " . 
 Working with his associate Theodore <unk> , Pei developed a design centered on a building with a top much wider than the bottom ; the facade leans at an angle of 34 degrees . A plaza stretches out before the building , and a series of support columns holds it up . It was influenced by Le Corbusier 's High Court building in Chandigarh , India ; Pei sought to use the significant overhang to unify building and plaza . The project cost much more than initially expected , and took 11 years . Revenue was secured in part by including a subterranean parking garage . The interior of the city hall is large and spacious ; windows in the ceiling above the eighth floor fill the main space with light . 
 The city of Dallas received the building well , and a local television news crew found unanimous approval of the new city hall when it officially opened to the public in 1978 . Pei himself considered the project a success , even as he worried about the arrangement of its elements . He said : " It 's perhaps stronger than I would have liked ; it 's got more strength than finesse . " He felt that his relative lack of experience left him without the necessary design tools to refine his vision , but the community liked the city hall enough to invite him back . Over the years he went on to design five additional buildings in the Dallas area . 
 = = = = Hancock Tower , Boston = = = = 
 While Pei and <unk> were coordinating the Dallas project , their associate Henry Cobb had taken the helm for a commission in Boston . John Hancock Insurance chairman Robert Slater hired I. M. Pei & Partners to design a building that could overshadow the Prudential Tower , erected by their rival . 
 After the firm 's first plan was discarded due to a need for more office space , Cobb developed a new plan around a towering parallelogram , slanted away from the Trinity Church and accented by a wedge cut into each narrow side . To minimize the visual impact , the building was covered in large reflective glass panels ; Cobb said this would make the building a " background and foil " to the older structures around it . When the Hancock Tower was finished in 1976 , it was the tallest building in New England . 
 Serious issues of execution became evident in the tower almost immediately . Many glass panels fractured in a windstorm during construction in 1973 . Some detached and fell to the ground , causing no injuries but sparking concern among Boston residents . In response , the entire tower was <unk> with smaller panels . This significantly increased the cost of the project . Hancock sued the glass manufacturers , Libbey @-@ Owens @-@ Ford , as well as I. M. Pei & Partners , for submitting plans that were " not good and workmanlike " . LOF countersued Hancock for defamation , accusing Pei 's firm of poor use of their materials ; I. M. Pei & Partners sued LOF in return . All three companies settled out of court in 1981 . 
 The project became an albatross for Pei 's firm . Pei himself refused to discuss it for many years . The pace of new commissions slowed and the firm 's architects began looking overseas for opportunities . Cobb worked in Australia and Pei took on jobs in Singapore , Iran , and Kuwait . Although it was a difficult time for everyone involved , Pei later reflected with patience on the experience . " Going through this trial toughened us , " he said . " It helped to cement us as partners ; we did not give up on each other . " 
 = = = = National Gallery East Building , Washington , DC = = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , directors of the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , declared the need for a new building . Paul Mellon , a primary benefactor of the gallery and a member of its building committee , set to work with his assistant J. Carter Brown ( who became gallery director in 1969 ) to find an architect . The new structure would be located to the east of the original building , and tasked with two functions : offer a large space for public appreciation of various popular collections ; and house office space as well as archives for scholarship and research . They likened the scope of the new facility to the Library of Alexandria . After inspecting Pei 's work at the Des Moines Art Center in Iowa and the Johnson Museum at Cornell University , they offered him the commission . 
 Pei took to the project with vigor , and set to work with two young architects he had recently recruited to the firm , William Pedersen and Yann Weymouth . Their first obstacle was the unusual shape of the building site , a trapezoid of land at the intersection of Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues . Inspiration struck Pei in 1968 , when he scrawled a rough diagram of two triangles on a scrap of paper . The larger building would be the public gallery ; the smaller would house offices and archives . This triangular shape became a singular vision for the architect . As the date for groundbreaking approached , Pedersen suggested to his boss that a slightly different approach would make construction easier . Pei simply smiled and said : " No compromises . " 
 The growing popularity of art museums presented unique challenges to the architecture . Mellon and Pei both expected large crowds of people to visit the new building , and they planned accordingly . To this end , he designed a large lobby roofed with enormous skylights . Individual galleries are located along the periphery , allowing visitors to return after viewing each exhibit to the spacious main room . A large mobile sculpture by American artist Alexander Calder was later added to the lobby . Pei hoped the lobby would be exciting to the public in the same way as the central room of the Guggenheim Museum in New York . The modern museum , he said later , " must pay greater attention to its educational responsibility , especially to the young " . 
 Materials for the building 's exterior were chosen with careful precision . To match the look and texture of the original gallery 's marble walls , builders re @-@ opened the quarry in Knoxville , Tennessee , from which the first batch of stone had been harvested . The project even found and hired Malcolm Rice , a quarry supervisor who had overseen the original 1941 gallery project . The marble was cut into three @-@ inch @-@ thick panels and arranged over the concrete foundation , with darker blocks at the bottom and lighter blocks on top . 
 The East Building was honored on May 30 , 1978 , two days before its public unveiling , with a black @-@ tie party attended by celebrities , politicians , benefactors , and artists . When the building opened , popular opinion was enthusiastic . Large crowds visited the new museum , and critics generally voiced their approval . Ada Louise Huxtable wrote in The New York Times that Pei 's building was " a palatial statement of the creative accommodation of contemporary art and architecture " . The sharp angle of the smaller building has been a particular note of praise for the public ; over the years it has become stained and worn from the hands of visitors . 
 Some critics disliked the unusual design , however , and criticized the reliance on triangles throughout the building . Others took issue with the large main lobby , particularly its attempt to lure casual visitors . In his review for Artforum , critic Richard Hennessy described a " shocking fun @-@ house atmosphere " and " aura of ancient Roman patronage " . One of the earliest and most vocal critics , however , came to appreciate the new gallery once he saw it in person . Allan Greenberg had scorned the design when it was first unveiled , but wrote later to J. Carter Brown : " I am forced to admit that you are right and I was wrong ! The building is a masterpiece . " 
 Starting in 2005 , the joints attaching the marble panels to the walls began to show signs of strain , creating a risk of panels falling off the building onto the public below . In 2008 officials decided that it would be necessary to remove and reinstall all the panels . The project is scheduled for completion in 2013 . 
 = = = = Fragrant Hills , China = = = = 
 After US President Richard Nixon made his famous 1972 visit to China , a wave of exchanges took place between the two countries . One of these was a delegation of the American Institute of Architects in 1974 , which Pei joined . It was his first trip back to China since leaving in 1935 . He was favorably received , returned the welcome with positive comments , and a series of lectures ensued . Pei noted in one lecture that since the 1950s Chinese architects had been content to imitate Western styles ; he urged his audience in one lecture to search China 's native traditions for inspiration . 
 In 1978 Pei was asked to initiate a project for his home country . After surveying a number of different locations , Pei fell in love with a valley that had once served as an imperial garden and hunting preserve known as Fragrant Hills . The site housed a decrepit hotel ; Pei was invited to tear it down and build a new one . As usual , he approached the project by carefully considering the context and purpose . Likewise , he considered modernist styles inappropriate for the setting . Thus , he said , it was necessary to find " a third way " . 
 After visiting his ancestral home in Suzhou , Pei created a design based on some simple but nuanced techniques he admired in traditional residential Chinese buildings . Among these were abundant gardens , integration with nature , and consideration of the relationship between enclosure and opening . Pei 's design included a large central atrium covered by glass panels that functioned much like the large central space in his East Building of the National Gallery . Openings of various shapes in walls invited guests to view the natural scenery beyond . Younger Chinese who had hoped the building would exhibit some of Cubist flavor for which Pei had become known were disappointed , but the new hotel found more favour with government officials and architects . 
 The hotel , with 325 guest rooms and a four @-@ story central atrium , was designed to fit perfectly into its natural habitat . The trees in the area were of special concern , and particular care was taken to cut down as few as possible . He worked with an expert from Suzhou to preserve and renovate a water maze from the original hotel , one of only five in the country . Pei was also meticulous about the arrangement of items in the garden behind the hotel ; he even insisted on transporting 230 short tons ( 210 t ) of rocks from a location in southwest China to suit the natural aesthetic . An associate of Pei 's said later that he never saw the architect so involved in a project . 
 During construction , a series of mistakes collided with the nation 's lack of technology to strain relations between architects and builders . Whereas 200 or so workers might have been used for a similar building in the US , the Fragrant Hill project employed over 3 @,@ 000 workers . This was mostly because the construction company lacked the sophisticated machines used in other parts of the world . The problems continued for months , until Pei had an uncharacteristically emotional moment during a meeting with Chinese officials . He later explained that his actions included " shouting and pounding the table " in frustration . The design staff noticed a difference in the manner of work among the crew after the meeting . As the opening neared , however , Pei found the hotel still needed work . He began scrubbing floors with his wife and ordered his children to make beds and vacuum floors . The project 's difficulties took an emotional and physical strain on the Pei family . 
 The Fragrant Hill Hotel opened on October 17 , 1982 but quickly fell into disrepair . A member of Pei 's staff returned for a visit several years later and confirmed the dilapidated condition of the hotel . He and Pei attributed this to the country 's general unfamiliarity with deluxe buildings . The Chinese architectural community at the time gave the structure little attention , as their interest at the time centered on the work of American <unk> such as Michael Graves . 
 = = = = Javits Convention Center , New York = = = = 
 As the Fragrant Hill project neared completion , Pei began work on the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in New York City , for which his associate James Freed served as lead designer . Hoping to create a vibrant community institution in a run @-@ down neighborhood on Manhattan 's west side , Freed developed a glass @-@ coated structure with an intricate space frame of interconnected metal rods and spheres . 
 The convention center was plagued from the start by budget problems and construction blunders . City regulations forbid a general contractor having final authority over the project , so architects and program manager Richard Kahan had to coordinate the wide array of builders , plumbers , electricians , and other workers . The forged steel globes to be used in the space frame came to the site with hairline cracks and other defects ; 12 @,@ 000 were rejected . These and other problems led to media comparisons with the disastrous Hancock Tower . One New York City official blamed Kahan for the difficulties , indicating that the building 's architectural flourishes were responsible for delays and financial crises . The Javits Center opened on April 3 , 1986 , to a generally positive reception . During the inauguration ceremonies , however , neither Freed nor Pei was recognized for their role in the project . 
 = = = = Le Grand Louvre , Paris = = = = 
 When François Mitterrand was elected President of France in 1981 , he laid out an ambitious plan for a variety of construction projects . One of these was the renovation of the Louvre Museum . Mitterrand appointed a civil servant named Emile <unk> to oversee it . After visiting museums in Europe and the United States , including the US National Gallery , he asked Pei to join the team . The architect made three secretive trips to Paris , to determine the feasibility of the project ; only one museum employee knew why he was there . Pei finally agreed that a reconstruction project was not only possible , but necessary for the future of the museum . He thus became the first foreign architect to work on the Louvre . 
 The heart of the new design included not only a renovation of the Cour Napoléon in the midst of the buildings , but also a transformation of the interiors . Pei proposed a central entrance , not unlike the lobby of the National Gallery East Building , which would link the three major buildings . Below would be a complex of additional floors for research , storage , and maintenance purposes . At the center of the courtyard he designed a glass and steel pyramid , first proposed with the Kennedy Library , to serve as entrance and anteroom skylight . It was mirrored by another inverted pyramid underneath , to reflect sunlight into the room . These designs were partly an homage to the fastidious geometry of the famous French landscape architect André Le Nôtre ( 1613 – 1700 ) . Pei also found the pyramid shape best suited for stable transparency , and considered it " most compatible with the architecture of the Louvre , especially with the faceted planes of its roofs " . 
 <unk> and Mitterrand liked the plans , but the scope of the renovation displeased Louvre director André <unk> . He resigned from his post , complaining that the project was " unfeasible " and posed " architectural risks " . The public also reacted harshly to the design , mostly because of the proposed pyramid . One critic called it a " gigantic , ruinous gadget " ; another charged Mitterrand with " despotism " for inflicting Paris with the " atrocity " . Pei estimated that 90 percent of Parisians opposed his design . " I received many angry glances in the streets of Paris , " he said . Some condemnations carried nationalistic overtones . One opponent wrote : " I am surprised that one would go looking for a Chinese architect in America to deal with the historic heart of the capital of France . " 
 Soon , however , Pei and his team won the support of several key cultural icons , including the conductor Pierre Boulez and Claude Pompidou , widow of former French President Georges Pompidou , after whom another controversial museum was named . In an attempt to soothe public ire , Pei took a suggestion from then @-@ mayor of Paris Jacques Chirac and placed a full @-@ sized cable model of the pyramid in the courtyard . During the four days of its exhibition , an estimated 60 @,@ 000 people visited the site . Some critics eased their opposition after witnessing the proposed scale of the pyramid . 
 To minimize the impact of the structure , Pei demanded a method of glass production that resulted in clear panes . The pyramid was constructed at the same time as the subterranean levels below , which caused difficulties during the building stages . As they worked , construction teams came upon an abandoned set of rooms containing 25 @,@ 000 historical items ; these were incorporated into the rest of the structure to add a new exhibition zone . 
 The new Louvre courtyard was opened to the public on October 14 , 1988 , and the Pyramid entrance was opened the following March . By this time , public opinion had softened on the new installation ; a poll found a fifty @-@ six percent approval rating for the pyramid , with twenty @-@ three percent still opposed . The newspaper Le Figaro had vehemently criticized Pei 's design , but later celebrated the tenth anniversary of its magazine supplement at the pyramid . Prince Charles of Britain surveyed the new site with curiosity , and declared it " marvelous , very exciting " . A writer in Le <unk> de Paris wrote : " The much @-@ feared pyramid has become adorable . " The experience was exhausting for Pei , but also rewarding . " After the Louvre , " he said later , " I thought no project would be too difficult . " The Louvre Pyramid has become Pei 's most famous structure . 
 = = = = Meyerson Symphony Center , Dallas = = = = 
 The opening of the Louvre Pyramid coincided with four other projects on which Pei had been working , prompting architecture critic Paul Goldberger to declare 1989 " the year of Pei " in The New York Times . It was also the year in which Pei 's firm changed its name to Pei Cobb Freed & Partners , to reflect the increasing stature and prominence of his associates . At the age of seventy @-@ two , Pei had begun thinking about retirement , but continued working long hours to see his designs come to light . 
 One of the projects took Pei back to Dallas , Texas , to design the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center . The success of city 's performing artists , particularly the Dallas Symphony Orchestra then being led by conductor Eduardo Mata , led to interest by city leaders in creating a modern center for musical arts that could rival the best halls in Europe . The organizing committee contacted 45 architects , but at first Pei did not respond , thinking that his work on the Dallas City Hall had left a negative impression . One of his colleagues from that project , however , insisted that he meet with the committee . He did and , although it would be his first concert hall , the committee voted unanimously to offer him the commission . As one member put it : " We were convinced that we would get the world 's greatest architect putting his best foot forward . " 
 The project presented a variety of specific challenges . Because its main purpose was the presentation of live music , the hall needed a design focused on acoustics first , then public access and exterior aesthetics . To this end , a professional sound technician was hired to design the interior . He proposed a shoebox auditorium , used in the acclaimed designs of top European symphony halls such as the Amsterdam Concertgebouw and Vienna Musikverein . Pei drew inspiration for his adjustments from the designs of the German architect Johann Balthasar Neumann , especially the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers . He also sought to incorporate some of the panache of the Paris Opéra designed by Charles Garnier . 
 Pei 's design placed the rigid shoebox at an angle to the surrounding street grid , connected at the north end to a long rectangular office building , and cut through the middle with an assortment of circles and cones . The design attempted to reproduce with modern features the acoustic and visual functions of traditional elements like filigree . The project was risky : its goals were ambitious and any unforeseen acoustic flaws would be virtually impossible to remedy after the hall 's completion . Pei admitted that he did not completely know how everything would come together . " I can imagine only 60 percent of the space in this building , " he said during the early stages . " The rest will be as surprising to me as to everyone else . " As the project developed , costs rose steadily and some sponsors considered withdrawing their support . Billionaire tycoon Ross Perot made a donation of US $ 10 million , on the condition that it be named in honor of Morton H. Meyerson , the longtime patron of the arts in Dallas . 
 The building opened and immediately garnered widespread praise , especially for its acoustics . After attending a week of performances in the hall , a music critic for The New York Times wrote an enthusiastic account of the experience and congratulated the architects . One of Pei 's associates told him during a party before the opening that the symphony hall was " a very mature building " ; he smiled and replied : " Ah , but did I have to wait this long ? " 
 = = = = Bank of China , Hong Kong = = = = 
 A new offer had arrived for Pei from the Chinese government in 1982 . With an eye toward the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong from the British in 1997 , authorities in China sought Pei 's aid on a new tower for the local branch of the Bank of China . The Chinese government was preparing for a new wave of engagement with the outside world and sought a tower to represent modernity and economic strength . Given the elder Pei 's history with the bank before the Communist takeover , government officials visited the 89 @-@ year @-@ old man in New York to gain approval for his son 's involvement . Pei then spoke with his father at length about the proposal . Although the architect remained pained by his experience with Fragrant Hill , he agreed to accept the commission . 
 The proposed site in Hong Kong 's Central District was less than ideal ; a tangle of highways lined it on three sides . The area had also been home to a headquarters for Japanese military police during World War II , and was notorious for prisoner torture . The small parcel of land made a tall tower necessary , and Pei had usually shied away from such projects ; in Hong Kong especially , the skyscrapers lacked any real architectural character . Lacking inspiration and unsure of how to approach the building , Pei took a weekend vacation to the family home in Katonah , New York . There he found himself experimenting with a bundle of sticks until he happened upon a cascading sequence . 
 The design that Pei developed for the Bank of China Tower was not only unique in appearance , but also sound enough to pass the city 's rigorous standards for wind @-@ resistance . The tower was planned around a visible truss structure , which distributed stress to the four corners of the base . Using the reflective glass that had become something of a trademark for him , Pei organized the facade around a series of boxed X shapes . At the top , he designed the roofs at sloping angles to match the rising aesthetic of the building . Some influential advocates of feng shui in Hong Kong and China criticized the design , and Pei and government officials responded with token adjustments . 
 As the tower neared completion , Pei was shocked to witness the government 's massacre of unarmed civilians at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 . He wrote an opinion piece for The New York Times titled " China Won 't Ever Be the Same " , in which he said that the killings " tore the heart out of a generation that carries the hope for the future of the country " . The massacre deeply disturbed his entire family , and he wrote that " China is besmirched . " 
 = = = 1990 – present : museum projects = = = 
 As the 1990s began , Pei transitioned into a role of decreased involvement with his firm . The staff had begun to shrink , and Pei wanted to dedicate himself to smaller projects allowing for more creativity . Before he made this change , however , he set to work on his last major project as active partner : The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland , Ohio . Considering his work on such bastions of high culture as the Louvre and US National Gallery , some critics were surprised by his association with what many considered a tribute to low culture . The sponsors of the hall , however , sought Pei for specifically this reason ; they wanted the building to have an aura of respectability from the beginning . As in the past , Pei accepted the commission in part because of the unique challenge it presented . 
 Using a glass wall for the entrance , similar in appearance to his Louvre pyramid , Pei coated the exterior of the main building in white metal , and placed a large cylinder on a narrow perch to serve as a performance space . The combination of off @-@ centered wraparounds and angled walls was , Pei said , designed to provide " a sense of tumultuous youthful energy , rebelling , flailing about " . 
 The building opened in 1995 , and was received with moderate praise . The New York Times called it " a fine building " , but Pei was among those who felt disappointed with the results . The museum 's early beginnings in New York combined with an unclear mission created a fuzzy understanding among project leaders for precisely what was needed . Although the city of Cleveland benefited greatly from the new tourist attraction , Pei was unhappy with it . 
 At the same time , Pei designed a new museum for Luxembourg , the Musée d 'art moderne Grand @-@ Duc Jean , commonly known as the <unk> . Drawing from the original shape of the Fort Thüngen walls where the museum was located , Pei planned to remove a portion of the original foundation . Public resistance to the historical loss forced a revision of his plan , however , and the project was nearly abandoned . The size of the building was halved , and it was set back from the original wall segments to preserve the foundation . Pei was disappointed with the alterations , but remained involved in the building process even during construction . 
 In 1995 Pei was hired to design an extension to the Deutsches <unk> Museum , or German Historical Museum in Berlin . Returning to the challenge of the East Building of the US National Gallery , Pei worked to combine a modernist approach with a classical main structure . He described the glass cylinder addition as a " beacon " , and topped it with a glass roof to allow plentiful sunlight inside . Pei had difficulty working with German government officials on the project ; their utilitarian approach clashed with his passion for aesthetics . " They thought I was nothing but trouble " , he said . 
 Pei also worked at this time on two projects for a new Japanese religious movement called Shinji <unk> . He was approached by the movement 's spiritual leader , <unk> Koyama , who impressed the architect with her sincerity and willingness to give him significant artistic freedom . One of the buildings was a bell tower , designed to resemble the bachi used when playing traditional instruments like the shamisen . Pei was unfamiliar with the movement 's beliefs , but explored them in order to represent something meaningful in the tower . As he said : " It was a search for the sort of expression that is not at all technical . " 
 The experience was rewarding for Pei , and he agreed immediately to work with the group again . The new project was the Miho Museum , to display Koyama 's collection of tea ceremony artifacts . Pei visited the site in Shiga Prefecture , and during their conversations convinced Koyama to expand her collection . She conducted a global search and acquired more than 300 items showcasing the history of the Silk Road . 
 One major challenge was the approach to the museum . The Japanese team proposed a winding road up the mountain , not unlike the approach to the NCAR building in Colorado . Instead , Pei ordered a hole cut through a nearby mountain , connected to a major road via a bridge suspended from ninety @-@ six steel cables and supported by a post set into the mountain . The museum itself was built into the mountain , with 80 percent of the building underground . 
 When designing the exterior , Pei borrowed from the tradition of Japanese temples , particularly those found in nearby Kyoto . He created a concise spaceframe wrapped into French limestone and covered with a glass roof . Pei also oversaw specific decorative details , including a bench in the entrance lobby , carved from a 350 @-@ year @-@ old keyaki tree . Because of Koyama 's considerable wealth , money was rarely considered an obstacle ; estimates at the time of completion put the cost of the project at US $ 350 million . 
 During the first decade of the 2000s , Pei designed a variety of buildings , including the Suzhou Museum near his childhood home . He also designed the Museum of Islamic Art in Doha , Qatar at the request of the Al @-@ Thani Family . Although it was originally planned for the corniche road along Doha Bay , Pei convinced project coordinators to build a new island to provide the needed space . He then spent six months touring the region and surveying mosques in Spain , Syria , and Tunisia . He was especially impressed with the elegant simplicity of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo . 
 Once again , Pei sought to combine new design elements with the classical aesthetic most appropriate for the location of the building . The rectangular boxes rotate evenly to create a subtle movement , with small arched windows at regular intervals into the limestone exterior . The museum 's coordinators were pleased with the project ; its official website describes its " true splendour unveiled in the sunlight " , and speaks of " the shades of colour and the interplay of shadows paying tribute to the essence of Islamic architecture " . 
 The Macao Science Center in Macau was designed by Pei Partnership Architects in association with I. M. Pei . The project to build the science center was conceived in 2001 and construction started in 2006 . The center was completed in 2009 and opened by the Chinese President Hu Jintao . The main part of the building is a distinctive conical shape with a spiral walkway and large atrium inside , similar to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York . Galleries lead off the walkway , mainly consisting of interactive exhibits aimed at science education . The building is in a prominent position by the sea and is now a landmark of Macau . 
 = = Style and method = = 
 Pei 's style is described as thoroughly modernist , with significant cubist themes . He is known for combining traditional architectural elements with progressive designs based on simple geometric patterns . As one critic writes : " Pei has been aptly described as combining a classical sense of form with a contemporary mastery of method . " In 2000 , biographer Carter Wiseman called Pei " the most distinguished member of his Late @-@ Modernist generation still in practice " . At the same time , Pei himself rejects simple dichotomies of architectural trends . He once said : " The talk about modernism versus post @-@ modernism is unimportant . It 's a side issue . An individual building , the style in which it is going to be designed and built , is not that important . The important thing , really , is the community . How does it affect life ? " 
 Pei 's work is celebrated throughout the world of architecture . His colleague John Portman once told him : " Just once , I 'd like to do something like the East Building . " But this originality does not always bring large financial reward ; as Pei replied to the successful architect : " Just once , I 'd like to make the kind of money you do . " His concepts , moreover , are too individualized and dependent on context to give rise to a particular school of design . Pei refers to his own " analytical approach " when explaining the lack of a " Pei School " . " For me , " he said , " the important distinction is between a stylistic approach to the design ; and an analytical approach giving the process of due consideration to time , place , and purpose ... My analytical approach requires a full understanding of the three essential elements ... to arrive at an ideal balance among them . " 
 On a matter of personal style and his method of business negotiation , Mr. Pei once told a television reporter during an interview about an amusing event that happened in his career . A client was inclined to disburse less treasure for a particular design , and the architect replied " My name is I. M. Pei , not I am Not Pay . " The client paid the asking price . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 In the words of his biographer , Pei has won " every award of any consequence in his art " , including the Arnold Brunner Award from the National Institute of Arts and Letters ( 1963 ) , the Gold Medal for Architecture from the American Academy of Arts and Letters ( 1979 ) , the AIA Gold Medal ( 1979 ) , the first Praemium Imperiale for Architecture from the Japan Art Association ( 1989 ) , the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Cooper @-@ Hewitt , National Design Museum , and the 2010 Royal Gold Medal from the Royal Institute of British Architects . In 1983 he was awarded the Pritzker Prize , sometimes called the Nobel Prize of architecture . In its citation , the jury said : " Ieoh Ming Pei has given this century some of its most beautiful interior spaces and exterior forms ... His versatility and skill in the use of materials approach the level of poetry . " The prize was accompanied by a US $ 100 @,@ 000 award , which Pei used to create a scholarship for Chinese students to study architecture in the US , on the condition that they return to China to work . In being awarded the 2003 Henry C. Turner Prize by the National Building Museum , then @-@ museum board chair Carolyn Brody praised his impact on construction innovation : " His magnificent designs have challenged engineers to devise innovative structural solutions , and his exacting expectations for construction quality have encouraged contractors to achieve high standards . " 
 In 1992 , Pei was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George H.W. Bush . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pei 's wife of over seventy years , Eileen Loo , predeceased him in June 2014 . They had three sons , T 'ing Chung ( 1946 – 2003 ) , Chien Chung ( b . 1946 ) and Li Chung ( b . 1949 ) , and a daughter , Liane ( b . 1960 ) . T 'ing Chung was an urban planner and alumnus of his father 's alma mater MIT and Harvard . Chieng Chung and Li Chung , who are both Harvard Graduate School of Design alumni , founded and run Pei Partnership Architects . Liane is a lawyer . 
 = The Chase ( U.S. game show ) = 
 The Chase is an American television quiz show based on the British program of the same name . The program involves a quiz competition in which contestants attempt to win money by challenging a quiz show genius known as the " chaser " . The show premiered on August 6 , 2013 , on Game Show Network , and received a nomination at the 41st Daytime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Game Show . In the United Kingdom and Ireland the show is seen on Challenge under the title The Chase USA . 
 The series is hosted by Brooke Burns and features Mark Labbett ( nicknamed " The Beast " ) as the chaser . The American version of the show follows the same general format as the original UK version ; however , the American version of the program features three contestants instead of four . Also , while the UK and Australian versions feature one of a panel of chasers who rotate from one episode to the next , the American version features Labbett as the only chaser . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Cash Builder and individual chases = = = 
 Three new contestants compete on each episode as a team . Each contestant first plays individually against the chaser , starting with a round where they try to answer as many questions correctly as possible during a one @-@ minute rapid @-@ fire round , with each correct answer adding $ 5 @,@ 000 to their bank . After the minute is up , the contestant competes head to head against the chaser in order to retain their bank and continue to the Final Chase . During celebrity episodes , contestants start with $ 5 @,@ 000 already in the bank . 
 In the Chase , the contestant 's goal is to answer enough questions correctly to move the earned winnings into the team bank without being caught by the chaser , whose job is to catch them by capitalizing on mistakes made by the player . The contestant must answer five questions correctly without being caught to bank the money and continue to the Final Chase , providing the contestant does not play for one of two additional offers given at the start of the round . These offers include having a contestant play for a lower amount and start one step closer to the bank , while being required to answer only four questions correctly without being caught . In addition , the contestant can also play for a higher amount of money , but must instead answer six questions correctly without being caught . On rare occasions , the chaser may escalate the stakes by offering a " super offer " for an even higher amount , with the contestant being required to answer seven questions correctly without being caught . Usually , the contestant is permitted to talk briefly with his or her teammates ( if he or she has yet to play or has moved on to the Final Chase ) for advice as to which offer to take . 
 After deciding which amount to play for , the prize money is displayed on a seven @-@ space gameboard , with the appropriate number of spaces away from the bank depending upon the contestant 's decision . The chaser starts the round off of the gameboard eight spaces away from the bank . Both the contestant and chaser are then presented with the same multiple choice question , and each locks @-@ in their answer separately . After one has selected their answer , they may not change it and the other has five seconds to answer after them , otherwise they are locked out and do not advance on the gameboard . For each question the contestant answers correctly , the prize money earned moves one step closer to the team bank . For each question answered correctly by the chaser , he moves one step closer to the prize money . Additional questions are asked until the contestant reaches the end of the board ( thus banking the prize money ) , or the chaser catches the contestant eliminating them from the game . No movement is made by the contestant and / or the chaser if an incorrect answer is provided or if they are locked out by the time limit . All three contestants take part in separate rounds to determine which of them will advance to the Final Chase and how much prize money will be at stake . If all three contestants fail to win their individual chases , the team selects one contestant to play the Final Chase alone for a total of $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 000 per contestant ) . During celebrity episodes , celebrity contestants that get caught leave with $ 5 @,@ 000 for their respective charities . 
 = = = The Final Chase = = = 
 The Final Chase is played on a gameboard , with the team receiving a head start of one space for each member who advanced to this round . During the commercial break , the team chooses between two sets of questions , labeled " A " and " B " , with the chaser playing the other set of questions . The contestants have two minutes to answer as many questions as possible . After a question is asked , contestants are only permitted to respond or pass a question after first ringing @-@ in . If a contestant rings @-@ in but another contestant answers , the question is treated as a wrong regardless if the answer was correct . If there is only one contestant in the Final Chase , then he or she does not ring @-@ in . Each question answered correctly within the time limit moves the team one space ahead on the board . 
 After time expires , the chaser is then given two minutes to catch the team by correctly answering a new series of questions , with each correct answer moving him one space along the board . If the chaser answers incorrectly or passes , the clock is stopped briefly and the team is given a chance to answer the question . A correct answer pushes the chaser back one space , or moves the team ahead by one if he has not moved on to the gameboard . An incorrect answer provides no movement for the chaser at all . Regardless of the outcome , the clock begins running again and the chaser continues to answer questions . If the chaser runs out of time before catching the team , the team splits the banked money equally ; however , if the chaser catches the team before time expires , the team leaves with no money . On celebrity episodes , if the chaser catches the team before time runs out , the team leaves with $ 15 @,@ 000 divided equally . 
 = = Production = = 
 In April 2012 , Fox ordered two pilot episodes to be taped in London for consideration to be added to the network 's U.S. programming lineup . Bradley Walsh , presenter of the British version of The Chase , was featured as the show 's host , while Labbett and Jeopardy ! champion Brad Rutter were the chasers . Fox passed up the opportunity to add the series to its lineup . 
 After Fox 's plans to launch The Chase fell through , GSN , in conjunction with ITV Studios America , picked up the series with an eight episode order on April 9 , 2013 , and announced Burns as the show 's host and Labbett as the chaser on May 29 . Dan Patrick was originally considered to host the series ; however , those plans eventually fell through . The first season premiered on August 6 , 2013 . Despite the show having not yet premiered at the time , the network ordered a second season of eight episodes on July 1 , 2013 , which premiered on November 5 . On March 18 , 2014 , GSN announced plans to renew the series for a third season , with both Burns and Labbett returning to the show . The third season premiered on July 8 , 2014 . After airing nine episodes , the series went on a hiatus , before returning with five additional new season three episodes on November 11 , 2014 . On August 21 , 2014 , GSN proceeded to renew the series for a fourth season , which began airing January 27 , 2015 . After the seventh episode of the season , the series went on another hiatus ; new episodes from the fourth season resumed airing July 16 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Chase has been generally well received by critics . Michael Tyminski of Manhattan Digest gave a positive review of the series , calling it " a breath of fresh air " and praising Burns and Labbett in their respective roles . Tyminski added that while the level difficulty is not always on par with other quiz shows such as Jeopardy ! , the show avoids a " painfully slow pace " . 
 Similarly , John Teti of The A.V. Club called the show a " pretty good adaptation " of its UK counterpart , but also noted the presence of " dick @-@ related questions " in the series . Teti also maintained that although the British version of the show was " better " , the American version " still holds its own " . Additionally , The Chase was ranked number 9 on Douglas Pucci 's ( of TV Media Insights ) list of best new television shows of 2013 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Chase was also one of two GSN originals ( the other being The American Bible Challenge ) to be honored at the 41st Daytime Emmy Awards in 2014 with an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Game Show ; however , the series lost to Jeopardy ! 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The Chase has become one of the highest rated original programs in GSN 's history . The series debuted to 511 @,@ 000 total viewers during its premiere while maintaining 90 % of its audience with 461 @,@ 000 total viewers during the second episode airing that night . On January 28 , 2014 , The Chase set a new series high in terms of total viewers and adults 18 – 49 , with 827 @,@ 000 and 234 @,@ 000 viewers respectively . 
 Although the season 3 premiere fell in the ratings from its series high , earning 494 @,@ 000 viewers with only 73 @,@ 000 in the 18 – 49 demographic , the premiere of the fourth season saw a sizeable rise over the previous season 's premiere , earning 749 @,@ 000 total viewers . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 On December 18 , 2013 , Barnstorm Games released a mobile version of the game for iOS and Android . The app features Labbett as chaser and can be played by up to four people . The only differences between the app and the show are that four choices are presented for questions in the Cash Builder and the Final Chase rounds and that no Final Chase is played if all players are caught in their individual chases . 
 = Hurricane Waldo ( 1985 ) = 
 Hurricane Waldo was a Pacific hurricane that caused significant flooding in Kansas during October 1985 . After developing into a tropical depression on October 7 , it steadily intensified , becoming a tropical storm within a day . Waldo reached hurricane intensity on October 8 . After peaking as a moderate Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , it re @-@ curved to the east , making landfall at peak intensity near Culiacan . Afterward , it rapidly dissipated . In all , Waldo caused moderate damage in Sonora . The remnants of the storm combined with a cold front over the Great Plains . Significant flooding and one death was recorded in Kansas . Many rivers and creeks overflowed its banks . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Waldo originated from a developing disturbance first noted by Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) on October 5 based on data from ship reports . By 0000 UTC October 7 , a circulation became evident on satellite imagery . Based on this , the EPHC upgraded the system into a tropical depression about 300 mi ( 480 km ) west of the Mexican coast . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression began to turn to the northwest in response to a strong upper @-@ level trough over Baja California Peninsula . Passing over 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) sea surface temperatures , the tropical cyclone intensified into Tropical Storm Waldo about 12 hours after developing . The storm began to intensify rapidly . Meanwhile , the tropical storm passed 92 mi ( 148 km ) east of Socorro Island . Tropical Storm Waldo then began to turn to the north and while located 130 miles ( 210 km ) south of Baja California Sur , Waldo was upgraded into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 After reaching hurricane status the strengthening cyclone attained Category 2 hurricane status on October 9 . Shortly thereafter , a ship reported a sea level pressure of 982 mb ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) just outside the center of circulation . Meanwhile , Hurricane Waldo reached its peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Four hours after Hurricane Waldo 's peak , the storm made landfall near Culiacan . The storm rapidly dissipated during the afternoon of October 9 , while the system was located inland over Mexico . The remnants of Waldo merged with a cold front and produced heavy rains across the Great Plains and Mississippi River Valley . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In parts of Sinaloa , people were evacuated and then granted refuge in shelters . In Los Mochis , the Mexican Army was put on standby in the event the Fuerte River flooded . While no deaths or injuries were reported , much farmland and 600 houses were destroyed . The Juarez River bursts its banks , flooding at least eight neighborhoods in Culiacán . Telephone service in Los Mochis , <unk> , and Guasave was cut when a communications tower was blown over . In Los Mochis , some schools and homes were destroyed and a few trees were uprooted . A total of 10 @,@ 000 people were left homeless across the state . The peak rainfall total in Mexico from Waldo was 9 @.@ 61 inches ( 244 mm ) in <unk> / San <unk> ; heavy rain was also recorded along southern Baja California Sur . 
 In the United States , heavy rainfall prompted flood watches for most of west Texas . The National Weather Service even noted the possibility of 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rain in some areas across the state . Waldo contributed to rain heavy enough to cause some flash flooding in the Permian Basin area of Texas . Flood waters rose , leaving motorists stranded . One motorist was stranded for 30 minutes before begin rescued by another car . Odessa , Texas received about 2 in ( 51 mm ) in a four and half @-@ hour period . Torrential rainfall was recorded in Texas , but the highest official rainfall total in the United States was 6 @.@ 6 in ( 170 mm ) , recorded in Hobbs , New Mexico . Flash floods affected the southern one – third of the state from rainfall associated from Waldo . Damage was estimated between $ 100 @,@ 000 – $ 1 million ( 1985 USD ) , mostly to crops , roads , and buildings . 
 With help from a cold front , Waldo contributed to major flooding in Kansas that forced many rivers and creeks to overflow their banks . A total of 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 110 mm ) of rain fell in some locations . In the rural town of Raymond , a 52 @-@ year @-@ old man died from a heart attack while moving to higher ground due to rising floodwaters . Approximately 15 people were evacuated from their homes in Easton due to the overflow of the nearby Stranger Creek . Some of the evacuated resident slept at the nearby senior center for the night where the American Red Cross delivered items such as blankets , food , and clothes to the victims of the flood . In Kansas City , Waldo produced 1 ft ( 30 cm ) of water on roads , but none of the nearby homes received extensive damage . The Sedgwick County , the county fire department freed 35 trapped people from rising flood waters , six of which were rescued via helicopter . County workers were forced to use sandbags to prevent the dike along <unk> creek from breaking . The Salt Creek overflowed its banks ; subsequently , Highway 68 closed in Osage County . Within six days after the dissipation of Hurricane Waldo , the remnants had produced heavy rainfall as far north as Michigan with flooding recorded as far north as Iowa . Waldo 's rain were comparable to Atlantic Hurricane Gloria though the wind speeds were much lower . 
 = Hurricane Julia ( 2010 ) = 
 Hurricane Julia was the easternmost Category 4 hurricane recorded in the Atlantic basin since reliable satellite observations became available . The twelfth tropical cyclone , fifth hurricane and fourth major hurricane of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , Julia rapidly developed on September 12 from a tropical wave near Cape Verde . Passing near the islands , the system quickly organized into Tropical Storm Julia the next day . On September 14 , Julia attained hurricane status and subsequently entered a trend of rapid intensification ; the storm strengthened from a minimal hurricane to a low @-@ end Category 4 in only 24 hours . After peaking in intensity , further development was impeded as interaction with nearby Hurricane Igor began to occur ; the storm was downgraded to a tropical storm by September 18 . It subsequently moved into a region of unfavorable conditions , heading toward lower sea surface temperatures . Correspondingly , Julia entered an extratropical transition on September 20 , and advisories on the storm were discontinued by that time . 
 As Julia never posed any significant threat to land , damage related to the storm was minimal . Trace amounts of rain reportedly fell across the Cape Verde islands , causing locally light flooding and minor inconveniences . Gusts battering the territory peaked at 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , resulting in some wind damage to crops . In addition , these winds produced rough sea conditions , and high waves posed few threats along coastlines . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Julia trace back to a vigorous tropical wave , or an equatorward low @-@ pressure area , which emerged into the Atlantic along the western coast of Africa on September 11 . At the time , the system maintained deep convection and strong easterly winds , prompting the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to commence tracking the system as an area of interest . As the wave moved generally westward at 10 to 15 mph ( 16 to 24 km / h ) , a quick increase in organization as well as a significant drop in surface pressure became notable . The system continued to organize , and several hours later , the NHC noted only a slight increase would suffice for the development of a tropical cyclone . By September 12 , a tropical depression developed , and the NHC initiated advisories at 1500 UTC that day . At the time , the cyclone was situated 250 mi ( 400 km ) southeast of the southernmost islands of Cape Verde . 
 For several hours , steady strengthening continued as the depression maintained a westward track . Operationally , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Julia early on September 13 , though post @-@ analysis confirmed the storm had reached winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) twelve hours after formation . For several hours , no significant change occurred in its intensity or organization as Julia passed near Cape Verde , though the storm gradually retraced to the west @-@ northwest along the southern periphery of a deep @-@ layer ridge . Slow intensification resumed as the storm bypassed the Cape Verde islands ; by early September 14 , it displayed a ragged , banded eye @-@ like feature in satellite imagery . Due to locally high sea surface temperatures of about 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) , a period of rapid intensification subsequently commenced ; within hours , Julia attained Category 1 hurricane status . Though located over an area with relatively low oceanic heat content , Julia continued to intensify rapidly under low vertical wind shear and over favorable sea surface temperatures ; as such , the hurricane was upgraded to Category 2 status on September 15 . In less than two hours , the hurricane deepened to reach Category 3 intensity , becoming the fourth major hurricane of the season . The rapid intensification trend continued , and Julia eventually strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane six hours later . Based on satellite estimates , its winds peaked at 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 948 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 99 inHg ) , though operationally estimated at 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) and 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) , respectively . 
 Upon peaking in intensity , Julia accelerated slightly as it re @-@ curved toward the northwest along a mid to upper @-@ level low to its southwest . In addition , this system generated unfavorable southerly flow aloft , inducing a slight weakening of the storm . By early September 16 , Julia 's eye became indistinguishable on satellite images , and the storm further dropped to below major hurricane status . Upon doing so , Julia became embedded within a south @-@ southeasterly steering current along deep @-@ layer ridging in its vicinity , resulting in a more westward track . Though still a hurricane , the relatively small tropical system moved to the east of the much larger Hurricane Igor . Concurrently , Igor 's outflow began impinging on Julia 's circulation , and due to colder sea surface temperatures , the storm weakened below hurricane intensity late on September 17 . Henceforth , Julia re @-@ accelerated as it further curved northward around the contiguous ridge , nearly merging with Igor as a result . Progressively tracking to the north over the next hours , Julia subsequently executed a turn to the northeast , then to the east . Proceeding eastward , the low @-@ level center of the storm became partially exposed on September 18 ; however , for several hours thereafter , convection gradually redeveloped over its center . Despite the deep convection , vertical wind shear again increased over the system , causing the storm to enter an extratropical transition . It is estimated Julia degenerated into a post @-@ tropical low by 1800 UTC on September 20 , while located about 1095 mi ( 1750 km ) west of the Azores . The resultant storm meandered around over the Atlantic for several days , continuing generally eastward before executing an elongated loop to the south . Following this erratic track , the remnants of Hurricane Julia proceeded northwestward and came within 350 mi ( 563 km ) of Bermuda , where they were once again briefly monitored by the NHC . However , chance of redevelopment dwindled , as conditions were not conducive for tropical formation ; convection nearly diminished entirely , and the NHC discontinued monitoring the system on September 28 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Immediately upon developing into a tropical depression , Julia posed a threat to Cape Verde . At the time , at least 3 to 5 in ( 76 to 127 mm ) of precipitation was expected , with locally accumulations of up to 8 in ( 203 mm ) . In response , the Government of Cape Verde issued a tropical storm warning for the southern portion of the archipelago , which included Maio , Sao Tiago , Fogo , and Brava . The tropical storm warning remained in effect after Julia intensified into a tropical storm ; it was finally discontinued early on September 14 . 
 Since Julia stayed at sea and never directly struck land as a significant cyclone , there were no reports of major damage or casualties . Across southern Cape Verde , intermittent rains and some gusty winds were reported when the storm neared the islands . Winds reached between 24 and 30 mph ( 38 and 48 km / h ) ; the only known report of rainfall accumulations was in Sal , where no more than 0 @.@ 39 in ( 9 @.@ 9 mm ) of precipitation was recorded . During the passage of the storm , authorities canceled several local and international flights across Cape Verde . In Sao Tiago , floods triggered several landslides , resulting in the isolation of the community of <unk> Grande from roadways . Several communities also reported wind damage to <unk> crops . In addition , rough seas with waves of 9 @.@ 8 to 14 @.@ 8 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 5 m ) resulted in minor disruptions along coastlines . 
 = Hurricane Cosme ( 2007 ) = 
 Hurricane Cosme was a minimal hurricane that threatened Hawaii in mid @-@ July 2007 . The sixth tropical cyclone , third named storm and first hurricane of the 2007 Pacific hurricane season , Cosme originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the coast of Africa on June 27 and tracked westward before emerging in the eastern Pacific . A system along the wave organized , and it was classified as a tropical depression on July 14 , a tropical storm on July 15 , and a hurricane on July 16 . Cosme reached peak intensity as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , but quickly weakened due to cooler waters . Steadily decreasing in strength , the storm was downgraded to a tropical depression before passing to the south of the Hawaiian Islands . The depression crossed into the Central Pacific and degenerated into a remnant low by July 23 . 
 Because Cosme stayed far from land , effects were mostly minor . Swells up to 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) and up to 6 @.@ 94 in ( 176 mm ) of rainfall were reported , in addition to wind gusts of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . No fatalities or injuries were reported , and only minimal damage occurred . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cosme can be traced back to a tropical wave that left the coast of Africa on June 27 , 2007 . Due to a lack of associated convection , the wave was difficult to track across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) estimated that the wave emerged into the Pacific Ocean on July 8 . Because the system was embedded within the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) , development was initially slow . However , when it separated from the ITCZ on July 13 , the disturbance increased in convective organization , and was classified as Tropical Depression Six @-@ E about midway between Mexico and Hawaii . It tracked westward at 12 mph ( 19 km / h ) due to steering currents of a tropical easterly flow . Although wind shear was generally light , ocean temperatures were only marginal for tropical cyclone intensification . Forecasters experienced difficulty in locating the exact center of circulation . By July 14 , convection had steadily decreased , although the storm 's movement was initially uncertain due to its location within a broad low pressure area . Early on July 15 the depression 's appearance on satellite imagery improved , and at 1800 UTC the NHC upgraded the depression to tropical storm status , and gave it the name " Cosme " . 
 Shortly after attaining tropical storm status , the previously @-@ broad circulation consolidated as banding features developed . The inner core gradually condensed and tightened , as indicated by an <unk> @-@ E overpass . On July 16 an eye began to form and Cosme intensified to attain winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Tracking northwest towards a weakness in the mid @-@ level ridge , the cyclone continued to intensify and was upgraded to Hurricane Cosme late on July 16 , about 1 @,@ 600 mi ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) east of Hilo . The hurricane reached peak intensity with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , although due to cooler waters it quickly weakened to a tropical storm , as the eye became ragged and cloud @-@ filled . 
 By July 17 , the cloud pattern had deteriorated , and its winds decreased to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The center subsequently became exposed , with just a few thunderstorms confined to the southwest portion of the storm as it began to accelerate to the west . As easterly vertical wind shear increased , convection temporarily reformed in a concentrated area southwest of the center . As Cosme reached steadily cooler water temperatures , it was downgraded to a tropical depression late on July 18 about 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) southeast of Hilo , Hawaii ; at around the same time , the storm entered the forecast responsibility of the Central Pacific Hurricane Center . Tracking westward at 14 mph ( 23 km / h ) , maximum sustained winds were 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) with localized higher gusts . Gradually weakening , Tropical Depression Cosme passed south of the Hawaiian Islands on July 20 with a minimum central pressure of 1010 mbar . On July 22 , the depression came within 180 mi ( 290 km ) of Johnston Island , and later that day , it degenerated into a remnant low . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Initially , Cosme was predicted to make landfall on Hawaii as a tropical storm . In anticipation of the storm , the National Weather Service issued a flash flood watch for the island of Hawaii on July 20 . Also , small craft advisories were in effect for Maui and Hawaii ; wind advisories were issued for summits in those regions . High surf advisories were also put into effect for coastal areas . The Hawaii County Civil Defense prepared for the storm by planning for increases in emergency response personnel and opening of evacuation centers . County crews worked to clean out drains and culverts to prevent flooding . 
 Because the depression stayed far from land , the effects were mostly minor and little damage was reported . A strong trade wind swell north of Cosme generated waves up to 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) high . Rain bands produced up to 6 @.@ 94 in ( 176 mm ) of rainfall , causing small stream and drainage ditch flooding , as well as ponding on roadways in portions of Hilo , Puna , and Kau . The rainfall helped to relieve a persistent drought which had existed for several months . Wind gusts reached 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in southern portions of Hawaii , causing no known damage . 
 = Royal National College for the Blind = 
 The Royal National College for the Blind ( RNC ) is a co @-@ educational specialist residential college of further education based in the English city of Hereford . Students who attend the college are aged over 16 and blind or partially sighted . They can study a wide range of qualifications at RNC , from academic subjects such as English and mathematics to more vocational topics such as performing arts . Alongside regular further education subjects and vocational training , the College offers training in mobility , independent living and personal development . 
 Founded in 1871 in London as the Royal Normal College and Academy for the Blind , the college had a number of homes before moving to its campus in Hereford ; it was renamed the Royal National College for the Blind in the late 1970s . It has been a pioneer in the education of visually impaired people in Britain since the Victorian era , and , as of 2010 , is the only college for visually impaired students in the United Kingdom to have been awarded Beacon Status in recognition of its outstanding teaching and learning . 
 RNC hosts the UK 's first VI Sports Academy , having begun as the home of the first football academy for visually impaired players and the England blind football team . It hosted the 2010 World Blind Football Championship and also served as a training facility for participants in the 2012 Paralympic Games . The college is actively involved in the development of assistive technology , including student participation in the Tech Novice Cafe , run for members of the public who are not confident in computer use . Two notable devices were developed at RNC ; the Mountbatten <unk> , an electronic braille writer , and the T3 , a talking tactile device that helped with the reading of maps and diagrams . 
 Early in the 21st century , there was dramatic departmental restructuring at the college , and a significant redevelopment and modernisation of the Hereford campus . The campus , located on <unk> Lane , Hereford , is home to RNC 's teaching , residential and leisure facilities . Students live in halls of residence , which enable them to gain a level of independence within the college environment . RNC operates a leisure facility , thePoint4 , which is open to the public , and conferencing and hotel accommodation under the name Gardner Hall . Principal Mark Fisher took over from his predecessor ( Sheila Tallon ) in December 2015 . 
 The college is a registered charity ( number <unk> ) , and its Patron is Charles , Prince of Wales . There are several high @-@ profile supporters , including Dave Clarke , former captain of the England and Great Britain blind football teams . RNC has a number of notable people among its alumni , including former Home Secretary David Blunkett . The college was the subject of a 2007 film for the Channel 4 Cutting Edge documentary strand , which followed three students through their first term of study . The film won a 2008 Royal Television Society Award . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The college was established in 1871 by the English philanthropist Thomas Rhodes Armitage and the American anti @-@ slavery campaigner Francis Joseph Campbell , who lost his sight as a young boy . Campbell had originally planned to establish a college for the blind in the United States , but was persuaded by Armitage that London would be a more suitable location . At the time , English schools for the blind did not provide their students with the skills to become independent and , dissatisfied with this situation , Armitage dreamed of establishing a school whose emphasis was on music and which would prepare its students for careers as organists , piano tuners , and music teachers . 
 With donations of £ 3 @,@ 000 , the college enrolled its first two students on 1 March 1872 . Queen Victoria became its first Patron , while several prominent members of her family became Vice @-@ Patrons . Among those to become governors of the College were Duke of Westminster , Lord Shaftesbury , Lord Lichfield and the Right Hon. W. H. Smith , M.P. At the time of its founding it was called " The Royal Normal College and Academy for the Blind " , the word Normal being an American expression referring to teacher training offered by the college , with Campbell recruiting many of his teaching staff from the United States . 
 Originally located in two small buildings on Anerley Hill near London 's Crystal Palace , the college later moved to larger accommodation at Westow Street , Upper Norwood after rapidly outgrowing its original premises . In its early days , the college was considered very progressive and experimental in its approach to education . A history of the college on its website describes the curriculum as " liberal and advanced for its day " , and emphasis was placed on physical activities such as swimming , cycling and roller @-@ skating . Students even took part in a morning of tobogganing following a heavy fall of snow . By the end of the 19th century , the college had over 200 students . Until the Second World War the college admitted 11- to 15 @-@ year @-@ olds , but in 1945 the principal of RNC and headmaster of Worcester College for the Blind came to an agreement that Worcester would provide secondary education and RNC would take students over the age of 16 . 
 As well as being one of its founders , Francis Joseph Campbell served as RNC 's first principal , from 1871 until his retirement in 1912 . He was knighted as a Knight Bachelor by King Edward VII in 1909 , for his services to blind people . He was succeeded by his son , Guy Marshall Campbell , and following his death in 1929 Guy 's widow , Louie <unk> Campbell took over the position . The role of principal passed outside the Campbell family for the first time upon Louie <unk> Campbell 's retirement in 1934 . 
 = = = Relocation = = = 
 In the 20th century , the college moved location several times before establishing itself at its present campus in Hereford . The first of these moves occurred at the beginning of the Second World War , when the college was evacuated from its London site and moved to a mansion named Great Maytham in Rolvenden in west Kent . However , because of the threat of a German invasion , the authorities soon advised another move , and this time , with 24 hours notice and the help of the London Society for the Blind , a temporary home was found for RNC in Dorton , near Aylesbury , Buckinghamshire . At the time of the move most of the students were on holiday , although some thirty had remained at the college along with several staff members . 
 The college did not return to London because the Upper Norwood site – which was being used as a hospital following RNC 's move to Kent – was bombed in 1940 during the Blitz , then acquired by the authorities . The college had to close temporarily , until a permanent new home could be found , but in 1941 it purchased new premises at Rowton Castle near Shrewsbury and relocated there . The castle was built in the 17th Century and is situated in 17 acres ( 69 @,@ 000 m2 ) of grounds six miles ( 10 km ) west of Shrewsbury . This accommodation had limited space , and throughout its time in Shrewsbury RNC acquired other premises in and around the town . Albrighton Hall , about three miles ( 5 km ) from Shrewsbury , was acquired in 1955 and adapted for residential and training purposes for male students , and Hardy House was obtained as a new residential area for female students in 1958 . Plans to enlarge the Rowton site were seriously affected when , in 1953 , fire destroyed much of the buildings and 38 pianos and organs . The alarm was raised by one of the students , and everybody present was evacuated to safety . Training was able to continue after Henshaw 's Institution for the Blind took students and staff as a temporary measure . 
 RNC remained in Shropshire for many years until , in 1978 , more suitable accommodation was found that would enable RNC to consolidate its teaching and residential accommodation into one campus , and the college moved to its current home in Hereford . The site had previously been the campus of Hereford College of Education , a former teacher training college . In 1978 the college adopted its present name , the Royal National College for the Blind . RNC was opened at its new campus by Prince Charles , who arrived in Hereford by helicopter to perform the ceremony in 1979 . 
 = = = Hereford = = = 
 In the early 2000s the halls of residence at the Hereford campus underwent an extensive £ 1 @.@ 5 million upgrade . The blocks were originally built when the campus was being used as a teacher training college during the 1960s and were updated to include modern facilities such as larger student bedrooms with en @-@ suite bathrooms and space for televisions and computers , and improved social areas . 
 In 2006 the college announced an extensive expansion of its campus , including new halls of residence , a sports and complementary therapy building and a new outdoor floodlit sports pitch . The £ <unk> sports development would be the venue for the 2010 World Blind Football Championship . A £ 10 million fundraising campaign , Building Brighter Futures , was created to raise the funds required to complete the project , and construction work began in the summer of 2007 . The complex , thePoint4 , was originally named The Point after a nearby block of flats . It includes a bistro and conference facilities , and commenced operation in April 2009 , and was officially opened on 24 June by BBC sports presenter and Daily Mail columnist Des Kelly . In 2008 the college was nominated as one of the sites for the 2012 Paralympic Games and acted as a pre @-@ Games training camp for Paralympic athletes . 
 RNC was the subject of a 2007 documentary for the Channel Four series Cutting Edge , which followed three young students ( Steve Markham , Daniel Angus and Selina Litt ) during their first term at the college . The film examines their individual journeys towards greater independence as they encounter the unique challenges that being visually impaired presents , as well as how they deal with the everyday issues that affect all teenagers , such as sex , relationships , partying and their future plans after graduation . The documentary , Blind Young Things , was first aired on 30 April 2007 , and won a Royal Television Society award for Channel Four and the Cutting Edge team in 2008 . 
 In September 2009 the college became the permanent home of the National <unk> Collection , a collection of paintings , sculptures , installations and other works of art designed to engage all the senses and to provide people who are visually impaired with greater accessibility to art . In November 2009 RNC announced that it had been forced to send a third of its students home following an outbreak of swine flu on campus . During the heavy winter snowfall of 2009 – 2010 the college 's sports facilities were utilised by the Hereford United team for training after the bad weather conditions made using their own grounds at Edgar Street difficult . 
 In January 2010 two students from the college appeared with the fashion consultant Gok Wan in an edition of the Channel 4 series How to Look Good Naked ... with a Difference , where they took part in a photo shoot . The series sought to highlight confidence issues among people with disabilities . In February 2010 the college secured a £ 90 @,@ 000 grant from the Learning and Skills Improvement Service to install a music video production studio enabling bands to record material and showcase their work . 
 RNC celebrated its 140th anniversary in March 2012 with a day of events at its campus and a street collection in Hereford . 
 = = = Restructuring = = = 
 In the late 2000s RNC underwent significant restructuring as it responded to changes in the world of employment and therefore the courses that it offered its students . However , some of the college 's changes provoked criticism from staff and students who argued these were not in RNC 's best interest . There was some controversy over the college 's decision to reduce the availability of courses in piano tuning , traditionally regarded as a secure profession for visually impaired people , while fears were expressed that the decrease in A Level subjects would lead to RNC becoming a sport rather than an academic orientated college . Responding to these concerns in July 2008 , the then principal Christine Steadman told In Touch , the BBC Radio 4 news programme for visually impaired listeners ; " It 's about what the local authorities , what the learning and skills council , what the Welsh Assembly for government will purchase from us . And at the moment we are reducing a small number of A Level courses but at the same time we 're extending other courses , for example we 've got level 3 Braille being taught for the first time at the college , we 're not cutting A Levels , we 're just responding to the needs of the learners that are coming through our doors . " In an interview in January 2010 , current principal Geoff Draper said that piano tuning would be taught at the college if there was a demand for it , and suggested RNC could look to bringing in international students to fill places . 
 The changes led to significant department reorganisations within RNC , with several dozen staff members being summarily dismissed without explanation ; some were replaced by volunteers . A number of former college employees made complaints regarding the manner in which their employment was ended . In July 2008 the college lecturers union , the University and College Union , called for greater consultation between management and staff at the college . Speaking in a 2009 interview with In Touch Ian Pickford , who was brought in as interim principal following Christine Steadman 's departure , claimed that the atmosphere of the college had changed and issued a challenge to any student or member of staff who was still unhappy to meet with him to discuss their concerns . 
 Financial concerns were raised in 2009 over the cost of the new leisure complex , and because of a change in the source of student funding from the Learning and Skills Council to Local Education Authorities . The college was facing a shortfall of at least £ 500 @,@ 000 in 2009 and its auditors expressed doubt about RNC 's ability to continue as a going concern . In response Ian Pickford said that much of thePoint4 's costs had been paid for through donations and that the shortfall issue was being addressed through cutbacks , including some redundancies . Of the auditors ' concerns he said ; " I think post the banking crisis a lot of auditors are incredibly nervous about making bland statements in terms of the future of organisations and therefore they frequently now put those sort of caveats in to protect their position going forward . " 
 = = Assistive technology = = 
 The college is actively involved in the development and use of assistive technology to aid visually impaired people in their everyday lives . For example , working with a United States @-@ based software engineer , RNC produced the T3 ( Talking Tactile Tablet ) , a touch sensitive device for interpreting tactile images such as diagrams , charts and maps . The device is connected to a computer and run with a programme CD , and has a tactile surface which produces <unk> icons that provide audio feedback when they are pressed . The device was originally developed for educational purposes but can be adapted for other uses . In 2005 Hereford Museum and Art Gallery became the first in the United Kingdom to invest in the technology . The T3 was later marketed internationally with the help of the UK Trade & Investment 's passport initiative – a scheme which gives new exporters the training , planning and support they need to succeed in overseas markets . 
 The Mountbatten , an electronic Braille writing machine and <unk> , was pioneered and developed at the college by Ernest Bate . Work began on the project following a bequest in the will of the late Lord Louis Mountbatten for the development of a modern , low cost , portable <unk> . It has been available since 1991 , and is manufactured by Quantum Technology , a company based in Australia . In the early 1990s two RNC lecturers , Clive Ellis and Tony Larkin , invented the Hoople , a hoop @-@ shaped mobility aid for blind people which performs a similar role to a white cane , but is designed for use in a rural environment and on rough terrain . RNC lecturer Nigel Berry designed the Fingerprints Braille course , which was first published in 1993 and is now widely used to teach adult beginners to touch @-@ read and write grade 2 Braille . 
 RNC is involved in the <unk> project which allows visually impaired Internet users to have text translated into Braille and MP3 audio format via email . The system , developed in Denmark , was launched in June 2006 and won a British Computer Society Social Contribution Project Award in 2007 . <unk> , which enables visually impaired users to browse the web more easily by making text easier for them to read , was developed in conjunction with the college . In 2009 RNC lecturer Tony Sales developed <unk> , an accessible version of the Linux operating system for the visually impaired . 
 = = Education = = 
 RNC provides full @-@ time and shorter courses in vocational and academic subjects for approximately 200 students aged 16 and above . In 2008 there were 196 students in attendance , 74 of whom were aged 16 to 18 and 122 aged 19 years and over . Younger students often join the college straight from school , while adult students are from a diverse range of backgrounds . Students have often been visually impaired since birth or may have lost their sight in later life as a result of illness or accident . Some students have additional disabilities such as autistic spectrum disorder and other medical needs . They can attend the college on a daily or residential basis , and accommodation is provided for those who board . There were 152 residential and 44 day students in 2008 . 
 Courses vary in length from a few weeks to two years . There are no formal academic requirements for entry into RNC , but potential students are invited to attend an assessment at the college before being offered a place to determine the level of support they will need during their studies . The assessment typically includes an evaluation of a person 's level of vision , their mobility and independence skills , any residential support they may require , basic literacy and numeracy skills tests , and an interview with the leader of the course they wish to take . 
 Study programmes at RNC are designed to prepare visually impaired students for progression into further education , university or employment . The development of independent living and personal skills is also encouraged . The college is divided into several different areas of study . These include Leisure , <unk> and Sport ( including courses and qualifications in massage , complementary therapies , and sport treatment and management ) ; Music , Media , Performance and Art ( including courses and qualifications in music technology , media and art ) ; Information and Communication Technology ( including courses and qualifications in office skills and the European Computer Driving Licence ) ; Business , Administration and Customer Service ; Secondary level qualifications – General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) and General Certificate of Education Advanced Level ( A @-@ Level ) qualifications in subjects such as English , mathematics , French and psychology ; and Braille reading . On top of academic and vocational study students are also taught to develop independence and mobility skills for day @-@ to @-@ day living . Topics covered here include the use of a white cane and becoming familiar with the surrounding environment , using public transport safely and confidently , cooking and laundry skills , and using cash machines or making Chip and PIN credit card transactions . 
 Traditionally courses in Piano Tuning and Piano Technology were also available at the college . However , these were significantly reduced in the late 2000s because of a decline in the number of students studying the subjects . There has also been a reduction in the number of A @-@ levels available for study owing to changes in the types of courses education funding bodies supporting students at RNC are willing to pay for . 
 RNC began to offer its first Higher Education ( or university level ) qualification in January 2010 with the launch of the Certificate in Higher Education : Working with People with Visual Impairment Programme . The qualification is offered in collaboration with St Joseph 's Centre for the Visually Impaired in Dublin and the University of Worcester . 
 Following an inspection by the Office for Standards in Education , Children 's Services and Skills ( Ofsted ) in 2004 the quality of the college 's teaching was graded as " outstanding " , and in 2005 RNC was one of only eight colleges in the UK to be awarded Learning and Skills Beacon Status . It is the only college for visually impaired students to have Beacon status , which is only given to educational establishments which have received a first @-@ class Ofsted inspection report . RNC was again praised by Ofsted in 2009 for its continued good progress when Inspectors graded the college as " outstanding " across all six areas inspected and said it had gained ground since its last inspection in 2006 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 RNC has four halls of residence , three of which ( Armitage , Campbell and Dowdell ) have been updated in recent years to include modern facilities in accordance with Care Standards and Disability Discrimination Act requirements . Specific accommodation has been adapted for wheelchair users , while some rooms have sensory fire alarm calls to alert those who are hard of hearing . Halls are divided into flats accommodating several students . Each flat has a number of single rooms with shared kitchen and dining facilities , and a central lounge . 
 Because it was not possible to upgrade Gardner Hall , a new modern block , Orchard Hall , was built to replace it . Gardner became an assessment centre for prospective students . In September 2009 Gardner was made available as a venue for hire for functions such as weddings . In addition to the halls of residence , the college also owns several houses both on and off campus which enable students to gain a greater level of independent living . There is a restaurant which provides meals , or students can choose to be self @-@ catering . All accommodation has kitchen facilities . 
 On @-@ campus facilities include a gym , sports hall , a floodlit all @-@ weather football pitch and tennis courts . RNC 's thePoint4 complex offers sporting , leisure and conference facilities , as well as a bistro , and is open to both students and members of the general public . Other facilities at RNC include the Flexible Learning Centre , which features the latest assistive technology and learning resources and is open seven days a week , a student social club which is licensed to sell alcohol to students who are 18 and over , and a student common room . The college has an active Students ' Union which plays an important role in college life , being responsible for organising leisure activities both on and off campus . There are also on @-@ campus medical facilities . 
 In December 2008 the Hereford Times reported that the college would be home to a sculpture by the Herefordshire @-@ based contemporary artist Walenty Pytel that he would create using an original drawing produced by an RNC student . The piece , depicting a man running in a Futurist style and titled the <unk> was unveiled in September 2009 and stands on a 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) plinth outside the entrance of the sports and leisure complex . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 RNC is the home of the first football academy for visually impaired players . The Football Academy was officially opened in August 2008 by former England footballer Sir Trevor Brooking and offers visually impaired students the opportunity to include football as part of their study programme with a view to playing the game at a national level . The college is the home of the England blind football team , which is supported by the Football Association and coached by former professional footballer Tony Larkin . The game is played as a five @-@ a @-@ side match using a ball filled with <unk> to enable players to hear its position . Teams consist of four blind players and a sighted goalkeeper who offers directions along with the coach and a sighted guide behind the opposition goalpost . RNC is helping to develop a national blind football league . In 2010 RNC hosted the World Blind Football Championship at its campus . The tournament got under way on Saturday 14 August with the opening match between England and Spain , and was won by Brazil following a 2 – 0 win against Spain in the final on 22 August . Members of England 's blind football team travelled to Los Angeles in November 2011 to promote the sport in the United States , and took part in a day 's training with former England captain David Beckham . The trip was organised by supermarket chain Sainsbury 's as part of their sponsorship deal with the footballer . 
 Blind cricket , which is played basically the same as conventional cricket but using larger stumps and wickets and a white ball so that players may see it much more easily , is also played at the college , and RNC has its own cricket team , which competes in the British Blind Sport ( BBS ) National Cricket League . The college also features acoustic shooting , a sport which uses air rifles fitted with photoelectric cells which convert light reflected from targets into sound . 
 As well as football , cricket and acoustic shooting , students at RNC can participate in a wide range of other sporting and athletic activities , including horse riding , swimming , ten pin bowling , weight training , circuit training and martial arts . Away from sport , other activities include art and design , ceramics , drama and dance , photography and gardening . There are shopping excursions and trips to the cinema and theatre , while clubs and societies include a dining club and the RNC choir . 
 = = Notable people and alumni = = 
 The college is a charitable organisation and is registered with the Charity Commission , the government body which oversees charities in England and Wales . It has a number of high @-@ profile supporters which include Charles , Prince of Wales , who is the current Patron , a position he has held since 1997 . The current president is Mrs Jessica White , and there are several public figures who serve as vice presidents . These include the Archbishop of Canterbury , the Archbishop of York , the Archbishop of Westminster , Countess Mountbatten of Burma and Michael <unk> . In 2008 the BBC sports presenter Gabby Logan and Daily Mail columnist Des Kelly both became Patrons of the England Blind Football team . 
 Since the Principalship passed outside the Campbell family in 1934 a number of individuals have held the position . Among them are Lance Marshall who was principal at the time the college moved to its Hereford campus in 1978 , followed by Colin <unk> @-@ Smith and then Roisin Burge . Christine Steadman oversaw the college 's restructuring during her tenure in the late 2000s and proved to be unpopular with staff and students ; Steadman resigned in November 2008 . Geoff Draper , a former Colonel in the British Army , was appointed to the position on 7 December 2009 . The present incumbent is Sheila Tallon , who succeeded Draper in September 2011 . 
 Graduates of the college include David Blunkett , British Labour Party politician and former Home Secretary , and Alfred Hollins , English composer and organist . Giles McKinley , who starred in a groundbreaking television commercial for <unk> Tequila during the 1990s , is a former RNC student . The actor Ryan Kelly , who in 1997 , became the first completely blind student to join the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School , and plays the role of Jack " <unk> " McCreary in Radio 4 's The Archers , attended RNC . The Paralympic cyclist Anthony Kappes also studied at the college . 
 = Adiantum viridimontanum = 
 Adiantum viridimontanum , commonly known as Green Mountain maidenhair fern , is a rare fern found only in outcrops of serpentine rock in New England and Eastern Canada . The leaf blade is cut into finger @-@ like segments , themselves once @-@ divided , which are borne on the outer side of a curved , dark , glossy rachis ( the central stalk of the leaf ) . These finger @-@ like segments are not individual leaves , but parts of a single compound leaf . The " fingers " may be drooping or erect , depending on whether the individual fern grows in shade or sunlight . Spores are borne under false indusia ( rolled flaps of tissue ) at the edge of the subdivisions of the leaf , a characteristic unique to the genus Adiantum . 
 Until 1991 , A. viridimontanum was grouped with the western maidenhair fern , A. aleuticum , which grows both in western North America and as a disjunct on serpentine outcrops in eastern North America . At one time , A. aleuticum itself was classified as a variety ( A. pedatum var. aleuticum ) of the northern maidenhair fern , A. pedatum . However , after several years of study , botanist Cathy Paris recognized that A. aleuticum was a distinct species , and that some of the specimens that had been attributed to that taxon ( group of organisms ) were a third , hybrid species intermediate between A. pedatum and A. aleuticum . She named the new species A. viridimontanum for the site of its discovery in the Green Mountains in Vermont ; it has since been located in Quebec and in one site on serpentine in coastal Maine . 
 A. viridimontanum is difficult to distinguish from its parent species in the field . It can generally be separated from A. pedatum by the shape of the ultimate segments ( the smallest divisions of the leaf ) , and by its habitat on thin , exposed serpentine soils rather than in rich woodlands . It more closely resembles A. aleuticum ; however , the stalks of the ultimate segments and the false indusia are longer and the spores larger . 
 Due to its limited distribution and similarity to other Adiantum species within its range , little is known of its ecology . It thrives on sunny , disturbed areas where ultramafic rock is covered with thin soil , such as road cuts , talus slopes , and asbestos mines . Individual plants seem long @-@ lived , and new individuals only infrequently reach maturity . It is one of four species endemic to serpentine in eastern North America and is considered globally threatened due to its habitat restrictions . 
 = = Description = = 
 Adiantum viridimontanum is a medium @-@ sized , deciduous , terrestrial fern , about 2 feet ( 60 cm ) wide and 1 to 2 feet ( 30 to 60 cm ) high . Its fronds range from 30 to 75 cm ( 12 to 30 in ) in length from the base of the stem to the tip . Like many ferns , the frond of A. viridimontanum is divided into a series of leaflets , known as pinnae , and the pinnae are further divided into pinnules . The shape of the frond in A. pedatum , A. aleuticum , and A. viridimontanum is very similar . They are usually described as having a rachis that forks into two branches , which curve outwards and backwards . Several pinnae grow from the outer side of the curve of each rachis branch , with the longest pinnae located closest to the fork of the rachis . The fingerlike pinnae are pinnately divided into short @-@ stalked pinnules . 
 However , this interpretation of the frond architecture ( <unk> divided into pinnae , then pinnately divided into pinnules ) presents a problem : no other species of Adiantum , nor any other member of the <unk> sensu lato ( the family in which Adiantum was once included ) has a forking rachis . In fact , these species are not <unk> , but <unk> . What appears to be a fork in the rachis is in fact the junction between the rachis and a basal pinna . That basal pinna makes up one of the two curving branches ; the rachis runs straight up the first fingerlike segment on the other branch , while the remainder of that curving branch is made up of the other basal pinna . Both basal pinnae are further divided and subdivided to create the other fingerlike segments . Therefore , even though they appear structurally similar , the longest and most central fingerlike segment represents the tip of the frond , pinnately divided into pinnae ( the first level of division of the frond ) , while the two shorter fingerlike segments immediately on either side of it are pinnae , pinnately divided into pinnules ( the second level of division ) . Each fingerlike segment thereafter represents a level of division one greater than the one that precedes it . Therefore , the final , pinnate subdivisions of each fingerlike segment may be referred to as " ultimate segments " to avoid the technical inaccuracy of calling them pinnules . 
 The rhizome shows little branching , with intervals of 4 @.@ 0 to 7 @.@ 5 mm between nodes . It measures 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 5 mm in diameter . The rhizome and the stipe ( the part of the stem below the leaf ) have bronze @-@ colored scales . The stipe and rachis range from chestnut brown to dark purple in color and are glabrous ; the stipe is about 2 to 3 mm in diameter while the rachis is smaller , 1 to 2 mm . The basal pinnae are from three to seven times pinnate ( due to the <unk> structure of the blade ) , while the apical parts of the blade ( and the corresponding segments of the basal pinnae ) are once @-@ pinnate . The penultimate segments of the blade ( the apparent " pinnae " , or fingerlike segments ) are typically lanceolate in shape . The overall arrangement of the penultimate segments ranges from drooping and fan @-@ shaped on plants growing in the shade to funnel @-@ shaped on plants growing in full sun ; under the latter conditions , the segments stand stiffly erect . 
 The ultimate segments of the divided blade ( the apparent " pinnules " ) are borne on short , dark stalks of 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 5 mm , with the dark color often spreading into the base of each segment . They are long and obliquely triangular , the <unk> margin forming the hypotenuse . The tip of the segments is typically acute , but entire ( not pointed ) . They measure from 9 @.@ 5 to 22 @.@ 5 mm in length and 4 @.@ 2 to 7 @.@ 5 mm in breadth , the average length being about 2 @.@ 5 times the breadth . Their tissue is herbaceous ( firmly leafy ) to <unk> ( parchment @-@ like ) in texture , and bright green to bluish @-@ green in color . As in other members of Adiantum , the glabrous leaves shed water when young . Under shady conditions , the ultimate segments lie within the plane of the blade , but tend to twist out of the plane when grown in the sun . The acroscopic margins of these segments are lobed , with narrow ( less than 1 @.@ 0 mm ) incisions lying between lobes . In fertile segments , these lobes are recurved to form false indusia beneath the leaf . These are transversely oblong , from 2 to 5 mm in length and from 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 4 mm in width . 
 The sporangia ( the fern 's spore @-@ bearing structures ) are borne on the underside of the leaf beneath the false indusium , a trait found in all members of Adiantum and not in any species outside it . The sori are round , and are found on veins ending in the false indusium , below the veins ' ends . The spores are tetrahedral to globose , yellow in color , and measure 41 to 58 micrometers ( μm ) in diameter ( averaging 51 @.@ 4 μm ) , on average larger than other species in the A. pedatum complex . Spores appear in the summer and fall . The species has a chromosome number of 116 in the sporophyte . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 Adiantum viridimontanum closely resembles the other species in the A. pedatum complex ( A. pedatum and A. aleuticum ) , and distinguishing the three in the field is difficult . Paris and Windham , in their study of the complex , noted that while each species , collectively , can be distinguished from the others , no single morphological character was absolutely distinctive among species . Sterile triploid hybrids between A. viridimontanum and the other two species may occur , further complicating field identification . 
 One potentially distinguishing character is the shape of the ultimate segments in the middle part of the leaf blade , which are oblong in A. pedatum and long @-@ triangular or reniform ( kidney @-@ shaped ) in A. viridimontanum and some specimens of A. aleuticum . Furthermore , A. viridimontanum can grow in both shade and sun , while A. pedatum grows in shade only . 
 Adiantum viridimontanum can be separated from the morphologically similar individuals of A. aleuticum by the greater length of the stalks on the medial ultimate segments and of the false indusia , measuring greater than 0 @.@ 9 mm and greater than 3 @.@ 5 mm , respectively , in A. viridimontanum . Spore size is also a useful character ( although not easily measured in the field ) ; the average A. viridimontanum spore measures 51 @.@ 4 μm in diameter . While A. aleuticum spores can reach up to 53 μm , they average about 43 μm . In A. aleuticum growing as a disjunct on eastern serpentine ( the specimens most likely to be confused with A. viridimontanum ) , the rhizome is much more frequently branched , with intervals of 1 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 0 mm between nodes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 All species in the genus Adiantum are currently placed in the subfamily <unk> of family <unk> on the basis of molecular phylogenetic evidence . 
 The work which led to the recognition of Adiantum viridimontanum as a distinct taxon began in the early 20th Century . Following the discovery of disjunct specimens of western maidenhair fern , then classified as A. pedatum var. aleuticum , on the serpentine tableland of Mount Albert by Merritt Lyndon Fernald in 1905 , botanists began to search for western maidenhair on ultramafic outcrops elsewhere in Quebec and Vermont . It was first identified in Vermont by L. Frances Jolley in 1922 at Belvidere Mountain in Eden . In 1983 , William J. Cody transferred A. pedatum growing on serpentine , both in eastern and western North America , to A. pedatum ssp. <unk> instead . Many of the stations for the fern in Vermont were described in 1985 , in a survey of ultramafic outcrops in that state . 
 From 1983 to 1985 , Cathy A. Paris , then a graduate student , gathered specimens of A. pedatum from non @-@ serpentine soils in the Midwest and Vermont , and from serpentine soils in New England and Canada , for <unk> analysis . In 1988 , Paris and Michael D. Windham published the results of this analysis , revealing A. pedatum in North America to be a cryptic species complex . They showed that A. pedatum sensu lato included two well @-@ distinguished diploid taxa , one found in the Eastern woodlands , and the other found both in the Western mountains and as a disjunct on serpentine in the East . However , not all of the serpentine <unk> proved to belong to the Western taxon . Several of them , including most of the specimens in Vermont , were found to be tetraploid , forming a taxon distinguishable from the two diploids . <unk> banding patterns suggested that the tetraploid had arisen by hybridization between the eastern subspecies of non @-@ serpentine woodlands and the western and serpentine taxon , followed by a duplication of the hybrid genome through polyploidy ( allowing the chromosomes to pair and restoring sexual fertility ) . This allotetraploid was also morphologically intermediate between the two taxa , although it more closely resembled the serpentine taxon ( hence its referral to var. aleuticum before Paris 's work ) . Paris formally described the tetraploid as a new species , A. viridimontanum , in 1991 , and also separated the western and serpentine taxon from A. pedatum as the species A. aleuticum . The type specimen of A. viridimontanum was collected from a talus slope at the old asbestos mine on Belvidere Mountain on August 28 , 1985 . The sequencing of several chloroplast DNA loci has revealed that the A. viridimontanum chloroplast genome most closely resembles that of A. aleuticum , suggesting that A. aleuticum was the maternal parent of A. viridimontanum . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Adiantum viridimontanum is narrowly distributed in New England and Quebec . Seven stations in Vermont lie in the <unk> Valley , in the northern Green Mountains , giving the fern its common name . The ultramafic rocks of this area extend northwards into Quebec , where eight stations are known in southern Quebec and six in the Thetford Mines area . It is also known from one station on serpentine on Deer Isle , Maine . 
 The fern thrives in thin serpentine soils on sunny , disturbed habitats such as roadcuts and talus slopes , in <unk> and other ultramafic rocks . Anthropogenic disturbance has removed thicker soils and increased sun exposure in many of these sites ; for instance , many of the Quebec stations are in asbestos mines , both abandoned and active . In more natural habitats , frost weathering and erosion may promote rock fall and maintain suitable habitat . 
 The eastern serpentine outcrops where A. viridimontanum thrives have relatively few endemics , compared to serpentine exposures globally . A. viridimontanum is one of only five taxa ( four species and a variety ) that are strictly endemic to serpentine in eastern North America , and two of these , A. aleuticum and <unk> densa , grow on non @-@ serpentine substrates elsewhere in North America . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Adiantum viridimontanum largely reproduces asexually by branching rather than sexually through spores . While wind @-@ blown spores can result in sexual reproduction for the species , most spores probably fall within a relatively short radius of the plant . In addition , reproduction through spore dispersal requires the spore to land in suitable conditions for generating a gametophyte , typically in bright sunlight on thin serpentine soils . These requirements allow A. viridimontanum to colonize recently disturbed sites on ultramafic outcrops , where bedrock has been exposed and competing plants have been removed . The populations appear stable , with the long life of individuals compensating for low recruitment rates . 
 Little is known about the role of A. viridimontanum in the ecosystem . In general , ferns are less susceptible to herbivory than flowering plants due to higher levels of toxic and distasteful compounds in their foliage . A. viridimontanum is not known to be threatened by a particular predator or disease . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Under the NatureServe conservation status system , A. viridimontanum is considered globally vulnerable ( G3 ) . It is considered imperiled ( S2 ) in Vermont and vulnerable ( S3 ) in Quebec ; it has not yet been classified in Maine . 
 Conservation of A. viridimontanum is primarily limited by its restricted habitat on serpentine cliffs and talus slopes . However , these sites are also of little value to humans . The most likely threat to the species is expansion of asbestos mining , which often occurs near populations of the fern , or other reuse of abandoned asbestos mines . Road construction might also threaten some sites , although this is mitigated by the fern 's ability to flourish on disturbed serpentine . None of the sites are as yet known to be invaded by non @-@ native plants . The species is considered more difficult to cultivate than either of its parent species . 
 = Hurricane Audrey = 
 Hurricane Audrey was an extremely destructive tropical cyclone which primarily impacted areas of the South Central United States in June 1957 . The first named storm and hurricane of the annual hurricane season , it first formed on June 25 , 1957 from a tropical wave which moved into the Bay of Campeche , developing so quickly that it was never recorded at tropical depression status . Situated within favorable conditions for tropical development , Audrey quickly strengthened , reaching hurricane status just a few hours after being classified as a tropical cyclone . Moving generally northwards , it continued to strengthen as it approached the United States Gulf Coast . On June 27 , the hurricane reached peak sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) , making it a major hurricane . At the time , Audrey had a minimum barometric pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) . The hurricane made landfall at the same intensity between the mouth of the Sabine River and Cameron , Louisiana later that day , causing unprecedented destruction across the region . Once inland , Audrey rapidly weakened and turned extratropical over Louisiana on June 28 , before fully dissipating on June 29 . 
 Prior to making landfall , Audrey severely disrupted offshore drilling operations in the Gulf of Mexico . Damages from offshore oil facilities alone was estimated at $ 16 million . Audrey caused much of its destruction near the border between Texas and Louisiana upon its first and only landfall . The hurricane 's strong winds resulted in widespread property and infrastructural damage . Power outages also resulted from the strong winds . However , as typical with most landfalling tropical cyclones , most of the destruction at the coast was the result of the hurricane 's strong storm surge , which was amplified by Audrey 's rapid deepening just prior to landfall . The hurricane 's storm surge was reported to have peaked as high as 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , helping to inundate coastal areas . Damage from the surge alone extended 25 mi ( 40 km ) inland . The rough seas killed nine people offshore after capsizing the boat they were in . Further inland in Louisiana , the storm spawned two tornadoes , causing additional damage . The hurricane also dropped heavy rainfall , peaking at 10 @.@ 63 in ( 270 mm ) near Basile , Louisiana . In Louisiana and Texas , where Audrey first impacted , damages totaled $ 128 million . 
 After moving inland and transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , Audrey caused additional damage across the interior United States . The storm produced 23 tornadoes across Mississippi and Alabama , causing $ 600 @,@ 000 in losses and killing two people . As it moved towards the northeast , moisture associated with the extratropical remnants of Audrey intersected with a weather front over the Midwestern United States , producing record rainfall that peaked at 10 @.@ 20 in ( 259 @.@ 08 mm ) in Paris , Illinois . The resultant flooding resulted in ten fatalities . Elsewhere in the United States , the storm brought strong winds , causing additional damage . Further north in Canada , 15 people were killed in Ontario and Quebec . Strong winds and torrential rainfall disrupted transportation services . In Quebec , ten people were killed in the Montreal area , making Audrey the deadliest hurricane to strike the Canadian province in recorded history . The storm was also considered the worst storm to strike Quebec in at least 20 years . In the United States , Audrey killed at least 416 people , the majority of which were in Cameron Parish Louisiana , though the final death total may never be known . Damage totaled $ 147 million in the country , at the time the fifth @-@ costliest hurricane recorded in the US since 1900 . The name Audrey was later retired from usage as an identifier for an Atlantic hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Between June 20 and 25 , 1957 , an ill @-@ defined tropical wave moved across the Caribbean Sea , over the Yucatán Peninsula , and into the Bay of Campeche . The system was difficult to trace until a report on June 24 from Carmen , Mexico confirmed the presence of a low pressure area . Later that evening , a shrimp boat in the Bay of Campeche reported sustained winds of 40 to 45 mph ( 65 to 75 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1008 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 78 inHg ) . As the disturbance developed , a large trough extended from a low over the Hudson Bay into the Gulf of Mexico . The " latitudinal superposition " of these systems resulting in the intensification of both . Situated over an area of high sea surface temperatures ( approximately 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) ) and within a region of favorable upper @-@ level divergence , the tropical disturbance rapidly deepened overnight . The system was declared a tropical depression early on June 25 as it became stationary over the southern Gulf of Mexico . An aircraft reconnaissance mission into the storm on June 25 revealed that the system had already intensified into a hurricane , reporting winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . At this time , Audrey was located approximately 380 mi ( 610 km ) southeast of Brownsville , Texas . 
 After attaining hurricane status , Audrey began to slowly move northward in response troughing in the upper @-@ levels of the atmosphere . Continued reconnaissance missions into the storm revealed a well @-@ developed structure , indicating that the system had become increasingly powerful . Only one observation close to the storm 's center was made from this point until its landfall ; the tanker Tillamook encountered the hurricane 's western eyewall between <unk> and 1025 UTC on June 27 . During this time , a pressure of 969 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 62 inHg ) was measured . According to the Hurricane Database , Audrey attained winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) shortly after passing this tanker , making it a Category 4 on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . Around 1430 UTC on June 27 , the eye of Audrey made landfall between the mouth of the Sabine River and Cameron , Louisiana . Adjustments were made to the strength of Hurricane Audrey winds were previously thought to have been at approximately 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . Later research showed the maximum sustained winds only reached 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) . 
 After maintaining its eye 60 mi ( 95 km ) inland , Audrey dramatically weakened and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it turned northeastward over Louisiana , and reached Tennessee as a 995 mb ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 39 inHg ) low . At this point , the system interacted with a wave extending from a polar front near Chicago , Illinois and subsequently re @-@ intensified . Curving northward and later northwestward around another extratropical low , the system attained a pressure of 974 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 76 inHg ) as it moved near Lake Huron . The rapid deepening of Audrey as an extratropical cyclone was stated to be similar to that of Hurricane Hazel in 1954 . By this point , the system was again producing hurricane @-@ force winds , with Jamestown , New York reporting gusts up to 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . By June 29 , the system became entangled with the other cyclone and was eventually absorbed into its circulation over southern Quebec . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 The name " Audrey " was soon retired and will never be used again to name a hurricane . Because of this , it was the only use of the name Audrey for the Atlantic Basin . Hurricane Audrey left $ 147 million ( 1957 USD ) in damage and at least 416 fatalities in the US , most in eastern Texas and western Louisiana . Audrey is ranked as the sixth deadliest hurricane to hit the United States mainland since accurate record @-@ keeping began in 1900 . No future hurricane caused as many fatalities in the United States until Katrina in 2005 . 
 = = = Gulf of Mexico = = = 
 One mobile drilling rig sank , with four tenders suffering damage when pulled loose from their mooring and running aground . The damage from all offshore oil facilities totaled US $ 16 million ( 1957 dollars ) . 
 = = = Texas and Louisiana = = = 
 Shortly after Audrey was classified as a tropical cyclone , the United States Weather Bureau advised ships in the path of the storm to exercise caution and small craft to remain in port on June 26 . In addition , the Weather Bureau requested for Texas and Louisiana to issue hurricane watches for their coasts . These requested watches were later succeeded by a hurricane warning for the entire Louisiana coast later that day . This warning was later extended westward to include areas of the Texas coast south to High Island , Texas . Northwest storm warnings were issued for the upper Texas coast north of Galveston , Texas , while southeast storm warnings were issued for coastal areas between the western border of Mississippi and Pensacola , Florida . These warnings remained posted until Audrey made landfall . Small craft warnings were issued the next day for coastal areas between Brownsville , Texas and Pensacola , Florida . 
 Residents in exposed low @-@ lying areas were urged to evacuate , due to the potential for high and damaging storm surge . Evacuation procedures in Texas began on June 27 , starting with residents in the Bolivar Peninsula area . Several power lines were redirected to Fort Davis to act as an emergency supply in the event of a mass evacuation . In Louisiana , schools were set up as emergency shelters . All residents on Grand Isle were urged to evacuate after the island was isolated from the mainland during Hurricane Flossy a year prior ; 3 @,@ 400 residents later evacuated from the island to cities in southern Louisiana . However , 600 residents remained on the island during the storm . Civil defense groups in the state placed key personnel in the area on 24 @-@ hour duty . 
 = = = = Texas = = = = 
 Although making landfall near the border between Texas and Louisiana , areas of eastern Texas saw relatively less damage associated with Audrey . In Port Arthur , Texas , winds gusted to 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) , while the barometric pressure fell to 966 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 52 inHg ) . The strong winds blew down communication lines and uprooted trees . Storm surge heights exceeded 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in coastal areas north of Galveston . Further south in Corpus Christi , Texas , storm tides peaked at 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal , washing out portions of Mustang Island Park Road . A 0 @.@ 75 mi ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) section of Texas State Highway 87 between High Island and Sabine Pass , Texas was later closed after sections of the highway were washed out by high water . Further inland , rainfall peaked at 7 @.@ 35 in ( 187 mm ) at Jefferson County Airport , setting a daily rainfall record . Overall , Audrey caused $ 8 million in damages and nine deaths in Texas . 
 = = = Elsewhere in the United States = = = 
 While moving inland , Audrey spawned 23 tornadoes which killed two people and injured 14 others in Mississippi and Alabama , while causing $ 600 @,@ 000 ( 1957 USD ) in damage . In the Midwest , the flow of moisture from Audrey intersected a weather front to its north , creating a large storm with associated rainfall of 5 inches ( 130 mm ) to 11 inches ( 280 mm ) extending from central Missouri east @-@ northeast across central Illinois and central Indiana . The 10 @.@ 20 inches ( 259 mm ) of rain that fell in Paris , Illinois led to a monthly precipitation record for June of 17 @.@ 65 inches ( 448 mm ) and its wettest year on record with a total of 61 @.@ 59 inches ( 1 @,@ 564 mm ) . It also flooded the entire town . The storm dropped huge amounts of rain that caused significant flooding , leaving 10 fatalities . In Pennsylvania , the storm produced 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) sustained winds while winds of 95 – 100 mph ( 153 – 161 km / h ) were reported in New York . In Canada , winds up to 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) were reported and there were 15 fatalities . 
 As an extratropical cyclone , Audrey brought hurricane @-@ force winds as far east as St. Albans , Vermont , where a gust of 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) was measured . Throughout the state , countless tress and power lines were downed . In Maine , rough seas stirred up by the storm forced yachts to be grounded . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 The remnants of Audrey entered Ontario with tropical storm force winds after crossing Lake Ontario . Heavy rainfall in the province washed out roads and rail lines . Six people were trapped in Algonquin Provincial Park for four days due to dangerous river currents and downed trees blocking roads . One boy drowned and a firefighter died due to the storm , and three other people died in Ontario due to traffic accidents . In neighboring Quebec , the remnants of Audrey were considered the worst storm in about 20 years , and over 100 houses were damaged by floods . The Montreal district of <unk> lost power for several days . Throughout Montreal , there were 10 deaths , nine of which due to traffic accidents . This made Audrey the deadliest tropical cyclone in Quebec on record . 
 = Zaolzie = 
 Zaolzie [ <unk> ] is the Polish name for an area now in the Czech Republic which was disputed between interwar Poland and Czechoslovakia . The name means " lands beyond the Olza River " ; it is also called Śląsk <unk> , meaning " trans @-@ Olza Silesia " . Equivalent terms in other languages include <unk> ( <unk> ) in Czech and <unk> @-@ <unk> in German . The Zaolzie region was created in 1920 , when Cieszyn Silesia was divided between Czechoslovakia and Poland . Zaolzie forms the eastern part of the Czech portion of Cieszyn Silesia . The division did not satisfy any side , and persisting conflict over the region led to its annexation by Poland in October 1938 , following the Munich Agreement . After German invasion of Poland in 1939 , the area became a part of Nazi Germany until 1945 . After the war , the 1920 borders were restored . 
 Historically , the largest specified ethnic group inhabiting this area were those identifying as Poles . Under Austrian rule , Cieszyn Silesia was initially divided into three ( Bielitz , <unk> and Teschen ) , and later into four districts ( plus <unk> ) . One of them , Frýdek , had a mostly Czech population , the other three were mostly inhabited by Poles . During the 19th century the number of ethnic Germans grew . After declining at the end of the 19th century , at the beginning of the 20th century and later from 1920 to 1938 the Czech population grew significantly ( mainly as a result of immigration and the assimilation of locals ) and Poles became a minority , which they are to this day . Another significant ethnic group were the Jews , but almost the entire Jewish population was exterminated during World War II . 
 In addition to the Polish , Czech and German national orientations there was another group living in the area , the <unk> , who claimed a distinct Silesian national identity . This group enjoyed popular support throughout the whole of Cieszyn Silesia although its strongest supporters were among the Protestants in eastern part of the Cieszyn Silesia ( now part of Poland ) and not in Zaolzie itself . 
 = = Name and territory = = 
 The term Zaolzie ( meaning " the trans @-@ Olza " , i.e. " lands beyond the Olza " ) is used predominantly in Poland and also commonly by the Polish minority living in the territory . In Czech it is mainly referred to as České Těšínsko / <unk> ( " land around Český Těšín " ) , or as Těšínsko or <unk> Slezsko ( meaning Cieszyn Silesia ) . The Czech equivalent of Zaolzie ( <unk> or <unk> ) is rarely used . The term of Zaolzie is also used by some foreign scholars , e.g. American <unk> Kevin Hannan . 
 The term Zaolzie denotes the territory of the former districts of Český Těšín and <unk> , in which the Polish population formed a majority according to the 1910 Austrian census . It makes up the eastern part of the Czech portion of Cieszyn Silesia . However , Polish historian Józef <unk> notes that the term is often mistakenly used for the whole Czech part of Cieszyn Silesia . 
 Since the 1960 reform of administrative divisions of Czechoslovakia , Zaolzie has consisted of Karviná District and the eastern part of Frýdek @-@ <unk> District . 
 = = History = = 
 After the Migration Period the area was settled by Slavs , which were later organized into the <unk> tribe . The tribe had a large and important gord situated in contemporary <unk> . In the 880s or the early 890s the gord was raided and burned , most probably by an army of Svatopluk I of Moravia , and afterwards the area could have been subjugated by Great Moravia , which is however questioned by historians like Zdeněk <unk> , <unk> Panic , Stanisław <unk> . 
 After the fall of Great Moravia in 907 the area could have been under the influence of Bohemian rulers . In the late 10th century Poland , ruled by Bolesław I Chrobry , began to contend for the region , which was crossed by important international routes . From 950 to 1060 it was under the rule of the Duchy of Bohemia , and from 1060 it was part of Poland . The written history explicitly about the region begins on 23 April 1155 when Cieszyn / Těšín was first mentioned in a written document , a letter from Pope Adrian IV issued for Walter , Bishop of Wrocław , where it was listed amongst other centres of <unk> . The castellany was then a part of Duchy of Silesia . In 1172 it became a part of Duchy of Racibórz , and from 1202 of Duchy of Opole and Racibórz . In the first half of the 13th century the Moravian settlement organised by Arnold von <unk> from Starý <unk> castle and later accelerated by Bruno von Schauenburg , Bishop of Olomouc , began to press close to Silesian settlements . This prompted signing of a special treaty between Duke Władysław of Opole and King Ottokar II of Bohemia on December 1261 which regulated a local border between their states along the <unk> River . In order to strengthen the border Władysław of Opole decided to found Orlová monastery in 1268 . In the continued process of feudal fragmentation of Poland the <unk> of Cieszyn was eventually transformed in 1290 into the Duchy of Cieszyn , which in 1327 became an autonomic fiefdom of the Bohemian crown . Upon the death of Elizabeth Lucretia , its last ruler from the Polish Piast dynasty in 1653 , it passed directly to the Czech kings from the Habsburg dynasty . When most of Silesia was conquered by Prussian king Frederick the Great in 1742 , the Cieszyn region was part of the small southern portion that was retained by the Habsburg monarchy ( Austrian Silesia ) . 
 Up to the mid @-@ 19th century members of the local Slav population did not identify themselves as members of larger ethnolinguistic entities . In Cieszyn Silesia ( as in all West Slavic borderlands ) various territorial identities pre @-@ dated ethnic and national identity . Consciousness of membership within a greater Polish or Czech nation spread slowly in Silesia . 
 From 1848 to the end of the 19th century , local Polish and Czech people co @-@ operated , united against the Germanizing tendencies of the Austrian Empire and later of Austria @-@ Hungary . At the end of the century , ethnic tensions arose as the area 's economic significance grew . This growth caused a wave of immigration from Galicia . About 60 @,@ 000 people arrived between 1880 and 1910 . The new immigrants were Polish and poor , about half of them being illiterate . They worked in coal mining and metallurgy . For these people the most important factor was material well @-@ being ; they cared little about the homeland from which they had fled . Almost all of them assimilated into the Czech population . Many of them settled in Ostrava ( west of the ethnic border ) , as heavy industry was spread through the whole western part of Cieszyn Silesia . Even today , ethnographers find that about 25 @,@ 000 people in Ostrava ( about 8 % of the population ) have Polish surnames . The Czech population ( living mainly in the northern part of the area : Bohumín , Orlová , etc . ) declined numerically at the end of the 19th century , assimilating with the prevalent Polish population . This process shifted with the industrial boom in the area . 
 = = = Decision time ( 1918 – 1920 ) = = = 
 Originally , both national councils ( the Polish Rada Narodowa Księstwa <unk> in its declaration " <unk> <unk> ! " of 30 October 1918 and the Czech <unk> národní <unk> pro Slezsko in its declaration of 1 November 1918 ) claimed the whole Cieszyn Silesia for themselves . 
 On 31 October 1918 , at the dusk of World War I and the dissolution of Austria @-@ Hungary , the majority of the area was taken over by local Polish authorities supported by armed forces . The interim agreement of 2 November 1918 reflected the inability of the two national councils to come to final delimitation . On 5 November 1918 , the area was divided between Poland and Czechoslovakia by an interim agreement of two local self @-@ government councils ( Czech <unk> národní <unk> pro Slezsko and Polish Rada Narodowa Księstwa <unk> ) . Before that , the majority of the area was taken over by Polish local authorities . In 1919 both councils were absorbed by the newly created and independent central governments in Prague and Warsaw . The former was not satisfied with this compromise and on 23 January 1919 invaded the area while Poland was engaged in its war against the West Ukrainian National Republic . 
 The reason for the Czech invasion in 1919 was primarily the organisation of elections to the Sejm ( parliament ) of Poland in the disputed area . The elections were to be held in the whole of Cieszyn Silesia . The Czechs claimed that the polls must not be held in the disputed area as the delimitation was only interim and no sovereign rule should be executed there by any party . When the Czech demand was rejected by the Poles , the Czechs decided to resolve the issue by force . 
 Czech units were held up near <unk> and a ceasefire was signed on 3 February . The new Czechoslovakia claimed the area partly on historic and ethnic grounds , but especially on economic grounds . The area was important for the Czechs as the crucial railway line connecting Czech Silesia with Slovakia crossed the area ( the Košice @-@ Bohumín Railway , which was one of only two railroads that linked the Czech provinces to Slovakia at that time ) . The area is also very rich in black coal . Many important coal mines , facilities and metallurgy factories are located there . The Polish side based its claim to the area on ethnic criteria : a majority ( 69 @,@ 2 % ) of the area 's population was Polish according to the last ( 1910 ) Austrian census . 
 In this very tense atmosphere it was decided that a plebiscite would be held in the area asking people which country this territory should join . Plebiscite commissioners arrived there at the end of January 1920 , and after analysing the situation declared a state of emergency in the territory on 19 May 1920 . The situation in the area remained very tense , with mutual intimidation , acts of terror , beatings and even killings . A plebiscite could not be held in this atmosphere . On 10 July both sides renounced the idea of a plebiscite and entrusted the Conference of Ambassadors with the decision . Eventually , on 28 July 1920 , by a decision of the Spa Conference , Czechoslovakia received 58 @.@ 1 % of the area of Cieszyn Silesia , containing 67 @.@ 9 % of the population . It was this territory that became known , originally from the Polish standpoint , as Zaolzie – the Olza River marked the boundary between the Polish and Czechoslovak parts of the territory . 
 The most vocal support for union with Poland had come from within the territory awarded to Czechoslovakia , while some of the strongest opponents of Polish rule came from the territory awarded to Poland . 
 = = = = 1918 @-@ 19 = = = = 
 Historian Richard M. Watt writes , " On 5 November 1918 , the Poles and the Czechs in the region disarmed the Austrian garrison ( ... ) The Poles took over the areas that appeared to be theirs , just as the Czechs had assumed administration of theirs . Nobody objected to this friendly arrangement ( ... ) Then came second thoughts in Prague . It was observed that under the agreement of 5 November , the Poles controlled about a third of the duchy 's coal mines . The Czechs realized that they had given away rather a lot ( ... ) It was recognized that any takeover in Teschen would have to be accomplished in a manner acceptable by the victorious Allies ( ... ) , so the Czechs cooked up a tale that the Teschen area was becoming Bolshevik ( ... ) The Czechs put together a substantial body of infantry – about 15 @,@ 000 men – and on 23 January 1919 , they invaded the Polish @-@ held areas . To confuse the Poles , the Czechs recruited some Allied officers of Czech background and put these men in their respective wartime uniforms at the head of the invasion forces . After a little skirmishing , the tiny Polish defense force was nearly driven out . " 
 In 1919 , the matter went to consideration in Paris before the World War I Allies . Watt claims the Poles based their claims on ethnographical reasons and the Czechs based their need on the Teschen coal , useful in order to influence the actions of Austria and Hungary , whose capitals were fuelled by coal from the duchy . The Allies finally decided that the Czechs should get 60 percent of the coal fields and the Poles were to get most of the people and the strategic rail line . Watt writes : " Czech envoy Edvard Beneš proposed a plebiscite . The Allies were shocked , arguing that the Czechs were bound to lose it . However , Beneš was insistent and a plebiscite was announced in September 1919 . As it turned out , Beneš knew what he was doing . A plebiscite would take some time to set up , and a lot could happen in that time – particularly when a nation 's affairs were conducted as cleverly as were Czechoslovakia 's . " 
 Watt argues that Beneš strategically waited for Poland 's moment of weakness , and moved in during the Polish @-@ Soviet War crisis in July 1920 . As Watt writes , " Over the dinner table , Beneš convinced the British and French that the plebiscite should not be held and that the Allies should simply impose their own decision in the Teschen matter . More than that , Beneš persuaded the French and the British to draw a frontier line that gave Czechoslovakia most of the territory of Teschen , the vital railroad and all the important coal fields . With this frontier , 139 @,@ 000 Poles were to be left in Czech territory , whereas only 2 @,@ 000 Czechs were left on the Polish side " . 
 " The next morning Beneš visited the Polish delegation at Spa . By giving the impression that the Czechs would accept a settlement favorable to the Poles without a plebiscite , Beneš got the Poles to sign an agreement that Poland would abide by any Allied decision regarding Teschen . The Poles , of course , had no way of knowing that Beneš had already persuaded the Allies to make a decision on Teschen . After a brief interval , to make it appear that due deliberation had taken place , the Allied Council of Ambassadors in Paris imposed its ' decision ' . Only then did it dawn on the Poles that at Spa they had signed a blank check . To them , Beneš ' stunning triumph was not diplomacy , it was a swindle ( ... ) As Polish Prime Minister Wincenty Witos warned : ' The Polish nation has received a blow which will play an important role in our relations with the Czechoslovak Republic . The decision of the Council of Ambassadors has given the Czechs a piece of Polish land containing a population which is mostly Polish ... The decision has caused a rift between these two nations which are ordinarily politically and economically united ' ( ... ) . " 
 The affair soured the Prague @-@ Warsaw relationship . 
 = = = = View by Victor S. Mamatey = = = = 
 Another account of the situation in 1918 – 1919 is given by historian Victor S. Mamatey . He notes that when the French government recognised Czechoslovakia 's right to the " boundaries of Bohemia , Moravia , and Austrian Silesia " in its note to Austria of 19 December , the Czechoslovak government acted under the impression it had French support for its claim to Cieszyn Silesia as part of Austrian Silesia . However , Paris believed it gave that assurance only against German @-@ Austrian claims , not Polish ones . Paris , however , viewed both Czechoslovakia and Poland as potential allies against Germany and did not want to cool relations with either . Mamatey writes that the Poles " brought the matter before the peace conference that had opened in Paris on 18 January . On 29 January , the Council of Ten summoned Beneš and the Polish delegate Roman Dmowski to explain the dispute , and on 1 February obliged them to sign an agreement <unk> the area pending its final disposition by the peace conference . Czechoslovakia thus failed to gain her objective in Teschen . " 
 With respect to the arbitration decision itself , Mamatey writes that " On 25 March , to expedite the work of the peace conference , the Council of Ten was divided into the Council of Four ( The " Big Four " ) and the Council of Five ( the foreign ministers ) . Early in April the two councils considered and approved the recommendations of the Czechoslovak commission without a change – with the exception of Teschen , which they referred to Poland and Czechoslovakia to settle in bilateral negotiations . " When the Polish @-@ Czechoslovak negotiations failed , the Allied powers proposed plebiscites in the Cieszyn Silesia and also in the border districts of <unk> and Spiš ( now in Slovakia ) to which the Poles had raised claims . In the end , however , no plebiscites were held due to the rising mutual hostilities of Czechs and Poles in Cieszyn Silesia . Instead , on 28 July 1920 the Spa Conference ( also known as the Conference of Ambassadors ) divided each of the three disputed areas between Poland and Czechoslovakia . 
 = = = Part of Czechoslovakia ( 1920 – 1938 ) = = = 
 The local Polish population felt that Warsaw had betrayed them and they were not satisfied with the division of Cieszyn Silesia . About 12 @,@ 000 to 14 @,@ 000 Poles were forced to leave to Poland . It is not quite clear how many Poles were in Zaolzie in Czechoslovakia . Estimates ( depending mainly whether the Silesians are included as Poles or not ) range from 110 @,@ 000 to 140 @,@ 000 people in 1921 . The 1921 and 1930 census numbers are not accurate since nationality depended on self @-@ declaration and many Poles filled in Czech nationality mainly as a result of fear of the new authorities and as compensation for some benefits . Czechoslovak law guaranteed rights for national minorities but reality in Zaolzie was quite different . Local Czech authorities made it more difficult for local Poles to obtain citizenship , while the process was expedited when the applicant pledged to declare Czech nationality and send his children to a Czech school . Newly built Czech schools were often better supported and equipped , thus inducing some Poles to send their children there . Czechs schools were built in ethnically almost entirely Polish municipalities . This and other factors contributed to the cultural assimilation of Poles and also to significant emigration to Poland . After few years , the heightened nationalism typical for the years around 1920 receded and local Poles increasingly co @-@ operated with Czechs . Still , <unk> was supported by Prague , which did not follow certain laws related to language , legislative and organizational issues . Polish deputies in Czechoslovak National Assembly frequently tried to put those issues on agenda . One way or the other , more and more local Poles thus assimilated into the Czech population . 
 = = = Part of Poland ( 1938 – 1939 ) = = = 
 Within the region originally demanded from Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany in 1938 was the important railway junction city of Bohumín ( Polish : <unk> ) . The Poles regarded the city as of crucial importance to the area and to Polish interests . On 28 September , Edvard Beneš composed a note to the Polish administration offering to reopen the debate surrounding the territorial demarcation in Těšínsko in the interest of mutual relations , but he delayed in sending it in hopes of good news from London and Paris , which came only in a limited form . Beneš then turned to the Soviet leadership in Moscow , which had begun a partial mobilisation in eastern Belarus and the Ukrainian SSR on 22 September and threatened Poland with the dissolution of the Soviet @-@ Polish non @-@ aggression pact . The Czech government was offered 700 fighter planes if room for them could be found on the Czech airfields . On 28 September , all the military districts west of the Urals were ordered to stop releasing men for leave . On 29 September , 330 @,@ 000 reservists were up throughout the western USSR . 
 Nevertheless , the Polish leader , Colonel Józef Beck , believed that Warsaw should act rapidly to forestall the German occupation of the city . At noon on 30 September , Poland gave an ultimatum to the Czechoslovak government . It demanded the immediate evacuation of Czechoslovak troops and police and gave Prague time until noon the following day . At 11 : 45 a.m. on 1 October the Czechoslovak foreign ministry called the Polish ambassador in Prague and told him that Poland could have what it wanted . The Polish Army , commanded by General Władysław <unk> , annexed an area of 801 @.@ 5 km ² with a population of 227 @,@ 399 people . Administratively the annexed area was divided between two counties : <unk> and Cieszyn County . At the same time Slovakia lost to Hungary 10 @,@ 390 km ² with 854 @,@ 277 inhabitants . 
 The Germans were delighted with this outcome , and were happy to give up the sacrifice of a small provincial rail centre to Poland in exchange for the ensuing propaganda benefits . It spread the blame of the partition of the Republic of Czechoslovakia , made Poland a participant in the process and confused political expectations . Poland was accused of being an accomplice of Nazi Germany – a charge that Warsaw was hard @-@ put to deny . 
 The Polish side argued that Poles in Zaolzie deserved the same ethnic rights and freedom as the Sudeten Germans under the Munich Agreement . The vast majority of the local Polish population enthusiastically welcomed the change , seeing it as a liberation and a form of historical justice , but they quickly changed their mood . The new Polish authorities appointed people from Poland to various key positions from which locals were fired . The Polish language became the sole official language . Using Czech ( or German ) by Czechs ( or Germans ) in public was prohibited and Czechs and Germans were being forced to leave the annexed area or become subject to Polonization . Rapid Polonization policies then followed in all parts of public and private life . Czech organizations were dismantled and their activity was prohibited . The Roman Catholic parishes in the area belonged either to the Archdiocese of Breslau ( Archbishop Bertram ) or to the Archdiocese of Olomouc ( Archbishop Leopold <unk> ) , respectively , both traditionally comprising cross @-@ border diocesan territories in Czechoslovakia and Germany . When the Polish government demanded after its takeover that the parishes there be disentangled from these two archdioceses , the Holy See complied . Pope Pius XI , former nuncio to Poland , subjected the Catholic parishes in Zaolzie to an apostolic administration under Stanisław Adamski , Bishop of Katowice . 
 Czechoslovak education in the Czech and German language ceased to exist . About 35 @,@ 000 Czechoslovaks emigrated to core Czechoslovakia ( the later Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia ) by choice or forcibly . The behaviour of the new Polish authorities was different but similar in nature to that of the Czechoslovak ones before 1938 . Two political factions appeared : socialists ( the opposition ) and rightists ( loyal to the new Polish national authorities ) . Leftist politicians and sympathizers were discriminated against and often fired from work . The Polish political system was artificially implemented in Zaolzie . The local Poles continued to feel like second @-@ class citizens and a majority of them were dissatisfied with the situation after October 1938 . Zaolzie remained a part of Poland for only 11 months until the invasion of Poland started on 1 September 1939 . 
 When Poland entered the Western camp in April 1939 , General Gamelin reminded General <unk> of the Polish role in the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia . According to historian Paul N. <unk> , Poland ’ s annexation of Teschen may have contributed to the British and French reluctance to attack the Germans with greater forces in September 1939 . 
 Richard M. Watt describes the Polish capture of Teschen in these words : 
 Amid the general euphoria in Poland – the acquisition of Teschen was a very popular development – no one paid attention to the bitter comment of the Czechoslovak general who handed the region over to the incoming Poles . He predicted that it would not be long before the Poles would themselves be handing Teschen over to the Germans . 
 Watt also writes that 
 the Polish 1938 ultimatum to Czechoslovakia and its acquisition of Teschen were gross tactical errors . Whatever justice there might have been to the Polish claim upon Teschen , its seizure in 1938 was an enormous mistake in terms of the damage done to Poland 's reputation among the democratic powers of the world . 
 Daladier , the French Prime Minister , told the US ambassador to France that " he hoped to live long enough to pay Poland for her cormorant attitude in the present crisis by proposing a new partition . " The Soviet Union was so hostile to Poland over Munich that there was a real prospect that war between the two states might break out quite separate from the wider conflict over Czechoslovakia . The Soviet Prime Minister , Molotov , denounced the Poles as " Hitler 's jackals " . 
 In his postwar memoirs , Winston Churchill compared Germany and Poland to vultures landing on the dying carcass of Czechoslovakia and lamented that " over a question so minor as Teschen , they [ the Poles ] sundered themselves from all those friends in France , Britain and the United States who had lifted them once again to a national , coherent life , and whom they were soon to need to sorely . ... It is a mystery and tragedy of European history that a people capable of every heroic virtue ... as individuals , should repeatedly show such inveterate faults in almost every aspect of their governmental life . " 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 1 September 1939 Nazi Germany invaded Poland , starting World War II in Europe , and subsequently made Zaolzie part of the Military district of Upper Silesia . On 26 October 1939 Nazi Germany unilaterally annexed Zaolzie as part of Landkreis Teschen . During the war , strong Germanization was introduced by the authorities . The Jews were in the worst position , followed by the Poles . Poles received lower food rations , they were supposed to pay extra taxes , they were not allowed to enter theatres , cinemas , etc . Polish and Czech education ceased to exist , Polish organizations were dismantled and their activity was prohibited . Katowice 's Bishop Adamski was deposed as apostolic administrator for the Catholic parishes in Zaolzie and on 23 December 1939 Cesare Orsenigo , nuncio to Germany , returned them to their original archdioceses of Breslau or Olomouc , respectively , with effect of 1 January 1940 . 
 The German authorities introduced terror into Zaolzie . The Nazis especially targeted the Polish intelligentsia , many of whom died during the war . Mass killings , executions , arrests , taking locals to forced labour and deportations to concentration camps all happened on a daily basis . The most notorious war crime was a murder of 36 villagers in and around Żywocice on 6 August 1944 . This massacre is known as the Żywocice tragedy ( Polish : Tragedia <unk> ) . The resistance movement , mostly composed of Poles , was fairly strong in Zaolzie . So @-@ called Volksliste – a document in which a non @-@ German citizen declared that he had some German ancestry by signing it ; refusal to sign this document could lead to deportation to a concentration camp – were introduced . Local people who took them were later on enrolled in the Wehrmacht . Many local people with no German ancestry were also forced to take them . The World War II death toll in Zaolzie is estimated at about 6 @,@ 000 people : about 2 @,@ 500 Jews , 2 @,@ 000 other citizens ( 80 % of them being Poles ) and more than 1 @,@ 000 locals who died in the Wehrmacht ( those who took the Volksliste ) . Also a few hundred Poles from Zaolzie were murdered by Soviets in the Katyn massacre . Percentage @-@ wise , Zaolzie suffered the worst human loss from the whole of Czechoslovakia – about 2 @.@ 6 % of the total population . 
 = = = Since 1945 = = = 
 Immediately after World War II , Zaolzie was returned to Czechoslovakia within its 1920 borders , although local Poles hoped it would again be given to Poland . While most Czechoslovaks of German ethnicity were expelled , the local Polish population again suffered discrimination , as many Czechs blamed them for the discrimination by the Polish authorities in 1938 – 1939 . Polish organizations were banned , and the Czechoslovak authorities carried out many arrests and dismissed many Poles from work . The situation had somewhat improved when the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia took power in February 1948 . Polish property deprived by the German occupants during the war was never returned . 
 As to the Catholic parishes in Zaolzie pertaining to the Archdiocese of Breslau Archbishop Bertram , then residing in the episcopal <unk> <unk> castle in Czechoslovak <unk> ( <unk> ) , appointed František <unk> ( 1888 – 1962 ) as vicar general for the Czechoslovak portion of the Archdiocese of Breslau on 21 June 1945 . In July 1946 Pope Pius XII elevated <unk> to Apostolic Administrator for the Czechoslovak portion of the Archdiocese of Breslau ( colloquially : Apostolic Administration of Český Těšín ; Czech : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , seated in Český Těšín , thus disentangling the parishes from Breslau 's jurisdiction . On 31 May 1978 Pope Paul VI merged the apostolic administration into the Archdiocese of Olomouc through his Apostolic constitution <unk> et <unk> . 
 Poland signed a treaty with Czechoslovakia in Warsaw on 13 June 1958 confirming the border as it existed on 1 January 1938 . After the Communist takeover of power , the industrial boom continued and many immigrants arrived in the area ( mostly from other parts of Czechoslovakia , mainly from Slovakia ) . The arrival of Slovaks significantly changed the ethnic structure of the area , as almost all the Slovak immigrants assimilated into the Czech majority in the course of time . The number of self @-@ declared Slovaks is rapidly declining . The last Slovak elementary school was closed in Karviná several years ago . Since the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993 , Zaolzie has been part of the independent Czech Republic . However a significant Polish minority still remains there . 
 = = = In the European Union = = = 
 The entry of both the Czech Republic and Poland to the European Union in May 2004 , and especially the entry of the countries to the EU 's passport @-@ free Schengen zone in late 2007 , reduced the significance of territorial disputes , ending systematic controls on the border between the countries . Signs prohibiting passage across the state border were removed , with people now allowed to cross the border freely at any point of their choosing . 
 The area now belongs mostly to the Cieszyn Silesia Euroregion with a few municipalities in the Euroregion <unk> . 
 = = Census data = = 
 Ethnic structure of Zaolzie based on census results : 
 Sources : Zahradnik 1992 , 178 – 179 . Siwek 1996 , 31 – 38 . 
 = Cyclone Gillian = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Gillian was the second most powerful of the 2013 – 14 Australian region cyclone season and the strongest in the basin in four years . It developed on 8 March , 2014 , in the Gulf of Carpentaria offshore northern Australia . It drifted southeastward , moving over northwestern Queensland on 10 March as a weak tropical cyclone , and subsequently turned to the southwest and later to the west . Unfavourable wind shear , land interaction , and dry air prevented much restrengthening , and for several days Gillian was a weak tropical low . The storm moved northward and curved westward around the Top End of northwestern Australia , and subsequently moved across several islands in Indonesia , first Timor on 18 March . On 21 March , Gillian again became a tropical cyclone as it moved away from Indonesia . The next day , it passed just southeast of Christmas Island as an intensifying storm , and subsequently Gillian underwent rapid deepening . On 23 March , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) estimated peak 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) . On the same day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) estimated peak 1 @-@ minute sustained winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) , making it a Category 5 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Increased wind shear caused the cyclone to rapidly weaken , and both BoM and JTWC discontinued advisories on Gillian on 26 March . 
 The cyclone affected northern Australia with gusty winds and some rainfall , while on the Indonesian island of Java , it produced strong waves . While moving near Christmas Island , Gillian downed thousands of trees and damaged the roof of one of the oldest buildings on the island . Winds gusted to 96 km / h ( 60 mph ) , making it the first cyclone to affect Christmas Island in six years . The storm also affected the search for missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Gillian were from a weak tropical low that persisted in the eastern Arafura Sea on 6 March . The next day , the system moved into the Gulf of Carpentaria , where it developed convection , or thunderstorms , which organised into curved rainbands . The thunderstorms were located west of a circulation , was exposed due to moderate wind shear . At 06 : 00 UTC on 8 March , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) office in Darwin began issuing warnings on the developing tropical low . Around that time , the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , indicated the high potential for tropical cyclogenesis due to the increasingly organised circulation and convection . At 09 : 00 UTC on 8 March , the BoM upgraded the low to Tropical Cyclone Gillian , and six hours later , the JTWC initiated advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 17P . After its formation , Gillian moved slowly southward toward Queensland within an area of weak steering currents . Despite ongoing wind shear , forecasters anticipated strengthening due to warm water temperatures and favourable outflow . The storm turned more toward the southeast due to the influence of a ridge to the northeast . Early on 10 March , Gillian made landfall along the western Cape York Peninsula of Queensland , after weakening below tropical cyclone status . 
 A strengthening ridge to the south turned the storm to the southwest , bringing Gillian back over water ; however , the circulation became poorly @-@ defined and the convection decreased due to land interaction . Early on 11 March the JTWC discontinued advisories . When Gillian was downgraded to a tropical low , the proximity to land and continued wind shear prevented initial redevelopment . The system tracked westward through the Gulf of Carpentaria due to the ridge to the south , passing just north of Mornington Island on 12 March . The next day , the convection reorganised as the circulation became better defined . On 14 March , the JTWC again assessed a high potential for Gillian redeveloping into a tropical cyclone , noting the appearance of a central dense overcast . At 06 : 00 UTC on the same day , the BoM again upgraded Gillian to tropical cyclone status in the central Gulf of Carpentaria . Due to a weak trough in the region , the storm turned to the northeast . Increasing wind shear again caused the storm to lose organisation early on 15 March , prompting the BoM to downgrade Gillian to a tropical low . 
 Dry air prevented the convection from initially reorganising after Gillian was downgraded . With a ridge to the south , the low turned westward around the Top End of northwestern Australia . On 17 March , the system moved north of 10 ° S , into the area of warning responsibility of the Indonesian Agency for Meteorology , Climatology and Geophysics . By that time , the low @-@ level circulation was disconnected from its mid @-@ level circulation , and land interaction with Indonesia was expected to prevent redevelopment . Late on 18 March , the storm moved over the island of Timor , and over the subsequent two days passed over several other Indonesian islands . On 21 March , the convection reorganised due to a drop in wind shear , and at 12 : 00 UTC that day , the BoM again upgraded Gillian to tropical cyclone status while the storm was about 380 km ( 235 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Jakarta . On the same day , the JTWC also re @-@ initiated advisories on the storm , noting that the circulation had improved as it moved away from Indonesia . With low wind shear and favourable outflow , Gillian gradually intensified while moving southwestward around the ridge . On 22 March , the storm passed just north of Christmas Island while Gillian was developing an eye ; by that time , the 10 minute sustained winds had increased to 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) within an environment favourable for continued strengthening . 
 At 12 : 00 UTC on 22 March , the BoM upgraded the storm to a Category 3 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale with 10 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , the equivalent of a minimal hurricane ; a few hours later , the JTWC followed suit . The cyclone continued to rapidly intensify , with a well @-@ defined anticyclone providing good outflow and very low wind shear . At 12 : 00 UTC on 23 March , the BoM estimated Gillian attained peak 10 minute winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) , making it a Category 5 on the Australian scale , while located about 1000 km ( 620 mi ) south @-@ southwest of Jakarta ; the agency also estimated peak gusts of 285 km / h ( 180 mph ) . At 18 : 00 UTC on 23 March , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . By that time , the eye had contracted to a diameter of 22 km ( 14 mi ) , but was beginning to undergo an eyewall replacement cycle . In addition , Gillian was experiencing increased wind shear due to an approaching trough , indicative of weakening . It continued around the ridge and turned more to the south over open waters well to the west of Western Australia . The eye became less distinct , and early on 25 March Gillian weakened below Category 3 intensity on the Australian scale . On the same day , the JTWC also downgraded the cyclone to tropical storm strength , noting the storm 's rapid weakening corresponded to a decline in Dvorak numbers – a system to estimate intensity via satellites . The circulation became exposed from the convection , and BoM downgraded Gillian to a tropical low on 26 March , the same day that the JTWC discontinued advisories after the circulation began dissipating . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Much of Far North Queensland was affected by rain for over a week as Gillian slowly moved through the Gulf of Carpentaria . The heaviest rains , averaging 150 to 250 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 to 9 @.@ 8 in ) , fell along a corridor along southern part of the Cape York Peninsula from the Mitchell @-@ Alice Rivers National Park to Cooktown . 227 @.@ 4 mm ( 8 @.@ 95 in ) of rain from 9 – 15 March with gusts up to 57 km / h ( 35 mph ) in Kowanyama , Queensland . On 17 March , Gillian brushed the Top End region , bringing only minor rainfall to coastal areas . Winds reached 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) in the Wessel Islands . 
 Across Java , Indonesia , the storm produced moderate to heavy rains . After re @-@ intensifying into a tropical cyclone , swells of 3 to 5 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 16 @.@ 4 ft ) from the storm affected southern shores of the island . Though well to the north of Cyclone Gillian , the system 's circulation drew moisture away from Riau western Indonesia , leaving behind fire @-@ prone conditions . Due in part to illegal logging and slash @-@ and @-@ burn land clearing , several new forest fires began by 23 March . 
 On 20 March , the BoM issued a cyclone watch for Christmas Island , and the next day upgraded it to a cyclone warning . The first cyclone to affect Christmas Island since Cyclone Rosie in 2008 , Gillian approached the island as a category 2 system , causing light to moderate damage . Only one structure on the island , the Immigration Detention Centre , is constructed to cyclone @-@ standards on the island . Island administrator Jon Stanhope stated that the 1 @,@ 700 asylum seekers were likely safer than residents in permanent homes . Gale @-@ force winds , peaking at 96 km / h ( 60 mph ) , battered the island for 15 hours . Several homes lost their roof and one family had to be evacuated ; however , most structures were left unscathed . The roof of the Rumah Tinggi Bar and Restaurant , one of the oldest buildings on the island , was torn off . Thousands of trees were reportedly downed across the island , with jungles sustaining significant losses , and there were power outages due to significant damage to the islands powerlines . Gillian also dropped 181 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) of rainfall over a 24 ‑ hour period on the island . 
 On 23 March , several aircraft at Subang airport in Malaysia taking part in the 26 @-@ nation search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 were grounded due to inclement weather . It was noted that Gillian could hamper rescue efforts in the southern corridor search for the aircraft . Following the discovery of possible debris from the aircraft about 2 @,@ 500 km ( 1 @,@ 600 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Australia , fears arose that large swells from the storm could sink the possible wreckage and make the investigation " almost impossible . " 
 = Let the Right One In ( film ) = 
 Let the Right One In ( Swedish : <unk> den <unk> <unk> in ) is a 2008 Swedish romantic horror film directed by Tomas Alfredson , based on the 2004 novel of the same title by John Ajvide Lindqvist , who also wrote the screenplay . The film tells the story of a bullied 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy who develops a friendship with a vampire child in Blackeberg , a suburb of Stockholm , in the early 1980s . Alfredson , unconcerned with the horror and vampire conventions , decided to tone down many elements of the novel and focus primarily on the relationship between the two main characters . Selecting the lead actors involved a year @-@ long process with open castings held all over Sweden . In the end , the 11 @-@ year @-@ olds Kåre Hedebrant and Lina Leandersson were chosen for the leading roles . They were subsequently commended by both Alfredson and film reviewers for their performances . 
 The film received critical acclaim and won several awards , including the " Founders Award for Best Narrative Feature " at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival and the European Fantastic Film Festivals Federation 's 2008 Méliès d 'Or ( Golden Méliès ) for the " Best European Fantastic Feature Film " , as well as four Guldbagge Awards from the Swedish Film Institute and the Saturn Award for Best International Film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Oskar , a meek 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy , resides with his mother Yvonne in the western Stockholm suburb of Blackeberg in 1981 and occasionally visits his father Erik in the countryside . It is not clear why Erik is living apart from Yvonne , but on one such visit , when Oskar and Erik are enjoying a cosy night playing games , a drunken neighbour arrives and Erik starts to drink heavily with him , breaking up the father / son evening . 
 Oskar 's classmates regularly bully him , and he spends his evenings imagining revenge , collecting clippings from newspapers and magazines about grisly murders . One night he meets Eli , who appears to be a pale girl of his age . Eli has recently moved into the next @-@ door apartment with an older man , Håkan . Eli initially informs Oskar that they cannot be friends . Over time , however , they begin to form a close relationship , with Oskar lending his Rubik 's Cube to Eli , and the two exchanging Morse code messages through their adjoining wall . Håkan requests that Eli stop seeing Oskar . After questioning Oskar about a cut on his cheek , Eli learns that the boy is being bullied by schoolmates and encourages him to stand up for himself . This inspires Oskar to enroll for weight @-@ training classes after school . 
 Earlier , Håkan stops and kills a passerby on a busy footpath near a main road to harvest fresh blood for Eli , but he fails to return with any when he is interrupted by an oncoming dog walker . Eli is prompted to waylay and kill a local man , Jocke , making his way home from a bar after having said goodnight to his best friend , Lacke . A local cat @-@ loving recluse , Gösta , witnesses the attack from his flat , but hardly believes what he has seen and later refuses to report the incident . Håkan hides Jocke 's body in an ice @-@ hole in the local lake . Håkan later makes another well @-@ prepared but incompetently executed effort to obtain blood for Eli by trapping a teenage boy in a changing room after school . The boy 's friends are waiting for him to emerge , and go to see what is holding him up . Before he is discovered , Håkan pours concentrated hydrochloric acid onto his own face , disfiguring it to prevent the authorities from identifying him and tracing Eli . Eli learns that Håkan has been taken to the hospital and scales the building to access his restricted room . Håkan opens the window for Eli and offers his neck to her for feeding ; after she has fed , Håkan falls out of the window on the snow . Now alone , Eli goes to Oskar 's apartment and spends the night with him , during which time they agree to " go steady " . While Eli states , " I 'm not a girl " , Oskar ( ambiguously ) either ignores this or accepts the homoerotic status of the relationship . 
 During an ice skating field trip at the lake , some of Oskar 's fellow students discover Jocke 's body . At the same time , Oskar finally stands up to his tormentors and strikes the leader of the bullies , Conny , on the side of the head with a pole , splitting his ear . Some time later , Oskar shows Eli a private place he knows . Unaware that Eli is a vampire , Oskar suggests that they form a blood bond , and cuts his hand , asking Eli to do the same . Eli , thirsting for blood but not wanting to harm Oskar , laps up his spilled blood before running away . Lacke 's girlfriend , Virginia , is subsequently attacked by Eli . Lacke turns up in time to interrupt the attack . Virginia survives , but she soon discovers that she has become painfully sensitive to sunlight . <unk> for blood , she pays a visit to Gösta , only to be fiercely attacked by his cats . In the hospital , Virginia , who has realized what she has become , asks an orderly to open the blinds in her room . When the sunlight streams in , she bursts into flames . 
 On realizing her true nature , Oskar confronts Eli , who admits to being a vampire . Oskar is initially upset by Eli 's need to kill people for survival . However , Eli insists that their bloodthirsty natures are alike , in that Oskar wants to kill and Eli needs to kill , and she encourages Oskar to " be me , for a little while . " 
 Lacke , who has lost everything because of Eli , tracks her down to the closed @-@ off apartment . Breaking in , he discovers Eli asleep in the bathtub . Lacke prepares to kill Eli , but Oskar , who was hiding inside the apartment , interferes ; Eli immediately wakes up , jumps on Lacke and kills him , feeding on his blood . Eli thanks Oskar and kisses him in gratitude . However , an upstairs neighbor is angrily knocking on the ceiling due to the disturbance the fight has caused . Eli realizes that it is no longer safe to stay and leaves the same night . 
 The next morning , Oskar receives a phone call from Conny 's friend , Martin , who lures Oskar out to resume the after @-@ school fitness program at the local swimming pool . The bullies , led by Conny and his sadistic older brother Jimmy , start a fire to draw Mr Ávila , the teacher in charge , outside , enter the pool @-@ area and order the other children to clear out , which leaves Oskar trapped alone in the pool . Jimmy forces Oskar under the water , threatening to stab his eye out if he does not hold his breath for three minutes . While Oskar is being held underwater , Eli arrives and rescues Oskar by killing and dismembering the bullies except for the most reluctant of their number , Andreas , who is left sobbing on a bench . 
 Later , Oskar is traveling on a train with Eli in a box beside him , safe from sunlight . From inside , Eli taps the word " kiss " to Oskar in Morse code , to which he taps back " puss " ( small kiss in Swedish ) . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kåre Hedebrant as Oskar 
 Lina Leandersson as Eli 
 Elif Ceylan as Eli ( Voice ) 
 Susanne Ruben as Aged Eli 
 Per Ragnar as Håkan 
 Henrik Dahl as Erik 
 Karin Bergquist as Yvonne 
 Peter Carlberg as Lacke 
 Ika Nord as Virginia 
 Mikael Rahm as Jocke 
 Karl Robert Lindgren as Gösta 
 Anders T. <unk> as Morgan 
 Pale Olofsson as Larry 
 Cayetano Ruiz as Magister Ávila 
 Patrik <unk> as Conny 
 Johan <unk> as Andreas 
 Mikael <unk> as Martin 
 Rasmus <unk> as Jimmy 
 <unk> <unk> as Erik 's friend 
 Bernt <unk> as Virginia 's nurse 
 Kajsa <unk> as Oskar 's Teacher 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film project started in late 2004 when John Nordling , a producer at the production company <unk> , contacted Ajvide Lindqvist 's publisher <unk> to acquire the rights for a film adaption of Ajvide Lindqvist 's novel . " At <unk> they just laughed when I called , I was like the 48th they put on the list . But I called John Ajvide Lindqvist and it turned out we had the same idea of what kind of film we should make . It wasn 't about money , but about the right constellation " . A friend introduced Tomas Alfredson to the novel . While he normally does not like to receive books , because " it 's a private thing to choose what to read " , he decided after a few weeks to read it . The depiction of bullying in the novel affected Alfredson deeply . " It 's very hard and very down @-@ to @-@ earth , unsentimental ( ... ) I had some period when I grew up when I had hard times in school ( ... ) So it really shook me " , he told the Los Angeles Times . Ajvide Lindqvist already knew Alfredson 's previous work , and he and Alfredson discovered that they " understood each other very well " . 
 In addition to <unk> , co @-@ producers included Sveriges Television and the regional production @-@ centre <unk> Nord . The production of the film involved a total budget of around 29 million SEK , including support from the Swedish Film Institute and Nordisk <unk> & TV Fond and WAG . 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Lindqvist had insisted on writing the screenplay himself . Alfredson , who had no familiarity with the vampire and horror genres , initially expressed skepticism at having the original author do the adaptation , but found the end result very satisfying . Many of the minor characters and events from the book were removed , and focus directed primarily on the love story between the two leads . In particular , many aspects of the character Håkan , including him being a paedophile , were toned down , and his relationship with Eli was mostly left open to interpretation . Alfredson felt that the film could not deal with such a serious theme as pedophilia in a satisfying manner , and that this element would detract from the story of the children and their relationship . Still , the film provided a few hints , of which Alfredson mentions one in the director 's comments ( Håkan likes children , for the wrong reasons ) . 
 A key passage in the novel details what happens when a vampire enters a room uninvited , an action that traditional vampire lore usually prohibits . Alfredson originally wanted to omit this from the film , but Ajvide Lindqvist was adamant that it had to be included . Alfredson was initially nervous about the scene . He realized in post @-@ production that the sound effects and music made it " American , in a bad way " , and had to be removed for the scene to work . The end result , which shows Eli slowly beginning to bleed from her eyes , ears , and pores , received positive notices from many critics . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian described it as a " haemophilia of rejection " . 
 The novel presents Eli as an androgynous boy , castrated centuries before by a sadistic vampire nobleman . The film handles the issue of Eli 's gender more ambiguously : a brief scene in which Eli changes into a dress offers a glimpse of a suggestive scar but no explicit elaboration . When Oskar asks Eli to become his girlfriend , Eli tries to tell Oskar " I 'm not a girl " . An actress plays Eli 's character , but her voice was considered to be too high pitched , so it was dubbed by voice actress Elif Ceylan . According to an interview with the director , as the film was originally conceived , flashbacks explained this aspect in more detail , but these scenes were eventually cut . In the end , Ajvide Lindqvist was satisfied with the adaptation . When Alfredson showed him eight minutes of footage for the first time , he " started to cry because it was so damn beautiful " . He subsequently described the film as a " masterpiece " . " It doesn 't really matter that [ Alfredson ] didn 't want to do it the way I wanted it in every respect . He could obviously never do that . The film is his creative process " , he said . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting of the lead actors took almost a year , with open castings held all over Sweden . Kåre Hedebrant , selected to audition for the role as Oskar after an initial screening at his school , eventually landed the role . Lina Leandersson responded to an online advertisement seeking a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy or girl " good at running " . After three more auditions , she was selected to play Eli . 
 Alfredson has described the casting process as the most difficult part of making the film . He had particular concerns about the interaction between the two leads , and the fact that those who had read the book would have a preconceived notion of how the characters were supposed to look . He wanted the actors to look innocent , and be able to interact in front of the camera . They were supposed to be " mirror images of each other . She is everything he isn 't . Dark , strong , brave , and a girl . ( ... ) Like two sides of the same coin . " On another occasion , Alfredson stated that " [ c ] asting is 70 percent of the job ; it 's not about picking the right people to make the roles . It is about creating chords , how a B and A minor interact together , and are played together . " 
 In the end , Alfredson expressed satisfaction with the result , and has frequently lauded Hedebrant and Leandersson for being " extremely intelligent " , " incredibly wise " , and " unprecedentedly fantastic . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Although the film takes place in Blackeberg , a suburb of Stockholm , principal photography took place in Luleå ( in the north of Sweden ) to ensure enough snow and cold weather . The area where the filming took place dated from around the same time as Blackeberg , and has similar architecture . However , Alfredson shot a few scenes in the Blackeberg area . In particular , the scene where Eli leaps down on Virginia from a tree , was shot in the town square of Blackeberg . Another scene , where Eli attacks Jocke in an underpass , was shot in the nearby suburb <unk> . The original Blackeberg underpass that Lindqvist had envisioned was deemed too high to fit in the picture . Some of the outdoor close @-@ up scenes were made in a super cold studio . 
 The jungle gym where much of the interaction between Oskar and Eli takes place was constructed specifically for the film . Its design was intended to suit the CinemaScope format better than a regular jungle gym , which would typically have to be cropped height @-@ wise . 
 Most of the filming used a single , fixed , Arri <unk> camera , with almost no handheld usage , and few cuts . Tracking shots relied on a track @-@ mounted dolly , rather than Steadicam , to create calm , predictable camera movement . The crew paid special attention to lighting . Cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema and director Alfredson invented a technique they called " spray light " . In an interview , van Hoytema describes it as follows : " If you could capture dull electrical light in a can and spray it like hairspray across Eli ’ s apartment , it would have the same result as what we created " . For the emotional scenes between Oskar and Eli , van Hoytema consistently diffused the lighting . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The film contains around 50 shots with computer @-@ generated imagery . Alfredson wanted to make them very subtle and almost unnoticeable . The sequence where multiple cats attack Virginia , one of the most complicated scenes to film , required several weeks of drafting and planning . The crew used a combination of real cats , stuffed cats and computer @-@ generated imagery . 
 The film features analogue sound @-@ effects exclusively throughout . The lead sound @-@ designer Per Sundström explained : " The key to good sound effects is working with natural and real sounds . ( ... ) These analogue sounds can be digitally reworked as much as necessary , but the origin has to be natural " . Sundström designed the soundscape to come as close to the actors as possible , with audible heartbeats , breathing , and swallowing . Late in production it was also decided to overdub actress Lina Leandersson 's voice with a less feminine one , to underline the backstory . " She 's 200 years old , not twelve . We needed that incongruity . Besides , it makes her menacing " , Sundström said . Both men and women up to the age of forty auditioned for the role . After a vote , the film team ended up selecting Elif Ceylan , who provides all of Eli 's spoken dialogue . Footage of Ceylan eating melon or sausage was combined with various animal noises to emulate the sound of Eli biting into her victims and drinking their blood . 
 The sound crew won a Guldbagge Award for Best Achievement from the Swedish Film Institute , for the " nightmarishly great sound " in the film . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Swedish composer Johan Söderqvist wrote the score . Alfredson instructed him to write something that sounded hopeful and romantic , in contrast to the events that take place in the film . Söderqvist has described the outcome as consisting of both darkness and light , and emphasized melody and harmony as the most important qualities of the music . 
 The Slovak National Symphony Orchestra performed the score ; two years earlier they had performed the score for the first Swedish vampire movie , <unk> . It placed fourth on Ain 't It Cool News ' Top 10 Best Scores Of 2008 List , being described as " scrupulously weaving together strains of bone @-@ chillingly cold horror with the encompassing warmth of newly acquired love " . If magazine described the score as " the most beautifully emotional score yet to grace the undead . It ’ s a feeling of tender melancholy that delivers its scares in a subtle , chamber orchestra way " . 
 The song " <unk> i min bil " , written and performed by Per Gessle , resonates repeatedly through the film . Originally an outtake from Gessle 's solo album En <unk> man , the song was specially provided for the film , to resemble the sound of popular 1980s pop group Gyllene Tider . Gessle has described the song as a " bluesy tune with a nice guitar hook ” . Other songs in the film include " <unk> " from 1968 , written and performed by future ABBA member <unk> <unk> , " Flash in the Night " from 1981 , written by Tim Norell and Björn Håkansson and performed by Secret Service , and " <unk> å <unk> <unk> " by <unk> <unk> . 
 On November 11 , 2008 , <unk> Media released the film soundtrack in a limited edition of 500 copies . It contains 21 of Söderqvist 's original scores from the film . 
 = = Release = = 
 Let the Right One In received its first performance at the Gothenburg Film Festival in Sweden on 26 January 2008 where Alfredson won the Festival 's Nordic Film Prize . It subsequently played at several other film festivals , including the Tribeca Film Festival in New York ( 24 April 2008 ) , where it won the Founders Award for Best Narrative Feature , the Edinburgh Film Festival on 25 Jun 2008 where it won the Rotten Tomatoes Critical Consensus Award , and the Neuchâtel International Fantastic Film Festival in Switzerland on 3 July 2008 where it won the Méliès d 'Argent ( Silver Méliès ) . The Swedish premiere was originally planned for 18 April 2008 , but following the positive response from the festival screenings , the producers decided to postpone the release until autumn , to allow for a longer theatrical run . At one time there was a plan to release the film for a special series of screenings in Luleå , beginning 24 September and lasting seven days . This was canceled when the Swedish Film Institute announced that Everlasting Moments had been selected over Let the Right One In as Sweden 's submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . The distributors released it on 24 October 2008 in Sweden , Norway , and as a limited release in the United States . In Australia , the film was released on 19 March 2009 . The film was released in cinemas in the UK on 10 April 2009 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Swedish critics generally expressed positive reactions to the film . In 26 reviews listed at the Swedish @-@ language review site <unk> it achieved an average rating of 4 @.@ 0 out of 5 . Svenska Dagbladet gave the film a rating of 5 out of 6 and hailed Alfredson for his ability to " tell [ stories ] through pictures instead of words about a society where hearts are turned to icicles and everyone is left on their own , but also about love warm and red like blood on white melting snow " . Göran <unk> for SVT 's <unk> Sverige gave the film 4 out of 5 and described the film as " kitchen sink fantasy " that " gives the vampire story back something it has been missing for a long time : the ability to really frighten us " . Expressen and Göteborgs @-@ Posten were less impressed and gave the film 3 out of 5 . Expressen criticized it for being unappealing to those uninitiated in vampire films while Göteborgs @-@ Posten believed the supporting characters had lost the emotional depth that made the novel so successful . 
 Let the Right One In received widespread critical acclaim in the U.S. As of 2014 the film has a 98 % " Certified fresh " rating at Rotten Tomatoes based on 175 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 . Additionally , Metacritic has reported an average score of 82 out of 100 based on 30 reviews which indicates " universal acclaim " . Reviewers have commented on the beautiful cinematography and its quiet , restrained approach to the sometimes bloody and violent subject matter . KJ Doughton of Film Threat thought the visuals in the ending were fresh and inventive and would be talked about for years to come . Roger Ebert gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , calling it a vampire movie that takes vampires seriously , drawing comparisons to Nosferatu and to Nosferatu the Vampyre . He described it as a story of " two lonely and desperate kids capable of performing dark deeds without apparent emotion " , and praised the actors for " powerful " performances in " draining " roles . Ebert later called the film " The best modern vampire movie " . One negative review came from Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly , who gave the movie a " C " , characterizing it as a " Swedish head @-@ scratcher " , with " a few creepy images but very little holding them together " . 
 Bloody Disgusting ranked the film first in their list of the ' Top 20 Horror Films of the Decade ' , with the article saying " It ’ s rare enough for a horror film to be good ; even rarer are those that function as genuine works of art . Let the Right One In is one of those films – an austerely beautiful creation that reveals itself slowly , like the best works of art do . The simplicity of the story allows Swedish director Tomas Alfredson to focus on these two pre @-@ teen characters with a penetrating insight that not only makes it a great vampire film but a great coming @-@ of @-@ age film as well . At its core , the film is , simply , a human story , a pensive meditation on the transcendent possibilities of human connection . Most of all , it ’ s a film that sticks with you , and whose stature will continue to grow in the decades to come . " 
 The film was ranked # 15 in Empire magazine 's 2010 list of " The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema " . In their rationale , the authors noted that , " in these days where every second movie seems to feature vampires , it takes a very special twist on the legend to surprise us – but this one knocked us out and then bit us in the jugular " , and found that the " strange central friendship " between the two lead characters was what made the film " so frightening , and so magnetic " . In the early 2010s , Time Out conducted a poll with several authors , directors , actors and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films . Let the Right One In placed at number 28 on their top 100 list . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released in North America on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in March 2009 by Magnet Films , and in the UK in August by Momentum Pictures . The American discs feature both the original Swedish dialogue and an English dubbed version , while the European versions feature only the Swedish , and an audio @-@ descriptive track in English . Icons of Fright reported that the American release had been criticized for using new , oversimplified English subtitles instead of the original theatrical subtitles . Following customer complaints , Magnet stated that they would release an updated version with the original theatrical subtitles , but will not exchange current discs . Director Tomas Alfredson also expressed his dissatisfaction with the DVD subtitles , calling it a " turkey translation " . " If you look on the ' net , people are furious about how bad it is done " , he added . The UK release retains the theatrical subtitles . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Alfredson won the Gothenburg Film Festival 's Nordic Film Prize as director of Let the Right One In on the grounds that he " succeeds to transform a vampire movie to a truly original , touching , amusing and heart @-@ warming story about friendship and marginalisation " . Let the Right One In was nominated in five categories for the Swedish Film Institute 's 2008 Guldbagge Award , eventually winning for best directing , screenplay and cinematography as well as a Best Achievement @-@ award to production designer Eva Norén . In awarding the film the " Founders Award for Best Narrative Feature " , the top award at the Tribeca Film Festival , the jury described the film as a " mesmerizing exploration of loneliness and alienation through masterful reexamination of the vampire myth " . The film also won the Méliès d 'Argent ( Silver Méliès ) at the Swiss Neuchâtel International Fantastic Film Festival ( <unk> ) and went on to win the Méliès d 'Or ( Golden Méliès ) for the " Best European Fantastic Feature Film " , awarded by the European Fantastic Film Festivals Federation of which <unk> is a part . Other awards include the first Rotten Tomatoes Critical Consensus Award at the Edinburgh Film Festival . 
 Despite being an internationally successful film , Let the Right One In was not submitted by Sweden for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . The details surrounding the film 's eligibility for the award resulted in some confusion . Being released on 24 October 2008 , the film would normally be eligible for submission for the 82nd Academy Awards . However , the producers decided to release it on 24 September as a seven @-@ day limited run only in Luleå . This would be exactly enough to meet the criteria for the 81st Academy Awards instead . When the Swedish Film Institute on 16 September announced that Jan Troell 's Everlasting Moments had been selected instead of Let the Right One In , the Luleå screenings were cancelled . Despite the fact that the film was released within the eligibility period for the 82nd Academy Awards , it wasn 't among the films considered because the Swedish Film Institute doesn 't allow a film to be considered twice . 
 = = American version = = 
 After the release of Let the Right One In took place , Cloverfield director Matt Reeves signed on to write and direct an English @-@ language version for Overture Films and Hammer Films . Hammer Films acquired the rights at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival , where Let the Right One In won the " Founders Award for Best Narrative Feature " , and Overture films planned to release the film in 2010 . Alfredson has expressed unhappiness about the idea of a remake , saying that " Remakes should be made of movies that aren 't very good , that gives you the chance to fix whatever has gone wrong " and expressing concern that the end result would be too mainstream . Alfredson was initially asked to direct the remake , but he turned it down stating that " I am too old to make the same film twice and I have other stories that I want to tell . " Lindqvist , in contrast , said that he had heard that Reeves " will make a new film based on the book , and not remake the Swedish film " and so " it 'll be something completely different , but it 's going to be really interesting to see . " Hammer Films producer Simon Oakes referred to the project as a remake of the film and later not as a remake , but just as " Reeves ' version " . Let Me In was released in late 2010 starring Chloë Grace Moretz and Kodi Smit @-@ McPhee as Abby and Owen , Eli 's and Oskar 's respective counterparts , and received very positive reviews despite not performing well at the box office . 
 = Hunter Mariners = 
 The Hunter Mariners were an Australian professional rugby league club based in the Hunter Region 's largest city , Newcastle . Hunter was formed in mid @-@ 1995 and was later disbanded at the end of 1997 . The club was formed because of the Super League war , which was the rivalry between the traditional Australian Rugby League competition and the new media driven Super League competition . The team competed in the inaugural and only Super League season in 1997 , as well as that year 's World Club Challenge . 
 The Mariners faced much adversity in the Newcastle region because of the Australian Rugby League 's Newcastle Knights team being already well established in the region . The club played its home games at Topper Stadium and missed out on the finals of the 1997 Super League season , but made the grand final of the World Club Challenge . The team was overshadowed by the Newcastle Knights who won the ARL competition and were admitted into the 1998 re @-@ united competition . The Mariners were disbanded after being left out of the new competition because they believed that the Hunter region could not support two entities . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The New South Wales Rugby League competition ( NSWRL ) had been formed in 1908 as the first rugby league competition in Australia . There was a Newcastle based club in the first two seasons of the Sydney @-@ based competition , but they eventually left to form their own Newcastle Rugby League competition . It was not until 1988 that another Newcastle based team was admitted into the NSWRL . In 1995 , the Australian Rugby League ( ARL ) took control of the competition amid the beginning of the Super League war . It was then that News Limited began proposing and deliberating a rival rugby league competition and the twenty teams which competed in the 1995 ARL season were split between the Super League and ARL competitions . 
 The Newcastle Knights , the Newcastle @-@ based team formed in 1988 , aligned itself with the ARL and the new Super League competition was left without a Newcastle @-@ based team . The Super League then established their own Newcastle @-@ based team . The financially successful Newcastle Wests Leagues Club was given a licence to form a club for the 1996 inaugural Super League season . 
 In July 1995 , it was officially announced that the Newcastle @-@ based team would be called the " Hunter Mariners " . However , in the middle of 1995 , members of the Newcastle Wests Leagues Club did not want the club involved in the rebel competition , and the club held a meeting after 5 @,@ 000 fans signed a petition objecting to the club ’ s involvement . After this , and when local unions became involved in the protest , the Leagues Club abandoned the licence . The club then became owned and supported by News Limited . 
 In early 1996 , the Hunter Mariners club was officially launched , without a home ground , but on that same day the Super League was banned from running its rebel competition . Originally the Mariners were allowed to use the Newcastle Knights home ground Marathon Stadium by the Showground Trust , but the Supreme Court found that they had no rights to play there . The club eventually played at Topper Stadium , sharing the ground with the National Soccer League 's Newcastle Breakers , and used over $ 1 million to upgrade facilities at the stadium . After an appeal in mid @-@ 1996 , the Super League was officially allowed to run the competition , which began in 1997 . 
 = = = 1997 Super League Telstra Cup = = = 
 The Mariners lost their first three games of the premiership season , their first a narrow loss on their home ground . However , after the first loss at home , the Mariners were able to win seven consecutive matches at Topper Stadium . Despite this home ground record , Mariners were never able to win away from home . They lost all nine matches played away from their stadium , and subsequently missed out on the finals for the Super League season . 
 The Mariners were able to produce some representative players throughout their one season . Noel Goldthorpe and Robbie Ross were selected in the Super League Tri @-@ Series and Goldthorpe scored the winning points for New South Wales in the final of that series . Tyran Smith , Tony Iro and Kevin Iro were all selected for the New Zealand representative team . While mid @-@ year find Brett Kimmorley was the club ’ s sole selection for Australia in the Super League Test series against Great Britain . 
 = = = 1997 World Club Championship = = = 
 The Super League had also begun a rugby league competition in England , and they had created a mixed competition , encompassing Super League clubs from Australia , New Zealand , France and England , known as the World Club Challenge . The 1997 World Club Championship was held in order to crown " the best club in the world " . The Mariners were a part of Australasia ’ s group A and competed in England , before returning to complete the Australian part of the competition . The Mariners won all three games in England , over Paris Saint @-@ Germain , Castleford and Sheffield . They returned home to again win the three games at Topper Stadium and therefore made the finals of the competition . 
 The finals system meant that they would have to play their finals match in England against English Super League club Wigan . The Mariners shocked the club and the league by winning 22 – 18 . That score line would again be repeated in the grand final qualifier against Australian club Cronulla , another match the Mariners were expected to lose . But the Mariners were able to defeat the Australian Super League runners @-@ up to take themselves to the grand final of the competition . Against the winners of the Super League grand final , Brisbane , the Mariners were blown away by the competition favourites . In what would be their final rugby league match as a club , the Mariners were down at half @-@ time 26 – 4 and the final scoreline of 36 – 12 prevented the Mariners taking out a A $ 1 million prize . 
 = = = Demise = = = 
 The agreement of the ARL and Super League was to unify and become one competition , to be known as the National Rugby League ( NRL ) , was that only twenty teams would compete in the competition in 1998 . This meant that three of the twenty @-@ two teams from both competitions was to be <unk> with the addition of a new Melbourne based team . With the other Newcastle @-@ based team , the Newcastle Knights winning the 1997 premiership , they were admitted into the new competition , however the NRL saw that two Newcastle based teams would not be financially viable . 
 Late in 1997 , the club was offered to merge with Gold Coast @-@ based team the Gold Coast Chargers , which would be known as the Gold Coast Mariners and would be based in the Gold Coast . However the Gold Coast party withdrew late to go alone in the 1998 competition , and while the Mariners tried to do the same , they , along with South Queensland Crushers and Western Reds , were not admitted into the NRL competition , thus ending their tenure as a first @-@ grade rugby league team . 
 = = Representative players = = 
 Players from the Hunter Mariners that have represented another teams while at the club include Australian international Brett Kimmorley and New Zealand internationals Kevin Iro , Tony Iro and Tyran Smith . Robbie Ross and Noel Goldthorpe also played for New South Wales in the State of origin . 
 = = Players = = 
 In the Super League season , the Mariners used a total of twenty @-@ nine players over the eighteen games . 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 = = = Individual records = = = 
 Scott Hill , Peter Gregory , and Tony Stone share the record of playing all eighteen Super League games for the Mariners , being the players with the most first grade games . Nick <unk> , however is the Mariner 's most prolific record holder , with the most first grade points for the team with 76 points . This encompasses the most tries for the team with nine as well as most goals with twenty . <unk> has the most tries and goals in a match with three and five scored respectively in a match . The Mariners have only had three representatives , Robbie Ross and Noel Goldthorpe represented New South Wales in the Super League Tri @-@ Series while Brett Kimmorley represented Australia in the Super League test matches . 
 = = = Team honours = = = 
 Their home ground success , winning seven from nine matches , was never able to attract decent figure crowds , their highest reaching 7 @,@ 719 . Compared with the Super League competition average of 12 @,@ 347 and the nearby Newcastle Knights had an average of 14 @,@ 257 home attendances . With crowds at these levels , the Mariners were unsuccessfully competing in the Newcastle area . 
 = Existence ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Existence " is the twenty @-@ first episode and eighth season finale of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files and 182nd episode overall . The episode first premiered on Fox in the United States on May 20 , 2001 , and subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on June 28 , 2001 on Sky1 . It was written by executive producer Chris Carter and directed by Kim Manners . " Existence " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 4 and was watched by 8 @.@ 58 million households and 14 million viewers , overall . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) — as well as ex @-@ FBI agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , continuing from the previous episode , " Essence " , a new type of alien , called a Super Soldier programmed to destroy any traces of alien involvement on Earth , is introduced . Mulder , Doggett , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , and Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) help Scully escape from Billy Miles with Special Agent Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) to a remote town . Shortly after , Skinner kills Krycek and Scully delivers an apparently normal baby with the alien Super Soldiers surrounding her . Without explanation , the aliens leave the area as Mulder arrives . 
 " Existence " is a story milestone for the series . It , along with previous season eight episodes starting with " Per Manum " , helped to introduce the story arc featuring the super @-@ soldiers which continued throughout the ninth season . The episode was the last to feature Fox Mulder 's character until the series finale the following year . As such , the last scene with Doggett and Reyes in Kersh 's office was intended to show the " New X @-@ Files " without David Duchovny . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with a metal box brought in containing the remains of Billy Miles . The coroner examines it and notices a small piece of metal . After he leaves the room , the metal begins to spin , growing into what looks like the beginnings of a spine . Meanwhile , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and Monica Reyes arrive at the abandoned town where Special Agent John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) was born . 
 Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) is seated in a chair in Assistant Director Walter Skinner 's office , where he is shown a video from the morgue . Skinner tells him that Miles is somehow alive and still out to get Scully and her unborn child . Suddenly , Agent Gene Crane comes to Doggett and tells him that there is a person — Knowle Rohrer — who wants to see him , about issues concerning Miles and Scully . This leaves Fox Mulder and Skinner to interrogate Krycek . Rohrer fabricates a story to Doggett that Miles is part of a Military Project to create a super soldier and that Scully had a chip put in the back of her neck during her abduction to make her pregnant with the first organic version of a super soldier . 
 In Skinner 's office , Krycek gets up from his chair and starts leaving out the doorway . Skinner goes after him , then turns around and sees Miles approaching behind him . Skinner just manages to escape with Krycek ( who was purposely closing the elevator doors on Skinner ) , but Miles ' hand breaks through the elevator , injuring Skinner . At the hospital , Mulder distrusts what Doggett has been told by Knowle Rohrer , so the two set out to find out how trustworthy Rohrer really is . Meanwhile , at Doggett 's abandoned hometown where Reyes and Scully are hiding out , Reyes sees someone running off and follows whoever it is . A car pulls up and she meets a trooper who agrees to help with the birth . As Mulder and Doggett pull into the garage , they find Krycek with a passenger , who happens to be Rohrer . Mulder believes that Rohrer and Krycek are colluding together . Doggett covertly pursues Rohrer and learns that Rohrer has an accomplice : Agent Crane . 
 Mulder 's own problems arise when his cell phone rings and Krycek disappears from his car . Mulder , after learning what Doggett has witnessed , believes that Crane gave Krycek access to the FBI . Suddenly , Krycek smashes through the car window with his prosthetic hand and destroys the cell phone . Krycek aims his gun at Mulder and tells him to get out . Krycek is about to pull the trigger when a bullet administered by Skinner pierces his arm . Krycek tries to pick his gun up again , but Skinner shoots his hand , rendering it useless . Krycek pushes his gun over and tells Skinner to shoot Mulder . Instead , Skinner raises his gun and shoots Krycek in the head . Doggett attempts to apprehend Rohrer and Crane but ends up being chased by the two . The pursuit ends up in the FBI garage and ends violently with Crane being run over and Rohrer crashing his car into the garage wall . Both men are presumed dead . 
 Scully goes into labour and Reyes helps her deliver an apparently normal baby with the alien Super Soldiers surrounding them . Without explanation , the aliens leave the area as Mulder arrives . While Doggett and Reyes report to the FBI Headquarters , Doggett initiates an investigation into Kersh after a late night meeting between him and Rohrer . Mulder takes Scully and their newborn baby back to her apartment . After marveling over the baby and discussing recent events , the two agents share a long , passionate kiss . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 " Existence " was written during filming , which led to Kim Manners — the director of the episode — helping with the script . Because of this , several of the action scenes , such as the fight at the FBI headquarters , were Manners ' ideas . The last scene with Doggett and Reyes in Kersh 's office is the birth of the " New X @-@ Files " without David Duchovny . From here on , Monica Reyes became a main character on the show . Star Trek : The Next Generation regular Denise Crosby briefly appears as Scully 's gynecologist . The episode features the last appearance of Nicholas Lea , sans the series finale . Reportedly , Lea had become tired of the role and was growing weary of the ambiguous nature of the character . When Lea learned that his character was to be killed off in " Existence " , he reportedly welcomed the news . The night the episode aired , Lea wrote on his personal website : " I felt that [ Krycek ] wasn 't getting a fair shake anyway . [ ... ] I wanted more in @-@ depth ideas about the character and it never came to pass . It kind of stopped being fun to play . " 
 The final scene of the episode featuring Mulder and Scully kissing almost was not filmed . Initially , the script called for Mulder to kiss Scully 's forehead . Both Duchovny and Manners argued that the scene was " mundane " and that they had " been teasing and doing that bull for so long " that they wanted " a real kiss at this point " . During the birth of Scully 's child , several allusions to the story of the birth of Jesus are made , including Mulder following a star to find Scully and The Lone Gunmen bringing gifts for the baby , much like the Three Wise Men . Scully 's child was portrayed by Jerry Shiban , who is the son of John Shiban , a producer who worked on The X @-@ Files as well as The Lone Gunmen . He was the first of seven babies to represent the character and the only one to play Baby William for a single episode . 
 = = = Effects and filming = = = 
 The episode featured several elaborate CGI scenes . The first scene with the vertebrae was entirely computer generated by visual effects head John Wash . Alex Krycek was killed by a CGI bullet straight through the head , which again was Manners ' idea . Extra money was budgeted for Krycek 's death . Mitch Pileggi was very happy when he was told he would be killing Krycek ; he explained , " when they came to me and told me that I was the one that was going to kill Krycek , I was elated . Not because I wanted Nick to go away or anything , it was just from a character stand @-@ point ; Skinner just wanted to kill Krycek so bad . " Manners later called it one of his " favorite scenes [ he 'd ] ever directed " and one of the " best scenes [ he 's ] seen in a long time on television . " 
 The car scene with Gillian Anderson and Annabeth Gish was shot at Kanan Road , Malibu . Anderson and Gish sat in what is known as an insert car , while the crew sat in a pickup car in front of them . The birth scene was filmed at the old Paramount Movie Ranch . According to director Kim Manners , the most difficult scene to shoot was in the elevator with Mitch Pileggi and Nicholas Lea . Gish had never worked much with guns before joining The X @-@ Files cast , so the producers got a retired LAPD officer to teach her more about firearms . She did some shooting practices before returning to the set . The FBI garage scenes were shot in Century City and took a total of four days to finish . 
 The episode also contains a scene wherein Reyes serenades Scully with " karaoke renditions " of whale calls . Gish later noted that " [ Series creator Chris Carter ] gave me a tape of whale songs , which was hysterical to be playing in my trailer . " Carter was inspired to write the scene after a friend gave him a Paul Winter album that incorporated whale sounds into the music . Carter later explained that , " I just thought it was kind of much like [ Reyes ' ] character to appreciate that . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Existence " premiered on May 20 , 2001 in the United States on Fox . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 4 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 4 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 58 million households and by 14 million viewers , overall . In the United Kingdom , " Existence " premiered on June 28 , 2001 and received 0 @.@ 65 million viewers , placing The X @-@ Files number three in the top ten broadcasts for Sky1 that week behind Star Trek : Voyager and The Simpsons . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Will the beginning be the end ? " The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Existence " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " . While offering a positive opinion in regards to the finale as a whole , he felt that " Existence " dragged more so than " Essence " , resulting in a less interesting episode . He also felt that the overarching mythology of the series had long ago become too convoluted to make sense , but that the " human pieces of the show still work , and that includes Doggett . " Contra Costa Times columnists George Avalos and Michael Liedtke were pleased with the episode noting that the last scene was " beautifully written " . Avalos and Liedtke also reacted positively to the death of Alex Krycek at the hands of Skinner , saying it was the best scene in the episode . Despite their praise , however , they stressed that " Existence " was not as exciting as the previous episode , " Essence , " or the 1998 The X @-@ Files feature film . Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity gave the episode an A- rating , noting that " season eight 's finale goes out with a big fat juicy kiss between Mulder and Scully , at long last " . Gareth Wigmore of TV Zone was positive toward both " Essence " and " Existence " . Wigmore gave the episodes a 9 out of 10 rating and wrote " the reason that this two @-@ parter works is that its plot is simple enough for the audience to still have a handle on " . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a more mixed two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a scathing review and awarded it no stars out of four . She heavily derided the plot , and wrote , " Thus <unk> the Mulder @-@ and @-@ Scully era of The X @-@ Files , and what a load of sanctimonious crap it turned out to be ! " 
 = I Am ... World Tour ( album ) = 
 I Am ... World Tour is a live DVD / CD concert film and live album by American R & B recording artist Beyoncé . Beyoncé produced , directed , and edited the concert film for her own production company Parkwood Pictures . The DVD was filmed in the presence of more than a million fans during her worldwide I Am ... World Tour , running from March 2009 through February 2010 , in support of her third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . The DVD release is a combination of performances from the tour , including guest appearances from Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West , as well as backstage moments . Beyoncé explained that the idea of filming her worldwide performances came when she realized that she was feeling lonely . She edited the DVD for nine months and it serves as her directorial debut . 
 The DVD was released in three separate editions ; standard , deluxe and Blu @-@ ray . In the United States , the standard edition was only made available exclusively at Wal @-@ Mart on November 26 , 2010 . The deluxe edition was released in several countries around the world on the same date . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released from December 3 , 2010 in a list of selected countries only . She promoted it by appearing on several shows , including ABC 's Nightline and by holding a screening of her DVD in New York , in presence of several fans and artists on November 21 , 2010 . Prior to the release , numerous trailers were posted on Beyoncé 's official website . I Am ... World Tour premiered exclusively on ABC on November 25 , 2010 as a 90 @-@ minute Thanksgiving special . 
 Upon the release of the DVD , it received mixed to positive reviews from music critics who generally praised the high @-@ energy performances of the songs as well as Beyoncé 's vocals . I Am ... World Tour debuted at number one on the Billboard Music DVD Chart , giving Beyoncé her second consecutive number one DVD ( and third overall ) in the United States . It was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . The DVD was also successful worldwide , peaking inside the top ten on the DVD charts in every country after its release . It became the best @-@ selling music DVD of 2010 in the world and seventh best @-@ selling of 2011 . I Am ... World Tour was nominated in the category for Best Long Form Music Video at the 54th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 To promote I Am ... Sasha Fierce , Beyoncé embarked on the worldwide I Am ... Tour with several performances . The tour kicked off in Edmonton , Canada on March 26 , 2009 , in support of the album . The European leg of the tour started on April 26 , 2009 , in Zagreb , Croatia and ended on June 9 , 2009 , in London , England . On June 21 , 2009 , she began the third leg of the tour in the United States and finished in August with a 4 @-@ day stint at Encore Las Vegas on the Las Vegas Strip . Starting on September 15 , 2009 , the fourth leg began in Melbourne , Australia and finished on September 24 in Perth , Australia . Beyoncé then went on performing in Asia , the Middle East , Europe , Africa , and the United Kingdom , before finishing the 2009 portion of the tour on November 24 in Belfast , Northern Ireland . The tour had its final leg in 2010 , visiting Latin America . Starting on February 4 , 2010 , in Florianópolis , Brazil , she visited five other places before ending in Trinidad on February 18 , 2010 . According to Pollstar , the tour earned $ 17 @.@ 2 million between January 1 , and June 30 , 2010 , which added onto her total of $ 86 million for her first 93 concerts in 2009 , bringing the tour total to $ 103 @.@ 2 million for the 97 shows . 
 While Beyoncé was on tour , she played at a Las Vegas residency at the Encore Theatre in Las Vegas . Titled I Am ... Yours , the August 2 , 2009 show was recorded and later released as a DVD , audio CD and television special in late November 2009 . 
 After Beyoncé finished her concert at the Trent FM Arena in Nottingham , England on November 20 , 2009 , she announced to the crowd that a new album would be released the next year . I Am ... World Tour features performances from Beyoncé 's tour . She explained that the idea of filming her worldwide performances came when she realized that she was feeling lonely , stating " there was one moment I was in China and I was in this huge suite and I looked out the window and there were just thousands of people walking and I couldn 't believe my life ... I guess I was a bit lonely and I wanted to talk to someone so I opened up my computer and I just talked . " Additionally , Beyoncé revealed that the DVD will show more of her intimate side . The album 's track listing was confirmed on November 12 , 2010 . Both Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West make guest appearances on the DVD . In November 2010 , there was a sweepstakes to win tickets to an exclusive screening of the DVD . 
 In the United States , the standard edition of the DVD was released exclusively at Wal @-@ Mart stores on November 26 , 2010 . The deluxe edition of I Am ... World Tour includes the concert DVD , a live audio CD , an exclusive documentary , and a 40 @-@ page four @-@ color booklet of never before seen photos of her journey around the world , made available on November 30 , 2010 in several countries . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on December 7 , 2010 . A live instrumentals album was released digitally February 1 , 2011 and on doubled sided vinyl on February 22 and February 28 . This is Beyoncé 's third release of this nature but the first live instrumental album to have a physical release ; the live instrumentals album from The Beyoncé Experience Live and I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas were her first two , only released digitally . 
 = = Production and filming = = 
 I Am ... World Tour was produced , directed , and edited by Beyoncé for her own production company Parkwood Pictures . It contains tour footage from 108 shows that took place in 78 cities , 32 countries , and 6 continents in the presence of 1 @.@ 1 million fans around the world . The show is a combination of performance clips from the tour , as well as backstage moments . I Am ... World Tour also serves as the directorial debut for Beyoncé . On this occasion , she confessed that it was a lot of work for her . Nevertheless , she was very happy and eager for her fans to see her DVD directed by herself . She explained , " I 'm so excited – this is my directorial debut . I am just thrilled that my fans are going to be in the theatre with me and I can 't wait for everyone to see it . It took me nine months to edit because I wanted to show a little bit of each show , each performance on tour , and it was 116 shows , so you can only imagine how much work it was , [ but ] it was worth it . " At the New York City screening of the DVD , Beyoncé further explained that she was completely " hands @-@ on " , deciding which moments made the final cut and which ones wound up on the cutting @-@ room floor , stating , " It was hard work . I learned so much . I have a new respect for directors and I think I would like to do more of it . " Some of the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage were shot by Beyoncé on her laptop . The DVD captures concert footage from cities in Europe , Asia , South America , and the United States , all edited into one concert . However , I Am ... World Tour was significantly recorded at London 's larger O2 Arena , a few months after the I Am ... Yours concert . A live CD of the concert , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary of her life along the tour and a 20 @-@ page book of exclusive photos are all included in the package . According to a press release , " it is meant to create the ne plus ultra Knowles concert experience , seen from her perspective " . 
 = = About the show = = 
 In addition to offering behind @-@ the @-@ scenes glimpses into Beyoncé 's intimate world on tour , the film also features performances of over twenty songs with staging , choreography , lighting and production values . In between performances of " If I Were a Boy " , which included a medley with Alanis Morissette 's " You Oughta Know " , viewers get glimpses of her childhood from old video footage . The footage transitions from Beyoncé dancing up a storm in her childhood home , to sleepless nights on tour where she worries about her health after nine consecutive days of touring , rehearsing , and recording . Despite her struggles , she sings Destiny 's Child songs , " Bootylicious " and " Survivor " , and asks for a guest appearance from Kanye West . For " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , Beyoncé 's performance is accompanied by YouTube footage of fans mimicking her moves , and a short video clip of US President Barack Obama . 
 In some of the raw moments captured in the documentary , Beyoncé appears completely bare . During one video , Beyoncé cries and asks herself : " Why did God give me this life ? Sometimes it 's overwhelming . Why did God give me my talent , my gift , my family . But I know you ’ re not supposed to question God . " She told Entertainment Tonight : " I wanted to do something a little different with the film ... I wanted people to re @-@ experience the show in a different way . Everyone that had been to the show -- I wanted them to see things that they didn 't get to see . I figured it would be cool for everyone to see it from my point of view . It 's a peek behind the curtain ... honestly , more than no makeup , the emotions and just being so real and raw , I don 't think I 'd be able to let down my guard the way I did if anybody was in the room . " The last minutes of the film get very sentimental , with a performance of Etta James 's classic " At Last " set to the backdrop of Civil Rights @-@ era footage , followed by a close @-@ up moment when Beyoncé admits that her life can be overwhelming , although she is blessed , stating , " I 'm grateful ... I 'm alive and I 'm living my dreams . " The film 's final performance shows Beyoncé performing " Halo " and sees her paying tribute to Michael Jackson . She also splices in footage of an old video from the night she attended her first Michael Jackson concert as a child . At the end of the performance , the whole production wraps as Beyoncé throws up the Roc sign and exits the stage . 
 = = Marketing and promotion = = 
 A thirty @-@ four second promo trailer of I Am ... World Tour was launched on several websites in early November 2010 . The concert film premiered exclusively on ABC on November 25 , 2010 as a 90 @-@ minute Thanksgiving special . A year before , over Thanksgiving itself , the network aired I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas , shot at the Encore Theater , Las Vegas , on August 2 , 2009 . Several other trailers kept dropping on Beyoncé ' official website in November . Beyoncé made an appearance at the School of Visual Arts Theater in New York City 's Chelsea neighborhood on November 21 , 2010 to premiere the concert film . On November 22 , 2010 , she held a screening of the DVD in New York , in presence of her parents and artists such as Mary J. Blige , Jennifer Hudson , <unk> <unk> , Tyson Beckford , Alicia Keys , and AJ Calloway . Additionally , in an interview with the Associated Press on the same day , Beyoncé revealed that the DVD will show more of her intimate side , stating : " I felt like I 've done so many different things , it 's time for me to show a bit of who I am . The hardest thing was showing that , because a lot of things that I filmed , I filmed in my computer , and I would never have gotten so open if someone else was in the room . " On November 23 , 2010 , Beyoncé was interviewed by Cynthia McFadden on ABC 's Nightline where she stated " I feel like I wanted the fans to be able to see the things that I see ... It 's a lot of things that I reveal about myself that I would never give to another director . " 
 On November 22 , 2010 , Rolling Stone organized a competition where I Am ... World Tour was one of the gifts for readers of the magazine . On December 1 , 2010 , Entertainment Weekly offered a six @-@ foot tall version of the poster signed by Beyoncé to one of the first ten people who posted a qualifying comment on the related post on their Facebook wall concerning the giveaway of the first ten copies of the DVD . On December 8 , 2010 , <unk> collaborated with Beyoncé 's official website for a competition where twenty copies of the album were available . Fans completed an entry form and signed up to receive one of the copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Andy Kellman of AllMusic awarded the DVD three out of five stars and stated , " for anyone but the most devout fans of Beyoncé , this will be overkill , and it doesn 't have as much of the playfulness such as the pleasing diversions as the I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas set . " Simon Gage of Daily Express awarded it four out of five stars , complimenting Beyoncé 's dance moves and praising her vocal capabilities , going on saying that she is " probably the most electric performer since Tina Turner " and calling her the " Queen of R & B " . She also praised the quality of the songs " Crazy In Love " , " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " and " Halo " . Ian Drew of Us Weekly complimented the " high @-@ energy performances " of Beyoncé on her Destiny 's Child songs and enjoyed the black @-@ and @-@ white behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . He also added that the singer is " most revelatory when tearing up over [ her ] missing husband Jay @-@ Z on the road . " New York 's Amy Odell described the DVD as a " cinematic masterpiece " . Jam ! ' s Darryl Sterdan gave the album a rating of three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and said , " More than two hours of powerhouse vocal performances and high @-@ energy choreography , accompanied by endless costume changes , eye @-@ popping production and general fabulousness . You 'll get tired just watching it . " Scott Kara of The New Zealand Herald awarded it three out of five stars , stating that the good thing about the DVD is that it has a " wider range of songs " , nevertheless they do not have the same " rump @-@ rattling power " of the songs in The Beyoncé Experience simply because some songs are too short in duration , for instance " Bootylicious " . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly wrote that although Beyoncé showed an emotional side of herself during the DVD , " Still , the shows go on in their high @-@ heeled , wonderfully choreographed glory . " 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times compared the DVD with Taylor Swift 's Journey to Fearless which aired as a special the same day as I Am ... World Tour . He noted , " Beyoncé 's I Am ... World Tour placed her before much larger audiences , documenting her choreographed razzle @-@ dazzle as she played arenas and stadiums in 2009 @-@ 10 . " He further said , " Beyoncé didn ’ t explain : she performed . With costumes that made her a comic @-@ book heroine , a cyborg , a club hottie , and a white @-@ clad vision of purity , she worked her big stages with hip @-@ pumping moves and a soul diva 's voice , from creamy to raspy . The documentary quietly flaunted her consistency as a trouper in montages that segued multiple shows — <unk> in small type — with Beyoncé in the same outfit making the same moves , while the fans ' nationalities changed around her . Yet for all her superhuman pep , she also came across as warmer than Ms. Swift . She grinned knowingly after belting a phrase into the bleachers , and she drew listeners into her own pop generalities . Andy Gill of The Independent was much less impressed with the DVD , qualifying it as an " unsatisfying , incoherent entertainment experience " even though she liked the way " the visual spectacle put everything in perspective " . The concert film received a nomination for a NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Variety – Series or Special in 2011 . I Am ... World Tour was nominated in the category for Best Long Form Music Video at the 54th Grammy Awards , held on February 12 , 2012 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The live album debuted at number one on the Billboard Music DVD Chart in November , 2010 . It sold 37 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and 31 @,@ 000 copies in its second week of release in the US . It spent nine non @-@ consecutive weeks at number one in its fifteen weeks of charting . By December 26 , 2010 , I Am ... World Tour had sold 139 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . I Am ... World Tour became the best @-@ selling music DVD of 2010 and the third best @-@ selling DVD of 2011 in the US . The album also debuted and peaked at number forty on the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart for the issue dated December 18 , 2010 . According to Nielsen SoundScan , I Am ... World Tour has shipped over 200 @,@ 000 copies in the US , giving the DVD a double @-@ platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 On the chart issue dated December 2 , 2010 , I Am ... World Tour debuted and peaked at number four on the Irish Music DVD Chart . On December 11 , 2010 , the DVD debuted at number six on the UK Music Video Chart . It descended the chart for the next three weeks , before peaking at number five on January 8 , 2011 . It stayed on that position on the chart for three consecutive weeks . It was last seen in the top forty of the chart on May 21 , 2011 at number thirty eight . It also peaked at number thirty seven on the UK R & B Albums Chart on July 9 , 2011 . On the chart issue dated December 4 , 2010 , I Am ... World Tour debuted at number one on the Dutch Music DVD Chart . The next week , it stayed on the top for a second week and fell to number three on December 18 , 2010 . I Am ... World Tour peaked at number six on the Flanders Music DVD Chart for the chart issue dated December 4 , 2010 . On December 11 , 2010 , it peaked at number ten on the Wallonia Music DVD Chart . For the week ending December 6 , 2010 , the DVD debuted at number nine on the French Music DVD Chart and later , it became its peak position . On the Czech Music Video Chart , the DVD peaked at number sixteen . On the Italian DVD Music Chart , I Am ... World Tour debuted at number eleven for the week ending January 25 , 2010 which later became its peak position in that country . In 2011 , the DVD was certified gold by the Polish Society of the Phonographic Industry ( ZPAV ) . 
 On December 6 , 2010 , I Am ... World Tour debuted at number six on the Australian Music DVD Chart , with more than 7 @,@ 500 copies sold in the first week and hence achieved a gold certification on the same date . It was later certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 copies . It was the fortieth best @-@ selling DVD in Australia in 2010 and 2011 . On the New Zealand Music DVD Chart , I Am ... World Tour debuted at number five for the chart issue dated May 30 , 2011 . The next week it moved to number four which became its peak position in that country . In 2010 , I Am ... World Tour became the best @-@ selling music DVD in the world . The next year , it was the seventh best @-@ selling DVD worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = Hurricane Florence ( 1953 ) = 
 Hurricane Florence was a minimal Atlantic hurricane that struck the Florida Panhandle in September of the 1953 season . The eighth storm and fifth hurricane of the season , Florence developed in the western Caribbean from a tropical wave near Jamaica on September 23 . It produced heavy rainfall on the nearby island , and later caused damage in western Cuba . The storm quickly intensified into a hurricane over the Yucatan Channel , and as it moved north through the Gulf of Mexico , Florence 's maximum sustained winds reached 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . On September 26 , the hurricane hit in a sparsely populated region of western Florida , and shortly after landfall became an extratropical cyclone . 
 Damage from Florence , with 421 houses damaged and another three destroyed . The winds destroyed the roofs of three evacuation shelters , resulting in one injury . The city of Apalachicola , Florida was temporarily isolated due to the storm 's impact . There were no deaths associated with Florence , and damage totaled $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1953 USD , $ 1 @.@ 77 million 2016 USD ) . After becoming extratropical , the remnants continued to the northeast , producing rainfall along its path before dissipating on September 28 southeast of New England . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Florence were from a tropical wave that moved through the Lesser Antilles into the eastern Caribbean Sea on September 21 . The wave tracked generally westward , and spawned a tropical storm on September 23 about 100 mi ( 160 km ) southeast of Jamaica . Given the name Florence , the storm steadily intensified after developing , although a well @-@ defined circulation was not observed until September 24 . That day , Florence attained hurricane status in the Yucatán Channel between the Yucatán Peninsula and the western tip of Cuba . 
 After turning north and entering the Gulf of Mexico , Florence quickly intensified , with the Hurricane Hunters estimating winds of 125 to 140 mph ( 205 to 225 km / h ) ; the official peak intensity was reported as 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) , along with a pressure of 968 @.@ 0 mb ( 28 @.@ 59 inHg ) . However , the estimate of the peak winds may have been too high , as ships in the region did not confirm them . On September 26 , it began quickly weakening , due to a combination of colder water temperatures and cool air . At around 1800 UTC that day , Florence made landfall in a sparsely populated area between Fort Walton and Panama City Beach , Florida with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Within six hours after moving ashore , the hurricane had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone near the borders of Florida , Alabama , and Georgia . The remnants of Florence turned the northeast along a cold front , crossing Georgia before emerging near Savannah . The storm paralleled the Carolinas just offshore , dissipating on September 28 southeast of New England . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 While the storm was first developing , Florence dropped heavy rainfall up to 10 in ( 250 mm ) in Jamaica , which isolated villages and blocked roads . Early in its existence , Hurricane Florence produced strong winds and waves along the west coast of Cuba , producing locally heavy damage . Prior to the hurricane making landfall on the United States Gulf Coast , the Weather Bureau issued warnings and recommended evacuations , which were credited in preventing any deaths or major injuries . In Florida and Alabama , the National Guard were activated in the event of heavy damage being caused , although they were ultimately not required . The Air Force flew hundreds of planes away from the region for safety . In addition , the Coast Guard drove along the beach to warn people of the approaching hurricane . In Panama City , Florida , about 10 @,@ 000 people were evacuated . All warnings related to the hurricane were lowered by the New Orleans U.S. Weather Bureau office at 4 pm CDT on September 26 . Offshore , a United States Coast Guard ship came to a standstill for 18 hours from the morning of September 25 into the early morning hours of September 26 while battling the cyclone out in the Gulf of Mexico . 
 The strongest winds recorded were 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) at Eglin Air Force Base . Although Florence made landfall in Florida , the heaviest rainfall related to Florence was 14 @.@ 71 in ( 374 mm ) in Lockhart , Alabama . Two intense rainbands , one on each side of the center , were responsible for the heaviest rainfall from the hurricane , including hourly rainfall rates of over 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) . Panama City reported 3 @.@ 66 in ( 93 millimetres ) in a three @-@ hour period . The combination of winds and heavy rainfall caused minor crop damage in the Florida panhandle and southeastern Alabama . Along the coast , Florence damaged 421 houses and destroyed three others . The winds destroyed the roofs of three shelters – one at Eglin Air Force Base and two in Crestview , Florida , forcing the evacuees to leave for safer areas ; one person was injured in the process . The winds also destroyed the roofs of nine houses in Crestview . Strong waves , reaching up to 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) in height , damaged 100 ft ( 30 m ) of a fishing pier in Panama City . The waves also washed over portions of U.S. Route 98 near Apalachicola , leaving the city isolated after power lines were downed . 
 Due to the strongest winds affecting a sparsely populated area near the coast , overall damage in the United States was minor , estimated around $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1953 USD , $ 1 @.@ 77 million 2016 USD ) . Heavy rainfall was reported in portions Alabama , including a total of 8 @.@ 72 in ( 221 mm ) , one inch shy of the 24 ‑ hour precipitation record in Montgomery set in 1892 . There , the rainfall backed up sewer drains , flooding homes and cars . The storm left about 4 @,@ 000 people without electricity in the area . While Florence moved across the southeastern United States , the heaviest rainfall fell to the near and left of its center , due to interaction with a cold front . 
 = 1938 – 39 Oregon Webfoots men 's basketball team = 
 The 1938 – 39 Oregon Webfoots men 's basketball team was a Division I college basketball team that represented the University of Oregon . The Webfoots , coached by Howard Hobson , played in the Pacific Coast Conference ( PCC ) and compiled a 29 – 5 win – loss record in regular and postseason competition . After winning the PCC title , they became the champions of the inaugural NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . 
 Coming off a season in which the Webfoots were defeated in the PCC championship series by Stanford , the team returned all five of their starters . Known for their fast break offense , Oregon 's players were nicknamed the " Tall Firs " and held a height advantage over most teams . After several early @-@ season wins , the Webfoots went on an extended road trip to the East Coast , becoming the first West Coast team to do so . The team suffered two losses on the trip , to City College of New York ( CCNY ) and Bradley , but posted seven victories as well . Oregon won 10 consecutive games at one point in PCC competition , and clinched a Northern Division championship with a win in the next @-@ to @-@ last contest of the regular season . In the best @-@ of @-@ three PCC championship series , against California , the Webfoots won in two games to earn the team 's first conference championship since 1919 . 
 Oregon was invited to compete in the West Regional of the NCAA Tournament , and beat Texas in their first game to reach the regional final , where the team won against Oklahoma . At the first NCAA Tournament final , versus Ohio State , the Webfoots claimed a 46 – 33 victory behind a game @-@ high 15 points by John H. Dick . Three players from the 1938 – 39 Oregon men 's basketball team were selected as All @-@ Americans , and Hobson and Lauren Gale have been honored by the Basketball Hall of Fame . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 1937 – 38 Webfoots posted a win – loss record of 14 – 6 in Pacific Coast Conference play . In the conference 's North division , the Webfoots won the title by a one @-@ game margin over Washington . The Webfoots were led by Lauren Gale , who was the PCC North division 's leader in scoring with 12 @.@ 5 points per game in conference play ; his overall average was 12 @.@ 4 . Oregon advanced to the best @-@ of @-@ three PCC championship series , but lost two consecutive games to Stanford by margins of 52 – 39 and 59 – 51 . That ended the team 's hopes of being crowned PCC champions . Following the decisive game of the series , player Bobby Anet said at a team meeting , " Next year , we 're going to win everything . " 
 = = Roster and schedule = = 
 Oregon 's entire starting lineup returned from the 1937 – 38 team that had lost in the conference championship playoff ; it included 6 ' 8 " center Slim Wintermute , who was known for his shot @-@ blocking ability . Forward Gale , who was 6 ' 4 " , had what sportswriter Michael Russell called " enormous hands ( that ) allowed him to fake opponents while palming the ball with one hand " ; he was the PCC points @-@ scoring leader in 1938 – 39 . Anet , a 5 ' 8 " guard , was " the heart of the team " , according to Russell , due to his ability to dribble and run the floor quickly . He was the Webfoots ' captain , and was responsible for calling timeouts and engaging in conversations with referees . Other players on the team included 6 ' 4 " forward John H. Dick and 5 ' 11 " guard Wally Johansen . Newspaper editor L. H. Gregory called the Oregon team the " Tall Firs " due to the height of the team 's players , since Oregon was taller than most other teams of the era . Eight of the eleven men on the roster came from Oregon , and the other three from neighboring Washington . Anet and Johansen , along with forwards Earl <unk> and Ted Sarpola , had played for Astoria High School ; Anet and Johansen had won multiple state championships before joining Oregon . Ford Mullen , a future Major League Baseball player , was a backup guard on the team . Along with Mullen , the Webfoots ' reserves included guard Matt <unk> and forwards Bob Hardy and Ted Sarpola . The team normally played up to nine players in a game , foregoing a regular substitute for Wintermute ; when he needed a rest , Dick or Gale often changed positions to play center , allowing for a third forward to be inserted into the lineup . The Webfoots ' head coach was Howard Hobson , who was in his fourth season on the job . In his previous three seasons , he had led the Webfoots to a total win – loss record of 63 – 28 . 
 Oregon 's preferred offensive game plan was to play an attacking fast break style of basketball . In response , opposing teams with shorter players often played a slower @-@ paced offense . Oregon 's fast break was unique among West Coast basketball teams , who were not accustomed to facing such an offensive style . Dick said of the team 's attack that " We wanted to keep the pressure on ( the opponent ) mentally – more so than physically . Never give them a moment 's rest . " Hobson frequently tracked Oregon 's attempted shots in both competition and practice sessions , and built the offense around his players ' strengths . On defense , the team switched between zone and man @-@ to @-@ man styles depending on how its opponent played . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 The Webfoots began the 1938 – 39 season by defeating Portland 51 – 24 on November 29 , 1938 . Oregon 's second game was also against a team based in Portland , which represented the Multnomah Athletic Club . The Webfoots won by an 83 – 25 final score . In a closer game with a team representing Signal Oil , Oregon stretched its winning streak to three games with a 46 – 34 triumph . The team then recorded a victory over Pacific <unk> , by a 54 – 39 final score . 
