 = = Production = = 
 The episode was the first episode of the series directed by Craig Zisk . Zisk had previously directed episodes of Nip / Tuck , Weeds , Scrubs , Smallville , and The Single Guy . " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " was written by Michael Schur , who plays Dwight 's Amish cousin Mose . 
 For Ryan 's new appearance this season , the writers originally had B. J. Novak grow a goatee . Show runner and executive producer Greg Daniels decided to have Novak lose the goatee , because according to Novak " a goatee would make Ryan a flat @-@ out chump . And we wanted it to be more subtle . " In addition to his five o 'clock shadow , Ryan was also seen wearing black clothes . Novak explained that " We wanted him to dress as obnoxious as possible . As much black as possible . " " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " went along with a website that had been created with the same name . The website was part of a game in which fans of The Office would sign up , and become " employees " of different " branches " . Members of the site would perform tasks such as design a logo for the company or make Creed look young again . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " received 4 @.@ 5 / 11 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 4 @.@ 5 percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and eleven percent had their televisions tuned to the channel at any point . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 49 million viewers . 
 " Dunder Mifflin Infinity " received mixed reviews from critics , with Michael driving his car into the lake being particularly panned by critics and viewers . Entertainment Weekly 's Christine Fenno commented that she thought " Michael seemed a bit more focused than usual , even competent at moments . And then he drove into a lake . " Jack Rodgers , from TV Guide said that his " favorite thing about this episode was the sly parallel that connects the three love stories " and " Michael ’ s obsession with sticking to his old methods rather than learning to change and embrace technology " . Will Leitch of New York Magazine criticized the episode , saying that Michael driving into the lake felt more like the actions of a " cartoon character " , than " based in reality " . Leitch did say that if " we can get Michael out of that lake and back in a conference room with Ryan , we 'll have something . " 
 = Slay Tracks ( 1933 – 1969 ) = 
 Slay Tracks ( 1933 – 1969 ) ( also referred to as Slay Tracks ) is the debut extended play by the American indie rock band Pavement . Pavement , then consisting of founding members Stephen Malkmus ( guitar , vocals ) and Scott Kannberg ( guitar ) , recorded Slay Tracks with producer and future member Gary Young ( drums ) during a four @-@ hour session . The EP was released as a 7 " vinyl record on the band 's own record label Treble Kicker in 1989 . The music in Slay Tracks is influenced by indie and punk rock bands , including Swell Maps and The Fall , and many of the lyrics are inspired by life in the band 's hometown of Stockton , California . 
 Although only 1000 copies of Slay Tracks were pressed , the EP became an underground hit . It was met with generally positive reviews from critics , though most of its initial reviews were from independently produced zines . The songs on Slay Tracks would later appear on the 1993 compilation Westing ( By Musket and Sextant ) , reaching a wider audience than the EP 's limited initial release . The release of Slay Tracks was significant to Pavement 's signing to Drag City , and later to Matador Records . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Pavement was formed in 1989 in Stockton , California , by Stephen Malkmus and Scott Kannberg . Malkmus and Kannberg had previously performed together in the band Bag O ' Bones . Pavement had its start playing at open mike nights at clubs and bars . The songs the band played during this time were mostly covers , although they also performed many original songs that would later be released on Slay Tracks . Malkmus recalls , " It was pretty reasonable to be able to make a single for $ 1 @,@ 000 , so we decided to go for it . We didn 't have any real plans because we weren 't a real band . " Two local studios existed in Stockton , the cheaper and less professionally minded of which was Gary Young 's Louder Than You Think Studio . The band decided to record at Young 's studio due to their admiration of other local punk bands who had recorded there , including The Young Pioneers and The Authorities . Kannberg reportedly borrowed $ 800 from his father to record Slay Tracks . 
 Slay Tracks was recorded during a four @-@ hour session on January 17 , 1989 , at Young 's studio . Kannberg , describing the studio and the recording process , said , " You go into his house and it 's stuff everywhere , old dogs lying around , big pot plants everywhere , and Gary tells us that he got all his equipment by selling pot ! It was us going in and pretty much just laying down the songs with a glide guitar and a detuned guitar through a bass amp and then we 'd play drums over the top . " Young , though bewildered by the band 's sound , contributed by playing drums . He recalled , " [ Malkmus and Kannberg ] come in and they play this weird guitar noise and it just sounds like noise , with no background . My drums were in there so I said , ' Should I drum ? ' and they said ' Okay . ' " Kannberg said , " We did it really fast . We probably spent one day tracking and one day mixing it . " The title of the EP had been decided prior to its recording , and the pseudonyms S.M. and Spiral Stairs were used to credit Malkmus and Kannberg respectively . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music on Slay Tracks was written entirely by Malkmus , and he stated his influences on the record included Chrome , Swell Maps , and The Fall . The songs on the EP drew comparisons to the likes of R.E.M. , Pixies , and Sonic Youth by Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Heather Phares of AllMusic . Radio static and noise are prominently used on the EP , techniques which are characteristic of the lo @-@ fi and noise pop genres that Pavement are frequently associated with . According to Malkmus , " We decided to use static as the third instrument . .... It was pretty exciting to be so experimental . " Young played drums on " Box Elder " and " Price Yeah ! " , and frequently improvised . Malkmus played drums on " Maybe Maybe " , while both Malkmus and Kannberg drummed on " She Believes " . 
 " You 're Killing Me " , the longest song on the EP at three minutes and 20 seconds , is an example of the impact punk rock had on Pavement . The song features fuzz effects , repetitive lyrics , and no percussion or drums . " Box Elder " , an ironic song about someone wanting to move to Box Elder , Montana , was considered by Gerald <unk> to be an example of Malkmus 's " honest , direct , and simplistic " lyrical style , and features greater influence from pop music than the rest of the EP . " Maybe Maybe " features distorted guitars and indiscernible vocals , and " Price Yeah ! " has a sound typical of hardcore punk . The band 's hometown of Stockton inspired the band 's lyrics and sound . Malkmus stated that " There 's something empty about Stockton . I wanted to convey that in our music . " Malkmus told Melody Maker in 1992 that " Pavement was originally a pathetic effort by us to do something to escape the terminal boredom we were experiencing in Stockton . " 
 = = Release = = 
 After recording was completed Kannberg was tasked with releasing the music himself , as Malkmus had left on a trip to parts of Europe , North Africa , and the Middle East . Kannberg designed the cover of the EP and sent copies to various independent labels , distributors , and zines . He recalled " I had no idea how to do it . I 'd send off these little notes to my favorite labels like SST and Twin Tone and ask , ' How do I do this ? ' " A representative from SST recommended that Kannberg use Erica Records , a Los Angeles 7 " manufacturer . Erica Records became the manufacturer of Slay Tracks ; however , Kannberg was unhappy with the master recording produced by the company : " It sounds like it sounds now — it 's just a mess — but being poor and not really caring I said , ' Okay , that 's cool , if it sounds like that – whatever . ' " 1000 copies of Slay Tracks were pressed , and the first 50 included a green dinosaur stamp on the label . The EP was distributed on Kannberg 's own Treble Kicker Records in the United States and England , although Malkmus came across a copy in a record store while visiting Austria . 
 Slay Tracks found unexpected attention after the Leeds , England @-@ based band The Wedding Present covered " Box Elder " on their own 1990 EP , <unk> . The Wedding Present 's bassist , Keith Gregory , had been introduced to Slay Tracks by future Pavement bassist Mark Ibold while visiting New York City . The Wedding Present cover is different from the original in that the line " that I had to get the fuck out of this town " was changed to " that I had to get right out of this town " . The " Box Elder " cover received radio airplay from influential English disc jockey John Peel , which generated publicity for both The Wedding Present and Pavement . Neither member of Pavement was aware of the cover until Kannberg was informed of it . Kannberg remembered " I was kind of mad . I had no idea that people could do that , so I was all offended . " However , his opinion of the cover and its significance later changed : " It was so cool that some band from the UK wanted to cover this obscure , horribly recorded song . At the time I probably never appreciated the full extent of how them covering the song helped Pavement , especially in the UK , but it really did , and I 'll always be grateful to them for that . " 
 Shortly after its release , Slay Tracks became a collector 's item . According to an April 1990 Drag City press release , copies were typically sold for $ 500 – $ 600 . Malkmus and Kannberg each kept 100 copies of the EP , and Malkmus said " I used to sell them for fifty dollars . When I needed money I 'd go in and sell a couple to the store and they 'd sell for a hundred dollars each . I rarely meet anyone who bought it when it originally came out . " Malkmus also said that the pair " probably gave away about one @-@ hundred to friends and bands we later toured with . " The songs on Slay Tracks found airplay on several college radio stations , including University of Virginia 's <unk> and University of California , Berkeley 's <unk> . Kannberg commented on the EP 's unanticipated popularity , saying " It was very surprising to find that people were into [ Slay Tracks ] . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Slay Tracks received generally positive reviews . Much of the initial critical reception to Slay Tracks was from zines to whom Kannberg had sent the EP . A review in the San Francisco @-@ based zine Maximum <unk> said " Most of the tunes work by virtue of their eclecticism , freshness , and originality — this is a good one . " The zine Conflict called the EP " absolutely perfect . " Slay Tracks also received attention from mainstream publications . Robert Christgau of the Village Voice rated Slay Tracks an A- , and selected it as his fourth favorite EP of 1990 . Spin 's review said : " a long stream of noise water is omitted by Pavement . ... What a party ! " A reviewer for Option praised the band 's lo @-@ fi characteristics and attitude , calling the EP " loose and intentionally lo @-@ fi , " and saying " let 's hope this Pavement stays cracked . " College Music Journal 's review was also favorable , noting " You 're Killing Me " and " She Believes " as highlights , and calling the EP a " deep , intoxicating breath of homemade music from people with tongues in their cheeks and hearts on their sleeves ... the twin engine feedback and fuzz hits dead center with naive [ sic ] melodic balance , and whether that is in spite of or because of the sloppy , one @-@ take feel is inconsequential . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Young 's drum performance on Slay Tracks eventually led to him joining Pavement as a full @-@ time member . Young produced the group 's 1990 EP Demolition Plot J @-@ 7 , but displayed hostility toward then @-@ current drummer Jason Fawkes . Fawkes left Pavement in 1991 due to animosity with Malkmus , allowing Young to drum on their third EP , Perfect Sound Forever . Young drummed on all Pavement releases from then on until 1992 's Watery , Domestic , after which he was fired for his increasingly erratic behavior and was replaced with Steve West . Young 's drumming on Slay Tracks was later recognized as an important turning point in Pavement 's history , and was considered to be " the opportunity of a lifetime " by C. Harris @-@ Nystrom of the News & Review . 
 Dan Koretzky , founder of Drag City , ordered 200 copies of the EP for the Chicago Reckless Records store he worked for at the time . Koretzky asked Kannberg if he would sign to Drag City during the same phone call that he ordered the EP . Kannberg remembered expressing reluctance to sign to any label , but Drag City producer and session musician Rian Murphy recalled that " We asked , they said yes . Lives didn 't seem to be on the line . " Chris Lombardi and Gerald <unk> of Matador Records also first heard of Pavement after Kannberg sent a copy of Slay Tracks to their zine , Conflict . Matador signed Pavement in 1992 for the release of their debut studio album , Slanted and Enchanted . 
 The songs on Slay Tracks are all included on the 1993 compilation Westing ( By Musket and Sextant ) , along with several of Pavement 's other early material . Westing has sold 63 @,@ 000 copies , and was praised by Robert Christgau and Stephen Thomas Erlewine for making songs previously found exclusively on vinyl available on compact disc . All of the songs from Slay Tracks were played live throughout Pavement 's history , with " Box Elder " particularly cited as an " old favorite " for fans at concerts . Live performances of " Box Elder " has also been included on the compilation reissues Slanted and Enchanted : <unk> & <unk> and <unk> <unk> : Sordid Sentinels Edition , with the version on the latter beginning with a short jam session . In a 1999 retrospective of the band 's career , Donna Freydkin of CNN.com called Slay Tracks " a quick underground favorite " , while John Hicks of the Planet Weekly wrote " Although Pavement was conceived as a studio @-@ only project , the underground success of Slay Tracks ensured that it was only a matter of time before the group became a full @-@ fledged performing entity . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were written by Stephen Malkmus . 
 " You 're Killing Me " – 3 : 20 
 " Box Elder " – 2 : 26 
 " Maybe Maybe " – 2 : 14 
 " She Believes " – 3 : 02 
 " Price Yeah ! " – 3 : 00 
 = Cloudland Canyon State Park = 
 Cloudland Canyon State Park is a 3 @,@ 485 acre ( 14 @.@ 10 km ² ) Georgia state park located near Trenton and Cooper Heights on the western edge of Lookout Mountain . One of the largest and most scenic parks in Georgia , it contains rugged geology , and offers visitors a range of vistas across the deep gorge cut through the mountain by Sitton Gulch Creek , where the elevation varies from 800 to over 1 @,@ 800 feet . Views of the canyon can be seen from the picnic area parking lot , in addition to additional views located along the rim trail . At the bottom of the gorge , two waterfalls cascade across layers of sandstone and shale , ending in small pools below . 
 The park , previously known as Sitton Gulch ( or Gulf ) or Trenton Gulf , was purchased in stages by the state of Georgia beginning in 1938 . Under President Franklin D. Roosevelt , a project of Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression built the first facilities and signs in the park , which opened the following year . Today the park features a variety of campsites , cabins , hiking and recreational activities . 
 = = History = = 
 Cloudland Canyon was designated a state park in 1939 when the state began acquiring land from private owners . Three of these owners , from the Mathews , McCauley and <unk> families , still reside in the area . Expansion of the park continues sporadically as new land is purchased for it . The park was originally 1 @,@ 924 acres ( 7 @.@ 8 km2 ) , and has been expanded to its present size of 3 @,@ 485 acres ( 14 @.@ 1 km2 ) . 
 Until 1939 the only access to the area ( and much of Dade County , Georgia ) was through Tennessee or Alabama . That year Georgia began work on Highway 136 to connect U.S. 41 to the recently established park . The Civilian Conservation Corps did much of the early work to construct the state park and access roads . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The park is located on the Cumberland Plateau , atop Lookout Mountain . On the summit of Lookout Mountain , the waters of Daniel Creek and Bear Creek cut gorges through the rock , converging to form Sitton Gulch Creek . The flat @-@ topped mountains of the Cumberland Plateau are significantly different from the narrow <unk> ridges beyond nearby Chickamauga Valley to the east . From a geological standpoint , Lookout Mountain is transitional between the flat @-@ lying sedimentary beds of central Tennessee , and the ridges and valley to the east , which display more intensive folding and faulting . Most of the canyon 's rock formations consist of sandstone ; shale layers below the sandstone are marked by pine trees . 
 Lookout Mountain was created through a combination of seismic activity and erosion . It was uplifted during the period of mountain building that formed the Appalachians , known as the Appalachian orogeny . Over 200 million years ago , the modern @-@ day parklands lay beneath an ocean . When first formed , the entire mountain was underwater , but the rim of the canyon eventually became a beach along the edge of the receding ocean . As the ocean dried up , Sitton Gulch Creek and its tributaries , particularly Daniel Creek , eroded the rock . The sandstone forming the bluffs has a tendency to fracture into blocks , creating unusual boulder formations . The concave shape of the top of Lookout Mountain also drains rainwater through fissures into the underlying limestone , forming miles of subterranean caves in the area . 
 The canyon is more than 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) deep , ranging in elevation from 800 feet ( 240 m ) to over 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) ; the park 's peak elevation is 1 @,@ 980 feet ( 600 m ) . The bottom of Cloudland canyon contains a slope of rock talus , which are sandstone and shale fragments . The valley floor is also rich in fossil @-@ bearing limestone . 
 = = Hiking trails = = 
 The Park contains several well @-@ marked trails which allow visitors to view the geology of the canyon and its surroundings , which spans millions of years . A paved , wheelchair @-@ accessible trail about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) long overlooks the rim of the canyon . The park also features four more extensive hiking trails , including one backpacking trail . These trails are generally considered moderate in difficulty . 
 The Waterfalls Trail begins on a paved section , at the main overlook , and progresses into the canyon along a 40 @-@ degree slope . Most of the trail consists of gravel , and a 600 @-@ step staircase . Each waterfall emanates from Daniel Creek , and both cascade down sheer faces at 60 feet ( 18 m ) and 90 feet ( 27 m ) . The trail is generally considered to be a strenuous hike , which can take up to 90 minutes to complete . Cherokee Falls is 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) from the trailhead ; Hemlock Falls , at the bottom of the canyon , appears at 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) . Each cascades into small pools at the base of the canyon , and continue down through a boulder @-@ strewn stream bed . The creek flow feeding the waterfalls varies considerably according to the season . The Sitton 's Gulch trail , commencing at the bottom of the Waterfalls Trail , runs parallel to the creek until it ends in a parking area in Trenton . 
 In contrast , the 4 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 7 km ) long West Rim Loop Trail is rated as moderately difficult , although it contains a few short , steep rocky sections . A scenic hike beginning at the Daniels Creek Bridge , it offers panoramic views before climbing out of the canyon and onto the plateau . This trail also provides views of Trenton , Georgia , neighboring Sand Mountain , and of Cloudland Canyon . Rhododendron and mountain laurel thickets are interspersed with <unk> and dogwood ; large oaks , hickories , hemlocks and maples shade the trail . Cottages , West Rim , and Walk @-@ In Camping areas are accessible via the West Rim Loop . Passing over varied terrain , most of the hike is moderately difficult , and is considered strenuous along several short sections . 
 The 2 @.@ 0 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) Backcountry Loop Trail provides access to the park 's eleven secluded primitive hike @-@ in camping sites . Beginning at the parking area for group camping , the trail passes through hemlock groves , before descending on a moderate grade into a hollow filled with spring and summer flowers . At the far end of the loop , hikers emerge from the hemlock groves onto level trail , among oaks and hickories , before returning to the parking area . 
 In the fall of 2011 , the park reopened the Bear Creek Trail , which had been closed to hikers for nearly a decade . This approximately 9 @.@ 0 @-@ mile ( 14 @.@ 5 km ) trail is the longest trail in the park . This trail begins as a spur off of the Back Country Trail and drops down to Bear Creek . After crossing the creek , the trail continues up until it becomes a loop around the northeast portion of the park . Around the area of the creek , the trail crosses over private property for a brief distance . During wet seasons , the creek crossing can be difficult as there is no bridge or dry crossing available . 
 = = Facilities and activities = = 
 Cloudland Canyon State park features a variety of camping and lodging options . There are 16 rental cottages as well as a group lodge . The park also offers 73 tent , trailer and RV sites , 30 walk @-@ in camp sites , and 11 back country camp sites for backpackers . Four pioneer sites provide facilities for groups of tent campers . The East Rim has 24 camp sites located along a loop road ; many of the sites can accommodate RVs , and all feature water and electric hookups . Bathing facilities are located nearby . The West Rim Camp ground , located across the gorge and away from the park 's busiest section , is located in thick forest , and hosts approximately 48 camp sites spread along two loops . It too offers bathing facilities . 
 Picnic areas include a group pavilion , tennis courts , a children ’ s playground and a disc golf course . The park has an interpretive center near the main parking lot , adjacent to the canyon . Annual events hosted in the park include a Wildflower Program in April , Adventure Weekend ( also in April ) , and a Kids ' Catfish Rodeo in May . 
 = Rapunzel ( Disney ) = 
 Rapunzel is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 50th animated feature film Tangled ( 2010 ) , and its short film Tangled Ever After ( 2012 ) . Voiced by American actress and singer Mandy Moore , Rapunzel is a young princess kept unaware of her royal heritage by a vain old woman named Mother Gothel , who raises her in a secluded tower in order to exploit her hair 's healing abilities to remain young and beautiful forever . 
 Created and animated by supervising animator Glen Keane , Rapunzel is loosely based on the title character who appears in the fairy tale of the same name by The Brothers Grimm . The character was adapted into a less passive heroine for the film . The writers incorporated the quirky personalities of actresses Reese Witherspoon , Natalie Portman and Amy Poehler into the character . 
 Critical reception of Rapunzel has been generally positive , with critics complimenting her spirited , lively personality and independence . Chronologically the tenth Disney Princess , Rapunzel was officially inducted into the line @-@ up on October 2 , 2011 , becoming the franchise 's first computer @-@ animated member . Her physical appearance and personality have drawn much comparison between her and preceding Disney Princess Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , by whom she was inspired . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Longtime Disney animator Glen Keane first decided to adapt the fairy tale " Rapunzel " by The Brothers Grimm into an animated feature film in 1996 . Keane became interested in the idea of directing an animated film based on " Rapunzel " because he was especially intrigued by the concept of a " person that was born with this gift inside of her and it had to come out " , which he felt was similar to his experience working as an animator at Walt Disney Animation Studios . Keane eventually resigned from his position as director after suffering a heart attack in 2008 , and Nathan Greno and Byron Howard were hired to replace him . However , Keane remained closely involved with the project nonetheless , serving as both the film 's executive producer and Rapunzel 's supervising animator . 
 Walt Disney first attempted to adapt " Rapunzel " into an animated film soon after the studio released Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in 1937 , but the project was ultimately abandoned when the story turned out to be " a really hard nut to crack " . According to Keane , this was mainly due to the fact that the majority of the fairy tale takes place within a tower . To overcome this , Tangled 's writers were forced to develop a way of " bringing Rapunzel out of the tower " . Originally , the film was conceived under the title Rapunzel <unk> , which Keane described as " a Shrek @-@ like version of the film " that revolved around an entirely different concept . Keane said of the original plot , " It was a fun , wonderful , witty version and we had a couple of great writers . But in my heart of hearts I believed there was something much more sincere and genuine to get out of the story , so we set it aside and went back to the roots of the original fairy tale . " 
 As directors , Greno and Howard felt it essential that Rapunzel resemble a less " passive " heroine than the way she is depicted in the original fairy tale . " We knew we were making this movie for a contemporary audience and we wanted Rapunzel to be a real role model in a way . We wanted all this girl power and to really drive this story , so she doesn 't wait around for anything ... she 's a smart girl , she has these hopes and dreams and she 's going to get what she wants out of life . " 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Actress and singer Kristin Chenoweth was cast as the voice of Rapunzel . At one point , though briefly , the directors had cast actress Reese Witherspoon in the role , who was also to serve as the film 's executive producer . However , Witherspoon eventually departed from the project , citing creative differences with the filmmakers . Broadway performer Idina Menzel had also auditioned for the role , but didn 't get the part . After hundreds of auditions , the directors ultimately decided to cast recording artist and actress Mandy Moore in the role because , according to co @-@ director Byron Howard , she " has this great soul to her voice " as well as " this down @-@ to @-@ earth , girl @-@ next @-@ door quality that makes her everything you could hope for in a Disney heroine . " Child actress Delaney Rose Stein was cast as a young version Rapunzel . 
 Moore " grew up loving Disney films " , describing the opportunity to be featured in one as " the ultimate fantasy " . Initially , she had little intention of auditioning for Tangled because she was aware that there would be much competition , and feared that a failed audition would simply result in disappointment . Once she made up her mind to audition , Moore reportedly " chased after " the role of Rapunzel , auditioning for it twice . Because the film is a musical requiring its cast to provide both their characters ' speaking and singing voices , it was mandatory for all auditioning to perform one song of their choice . Following the given instructions to sing a song that was in the style of a singer @-@ songwriter , Moore , a professional singer , performed singer @-@ songwriter Joni Mitchell 's " Help Me " , a song that she herself had covered on her fourth studio album , Coverage ( 2003 ) . 
 The filmmakers fought against hiring top @-@ billed celebrities to voice the film 's characters . When she joined the cast of Tangled , Moore was initially unaware that the film would become Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 50th animated feature film . Since that time , she has received her ignorance with gratitude , explaining , " I feel lucky because I would 've probably felt a bit more pressure had I known going into the recording process . " Moore was also surprised to learn that the majority of her dialogue would not be recorded in the presence of co @-@ stars Zachary Levi and Donna Murphy , who provided the voices of Flynn Rider and Mother Gothel respectively . She claims to have only met with Levi once to record the song " I See the Light " , a duet between her character Rapunzel and Levi 's character , Flynn . Moore described the recording process as challenging because she was provided with little visual aid , explaining , " All I had to work off were a few sketches ... but it was also fun because it allows you to go into the depths of your imagination . " She also revealed that creating Rapunzel 's voice was simply a process of " let [ ting ] go " . Moore was often required to re @-@ record a single line a total of four times before the directors finally heard a version with which they were satisfied . After watching the completed film for the first time , Moore was disappointed with her own performance because she felt that her voice sounded " shrill " . 
 = = = Characterization and design = = = 
 Executive producer John Lasseter explained that " The challenge is that you want to make Rapunzel feel like a smart , clever , educated , healthy , fun human being " despite the fact that the character has not ventured outside of her tower in 18 years . To avoid creating a " <unk> and aloof " heroine , the writers decided to base Rapunzel 's personality on those of real @-@ life celebrities such as actresses Reese Witherspoon and Natalie Portman , as well as comedian Amy Poehler , which ultimately resulted in the character having a variety of " quirky qualities " that were used to " shake up expectations of what a princess should be . " According to The New York Times , Rapunzel 's personality made her a significant departure from traditional Disney heroines . Mandy Moore believes that Rapunzel is an atypical Disney princess because she is an independent character who " can take care of herself " , in addition to being largely oblivious to the fact that she is a princess . 
 Supervising animator Glen Keane designed Rapunzel under the tutelage of veteran animator Ollie Johnston , one of Disney 's original Nine Old Men . Johnston advised Keane to attempt to capture what Rapunzel is thinking as opposed to simply animating what the character is doing after reviewing one of his early pencil tests . Keane compared receiving this advice to receiving a " slap that I never forgot , so when I was drawing over people 's work , I really tried to get into the head of the thinking of the character " . Co @-@ director Byron Howard was inspired by the appearance of Ariel from Disney 's The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , a character who was also animated by Keane . Howard elaborated that " Ariel was the first character that I ever thought there was a soul behind her eyes ... We hoped to do that with Rapunzel to find some sort of soul and depth that people could relate to " . Meanwhile , Keane observed that Ariel and Rapunzel also share " irrepressible " spirits while encountering barriers that prevent them from pursuing their dreams . Keane was inspired by a book about the idea of feminine beauty ; the book cited " strangeness " as " the key to beauty ... in a woman 's face . " Taking this into consideration , Keane maintained a sense of asymmetry while drawing Rapunzel , incorporating into her face several subtle imperfections , specifically her bucked teeth that are bucked teeth . The character was also drawn with freckles , making her the first Disney princess to have this feature . Keane designed Rapunzel with large eyes in order to convey her " irrepressible quality " , a trait her also discovered in Mandy Moore 's voice . The animators created nine different versions of Rapunzel before finally settling on a design with which they were satisfied . 
 Keane is known for basing his characters on members of his family ; Rapunzel 's passion for art and painting was inspired by the interests of his daughter , Claire . Several of Claire 's original drawings and paintings are used to decorate Rapunzel 's tower . While Keane working on Tangled , Claire gave birth to his first grandchild , Matisse , whose appearance served as the animator 's inspiration for the infant Rapunzel . 
 = = = = Hair = = = = 
 Rapunzel was the first blonde @-@ haired Disney animated heroine since Aurora in Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) . Animating Rapunzel 's hair using computer @-@ generated imagery has been regarded as the most challenging aspect in the development process of Tangled . According to the Los Angeles Times , supervising animator Glen Keane has become well known for animating some of Walt Disney Animation Studios ' " greatest hair hits " since 1989 , including Ariel from The Little Mermaid , the Beast from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Pocahontas from Pocahontas ( 1995 ) . Both Keane and Howard have expressed similar opinions on Rapunzel 's hair , with Keane describing it as " this constant reminder that she has this gift " , and Howard describing it as its own character . As directors , Howard and Greno provided the animators with much live @-@ action material and reference to use as inspiration for the appearance of Rapunzel 's hair , such as attaching long strands of string to a baseball cap that they would take turns wearing in the studio and moving around it . Additionally , they recruited women who had not cut their hair in several years to serve as live models . 
 Senior Software Engineer Dr. Kelly Ward , a hair simulation major and graduate from the University of North Carolina , was placed in charge of developing special software meant to assist the animators in animating 70 feet of hair . Ward revealed that , in real life , the character 's hair would weigh roughly 60 pounds , " more weight than a real person would be able to move around as effortlessly as we allow Rapunzel to do in the movie " . For simplicity sake , the animators reduced the realistic total of 100 @,@ 000 individual strands of hair found on a typical human head to a more manageable 100 for Rapunzel . Acquiring the unique but realistic shade of golden blonde for Rapunzel 's hair also proved challenging animators . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 In order to remain young and beautiful , a vain old woman named Mother Gothel hoards the healing properties of a magical golden flower . When the pregnant Queen falls ill , the flower is harvested and fed to her as medicine , thus preventing Gothel 's from using it . Once healthy , the Queen gives birth to Rapunzel , whose long golden hair has inherited the flower 's powerful healing magic . Hoping to regain full control over the flower , Gothel kidnaps the princess and <unk> her in an isolated tower simply for the purpose of exploiting her magic hair in order to remain youthful . Every year on Rapunzel 's birthday , the kingdom of Corona releases thousands of floating lanterns into the sky in her memory . 
 Eighteen years later , Rapunzel , ignorant to the fact that she is a princess , is growing eager to leave the tower and see the " floating lights , " which she believes bear some significance to her . However , she is forbidden by Gothel , by whom she has been led to believe is her mother . When a wanted thief named Flynn Rider , in search of a place to hide , stumbles upon Rapunzel 's tower , Rapunzel , who has tricked Gothel into leaving her unattended , blackmails Flynn into taking her to see the lanterns in return for the crown that he has stolen from the palace . Accompanied by Rapunzel 's chameleon friend Pascal , they embark , but Gothel is soon in close pursuit . 
 Rapunzel and Flynn eventually arrive at the kingdom in time for the lantern ceremony . Soon afterwards , Flynn is ambushed and <unk> turned into the police by his former partners @-@ in @-@ crime the Stabbington Brothers , who he abandoned in an attempt to outrun the King 's soldiers , and sentenced to death . However , before the Brothers can harm Rapunzel , Gothel knocks them unconscious and takes a heartbroken Rapunzel back to the tower . 
 Back in her bedroom , Rapunzel is suddenly flooded by memories from her past . Realizing Gothel is a fraud , she finally finds the courage to rebel against her . However , Gothel , unwilling to lose Rapunzel , chains her up and gags her with a white handkerchief . When Flynn , having managed to escape from the castle , arrives at the tower , Gothel stabs him . Desperate to save him , Rapunzel promises to do whatever Gothel pleases in return . Gothel complies , but just as Rapunzel is about to heal him , Flynn cuts her hair short , causing it to turn brown and lose all of its magical powers and might never be long again , resulting in Gothel 's death . Flynn dies in Rapunzel 's arms and she cries bitterly . However , the flower 's magic manifests itself through Rapunzel 's tears and returns Flynn to life . Flynn returns Rapunzel to the palace , where she is finally reunited with her parents . 
 Rapunzel appeared later in the short film Tangled Ever After , that features his marriage with Eugene . 
 Rapunzel will also appear in the upcoming television series . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Rapunzel is the tenth member of the Disney Princess line @-@ up , a marketing franchise aimed primarily at young girls that manufactures and releases products such as toys , video and audio recordings , clothing , and video games . The Walt Disney Company introduces characters into its Disney Princess line @-@ up through coronation . Rapunzel 's was held on October 2 , 2011 , at the Kensington Palace in London , England ; the character became the franchise 's first princess to have been computer @-@ animated . However , the franchise uses a traditionally animated rendering of Rapunzel in most of its merchandise . Following her coronation , Rapunzel was recognized with her own page on the official Disney Princess website . 
 Disney Consumer Products has released several merchandise based on Tangled that features Rapunzel . Rapunzel appears as a playable character in an interactive adventure @-@ themed video game based on the film , entitled Tangled : The Video Game . The game was released by Disney Interactive Studios on November 23 , 2010 , one day before the film 's November 24 theatrical release , specifically for the Nintendo video game platforms Wii and DS , and follows the plot of the original film . Voice actress Mandy Moore reprises her role as Rapunzel in the video game . The character 's likeness has also been adapted into a variety of doll products . Rapunzel was the first character created and released as part of the Disney Animator 's Collection , a series of dolls depicting each of the eleven Disney Princesses as toddler . She was designed Glen Keane , who served as her supervising animator on the original film . 
 = = = Theme parks = = = 
 Rapunzel currently makes regular appearances at various Walt Disney Parks and Resorts sites , locations and attractions . In anticipation of the film 's theatrical release , several Tangled @-@ based attractions were constructed at various Disney Parks locations in both California and Florida , USA . These include a life @-@ sized replica of Rapunzel 's tower , located in Fantasyland . 
 As part of photographer Annie Leibovitz 's Disney Dream Portrait Series that she has been commissioning for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts since 2007 , The Walt Disney Company hired American country singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift to be featured as the model for Rapunzel . In a detailed description of the piece , Us Weekly wrote , " The stunning image — captioned ' Where a world of adventure awaits ' — shows the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Grammy winner perched on the window ledge of a moss @-@ covered stone tower . A pink petticoat peeks out from under her purple gown as she stares wistfully into the distance , her long golden tresses flowing regally in the wind . " Swift told On The Red Carpet that she was honored to have been selected for the piece . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics were generally positive in their opinions of Rapunzel . The St. Paul Pioneer Press ' Chris Hewitt described the character as " no damsel in distress " , while Sara Vizcarrondo of Boxoffice described the character as " a spunky heroine who could infiltrate the heavily guarded princess canon . " Stephen Whitty of The Star @-@ Ledger dubbed Rapunzel " a fairly capable young woman " . Bruce <unk> of The New Yorker wrote that Rapunzel has " a sharp wit and intelligent concerns " , while Claudia Puig of USA Today opined , " Rapunzel is ... believable in her teenage histrionics " . Calling the character a " delight " , The Austin Chronicle 's Marjorie Baumgarten wrote , " Rapunzel is a spunky gal , capable of defending herself " . Sandie Angulo Chen of Common Sense Media wrote that Rapunzel is a " guileless , strong , and beautiful " character who is " so breathtakingly good that you can 't help but weep with her when she thinks all hope is lost . " The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel 's Cathy Jakicic described Rapunzel as a " scrappy , self @-@ reliant " heroine who " can rescue herself " . The Scotsman commented , " the film doesn 't ... turn [ Rapunzel ] into a simpering damsel in distress . " Describing the character as " innocent but ( inevitably ) feisty " , Empire 's Helen O 'Hara enjoyed the fact that both Rapunzel and Flynn are given " decent character development " while " bas [ ing ] their growing love story on more than a single longing glance . " Similarly , the Mountain Xpress praised Rapunzel and Flynn 's relationship , writing , " what works best is the interplay between the two leads ... these animated characters are frankly more believable and charismatic than the human ones in ... Love and Other Drugs . " Todd Hertz of Christianity Today called Rapunzel " fun , dynamic , and wondrous " . 
 Jim Schembri of The Age gave the character a very detailed , positive review , writing : 
 And , of course , the heart of the story is Rapunzel , a freshly minted heroine who morphs from prisoner to strong @-@ willed seeker of her own destiny . Blondes have not had a good rap of late , thanks chiefly to the stream of formulaic rom @-@ <unk> that have played them up as the <unk> and <unk> of cliche . Rapunzel 's no @-@ nonsense attitude and proactive air , however , reminds us that the blondes of yore were not to be trifled with . As reimagined in Tangled , Rapunzel defies authority , shuts down male ego and charts her own course . She 's not only a great role model for kids , she 's the type of gutsy , independently minded , value @-@ added blonde Mae West would have been proud of . 
 The character was not void of criticism . Although Richard Corliss of Time thoroughly enjoyed the film , he felt that too much emphasis was placed on Flynn Rider and not enough on Rapunzel . Corliss questioned the future of Disney 's animated heroines , writing , " For 60 years ... girls were the focal characters who could be expected to come of age , triumph over adversity and , in general , man up , " and accused various film studios of " abolish [ ing ] female @-@ centered stories . " Variety 's Justin Chang described Rapunzel as a " bland , plastic " heroine , likening her to a Barbie doll . Similarly , Tom Huddleston of Time Out described Rapunzel as " bland " . James Berardinelli of ReelViews was fairly mixed in his review , writing , " although likeable and energetic , [ Rapunzel ] is not as memorable as Snow White , Ariel , or Belle . " Keith Uhlich of Time Out described the character as " synthetic " . He wrote , " you never feel like you 're watching a girl on the empowering cusp of adulthood so much as a selection of attitudes compiled through demographic study . " The Independent 's Anthony Quinn panned the character , describing her as " bland and Valley <unk> " . Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch opined , " when the big @-@ eyed heroine tries to tug at our heartstrings and Flynn turns into Prince Charming , the too @-@ familiar hero @-@ and @-@ damsel motif feels like a fashion faux @-@ pas . " Similarly , the <unk> 's Jake Coyle wrote , " Both Rapunzel and Flynn too much resemble Barbie and Ken , lacking both superficial and emotional individuality . " Jen Yamato of Movies.com criticized Disney for " failing to give Rapunzel a backbone and retreading ground so familiar you can fall asleep for ten minutes and still know exactly what happened " . 
 As the tenth Disney Princess , several critics have drawn comparisons between Rapunzel and preceding Disney Princesses and animated heroines , the most frequent and prominent of whom remains Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . The Daily News ' Joe Neumaier likened Rapunzel 's independence to that of Belle from Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) , writing , " thoroughly modern Rapunzel does most of the saving " . Jonathan Crocker of Total Film noted similarities between Rapunzel and Ariel , describing Rapunzel as " A strong @-@ willed heroine longing to see outside . " Mike Scott of The Times @-@ Picayune commented on Rapunzel 's innocence , describing it as " reminiscent of Amy Adams ' flighty Giselle from ... Enchanted . " LoveFilm 's Tom Charity commented on the character 's independence , likening Rapunzel 's spirited personality to those of both Ariel from The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) and Mulan from Mulan ( 1998 ) . Charity also labeled Rapunzel " another addition to the more recent Disney tradition of emancipated heroines " . 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 CNN 's Stephanie Goldberg included Rapunzel in her article " Brave 's Merida and other animated heroines " , a list that recognized some of Disney 's most heroic and independent heroines who have appeared in animated films . Goldberg jokingly wrote , " So what if ... Rapunzel defends herself with a frying pan and holds prisoners captive with her long , magical hair ? " Sonia Saraiya of Nerve ranked Rapunzel fourth in her article " Ranked : Disney Princesses From Least To Most Feminist " . Comparing the character 's spirited personality to that of preceding Disney Princesses Ariel and Jasmine from Aladdin ( 1992 ) , Saraiya described Rapunzel as " badass , " despite the fact that " her naivete sometimes gets in the way of her progressivism . " Saraiya continued , " [ Rapunzel ] also recognizes the unfairness of her plight and finds a way out of it , outwitting her ' mother , ' who is in fact her kidnapper , to venture to the outside world . " Tala <unk> of Female Network included Rapunzel in her article " 30 Fierce and Fun Female Cartoon Characters " , writing that , unlike her original fairy tale counterpart , " She ’ s not the helpless damsel locked in a tower awaiting an unknown fate , but a strong woman capable of defending herself in a fight . " 
 In the film , Rapunzel performs the song " I See the Light " as a duet with Flynn Rider . The song received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song at the 83rd Academy Awards in 2011 . Voice actress Mandy Moore performed the song live at the ceremony with co @-@ star Zachary Levi , who provided the voice Flynn in the film . The song did , however , garner the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media at the 54th ceremony in 2012 . 
 = Dragon Age : Origins = 
 Dragon Age : Origins is a role @-@ playing video game developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts . It is the first game in the Dragon Age franchise , and was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 in November 2009 , and for OS X in December 2009 . Edge of Reality developed the game 's console versions . 
 Set in the fictional kingdom of Ferelden during a period of civil strife , the game puts the player in the role of a warrior , mage or rogue coming from an elven , human , or dwarven background who must unite the kingdom to fight an impending invasion by demonic forces known as the " Darkspawn " . The player character is recruited as a Grey Warden and is tasked to defeat the Archdemon ( a being with the soul of an old god in the body of a powerful Dragon ) that commands the Darkspawn , and end the catastrophe known as the Blight . The game is played from a third @-@ person perspective that can be shifted to top @-@ down perspective . Throughout the game , players encounter various companions , who play major roles in the game 's plot and gameplay and accompany the player throughout the game . 
 BioWare described Dragon Age : Origins as a " dark heroic fantasy " set in a unique world , and a spiritual successor to their previous Baldur 's Gate and Neverwinter Nights franchises . Its setting was inspired by The Lord of the Rings and A Song of Ice & Fire , and was described by BioWare as a mix between high fantasy and low fantasy . Development of the game began in 2002 , and lasted over six years . BioWare employed more than 144 voice @-@ actors , and hired Inon Zur to compose the game 's music . 
 Origins received critical acclaim upon release , with praise mostly directed at its story , setting , characters , music and combat system . It sold more than 3 @.@ 2 million copies , and 1 million pieces of downloadable content . Its multiple year @-@ end accolades included Game of the Year and Best Role @-@ playing awards from several gaming publications . BioWare released several instances of downloadable content after the game 's initial launch , an expansion pack for the game titled Awakening in March 2010 , and two sequels , Dragon Age II and Dragon Age : Inquisition , were released in 2011 and 2014 respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dragon Age : Origins is an action role @-@ playing game . The player is a Grey Warden , part of an order of elite fighters , whose task is to defeat the Archdemon and save the world from a disastrous event called the Blight . Players create their own Grey Warden character , customizing gender and appearance as well as choosing a race and class . The available classes are warriors , who perform strong physical attacks ; rogues , who carry out stealth attacks and steal items from other characters ; and mages , who cast spells on enemies , create combo spells , and support other party members . The three choices of race are human , elf , and dwarf . The combination of class and race determines which of six different origin stories the player experiences : <unk> Elf , City Elf , Dwarven Noble , Dwarven Commoner , Mage , or Human Noble . This affects the way other in @-@ game characters perceive the player 's character ; for instance , a Dwarven Commoner would receive hatred and discrimination from other dwarves . However , all classes follow the same plot after the completion of the origin story . 
 During gameplay the player encounters a variety of enemies , including giant spiders , darkspawn , ghosts , walking trees , and dragons . They also recruit companions , who accompany them and provide assistance in battle . These companions are normally controlled by artificial intelligence , with behavior that the player can adjust through the " Tactic " menu , but the player also has the option to switch between characters , and is able to issue orders to them in real @-@ time or pause the game to queue up actions . 
 Utilizing a third @-@ person perspective , the combat in Origins is largely similar to BioWare 's previous Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic . The player and any companions engage in combat with the weapons they have equipped when the player targets or is noticed by a hostile enemy . Players can swap weapons and perform special attacks during combat , but most of these attacks have a recharge time . The point of view can be shifted from third person to a top @-@ down view , where friendly and hostile units are labelled with different colors to distinguish them . At the end of a battle the characters ' health and stamina , which powers a character 's skills , are automatically refilled . When an enemy is defeated , the player collects any items or loot from its corpse . 
 The player can level up their Warden character by earning experience points through completing quests and defeating enemies . Each time player levels up , they receive three points to spend on the character 's six attributes . Strength inflicts more damage , dexterity helps evade attacks more often , willpower increases stamina , magic increases spell damage or magic defense , cunning improves combat tactics , and constitution helps withstand attacks . Special skills , which are divided into four different aspects for each class , and specialization options , which offer class @-@ specific skills , can also be unlocked by levelling up . 
 Players can be accompanied by a maximum of three companions . Companions who are not in the player 's active party stay in base camp , a hub where the player can talk to their party members as well as purchase new weapons , armor , and gear . In addition to the main story , the player can learn more about the world of Thedas by collecting the Indexes scattered throughout the game . 
 The game 's dialogue engine is the same as that of Mass Effect . The player can talk and interact with both party members and other non @-@ playable characters . A dialogue tree offers several dialogue options for the player to select . Through conversation , the player can unlock unique quests and dialogue revealing the lore of Dragon Age . It can also be used to persuade or intimidate other characters . The player often must choose between morally ambiguous options , which result in consequences that affect the game 's world and progression , and can even lead to the death of a potential companion . Companions react to the player 's choices through an " approval system " . When they dislike or object to the player 's decisions , their approval drops , which can result in a companion leaving the party or even attacking the Warden . Approval points can also be influenced by gifts , which will improve any companion 's approval but are each intended for a specific companion . Some gifts , if given to the right character , start a cutscene and can even unlock a quest . A high approval rating improves a companion 's morale and gives bonuses to their combat abilities . A significant approval rating also makes it possible for the Warden to pursue a romantic relationship with certain companions . The game 's " interaction reactivity " system means that the way a player treats one companion affects the approval rating of other companions as well . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game is set in Ferelden , one of several countries in the mythical continent Thedas . Demonic creatures called the Darkspawn dwell within the Deep Roads , an underground highway system created by the dwarves long ago , deep beneath the surface of Thedas . Every few hundred years , the Darkspawn swarm the surface world in a movement known as a Blight . Ever since the first Blight , Thedas has relied on the legendary order of warriors known as the Grey Wardens to drive the Darkspawn back . Dragon Age : Origins begins on the eve of Thedas 's fifth Blight . 
 Thedas is a world in which race and class combine to determine social class . Elves are often viewed as second @-@ class citizens by humans , while human nobles are treated with respect . Mages , on the other hand , are cloistered by the Chantry : they have access to the Fade , the unconscious realm that is the home of spirits , and a single lapse in vigilance could cause them to be possessed by demons . Apostate mages , who live outside the Chantry 's control , are considered extremely dangerous , and the Chantry has a militant wing , the Templars , to seek them out and subdue them by any means necessary . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The chief protagonist of Dragon Age : Origins is the player @-@ controlled character , whose biography and combat specialization are determined by the race and class chosen at the start of the game . While the player can choose his or her avatar 's first name , the character is usually referred to as " The Warden " by other characters and the game 's narration . 
 Many of the game 's non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) are companion characters , who appear throughout the game and may volunteer their services . Companions include Alistair , a reluctantly heroic Grey Warden with a sarcastic wit ; Morrigan , the sultry but cynical dark mage who has little regard for authority or social mores ; <unk> , an ex @-@ member of Ferelden 's Chantry whose optimistic and virtuous demeanor belies an aptitude for espionage and combat ; Sten , a proud but stoic warrior of the militaristic <unk> people who often questions human ways ; <unk> , a brutal dwarven warrior whose love of alcohol is only matched by his penchant for violence and loyalty to his friends ; Wynne , an Elder Mage of the Circle , a maternal figure to the party and a powerful healer ; <unk> , a rakish elven assassin who is fond of treasures , sex and innuendo ; and a loyal <unk> War Hound , which the player can name and use for scouting and combat . In the DLC , Shale , a sarcastic Golem with a mild <unk> who was a female dwarf in her prior life , is also available . There is also a so @-@ called " secret companion " who can be recruited , but that will cause Alister to leave the Warden . The secret companion is Loghain . 
 Outside of companion characters , NPCs significant to the Origins plot include Duncan , the Grey Warden who recruits the player ; King Cailan , Ferelden 's naive but courageous leader and son of the legendary King Maric ; Queen Anora , Cailan 's politically @-@ savvy wife , whose youth and beauty are matched by a commanding personality but somewhat offset by her ambition and ruthlessness ; and Flemeth , Morrigan 's mother , who appears to be a harmless old woman in public , but in truth is an infamous dark witch of Ferelden legend . 
 The faceless Darkspawn horde is led by the archdemon <unk> , supposedly one of the Old Gods of the <unk> Imperium , incarnated in the form of a powerful and corrupted dragon with total control over the darkspawn . The game 's other main antagonists are Teyrn Loghain Mac Tir , father of Queen Anora , a once @-@ respected war hero gone mad with ambition and paranoia ; and <unk> Howe , the amoral and corrupt <unk> of <unk> who allies with Loghain to further his own ambitions . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Depending on the player 's chosen race and class , they will begin the game with one of six predetermined origin stories . In each origin story , the player is introduced to Duncan , the commander of Ferelden 's Grey Wardens , who is trying to find recruits to join the order . At the end of the origin story , the player 's character is selected as a potential Grey Warden , and leaves with Duncan . 
 The player and Duncan journey to a fortress in southern Ferelden called Ostagar . There , they join Cailan , the King of Ferelden , and his father @-@ in @-@ law Loghain , a legendary general . The three leaders plan to make a stand against the encroaching Darkspawn before a new Blight overwhelms Ferelden . Duncan senses the influence of an Archdemon , a god @-@ like being hosted in the body of a powerful Dragon that commands the Darkspawn , which makes this the first true Blight in over 400 years . Duncan emphasizes the importance of defeating the Blight before it can gain enough momentum to threaten the rest of Thedas . 
 Duncan initiates the player into the Grey Wardens through a dangerous ritual called the Joining . The Joining involves imbibing Darkspawn blood , which will either kill a person or imbue them with the powerful darkspawn essence known as the Taint , granting them the ability to sense Darkspawn and a rudimentary connection into their hive mind . After surviving the Joining , the player and another Grey Warden , Alistair , are given the task of lighting a beacon at the top of the fortress which will signal Loghain 's men to charge the horde 's flank . However , upon seeing the signal , Loghain abandons the battlefield with his army . Without Loghain 's reinforcements , King Cailan and Duncan are overwhelmed and slain by the Darkspawn , who massacre Cailan 's army , seize control of Ostagar and begin advancing into southern Ferelden . 
 The player 's Warden and Alistair are saved by Flemeth , a powerful witch who lives in a secluded hermitage with her daughter and apprentice , Morrigan . The player , Alistair , and Morrigan decide that in order to stop the Blight from destroying Ferelden , and possibly all of Thedas , they will need to gather a new army and slay the Archdemon . Using ancient Grey Warden treaties , the player 's Warden must travel across Ferelden to enlist the aid of the <unk> Elves , the Dwarves of <unk> , the Circle of Magi , and the soldiers of Redcliffe , loyal to <unk> Eamon . In addition , Alistair reveals that he is a bastard son of King Maric <unk> , Cailin 's father , putting him in contention for the recently vacated throne . 
 Meanwhile , Loghain returns to Ferelden 's capital city , Denerim , to inform his daughter Queen Anora of King Cailan 's death . Loghain scapegoats the Grey Wardens for the defeat at Ostagar ; accusing them of betraying Ferelden , Loghain outlaws the order and demands the deaths of any surviving Wardens . While Anora inherits her husband 's authority , Loghain quickly declares himself her regent and effectively seizes control of the kingdom . Loghain swiftly becomes a brutal and tyrannical ruler willing to do anything to retain power , igniting a civil war between himself and Ferelden 's nobility , who refuse to acknowledge his authority . Both sides battle to an inconclusive stalemate , and the darkspawn take advantage of the chaos to advance further into Ferelden unopposed . 
 After the player successfully obtains the assistance of each of the primary factions , a <unk> is called among the nobles of Ferelden . There , the player confronts Loghain , ultimately either executing him or making him a Grey Warden ( in which case he joins the party , replacing Alistair ) . The player also settles who will lead Ferelden against the Blight ( Alistair , Anora , or both ) and rallies support from the rest of the kingdom to face the Darkspawn . At this point , the player learns that only a Grey Warden can slay the Archdemon because of the Taint present in a Grey Warden 's body . Killing the Archdemon releases the demonic essence within it , which is drawn to the Taint in the Grey Warden and effectively kills them as well ; if anyone other than a Warden slays it , the Archdemon 's essence survives and finds a new host in the nearest Darkspawn , making the monster effectively immortal . 
 On the night before the final battle , Morrigan offers the player 's Warden a way to slay the Archdemon without sacrificing anyone : Morrigan believes that if the player succeeds in conceiving a child with her , the child would also carry the Taint . Once the Archdemon dies , its demonic essence would be drawn away from any Grey Warden to safely merge with the unborn child instead . The resulting child would be born a demigod , which she plans to raise on her own . The player can accept Morrigan 's offer , convince Alistair or Loghain to take part instead , or refuse the witch 's proposal , which will cause her to leave the party . 
 The next day , the player and the newly assembled army of Ferelden fight their way through the city of Denerim , which has been overrun by the Darkspawn . After fighting their way through the Darkspawn horde , and a final battle against the Archdemon atop Denerim 's highest tower , the player is given the chance to deliver the killing blow or to let Alistair or Loghain do it . With each choice , the Archdemon is killed and the leaderless Darkspawn army retreats from Denerim , marking the end of the Fifth Blight . Unless the ritual with Morrigan was performed , whoever slew the Archdemon also perishes . The story ends with a ceremony attended by the people of Ferelden during which the player and their companions are honored for saving the kingdom . The game then presents an epilogue in text and pictures which details the ramifications of the player 's in @-@ game choices on the future of Ferelden and the lives of his or her companions . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Dragon Age : Origins was created by the Edmonton studio of BioWare , the developer of Neverwinter Nights and Jade Empire . Development of the game 's first demo began in November 2002 . It was officially revealed at E3 2004 as simply Dragon Age , and was re @-@ revealed as Dragon Age : Origins in July 2008 , alongside a new trailer for the game . According to BioWare , they kept any information about the game hidden from the public , to further the game 's design and technology . More than 180 people worked on the game , and full @-@ scale production began three years after the game 's initial development . The subtitle " Origins " was chosen to represent the six origins storyline , BioWare 's return to PC role @-@ playing games , and the beginning of a new franchise . Origins is a spiritual successor to Baldur 's Gate and Neverwinter Nights , as an attempt to build a similar fantasy RPG without any licensing restrictions or issues . The similarities are mostly present in gameplay elements , such as real @-@ time tactical combat ; the game does not share the Dungeons and Dragons setting of the Baldur 's Gate series , and is instead set in a period resembling the Stone Age or Iron Age , with dragons prevalent . The tactic menu was inspired by the gambit system from Final Fantasy XII . 
 David <unk> , the lead writer for Origins , built the game 's world first before writing the plot . The team chose a " fantasy " setting because Dan <unk> , the game 's director , thought that BioWare was at its best in the fantasy genre . In the first draft , there were no Darkspawn or Grey Wardens , and mages were not allowed to use magic in cities . There were twelve different origin stories , including Human Commoner and <unk> , a barbarian origin . However , most of them were scrapped for being " ridiculous " , leading to six stories being finalized . Loghain was the first character to be created , while an Ogre , nicknamed " Fluffy " , and a human with medium armor were the first enemies designed . The concepts of Alistair and Morrigan were the next to be created , as they play the largest role in the game 's plot . Their creation also took far longer than other characters . Morrigan was originally conceived to be similar to Flemeth , speaking whimsically . However , <unk> was not satisfied and decided to completely rewrite her personality . As a result , she was designed as a " blunt " person who always resists her mother . Finding a suitable voice actor for Morrigan took the most time of any character . The game 's final version features 68 @,@ 260 lines of dialogue ; the quality assurance testers for the game enabled a cheat to automatically skip these cutscenes and dialogues during test runs . 
 Ray Muzyka , co @-@ founder of BioWare , said that the team wanted to try something that would be new but familiar to most players . They hoped that Origins would redefine the genre to become The Lord of the Rings of video game franchises . Greg Zeschuk , another co @-@ founder of BioWare , described the fantasy of Dragon Age as in between the high fantasy of J. R. R. Tolkien 's works and the low fantasy of works by George R.R. Martin . The goal was a " dark heroic fantasy " that would suit the taste of any fan of the genre . Thus , while the game has the typical races of human , elf , and dwarf , they are slightly altered from the usual nature of the three races , and a new lizard @-@ like race called the <unk> was introduced . Some of the alterations they made included flipping how certain races , like elves , are treated in other fictional worlds . While elves are often described as a race of high prestige in fiction , Dragon Age : Origins presents them as slaves of humans , labelled as second class citizens who resent the human race . This extended to the gameplay , where the player can choose to discriminate against other races , and can experience discrimination from others based on their choices . 
 BioWare recognized that non @-@ linear choices are an element unique to video games in the entertainment industry . Zeschuk called the sheer number of choices in the game " big " and " impactful " , and the team designed many of those to be emotional and create a more personal experience for the player . They intentionally avoided adding a karma system , as the choices are designed to be ambiguous , with only the player to judge whether they are good or bad . According to Muzyka , their goal was to make players sympathize with events and characters , connecting with them to feel true emotions . This vision challenged the team to balance many key aspects , such as the amount of dialogue and animation in each cutscene , to create a believable scenario for players . 
 The team also hoped to handle romance in a more " mature " and " complicated " way , with a true reflection on human relationships and reactions rather than " adolescent titillation " . The game has sex scenes , but no nudity . Muzyka added that it was an artistic choice , and a decision made by the team , not the publisher Electronic Arts . 
 While Origins is a single @-@ player @-@ only game , Muzyka described it as a " social experience " , considering the narrative and its variety of paths as an integral part of the gameplay . The characters a player meets , items they collect , and quests they receive and complete may be different , leading to a completely different experience . He also considered the ways a player explores the world and discovers new areas as an exploration narrative . As each player had different experience , they hoped that those players would collaborate to expand upon their knowledge of the world . To that effect , the team built a community site as an online social environment for players to communicate . Players could share stats and automatically generated screenshots with the community . 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 The game features an orchestral soundtrack with choir , used both in @-@ game and during cutscenes . The soundtrack was recorded by performance of a 44 @-@ piece orchestra , recorded twice and merged to sound like an 88 @-@ piece orchestra . It was composed by Inon Zur and performed by the Northwest Sinfonia . According to Zur , he intentionally made most of the soundtrack feel " dark " , combining low brass and bass string instruments with ancient drums to express a feeling that is both heroic and demonic . One of the tracks , " <unk> 's Song " , was composed in under 24 hours . The soundtrack was presented at a panel in the Hollywood Music in Media Interactive Conference in 2009 , and was performed as part of the September 26 " A Night in Fantasia 2009 " concert in Sydney , Australia , by the Eminence Symphony Orchestra . 
 Origins contains a large amount of voice acting recorded in the US and the UK . Actors include Tim Russ , Steve Valentine , Kate Mulgrew , Simon Templeman , Mark Rolston , Tim Curry , Adam Howden , Nicola Bertram , and Claudia Black . In total , more than 140 voice actors worked on the game . A large part of these recordings became the ambient dialogue that takes place between non @-@ player characters in the adventuring party , adding to their backstories and lending more credibility to the characters . Mark Darrah , executive producer of BioWare , described the cast of characters the largest of any of their games at that time , and hoped that using celebrities would add a layer of depth and complexity to the characters . The main protagonist is not voice @-@ acted , as the team hoped that players would " reflect their own inner voice " when making decisions . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 While the game was originally intended for PC , a console version was announced in 2008 by gaming magazine Game Informer . Prior to the announcement , Zeschuk suggested that the entire franchise has a " console future " . The decision was made to bring the game to consoles to introduce it to a wider audience . Mike Laidlaw , the game 's lead designer , considered creating the console versions ' interface a challenge , as they had to convert the long and complex <unk> from the PC version to a more streamlined interface that could use the same actions with only few button presses . To that end , the team decided to map six different actions together , and allow players to customize the arrangement . Also , the console version does not allow the top @-@ down view possible in the PC version . 
 The game was originally set to be released in early 2009 for Microsoft Windows , and later for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The team partnered with Edge of Reality to develop the console versions of the game . However , its release date was pushed to the latter half of that year in order to have a simultaneous launch . BioWare announced that the game would be released on October 20 , 2009 , but pushed it back again to November 6 , 2009 , as the team wanted additional time to finalize some last @-@ minute decisions . The PlayStation 3 version was at one point delayed to November 17 , but did end up launching alongside the other versions . A Mac version of the game , developed by <unk> , was released on December 21 , 2009 . 
 In addition to the standard version , other editions of Origins were made available for purchase . The Collector 's Edition came in a SteelBook with different artwork . Like the standard edition , the Collector 's Edition included a redemption code to obtain the Stone Prisoner and Blood Dragon Armor DLC for free , but added three additional exclusive in @-@ game items , a bonus disc containing a making @-@ of documentary , concept art , trailers , the game 's original soundtrack , and a cloth map of Ferelden . The " Ultimate Edition " , released on October 26 , 2010 , includes the base game , the Awakening expansion pack , and all 9 DLC packs . 
 The Dragon Age Character Creator was released on October 13 , 2009 , allowing players to create a character in advance and import it into the full game upon release . BioWare also released a " developer @-@ grade " toolset to allow extensive modification and customization of the game 's PC version . Players can use these tools to craft new campaigns , quests , cinematics , and lip @-@ syncing . 
 On November 26 , 2009 , Electronic Arts announced a competition called Dragon Age : Warden ’ s Quest . Contestants formed groups of four people and competed to adventure through the game 's world , with the winning group receiving $ 12 @,@ 500 . The representatives from Hungary won the contest , followed by a group called Bioware Community , Canada and a group from Poland . On March 9 , 2011 , Electronic Arts announced that players who pre @-@ ordered <unk> would receive a free copy of Origins . In 2012 , to celebrate the first @-@ year anniversary of Electronic Arts ' own digital distribution software Origin , the game was made free to download alongside Battlefield : Bad Company 2 and Spore for a limited time . On October 8 , 2015 , it became free to download again for a limited time as part of Origin 's On the House program . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 BioWare announced that they would support the game with downloadable content for at least 2 years . The DLC packs are both story @-@ based and content @-@ based , and added in elements that were cut from the base game , such as Shale , a stone @-@ based companion who always gets stuck in doors and causes trouble with the camera system . A crossover with Mass Effect 2 , an item called the Blood Dragon Armor , is also available for purchase . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Dragon Age : Origins received critical acclaim from major video game critics upon its release . While the game is considered to be virtually identical across all platforms , differences in user interface , graphical performance , and online content delivery have led the PC version to be reviewed more favorably than the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions ; Metacritic ranks the PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 versions of the game with scores of 91 , 87 , and 86 , respectively . 
 The game 's setting was well received by critics . Dave Snider from Giant Bomb thought that the setting felt traditional due to the presence of dwarves and elves , but that the world was beautifully executed . He also appreciated the small touches BioWare added to the world , noting the " French @-@ tinged accent " of the <unk> Empire humans . He added that the six origin stories and their unique dialogue and referencing throughout the game make the world feel cohesive . Kevin VanOrd from GameSpot made similar comments , stating that the new ideas added to a familiar world make it feel original and new . However , Jeff Haynes from IGN said that the origin stories were inconsistent , with missteps that make the world , while " rich and vivid " , feel less believable . Joe Juba from Game Informer wrote that the world was well @-@ realized with a deep history , which makes the game addicting , as players can sense their Warden 's importance in the world . 
 The game 's story and characters also received praise . Snider said that the story is driven by the characters , and that the choices presented in the game were difficult , making him regret some choices for weeks after completing the game . He added that the game 's main quest was well @-@ written , and its quality boosted by excellent voice acting ; he called the performance of Claudia Black as Morrigan one of the best in the game . VanOrd commended the game 's story , saying that it was memorable and crafted with care , successfully making players care about the game 's world and characters . He added that the deep character development made every choice " momentous " . GamesRadar thought that the story and the Warden 's appearance felt generic , but that the story become more and more engrossing as it progressed . Nick Tan from Game Revolution liked the banter between companions as a humorous change of pace within the game . Gerald Villoria from GameSpy praised the exclusion of the moral system for making the characters feel more complex . Juba wrote that the story was good but predictable , not straying far from standard fantasy stories . Wesley Yin @-@ Poole from VideoGamer.com called the story memorable , saying that it " leaves an itch in your mind " , and has attracted players to return to the game " like an addict seeking a hit of relief . " 
 As for the game 's combat , Snider called it streamlined , but said that players who do not want to use the pause mechanic would not be able to appreciate the game , as the combat requires both patience and strategy . He liked the game 's third @-@ person view more than the top @-@ down view , saying that being able to view the sky made environments feel more complicated , and praised the high difficulty of boss battles , which task players to manage their stamina carefully . His conclusion was that Origins " feels like a real throwback to the good old days of PC role @-@ playing epics . " VanOrd said that the combat system was easily recognizable for players who have played other RPGs developed by BioWare . He added that players can have a lot of fun switching between characters , and agreed that the game had created thrilling boss battles . He praised the choice to have health and stamina replenish immediately after battles , as it sped up combat pace and flow . Tan also commended the combat , finding it a better system than other BioWare RPGs , but disliked the fact that characters can step into water . Juba praised the amount of space for players to experiment with new skills and abilities , adding that the required focus and attention make combat very satisfying . 
 The game 's graphics received mixed reviews . VanOrd was not impressed , stating that the environments do not look as good viewed from a top @-@ down perspective , but he praised the art style and some of the game 's " eye @-@ catching " landmarks . Tan liked that the environments were varied and unique , saying that each level felt " vast " and filled with details . Villoria found its visual quality lacking when compared with that of Mass Effect 2 , adding that the facial animation can feel wooden at times . However , he found the combat animation rewarding and satisfying . He further criticized the sex sequences as " off @-@ putting " . Yin @-@ Poole said that the game 's graphics were boring and generic , and called the sex scenes " anti @-@ climatic " and poorly @-@ executed . Both Villoria and Yin @-@ Poole felt that the six @-@ year development time was too long , considering the game 's mediocre graphics . 
 GamesRadar estimated that there are more than 80 hours of content available in the game . Villoria called the world engaging , and its replay value very high , as players can play the story over and over again with a different origin . Juba agreed , as did Yin @-@ Poole , who added that the way companions react to the player 's decisions , as well as the six origin stories , significantly expand the game 's longevity . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Dragon Age : Origins topped Steam 's sales chart on November 10 , 2009 . The Digital Deluxe version of the game was ranked first place , with the standard edition ranked second . The Xbox 360 version of the game was the ninth @-@ best @-@ selling game in the US according to the NPD Group , selling approximately 362 @,@ 100 copies . According to John <unk> , CEO of Electronic Arts , the company is very satisfied with the sales of Origins ; more than 1 million DLC packs for the game were sold before the end of 2009 . In February 2010 , Electronic Arts announced that more than 3 @.@ 2 million copies of the game had been sold . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Origins gained recognition from several gaming publications for its achievements . The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences named it the " Role @-@ Playing / Massively Multiplayer Game of the Year 2009 " . At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards , Dragon Age : Origins received the Best PC Game and Best RPG awards . It was chosen as the PC Game of the Year , Best Xbox 360 RPG of the Year , Best Story of the Year , and Best PC Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year by IGN . The game also received Giant Bomb 's Best PC Game of 2009 award , and Game of the Year 2009 and RPG of the Year awards from U.S. PC Gamer . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . 
 = = Franchise = = 
 Although the name " Origins " hinted that the game would be a beginning of a new franchise , the team did not expect the game to become successful , and had never planned for sequels . Due to its success , the game spawned a Dragon Age franchise consisting of video games , comics , and novels . The game 's sequel , Dragon Age II , was announced on July 9 , 2010 , with the goal of bringing improved graphics and combat to the franchise . Dragon Age II is set within a ten @-@ year period and features a new predefined protagonist , Hawke , and a new locale within the Dragon Age world , the city of Kirkwall . Players are able to transfer save data from Dragon Age : Origins into the sequel ; decisions that the player made during the course of Dragon Age : Origins are referenced while playing Dragon Age II . 
 The third installment of the series , titled Dragon Age : Inquisition , was announced on September 17 , 2012 . In Inquisition , players take on the role of an Inquisitor , and must unite Ferelden and <unk> to defeat an ancient Darkspawn called <unk> . The game was released on November 18 , 2014 , and in addition to the original three gaming platforms , it brought the Dragon Age franchise to the eighth generation of video game consoles : PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . 
 A free @-@ to @-@ play mobile game , Heroes of Dragon Age , was released in 2013 . 
 = Shōkaku @-@ class aircraft carrier = 
 The two Shōkaku @-@ class ( <unk> , Shōkaku @-@ gata ) aircraft carriers were built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1930s . Completed shortly before the start of the Pacific War in 1941 , they have been called " arguably the best aircraft carriers in the world " when built . With the exception of the Battle of Midway , they participated in every major naval action of the Pacific War , including the attack on Pearl Harbor , the Indian Ocean Raid , the Battle of the Coral Sea , and the Guadalcanal Campaign . 
 Their inexperienced air groups were relegated to airfield attacks during the attack on Pearl Harbor , but they later sank two of the four fleet carriers lost by the United States Navy during the war in addition to one elderly British light carrier . The sister ships returned to Japan after the Battle of the Coral Sea , one to repair damage and the other to replace aircraft lost during the battle , so neither ship participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After the catastrophic losses of four carriers during that battle , they formed the bulk of the IJN 's carrier force for the rest of the war . As such they were the primary counterattack force deployed against the American invasion of Guadalcanal in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons in August . Two months later , they attempted to support a major offensive by the Imperial Japanese Army to push the United States Marines off Guadalcanal . This resulted in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands where they crippled one American carrier and damaged another in exchange for damage to Shōkaku and a light carrier . Neither attempt succeeded and the Japanese withdrew their remaining forces from Guadalcanal in early 1943 using the air group from Zuikaku to provide cover . 
 For the next year , the sisters trained before moving south to defend against any American attempt to retake the Mariana Islands or the Philippines . Shōkaku was sunk by an American submarine during the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 as the Americans invaded the Marianas and Zuikaku was sacrificed as a decoy four months later during the Battle of Cape <unk> . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The two Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were ordered in 1937 as part of the 3rd Naval Armaments Supplement Program . No longer restricted by the provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty , which had expired in December 1936 , and with relaxed budgetary limitations , the IJN sought qualitative superiority over their foreign counterparts . Drawing on experience with their existing carriers , the Navy General Staff laid out an ambitious requirement for a ship that equaled the 96 @-@ aircraft capacity of the Akagi and Kaga , the speed of Hiryū and the defensive armament of Kaga . The new ship was also to have superior protection and range over any of the existing carriers . 
 The Basic Design Section of the Navy Technical Department decided upon an enlarged and improved Hiryū design with the island on the port side , amidships . After construction of the ships began , the Naval Air Technical Department ( NATD ) began having second thoughts about the location of the island because it thought that the portside location of the island on Hiryū and Akagi had an adverse impact on airflow over the flight deck . Another issue identified was that the amidships position shortened the available landing area , which had the potential to be problematic in the future as aircraft landing speeds increased with their growing weight . To verify these assumptions , the NATD filmed hundreds of takeoffs and landings aboard Akagi in October – November 1938 and decided to move the island over to the starboard side and further forward , about one @-@ third of the length from the bow . Shōkaku was the furthest advanced by this point and the supporting structure for the bridge had already been built ; rebuilding it would have delayed construction so it was left in place . The changes that had to be made consisted of a 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) widening of the flight deck opposite the island and a corresponding 50 @-@ centimeter ( 20 in ) narrowing on the starboard side and the addition of 100 metric tons ( 98 long tons ) of ballast on the port side to re @-@ balance the ship . 
 The ships had a length of 257 @.@ 5 meters ( 844 ft 10 in ) overall , a beam of 29 meters ( 95 ft 2 in ) , a draft of 9 @.@ 32 meters ( 30 ft 7 in ) at deep load , and a moulded depth of 23 m ( 75 ft 6 in ) . They displaced 32 @,@ 105 metric tons ( 31 @,@ 598 long tons ) at deep load . Based on hydrodynamic research conducted for the Yamato @-@ class battleships , the Shōkaku class received a bulbous bow and twin rudders , both of which were positioned on the centerline abaft the propellers . Their crew consisted of 1 @,@ 660 men : 75 commissioned officers , 56 special duty officers , 71 warrant officers and 1 @,@ 458 petty officers and crewmen , excluding the air group . 
 The Shōkaku @-@ class ships were fitted with four Kampon geared steam turbine sets , each driving one 4 @.@ 2 @-@ meter ( 13 ft 9 in ) propeller , using steam provided by eight Kampon Type Model B water @-@ tube boilers . With a working pressure of 30 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 942 kPa ; 427 psi ) , the boilers gave the turbines enough steam to generate a total of 160 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 120 @,@ 000 kW ) and a designed speed of 34 @.@ 5 knots ( 63 @.@ 9 km / h ; 39 @.@ 7 mph ) . This was the most powerful propulsion system in IJN service , 10 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 and 6 @,@ 000 kW ) more than the Yamato class and the Mogami @-@ class cruiser , respectively . During their sea trials , the sister ships achieved 34 @.@ 37 – 34 @.@ 58 knots ( 63 @.@ 65 – 64 @.@ 04 km / h ; 39 @.@ 55 – 39 @.@ 79 mph ) from 161 @,@ 290 – 168 @,@ 100 shaft horsepower ( 120 @,@ 270 – 125 @,@ 350 kW ) . They carried 5 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 9 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 18 @,@ 000 km ; 11 @,@ 200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boiler uptakes were trunked to the ships ' starboard side amidships and exhausted just below flight deck level through two funnels that curved downward . The Shōkaku class was fitted with three 600 @-@ kilowatt ( 800 hp ) turbo generators and two 350 @-@ kilowatt ( 470 hp ) diesel generators , all operating at 225 volts . 
 = = = Flight deck and hangars = = = 
 The carriers ' 242 @.@ 2 @-@ meter ( 794 ft 7 in ) flight deck had a maximum width of 29 meters and overhung the superstructure at both ends , supported by pillars . Ten transverse arrestor wires were installed on the flight deck that could stop a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 8 @,@ 800 lb ) aircraft . If the aircraft missed those , it could be stopped by one of three crash barricades . Although space and weight were allocated for two aircraft catapults , their development was not completed before the Shōkaku @-@ class ships were sunk . The ships were designed with two superimposed hangars ; the upper hangar was about 200 meters ( 656 ft 2 in ) long and had a width that varied between 18 @.@ 5 and 24 meters ( 60 ft 8 in and 78 ft 9 in ) . It had a height of 4 @.@ 85 meters ( 15 ft 11 in ) while the lower hangar was 4 @.@ 7 meters ( 15 ft 5 in ) high and only usable by fighters . The lower hangar was about 20 meters ( 65 ft 7 in ) shorter than the upper one and its width ranged from 17 @.@ 5 to 20 meters ( 57 ft 5 in to 65 ft 7 in ) . Together they had a total area of 5 @,@ 545 square meters ( 59 @,@ 690 sq ft ) . Each hangar could be subdivided by five or six fire curtains and they were fitted with fire fighting foam dispensers on each side . The lower hangar was also fitted with a carbon dioxide fire suppression system . Each subdivision was provided with a pair of enclosed and armored stations to control the fire curtains and fire fighting equipment . 
 Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by three elevators that took 15 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . The forward elevator was larger than the others to allow aircraft that had just landed to be moved below without folding their wings and measured 13 by 16 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 52 ft 6 in ) . The other elevators were narrower , 13 by 12 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 39 ft 4 in ) . The ships mounted a crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , abreast the rear elevator . When collapsed , it was flush with the flight deck . 
 The Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were initially intended to have an air group of 96 , including 24 aircraft in reserve . These were envisioned as 12 Mitsubishi A5M ( " Claude " ) monoplane fighters , 24 Aichi D1A2 ( " Susie " ) Type 96 dive bombers , 24 Mitsubishi <unk> ( " Mabel " ) Type 97 No. 2 torpedo bombers , and 12 Nakajima <unk> Type 97 reconnaissance aircraft . All of these aircraft were either superseded by larger , more modern aircraft or cancelled while the ships were being built , so the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , 27 Aichi D3A ( " Val " ) dive bombers , and 27 Nakajima B5N ( " Kate " ) torpedo bombers . In addition , the ship carried 2 Zeros , 5 " Vals " , and 5 " Kates " as spares for a total of 84 aircraft . 
 = = = Armament and sensors = = = 
 The carriers ' primary anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of eight twin @-@ gun mounts equipped with 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 in ) Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns mounted on projecting sponsons , grouped into pairs fore and aft on each side of the hull . The guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) , and a ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at an elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was fourteen rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . The ship was equipped with four Type 94 fire @-@ control directors to control the 12 @.@ 7 cm guns , one for each pair of guns , although the director on the island could control all of the Type 89 guns . 
 Their light AA armament consisted of a dozen triple @-@ gun mounts for license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 AA guns , six mounts on each side of the flight deck . The gun was the standard Japanese light AA weapon during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high @-@ speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high @-@ speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast " . These guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and a ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the 15 @-@ round magazines . The Type 96 guns were controlled by six Type 95 directors , one for every pair of mounts . 
 In June 1942 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku had their anti @-@ aircraft armament augmented with six more triple 25 mm mounts , two each at the bow and stern , and one each fore and aft of the island . The bow and stern groups each received a Type 95 director . In October another triple 25 mm mount was added at the bow and stern and 10 single mounts were added before the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 . After the battle , Zuikaku 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced with 26 single mounts for the 25 mm Type 96 gun , bringing the total of 25 mm barrels to 96 , 60 in 20 triple mounts and 36 single mounts . These guns were supplemented by eight 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . Each 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) rocket weighed 22 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 50 lb ) and had a maximum velocity of 200 m / s ( 660 ft / s ) . Their maximum range was 4 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 yd ) . 
 Shōkaku was the first carrier in the IJN to be fitted with radar , a Type 21 early @-@ warning radar , mounted on the top of the island around September 1942 . The date of Zuikaku 's installation is unknown , but both ships received a second Type 21 radar in a retractable installation adjacent to the flight deck after October . Before June 1944 , a Type 13 air @-@ search radar was installed on the light tripod mast abaft the island . The Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were also fitted with a Type 91 hydrophone in the bow that was only useful when anchored or moving very slowly . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The Shōkaku class had a waterline belt that consisted of 46 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) of Copper @-@ alloy Non @-@ Cemented armor ( CNC ) that covered most of the length of the ship . The belt was 4 @.@ 1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) high , of which 2 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) was below the waterline . The lower strake of the armor was backed by 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of Ducol steel . The magazines were protected by 165 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) of New Vickers Non @-@ Cemented ( NVNC ) armor , sloped at an inclination up to 25 ° and tapered to thicknesses of 55 – 75 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) . The flight and both hangar decks were unprotected and the ships ' propulsion machinery was protected by a 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck of CNC armor . The NVNC armor over the magazines was 132 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) thick and 105 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick over the aviation gasoline storage tanks . All of the deck armor was overlaid on a 25 @-@ millimeter deck of Ducol steel . 
 The <unk> were the first Japanese carriers to incorporate a torpedo belt system . Based on model experiments that began in 1935 , it consisted of a liquid @-@ loaded " sandwich " of compartments outboard of the torpedo bulkhead . The experiments showed that a narrow liquid @-@ loaded compartment was necessary to distribute the force of a torpedo or mine 's detonation along the torpedo bulkhead by spreading it across the full width of the bulkhead and to stop the splinters created by the detonation . Outboard of this were two compartments intended to dissipate the force of the gases of the detonation , including the watertight compartment of the double bottom . The two innermost compartments were intended to be filled with fuel oil that would be replaced by water as it was consumed . The torpedo bulkhead itself consisted of an outer Ducol plate 18 – 30 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 71 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick that was riveted to a 12 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) plate . The IJN expected the torpedo bulkhead to be damaged in an attack and placed a thin holding bulkhead slightly inboard to prevent any leaks from reaching the ships ' vitals . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Careers = = 
 Shortly after completion in 1941 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to the newly formed Fifth Carrier Division , which was itself assigned to the 1st Air Fleet ( Kidō Butai ) , and began working up to prepare for the Pearl Harbor attack . Due to their inexperience , their air groups were tasked with the less demanding airfield attack role rather than the anti @-@ ship mission allocated to the veteran air groups of the older carriers . Each carrier 's aircraft complement consisted of 18 Zero fighters , 27 D3A dive bombers , and 27 B5N torpedo bombers . The two carriers contributed a total of 12 Zeros and 54 D3As to the first wave on the morning of 8 December 1941 ( Japan time ) ; these latter aircraft struck Wheeler Army Airfield , Hickam Field , and Naval Air Station Ford Island while the fighters strafed Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay . Only the 54 B5Ns participated in the second wave , striking Ford Island , Hickam Field and Kaneohe Bay again . The Fifth Carrier Division 's aircraft conducted the majority of the attack against the airfields , supplemented only by fighters from the other four carriers . Only one of Shōkaku 's dive bombers was lost during the attack ; in exchange 314 American aircraft were damaged or destroyed . Historian Alan <unk> said the young aviators delivered " a sterling performance , greatly exceeding expectations and outshining the dive bombers from the more experienced carriers . " 
 In January 1942 , together with Akagi and Kaga of the First Carrier Division , the sisters supported the invasion of Rabaul in the Bismarck Archipelago , as the Japanese moved to secure their southern defensive perimeter against attacks from Australia . Aircraft from all four carriers attacked the Australian base at Rabaul on 20 January ; the First Carrier Division continued to attack the town while the Fifth Carrier Division moved westwards and attacked Lae and Salamaua in New Guinea . They covered the landings at Rabaul and Kavieng on 23 January before returning to Truk before the end of the month . After the Marshalls – Gilberts raids on 1 February , the Fifth Carrier Division was retained in home waters until mid @-@ March to defend against any American carrier raids on the Home Islands . 
 = = = Indian Ocean raid = = = 
 The sister ships then rejoined the Kido Butai at Staring Bay on Celebes Island in preparation for the Indian Ocean raid . By this time the air groups had been reorganized to consist of 21 each of the A6Ms , D3As and B5Ns . The Japanese intent was to defeat the British Eastern Fleet and destroy British airpower in the region in order to secure the flank of their operations in Burma . Shōkaku and Zuikaku contributed aircraft to the 5 April Easter Sunday Raid on Colombo , Ceylon . Although the civilian shipping had been evacuated from Colombo harbor , the Japanese sank an armed merchant cruiser and a destroyer and severely damaged some of the support facilities . The Kido Butai returned to Ceylon four days later and attacked Trincomalee ; the sisters ' aircraft sank a large cargo ship and damaged the monitor HMS Erebus . In the meantime , the Japanese spotted the light carrier HMS Hermes , escorted by the destroyer HMAS Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku were the first to attack the Allied ships , both of which were sunk . 
 = = = Battle of the Coral Sea = = = 
 En route to Japan , the Fifth Carrier Division was diverted to Truk to support Operation Mo ( the planned capture of Port Moresby in New Guinea ) . While they were preparing for the mission , the Americans intercepted and decrypted Japanese naval messages discussing the operation and dispatched the carriers Yorktown and Lexington to stop the invasion . The Japanese opened Operation Mo by occupying Tulagi , in the Solomon Islands , on 3 May . American land @-@ based aircraft had spotted the light carrier Shōhō escorting the transports of the main invasion force on 6 May , and the American carriers moved west to place themselves in a position to attack it the following morning . 
 Shōhō was quickly located again that morning and sunk . In turn , the Japanese spotted the oiler , Neosho , and her escorting destroyer , which were misidentified as a carrier and a light cruiser . A single dive bomber was lost during the consequent airstrike that sank the destroyer and damaged Neosho badly enough that she had to be scuttled a few days later . Late in the afternoon , the Japanese launched a small airstrike , without any escorting fighters , based on an erroneous spot report . The American carriers were far closer to the Japanese than they realized and roughly in line with their intended target . Alerted by radar , some of the American Combat Air Patrol ( CAP ) was vectored to intercept the Japanese aircraft , the rest being retained near the carriers because of bad weather and fading daylight . The American fighters mauled the Japanese attackers who were forced to call off the attack , but some of the surviving Japanese pilots became confused in the darkness and attempted to verify if the American carriers were their own before being driven off . 
 On the morning of 8 May , both sides located each other at about the same time and began launching their aircraft about 09 : 00 . The American dive bombers disabled Shōkaku 's flight deck with three hits , but the carrier was able to evade all of the torpedoes . Hidden by a rain squall , Zuikaku escaped detection and was not attacked . In return , the Japanese aircraft badly damaged Lexington with two torpedo and two bomb hits and scored a single bomb hit on Yorktown . The torpedo hits on Lexington cracked one of her avgas tanks , and leaking vapor caused a series of large explosions that caused her to be scuttled . 
 The air groups of the sisters were decimated in the battle , which forced Zuikaku to return to Japan with Shōkaku for resupply and aircrew training , and neither carrier was able to take part in the Battle of Midway in June . En route to Japan , Shōkaku was caught in a severe storm and nearly capsized as the weight of the water used to put out the fires had compromised her stability . Repairs took three months and she was not ready for action until late August . 
 = = = Battle of the Eastern Solomons = = = 
 The American landings on Guadalcanal and Tulagi on 7 August 1942 caught the Japanese by surprise . The next day , the light carrier Ryūjō joined the sister ships in the First Carrier Division , which departed for Truk on 16 August . Having learned the lesson taught at Midway , the IJN strengthened the fighter contingent at the expense of the torpedo bombers assigned to its carriers ; the Shōkaku @-@ class carriers mustered 53 Zeros , 51 D3As , 36 B5Ns and 2 Yokosuka <unk> @-@ C " Judy " reconnaissance aircraft between them . After an American carrier was spotted near the Solomon Islands on 21 August , the division was ordered to bypass Truk and continue to the south . Ryūjō was detached early on 24 August to move in advance of the troop convoy bound for Guadalcanal and to attack the American air base at Henderson Field if no carriers were located . The two fleet carriers were to stand off , prepared to attack the Americans if found . 
 Ryūjō and her escorts were the first Japanese ships spotted and sunk by the Americans later that morning , but Zuikaku and Shōkaku were not spotted until the afternoon . Shortly before an unsuccessful attack by the pair of Douglas SBD Dauntlesses conducting the search , the sisters launched half of their dive bombers to attack the American carriers Enterprise and Saratoga . Most of the American carrier aircraft were already airborne by this time , either on CAP , returning from search missions , or from sinking Ryūjō , so only a small airstrike was launched in response to the spot report . About an hour after the first Japanese airstrike took off , a second airstrike that included the rest of the dive bombers was launched , but their target location was mistaken and they failed to find the Americans . The first airstrike attacked the two American carriers , scoring one hit on the battleship USS North Carolina and three hits on Enterprise , but they were mauled by the large number of airborne American aircraft and heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . Uncertain of the damage inflicted on each other , both sides disengaged later that evening . 
 = = = Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands = = = 
 The First Carrier Division , now including the light carrier Zuihō , departed Truk on 11 October to support the Japanese Army operation to capture Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . At this time , the sisters mustered 54 A6Ms , 45 D3As , and 36 B5Ns between them . Four days later , the Japanese spotted a small American convoy that consisted of a fleet tug towing a gasoline barge and escorted by the destroyer Meredith . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku sank the latter , but did not attack the tug . 
 The Japanese and American carrier forces discovered each other in the early morning of 26 October and each side launched air strikes . Shōkaku was badly damaged by six hits from USS Hornet 's dive bombers ; Zuikaku was not spotted or attacked as she was hidden by the overcast conditions , just like at the Battle of the Coral Sea . In exchange , the Japanese crippled Hornet with two torpedoes and three bombs . In addition , two aircraft crashed into the American carrier and inflicted serious damage . Enterprise was also damaged by two bomb hits and a near miss and a destroyer was damaged when it was struck by a B5N . Attacks later in the day further damaged Hornet , which was abandoned and later sunk by Japanese destroyers Makigumo and Akigumo . The Japanese lost nearly half their aircraft that participated in the battle , together with their irreplaceable experienced aircrew . On 2 November , the First Carrier Division was ordered home for repairs and training . 
 Shōkaku 's repairs continued until March 1943 and Zuikaku , together with the recently repaired Zuihō , sailed for Truk on 17 January to support the impending evacuation of Japanese ground forces from Guadalcanal ( Operation Ke ) . On 29 January , the two carriers flew off 47 Zeros to Rabaul and Kahili Airfield , contributing some of their own aircraft and pilots . Zuihō was then used to cover the evacuation , while Zuikaku remained at Truk , together with the two Yamato @-@ class battleships , acting as a fleet in being threatening to sortie at any time . 
 In May , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to a mission to counterattack the American offensive in the Aleutian Islands , but this operation was cancelled after the Allied victory on Attu on 29 May 1943 . The sister ships were transferred to Truk in July . In response to the carrier raid on Tarawa on 18 September , the carriers and much of the fleet sortied for Eniwetok to search for the American forces before they returned to Truk on 23 September , having failed to locate them . The Japanese had intercepted some American radio traffic that suggested another attack on Wake Island , and on 17 October , Shōkaku and Zuikaku and the bulk of the 1st Fleet sailed for Eniwetok to be in a position to intercept any such attack , but no attack occurred and the fleet returned to Truk . At the beginning of November , the bulk of their air groups were transferred to Rabaul to bolster the defenses there , just in time to help defend the port against the Allied attack a few days later . They accomplished little there , for the loss of over half their number , before returning to Truk on the 13th . The sisters returned to Japan in December . 
 In February 1944 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were transferred to Singapore . On 1 March the carrier divisions were reorganized with the new fleet carrier Taihō replacing Zuihō in the division . The First Carrier Division sailed in mid @-@ May for Tawi @-@ Tawi in the Philippines . The new base was closer to the oil wells in Borneo on which the IJN relied and also to the Palau and western Caroline Islands where the Japanese expected the next American attack ; the location lacked an airfield on which to train the inexperienced pilots and American submarine activity restricted the ships to the anchorage . 
 = = = Battle of the Philippine Sea = = = 
 The 1st Mobile Fleet was en route to Guimares Island in the central Philippines on 13 June , where they intended to practice carrier operations in an area better protected from submarines , when Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa learned of the American attack on the Mariana Islands the previous day . Upon reaching Guimares , the fleet refueled and sortied into the Philippine Sea where they spotted Task Force 58 on 18 June . At this time , the sister ships mustered 54 Zeros , 60 D4Ys and 36 Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . As the carriers were launching their first airstrike the following morning , Taihō was torpedoed by an American submarine and later sank . Later that morning , Shōkaku was torpedoed by a different submarine , USS Cavalla . The three or four torpedoes started multiple fires in the hangar , which ignited fueling aircraft , in addition to causing heavy flooding . As the bow continued to sink , aircraft and munitions began to slide forward and a bomb in the hangar detonated . This ignited gas and oil fumes which caused a series of four explosions that gutted the ship . Shōkaku sank several minutes later with the loss of 1 @,@ 263 of her crew . 570 men were rescued by a light cruiser and a destroyer . 
 The loss of Taihō and Shōkaku left Zuikaku to recover the Division 's few remaining aircraft after their heavy losses ( only 102 aircraft remained aboard the seven surviving carriers by the evening ) and the 1st Mobile Fleet continued its withdrawal towards Okinawa . The Americans did not spot the Japanese carriers until the afternoon of the following day and launched a large airstrike that only succeeded in hitting Zuikaku with a single bomb that started a fire in the hangar . 
 = = = Battle of Leyte Gulf = = = 
 In October 1944 , Zuikaku was the flagship of Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa 's decoy Northern Force in Operation Shō @-@ Gō 1 , the Japanese counterattack against the Allied landings on Leyte . At this time , the ship had 28 A6M5 Zero fighters , 16 A6M2 Zero fighter @-@ bombers , 7 D4Y reconnaissance aircraft and 15 B6Ns . On the morning of 24 October , she launched 10 fighters , 11 fighter @-@ bombers , 6 torpedo bombers , and 2 reconnaissance aircraft as her contribution to the airstrike intended to attract the attention of the American carriers away from the other task groups that were to destroy the landing forces . This accomplished little else as the Japanese aircraft failed to penetrate past the defending fighters ; the survivors landed at airfields on Luzon . The Americans were preoccupied dealing with the other Japanese naval forces and defending themselves from air attacks and finally found the Northern Force late that afternoon , but Admiral William Halsey , Jr . , commander of Task Force 38 , decided that it was too late in the day to mount an effective strike . He turned all of his ships north to position himself for an attack . 
 The American carriers launched an airstrike shortly after dawn ; Zuikaku was struck by three bombs and one torpedo that started fires in both hangars , damaged one propeller shaft , and gave her a 29 @.@ 5 ° list to port . Fifteen minutes later , the fires were extinguished and the list was reduced to 6 ° by counterflooding . She was mostly ignored by the second wave of attacking aircraft , but was a focus of the third wave that hit her with six more torpedoes and four bombs . The bombs started fires in the hangars , the torpedoes caused major flooding that increased her list , and the order to abandon ship was issued before Zuikaku sank by the stern . Lost with the ship were 49 officers and 794 crewmen , but 47 officers and 815 crewmen were rescued by her escorting destroyers . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = President of Croatia = 
 The President of Croatia ( Croatian : Predsjednik Hrvatske ) , officially styled the President of the Republic ( Croatian : Predsjednik Republike ) , is the head of state and chief representative of the Republic of Croatia in the country and abroad . The President is the holder of the highest office within the Republic of Croatia ; however , they are not the head of the executive branch . 
 The President maintains regular and coordinated operation and stability of the national government system , and safeguards the independence and territorial integrity of the country . The President has the power to call elections for the Croatian Parliament as well as referendum ( with countersignature of the Prime Minister ) . The President appoints Prime Ministers on the basis of the balance of power in the Parliament , grants pardons and awards decorations and other state awards . The President and Government cooperate in the conducting the foreign policy . In addition , the President is the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Croatian Armed Forces . The President appoints the director of the Security and Intelligence Agency with the Prime Minister . The President may dissolve the Parliament as provided by the Constitution . Although enjoying immunity , the President is impeachable for violation of the Constitution . In case of incapability to discharge duties of office , the Speaker of the Parliament assumes the office of acting President until the President resumes duty , or until election of a new President . 
 The Office of the President of the Republic ( <unk> <unk> Republike ) consists of the immediate staff of the president of Croatia , as well as support staff reporting to the president . The office is seated in the Presidential Palace in the Pantovčak area of Zagreb . The Constitution of Croatia defines the appearance and use of the presidential standard , flown on buildings of the Office of the President of Croatia , the residence of the president , the transportation vehicles when in use by the president , and in other ceremonial occasions . 
 The President is elected on the basis of universal suffrage , through a secret ballot , for a five @-@ year term . If no candidate in the elections secures more than 50 % of the votes , a runoff election is held . The Constitution of Croatia sets a limit to a maximum of two terms in office . The president @-@ elect is required to take an oath of office before the judges of the Constitutional Court . Franjo Tuđman won the first Croatian presidential elections in 1992 and 1997 . During his time in office , the constitution of 1990 provided for a semi @-@ presidential system . After his death in 1999 , the constitution was amended and much of the presidential powers were transferred to the parliament and the government . Stjepan Mesić won two consecutive terms , in 2000 and in 2005 . Ivo Josipović won the presidential elections held in 2009 – 2010 . Winner of the most recent presidential elections , held in 2014 – 15 , was Kolinda Grabar @-@ Kitarović . She succeeded Josipović on 19 February 2015 . 
 = = Powers , duties and responsibilities = = 
 The President of Croatia , officially styled the President of the Republic ( Croatian : Predsjednik Republike ) represents the Republic of Croatia in the country and abroad as the head of state , maintains the regular and coordinated operation and stability of the national government system and safeguards the independence and territorial integrity of the country . The president is barred from executing any other public or professional duty while in office . 
 The President of Croatia calls elections for the Croatian Parliament ( Croatian : Hrvatski Sabor ) and convenes the first meeting of the parliamentary assembly . The president is also required to appoint a prime minister , on the basis of the balance of power in the parliament . The appointed candidate is in turn required to seek confirmation from the parliament through a confidence vote , in order to receive a mandate to lead the Croatian Government . The president may also call referenda , grant pardons and award decorations and other forms of recognition defined by legislation . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 The President of Croatia and the Government cooperate in the formulation and implementation of Croatia 's foreign policy . This provision of the constitution is an occasional source of conflict between the president and the government . The president decides on the establishment of diplomatic missions and consular offices of the Republic of Croatia abroad , at the Government 's proposal and with the countersignature of the prime minister . The president , following prior countersignature of the prime minister , appoints and recalls diplomatic representatives of the Republic of Croatia , at the proposal of the Government and upon receiving the opinion of an applicable committee of the parliament . The president receives letters of credence and letters of recall from foreign diplomatic representatives . 
 = = = National security and defense = = = 
 The President of Croatia is the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces of the Republic of Croatia and appoints and relieves military commanders of duty , conforming to applicable legislation . Pursuant to decisions of the parliament , the president declares war and concludes peace . In cases of immediate threats to the independence , unity and existence of the state , the president may order the use of armed forces , even if no state of war is declared , provided that such an order is countersigned by the prime minister . During a state of war , the president may promulgate regulations with the force of law on the basis of , and within the scope of , authority obtained from the parliament . In such circumstances , the president may convene government cabinet meetings and preside over them . If the parliament is not in session , the president is authorized to regulate all matters required by the state of war through regulations carrying the force of law . In case of an immediate threat to the independence , unity and existence of the state , or if the governmental bodies are prevented from performing their constitutional duties regularly , the president may , at the proposal of the prime minister , issue regulations carrying the force of law . Such regulations must also be countersigned by the prime minister to become valid . The president is required to submit regulations that are promulgated thus to the parliament for approval as soon as the parliament may convene , otherwise the regulations become void . The president cooperates with the government directing operation of the Croatian security and intelligence system . The president and the prime minister jointly appoint heads of the security agencies , and the president may attend cabinet meetings , taking part in discussions held at such meetings . 
 = = = Dissolution of Parliament = = = 
 The President of Croatia may dissolve Parliament upon the request of the government if the government proposes a confidence motion to Parliament and the majority of all deputies adopt a motion of no confidence or if Parliament fails to approve government budget 120 days after the budget is proposed in the parliament . That decision must be countersigned by the Prime Minister to become valid . The President may also dissolve Parliament after a motion of no confidence supported by a majority of all deputies has been adopted and a new government cannot be formed within 30 days or if a new government cannot be formed after general elections ( maximum period of 120 days ) . However , the President may not dissolve Parliament at the request of the government if a procedure to determine if the President has violated provisions of the constitution is in progress . 
 = = Office of the President = = 
 The Office of the President of the Republic ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> Republike ) consists of the immediate staff of the President of Croatia , as well as support staff reporting to the president . As of May 2008 , the office employed 170 staff , with the maximum staffing level set at 191 by the Regulation on Internal Organisation of the Office of the President of Croatia . In 2009 government budget , the office was allocated 54 million kuna ( c . 7 @.@ 3 million euro ) . The net monthly salary of the president is 23 @,@ 500 kuna ( c . 3 @,@ 170 euro ) . 
 The Office of the President was created by a presidential decree by Franjo Tuđman on 19 January 1991 . The Office is headed by a Chief of Staff ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> ) , who is appointed by the president . The presidents declare bylaws regulating composition of the office . The office employs advisors to the president and comprises eight departments , four councils , presidential pardon commission and two decorations and awards commissions . 
 = = = Presidential Palace = = = 
 The Presidential Palace ( Croatian : <unk> dvori , also referred to by the metonym Pantovčak ) in Zagreb is the official residence of the president . The president does not actually live in the building , as it is used as the Office of the President of Croatia rather than as a residence . The structure covers 3 @,@ 700 square metres ( 40 @,@ 000 square feet ) . It had been used as the official residence since then @-@ president Franjo Tuđman moved there following the October 1991 bombing of Banski dvori . In addition to the original building , there is also an 3 @,@ 500 square metres ( 38 @,@ 000 square feet ) annex built in 1993 , an ancillary structure housing office security services and a bomb shelter predating the 1990s . The building , formerly known as Villa Zagorje or Tito 's Villa , was designed by architects <unk> Richter and Kazimir <unk> and completed in 1964 for the former Yugoslav president Josip Broz Tito . 
 = = Election and taking office = = 
 The president is elected on the basis of universal suffrage , through a secret ballot , for a five @-@ year term . If no candidate in the elections secures more than 50 % of the votes , a runoff election is held in 14 days . The Constitution of Croatia sets a limit to a maximum of two terms in office and requires election dates to be determined within 30 to 60 days before the expiry of the term of the incumbent president . Any citizen of Croatia of 18 or over may be a candidate in a presidential election , provided that the candidate is endorsed by 10 @,@ 000 voters . The endorsements are required in form of a list containing name , address , personal identification number and voter signature . The presidential elections are regulated by an act of the parliament . 
 The constitution requires that the president @-@ elect resign from political party membership . The president @-@ elect is also required to resign from the parliament as well . Before assuming presidential duty , the president @-@ elect is required to take an oath of office before the judges of the Constitutional Court , swearing loyalty to the Constitution of Croatia . The inauguration ceremony is traditionally held at St. Mark 's Square in Zagreb , in front of the St. Mark 's Church , midway between the building of the Parliament of Croatia and Banski dvori — the seat of the Government of Croatia . The text of the oath is defined by the Presidential Elections Act amendments of 1997 . 
 = = = Presidential elections = = = 
 Presidential elections were held in Croatia for the first time on 2 August 1992 , simultaneously with the 1992 parliamentary elections . Voter turnout was 74 @.@ 9 % . The result was a victory for Franjo Tuđman of the Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) , who received 57 @.@ 8 % of the vote in the first round of the elections , ahead of 7 other candidates . Dražen Budiša , the Croatian Social Liberal Party ( HSLS ) candidate and runner @-@ up in the election , received 22 @.@ 3 % of the vote . The second presidential elections in modern Croatia were held on 15 June 1997 . The incumbent , Franjo Tuđman ran opposed by Zdravko Tomac , the candidate of the Social Democratic Party of Croatia ( SDP ) , and Vlado Gotovac , nominated by the HSLS . Tomac and Gotovac received 21 @.@ 0 % and 17 @.@ 6 % of votes respectively in the first round of voting , and Tuđman secured another term . The third presidential elections were held on 24 January 2000 , to fill the office of the President of the Republic , after the incumbent Franjo Tuđman died on 10 December 1999 . The first round of voting saw Stjepan Mesić , candidate of the Croatian People 's Party ( HNS ) in the lead , receiving 41 @.@ 3 % of votes , followed by Dražen Budiša of the HSLS with 27 @.@ 8 % of votes and Mate Granić , nominated by the HDZ , receiving 22 @.@ 6 % of votes . The runoff election , the first in the presidential elections of modern Croatia , was held on 7 February , when Mesić won , picking up 56 @.@ 9 % of votes . Voter turnout in the first round was 63 @.@ 0 % and 60 @.@ 9 % in the runoff . The first round of the fourth presidential elections was held on 2 January 2005 . No candidate secured a first @-@ round victory ; however , the incumbent Mesić enjoyed a substantial lead over other candidates , as he received 48 @.@ 9 % of votes , and the second and third ranked candidates Jadranka Kosor ( HDZ ) and Boris <unk> ( independent ) managed only 20 @.@ 3 % and 17 @.@ 8 % of voter support respectively . Ultimately , Mesić won reelection , receiving 65 @.@ 9 % of votes in the runoff held on 16 January . The 2009 – 2010 presidential election was held on 27 December 2009 , with Ivo Josipović ( SDP ) picking up 32 @.@ 4 % of votes , followed by Milan Bandić ( independent ) , Andrija Hebrang ( HDZ ) and <unk> <unk> ( independent ) receiving 14 @.@ 8 % , 12 @.@ 0 % and 11 @.@ 3 % of the votes respectively . The second round of voting was held on 10 January 2010 , when Josipović defeated Bandić , receiving 60 @.@ 3 % of the vote . The first round of the most recent presidential election was held on 28 December 2014 , where Josipović won 38 @.@ 46 % of the votes , followed by Kolinda Grabar @-@ Kitarović ( HDZ ) who received 37 @.@ 22 % of ballots . The third was an independent candidate , Ivan <unk> Sinčić who received 16 @.@ 42 % of votes , and Milan <unk> ( Croatian Dawn – Party of the People ) who was supported by 6 @.@ 3 % of the votes . The runoff was held on 11 January 2015 , and Grabar @-@ Kitarović won by a margin of approximately one percentage point . 
 = = = History = = = 
 The Socialist Republic of Croatia within SFR Yugoslavia was led by a group of communist party officials , who formed a collective Presidency with the president of the Presidency at its head . The first democratic elections of 1990 did not elect members of the Presidency directly . Rather , the parliament was tasked with filling these positions as it had done in the socialist period . The HDZ won the elections and its leader Tuđman assumed the presidency on 30 May 1990 . On 25 July of the same year , the parliament passed several constitutional amendments , including amendment LXXI , which created the position of President and Vice @-@ Presidents . The Christmas Constitution , passed on 22 December 1990 , established the government as a semi @-@ presidential system and called for presidential elections . 
 Tuđman won the presidential elections in 1992 , and was inaugurated on 12 August 1992 . He was reelected in 1997 , and the Constitution of Croatia was amended the same year . After his death in 1999 , the constitution was amended and much of the presidential powers were transferred to the parliament and the government , creating a parliamentary system . Mesić won two consecutive terms in 2000 on the HNS ticket and in 2005 , the maximum term permitted by the constitution . Josipović , an SDP candidate , won the presidential elections held in 2009 – 2010 . Grabar @-@ Kitarović won the elections of 2014 – 15 and she was voted to become the first woman president of Croatia . 
 = = Immunity and impeachment = = 
 The President of Croatia enjoys immunity — the president may not be arrested , nor can any criminal proceedings be instituted against the president without prior consent from the Constitutional Court . The only case in which immunity does not apply is if the president has been caught in the act of committing a criminal offense , which carries a penalty of imprisonment for more than five years . In such a case the state body that has detained the president must notify the President of the Constitutional Court immediately . 
 The President of Croatia is impeachable for any violation of the Constitution committed in performance of duty . Impeachment proceedings may be initiated by the Parliament of Croatia by a two @-@ thirds majority vote of all members of the parliament . The impeachment of the president is then decided by the Constitutional Court , by a two @-@ thirds majority vote of all its judges . If the Constitutional Court <unk> the president , the president 's term is terminated . 
 = = Vacancy or incapacity = = 
 In case of brief incapacitation to execute the office of the President of Croatia due to absence , illness or vacations , the president may transfer his powers to the Speaker of the Croatian Parliament to act as a deputy . The president decides on the revocation of this authority and his return to the office . If the president is prevented from performing his duties for a longer period of time due to illness or other form of incapacitation , and especially if the president is unable to decide on a transfer of powers to a deputy , the Speaker of the parliament becomes the acting president , assuming presidential duty pursuant to a decision of the Constitutional Court , made upon request of the Government . 
 In case of death or resignation submitted to the President of the Constitutional Court and communicated to the Speaker of the parliament , or in cases when the Constitutional Court decides to terminate the presidential term through impeachment , the Speaker of the parliament becomes acting president . In those circumstances , new legislation is countersigned by the prime minister instead of the president and a new presidential election must be held within 60 days . This situation occurred after the death of Franjo Tuđman on 10 December 1999 , when Vlatko <unk> became the acting president . After the parliamentary elections of 2000 , the role was transferred to Zlatko <unk> , who filled the office until Stjepan Mesić was elected President of Croatia in 2000 . 
 = = Symbols = = 
 Legislation defines the appearance and use of the Presidential Standard of Croatia as a symbol of the President of Croatia , and the appearance and use of the presidential sash as a symbol of honour of the office of the president . The presidential standard is a square , blue field with a thin border of alternating red and white squares on each side . In the centre of the blue field is the main shield of the coat of arms of Croatia with the historical arms of Croatia surrounding the main shield . From left to right , these are the oldest known coats of arms of Croatia , the Republic of Dubrovnik , Dalmatia , Istria and Slavonia , adorned with bands of gold , red and white stripes extending down vertically . Atop the shield there is a Croatian tricolour ribbon with golden letters RH that stand for the Republic of Croatia , executed in Roman square capitals . The presidential standard is flown on buildings of the Office of the President of Croatia , the residence of the president , transportation vehicles when in use by the president , and in other ceremonial occasions . The presidential standard was designed by Miroslav <unk> in 1990 . 
 The presidential sash is a Croatian tricolour band , trimmed with gold and adorned with the coat of arms of Croatia , which is placed in a white field , with the tricolour at the front . The arms are bordered by oak branches on the left and olive branches on the right . The sash is worn diagonally , over the right shoulder , and is fastened using a square clasp trimmed with golden Croatian interlace . The sash is adorned with the arms used on the presidential standard , although without the ribbon used in the arms . The constitution specifies that the sash is worn on Statehood Day , during awards ceremonies , during the acceptance of letters of credence and in other ceremonial occasions . The presidential sash was not in use since 2000 inauguration of Stjepan Mesić . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 Former presidents of the Republic of Croatia are provided with an office and two staff members paid by the state once they leave the office . In addition , former presidents are assigned a driver , an official car and bodyguards . The government of Croatia is required to provide these benefits within 30 days following the end of the term of president , upon a president 's personal request . Stjepan Mesić 's office is located in <unk> Street in Zagreb . The office employs a public @-@ relations advisor and a foreign policy advisor . The office was established in 2010 and assigned an annual budget of 1 @.@ 3 million kuna ( c . 175 @,@ 000 euro ) . According to Mesić himself , his new office of the former president shall be at the disposal of Croatian companies to help them expand their market . Since the office has been established , former president Mesić also receives foreign diplomats and visits abroad where he meets officials and delivers lectures on occasion . 
 The rights of the former presidents are defined by a parliamentary Act enacted in 2004 , during the first term of Stjepan Mesić . Before that act was enacted , the constitution provided that the former presidents shall become members of the Chambers of Counties of the Parliament of Croatia for life , unless otherwise requested by the president . This was never exercised in practice , since Franjo Tuđman died in office and the Chamber of Counties was abolished before the end of the first term of Stjepan Mesić . 
 = = Living former Presidents = = 
 There are two living former Croatian Presidents : 
 Living former Presidents 
 = = Timeline of Presidents = = 
 This is a graphical timeline listing of the Presidents of Croatia since 1990 . Currently there are two living former presidents : Stjepan Mesić ( 2000 @-@ 2010 ) and Ivo Josipović ( 2010 @-@ 2015 ) . There is also one living former acting president : Zlatko <unk> ( 2000 ) . 
 = Bill Brown ( cricketer ) = 
 William Alfred " Bill " Brown , OAM ( 31 July 1912 – 16 March 2008 ) was an Australian cricketer who played 22 Tests between 1934 and 1948 , captaining his country in one Test . A right @-@ handed opening batsman , his partnership with Jack Fingleton in the 1930s is regarded as one of the finest in Australian Test history . After the interruption of World War II , Brown was a member of Don Bradman 's Invincibles , who toured England in 1948 without defeat . In a match in November 1947 , Brown was the unwitting victim of the first instance of " <unk> " . 
 Raised in New South Wales , Brown initially struggled in both work and cricket , before gradually rising through the cricket ranks . He made his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales in the 1932 – 33 season and forced his way into the national side during the 1934 tour of England . When long @-@ term openers Bill Ponsford and Bill Woodfull retired at the end of the tour , Brown and his state opening partner Fingleton took over . After poor form made his selection for the 1938 tour of England controversial , Brown responded with a total of 1 @,@ 854 runs , including an unbeaten 206 that saved Australia from defeat in the second Test , and was honoured as one of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year . 
 The outbreak of the Second World War cost Brown his peak years , which he spent in the Royal Australian Air Force . Cricket resumed in 1945 – 46 and Brown , in Bradman 's absence , captained an Australian eleven in a match that was retrospectively awarded Test status . Brown missed the entirety of the following season because of injury . Upon his return , he was unable to repeat his previous success and was ousted from the opening positions by Arthur Morris and Sid Barnes . Selected for the Invincibles tour , he performed reasonably well in the tour matches but , with Morris and Barnes entrenched as openers , he batted out of position in the middle order during the first two Tests . He struggled and was dropped from the Test team , never to return . Upon returning to Australia , Brown continued playing for Queensland until the end of the 1949 – 50 season . 
 In retirement , Brown briefly served as a Test selector and sold cars and , later , sports goods . In 2000 , he was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia for his services to cricket . At the time of his death in 2008 , he was Australia 's oldest Test cricketer . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The son of a dairy farmer and hotel owner , Brown was born in Toowoomba , Queensland . Aged three , business failure hit the family , and they moved to Marrickville in inner Sydney . The family 's poor financial position meant that they lived in a one @-@ bedroom home , with Brown and his brother sharing a bed . Educated at Dulwich Hill and Petersham High Schools in Sydney , Brown started playing cricket as a wicket @-@ keeper , before changing his focus to opening the batting . He left high school after two years , but was unable to find regular full @-@ time work amid the Great Depression . In 1929 – 30 , Brown played grade cricket for Marrickville Cricket Club , but was unable to hold down a regular place . He was on the verge of leaving Sydney when an innings of 172 for his Shire team reinvigorated his career . He progressed through the grades and reached the club 's First XI , where he performed steadily to earn selection for New South Wales in 1932 – 33 . 
 = = Pre @-@ war career = = 
 Making his first @-@ class debut for New South Wales in a Sheffield Shield match against Queensland on 11 November 1932 , Brown was run out for a duck without facing a ball , while opening with Jack <unk> however , the match ended happily with Brown 's team winning decisively by an innings and 274 runs . The highlights of Brown 's first season were his 79 against South Australia , and 69 against Douglas Jardine 's England . However , neither Harold Larwood nor Bill Voce , the Bodyline spearheads , played in the match . During his first season , Brown earned the ire of Don Bradman , who was displeased with Brown 's poor communication with batting partners when running between the wickets , with the ensuing risk of falling foul of run outs . Brown ended his debut season with 269 runs at 29 @.@ 88 . 
 The following season , in the opening match of the season against Queensland at Brisbane in November 1933 , Brown made 154 , partnering Bradman in a stand of 294 in just three hours . This set up at total of 4 / 494 declared and an innings victory . He followed this with 205 in an opening stand of 340 against Victoria . Brown amassed two further half @-@ centuries to end with 878 runs for the season at an average of 67 @.@ 53 , which placed him second behind Bradman in the first @-@ class run @-@ scoring aggregates . When the selectors met to discuss the tour party for the 1934 tour of England , Brown and Fingleton had similar figures , but with the incumbent Victorian opening pair of Bill Ponsford and captain Bill Woodfull firmly in place , there was only one spot available for a reserve opener . The selectors asked Bradman — Australia 's leading batsman — for advice . Bradman nominated Brown , believing that his style was better suited to English pitches . A disappointed Fingleton disagreed and wrote to Woodfull , saying " You have chosen chaps who do not like fast bowling " . Brown justified his selection before departure with a pair of 90s in two matches for a combined Australian XI against Tasmania . 
 Brown missed selection for the tour opener against Worcestershire — in which Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice XI — before making his debut in the second match against Leicestershire . He made a century against Cambridge University in his second tour match , making 105 in the middle order . Batting at number 3 against Lancashire in the final tour match before the Tests , Brown scored 119 . After compiling 351 runs at 43 @.@ 88 in the opening tour matches , Brown was selected for the Test side . Playing in all five Tests , Brown made his debut at Trent Bridge , Nottingham and scored 22 in his first innings . After Australia lost three early wickets in the second innings , Brown scored 73 to help secure a winning lead . Brown then made a century while opening the batting against Northamptonshire , and an unbeaten 62 in the second innings , guiding Australia to an eight @-@ wicket victory over the Gentlemen of England . He was promoted to open in the Second Test at Lord 's with Woodfull , after Ponsford was unavailable due to illness . At the home of cricket , Brown made his maiden Test century , scoring 105 in the first innings . His innings was an unhurried one ; he tended to wait for the ball to come onto the bat rather than attacking the leather . However , he was unable to prevent Australia from being forced to follow @-@ on and made two the match ended in an innings defeat . He was retained as opener upon Ponsford 's return for the Third Test , with Woodfull dropping down the order in a reshuffled batting line @-@ up . Brown made 72 and a duck . The match ended in a draw after both teams passed 490 in the first innings . 
 It was the start of a barren month for Brown , who passed 30 only once in 11 first @-@ class innings , totalling 171 runs at 15 @.@ 55 . He ended the unproductive sequence with an unbeaten 100 against Nottinghamshire . This came after Bill Voce had bowled Bodyline at the start of the Australian innings , in contravention of a prior agreement . After an Australian protest , Voce missed the remainder of the match and Brown 's innings was punctuated by angry heckling by the local supporters . 
 He was unable to pass 20 in the final two Tests and ended the series with 300 runs at 33 @.@ 33 . Despite his inability to make a substantial contribution , Australia won the Fifth Test by 562 runs to reclaim the Ashes 2 – 1 . Brown scored three consecutive half @-@ centuries after the Tests and ended with 1287 first @-@ class runs at 36 @.@ 77 . 
 Brown 's strong form continued upon returning to Australia , compiling 683 runs at 45 @.@ 53 , including three centuries , to be the second highest run @-@ scorer for the 1934 – 35 domestic season . He started the season with the testimonial match for Woodfull , who retired upon returning to Australia . Brown scored 102 in the second innings to help Woodfull 's men defeat Victor Richardson 's XI by seven wickets . He started the Sheffield Shield season with 11 in an innings victory over South Australia , and scored fifties in three consecutive matches , before rounding off the season with 116 in the final match against Western Australia . 
 = = Opening in Tests with Fingleton = = 
 With the retirement of Woodfull and Ponsford after the tour of England , Brown and his state partner Fingleton became Australia 's opening pair for the 1935 – 36 tour of South Africa . It was one of the most productive phases of both men 's career . In Australia 's warm @-@ up match against Western Australia before sailing across the Indian Ocean , Brown struck 55 in an innings win . 
 Brown started the tour consistently , scoring 148 , 58 , 31 and 28 not on out in the three warm @-@ up matches . In the first match of the tour against Natal , both Brown and Fingleton made centuries ; the first two matches were won by an innings and the third by ten wickets . 
 Brown scored three consecutive half @-@ centuries in the first two Tests in Durban and Johannesburg . Australia won the first by nine wickets and were 124 runs from victory with eight wickets in hand in the second when bad light stopped play . In the Third Test at Cape Town , the pair set a new Australian opening record of 233 , which laid the foundation for a large Australian total and an innings victory . It was Australia 's first double @-@ century opening stand in Test cricket , and remains an Australian Test record for the first wicket against South Africa . Brown posted 121 , his highest Test score at the time . He scored 34 and 84 in Australia 's only innings of the Fourth and Fifth Tests in Johannesburg and Durban , making solid opening stands with Fingleton , who scored three consecutive centuries . The pair laid the platform for two further innings victories , as Australia took the five @-@ Test series 4 – 0 . His compiled 417 runs at 59 @.@ 57 for the series . Brown scored a further four fifties in the remaining tour matches to end with 1065 runs at 62 @.@ 65 . 
 In 1936 , Brown accepted a coaching position and employment as a car salesman to move back to Queensland , representing his state of birth from 1936 – 37 onwards . He was appointed captain the following season . Brown started the new season strongly , scoring 111 for Victor Richardson 's XI in a testimonial match against Bradman 's XI , in the opening match of summer . In November , Brown played for an Australian XI and Queensland in two matches against the touring England team , scoring 71 and 74 the two drawn matches . 
 His 1936 – 37 season was interrupted by injury and he appeared in only the Third and Fourth Tests against England . They were relatively unsuccessful , yielding only 95 runs at 23 @.@ 75 in four innings without passing fifty . Nevertheless , Australia won the two matches . His debut season for Queensland was moderately successful , with 557 runs at an average of 37 @.@ 13 , including one century and four fifties . Brown did not taste victory with his home state during the season ; the closest Queensland came was a one @-@ wicket loss to New South Wales . 
 = = Wisden Cricketer of the Year = = 
 Brown 's form started to deteriorate in 1937 – 38 ; he scored only 400 runs at 36 @.@ 36 for the season . Queensland played five matches under his watch , losing three , and went without victory . Of the two draws , one was washed out and in the other , Queensland hung on with two wickets in hand when time ran out . Although Brown compiled two centuries , he was only twelfth in the aggregates during an Australian season with no international tours . As a result , his selection for the 1938 tour to England was criticised in some quarters . 
 Brown started the tour patchily , although Australia won their first four matches by an innings . In his first four innings , Brown passed five only once , scoring 72 against Oxford University . He returned to form with an unbeaten 194 against Northamptonshire , helping to set up an innings win , before adding another 96 in the next match against Surrey . Brown entered the Tests with 504 runs at 56 @.@ 00 in the lead @-@ in tour matches . 
 After adding 48 in Australia 's first innings of 411 , Brown scored 133 in the second innings of the First Test at Nottingham after the tourists were forced to follow @-@ on , helping Bradman ( 144 not out ) to save the Test . The Australians reached 6 / 427 in the second innings when the match ended in the draw . 
 Brown 's most celebrated innings came in the Second Test at Lord 's , carrying his bat to score 206 in the first televised Test match . England batted first and amassed 494 , largely on the back of Wally Hammond 's 240 . Brown featured in an opening stand of 69 before Fingleton was dismissed . Hedley Verity then bowled Bradman for 18 , leaving the score at 101 , before Stan McCabe fell after a quickfire 38 with the score at 3 / 152 . Brown registered his century in 193 minutes , during an innings highlighted by his driving on both sides of the wicket . After Lindsay Hassett was dismissed for 56 following a 134 @-@ run partnership , Australia reached stumps at 5 / 299 , with Brown on 140 . The following day , Brown set about ensuring that Australia would avoid the follow on , featuring in an aggressive eighth @-@ wicket stand with tailender Bill O 'Reilly . The pair added 85 runs in just 46 minutes , with Brown recalling " It was a nice day , and a nice wicket . O 'Reilly came in , and I told him I 'd take the quicks — Wellard and Farnes — and Tiger [ O 'Reilly ] took Verity . " Brown continued past his double century and remained unbeaten on 206 from just 375 minutes when his last partner fell , leaving Australia all out for 422 . Brown 's innings was the 100th century by an Australian against England , and the highest Test score for batsman carrying his bat ; it stood until Glenn Turner made an unbeaten 223 in 1972 . Ray Robinson quipped that Brown 's performance " did not cause smoke to rise from the back of those [ television ] sets but the charm of his style gave viewers a favourable impression of Australian batsmanship " . They went on to draw the match , which was crucial in Australia 's eventual retention of the Ashes . Brown 's uninterrupted batting meant that he was on the field from the first morning until late on the fourth day . 
 Immediately after making his highest Test score at Lord 's , Brown recorded his highest first @-@ class score of 265 not out against Derbyshire , in six hours of batting . Australia amassed 4 / 441 declared and won by an innings and 234 runs . He then made it three centuries in a row , scoring 101 against Warwickshire , setting up another innings win . 
 The Third Test was washed out without a ball being bowled , and Australia won the Fourth Test by five wickets in a low @-@ scoring match to retain The Ashes . Brown made 22 and nine as Australia scored 242 and 5 / 107 . It was the start of a quiet month for the opener , who scored only 194 runs in eight completed innings . He was the top Australian scorer in both innings of the Fifth Test at The Oval , scoring 69 and 15 . This was the match in which Len Hutton scored a world Test record 364 and England compiled 7 / 903 , before winning by an innings and 579 runs , which remains a world record winning margin in a Test match . Throughout the Tests , Brown aggregated 512 runs at 73 @.@ 14 , totaling 1854 runs at 59 @.@ 57 in all first @-@ class matches for the tour . This placed Brown second to Bradman in both aggregates and average . He was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year for his performances in 1938 . Wisden described him as a " cricketer of remarkable powers " who batted with " a charming skill , coolness , thoughtfulness and certainty " . 
 Upon returning to Australia , Brown scored 1 @,@ 057 runs at 105 @.@ 70 in the 1938 – 39 Australian season , including 990 at 110 @.@ 00 in six Sheffield Shield matches . Brown started the season well , scoring 84 as Queensland amassed 501 against New South Wales . His old state were still 27 runs from making Queensland bat again , but time ran out with one wicket intact , with Brown yet to taste victory with his new state . Nevertheless , he continued to perform strongly as passed 50 in each of his first four innings . In the fourth of these , he was out for 99 and then declared at 5 / 510 to leave Victoria a victory target of 319 . Brown then narrowly missed out on a milestone for the second time in the match when Victoria scraped home by three wickets to deny him a maiden victory with his home state . In the next match , he carried his bat to make an unbeaten 174 against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval , as his team fell to an innings defeat . 
 After twelve matches for his state of origin , Brown was still to end up on the winning side . This changed in the next match against New South Wales . After their opponents had made 214 , Brown top @-@ scored with 95 as Queensland replied with 200 . New South Wales made 264 to leave Brown 's men 279 for victory . The captain led the way , combining with Geoff Cook in Queensland 's then record first @-@ wicket partnership of 265 . Brown was out for 168 , but his team held on to secure an eight @-@ wicket victory over New South Wales . It was Brown 's first win in Queensland colours . He then scored 81 in a ten @-@ wicket defeat to South Australia , before adding a second victory , this time over Victoria . Brown ended the season by amassing 215 as Queensland reached 7 / 575 declared before completing an innings win . Brown topped the aggregates with 1 @,@ 057 runs and was the only player to pass 1 @,@ 000 runs for the season . 
 Brown had another strong campaign in the following year , netting 857 runs at 61 @.@ 21 , including three centuries . Despite this , Queensland had another poor season , losing five of their six matches . Brown started the season strongly , scoring 87 and 137 , but he was unable to stop New South Wales winning the opening match by three wickets . After a seven @-@ wicket loss to Victoria , Brown made 156 , but was unable to prevent an innings defeat to South Australia . After an innings loss to New South Wales , he made 111 to steer Queensland to its only win of the season , a two @-@ wicket victory over South Australia . He finished the season with 35 and 97 as The Rest of Australia lost to New South Wales by two wickets . 
 = = Second World War and post @-@ war career = = 
 Due to World War II , cricket in Australia was scaled down and in a shortened season in 1940 – 41 , Brown made 307 runs at 30 @.@ 70 in five matches , with two half @-@ centuries . In 1941 – 42 , he played one match , his last first @-@ class fixture during the war , scoring 56 and 69 in a narrow 19 @-@ run win over New South Wales . 
 Brown was a flight lieutenant with the Royal Australian Air Force , serving in New Guinea and the Philippines during the Second World War , losing his prime years from the age of 27 to 33 . During the pre @-@ war years , he had averaged 49 @.@ 02 in Test cricket . 
 First @-@ class cricket resumed in 1945 – 46 after the Allied victory , and Brown began the post @-@ war phase of his career with a steady season , scoring 604 runs at 46 @.@ 46 with five half @-@ centuries in seven matches . This placed him second to Sid Barnes in the run @-@ scoring aggregates . His best effort was a 98 against South Australia , denied a century by a run out . Queensland lost more than they won , with two victories and three losses . At the end of the season , Brown captained an Australian side on a tour of New Zealand , and all five matches resulted in convincing victories . 
 Australia played its inaugural Test against New Zealand in Wellington , a match that was retrospectively given Test status . The uncertain status of the tour saw the players wearing blazers that were labelled ABC ( Australian Board of Control ) , rather than the Australian coat of arms . Brown led from the front , topping the tour aggregates and averages , with 443 runs at 73 @.@ 83 in five matches . In the opening tour match against Auckland , Brown elected to bat and opened with 68 as Australia amassed 579 and took victory by an innings and 180 runs . This was followed by a match against Canterbury in Christchurch , in which Brown top @-@ scored with 137 . This laid the foundation for a total of 8 / 415 and another innings victory . Brown made his second consecutive century in the third match against Otago at Carisbrook in Dunedin , again top @-@ scoring with 106 in an eight @-@ wicket victory . Brown made 34 in the final tour match as Australia defeated Wellington in another innings victory . 
 The tour culminated in a match against New Zealand at the Basin Reserve in Wellington . With regular captain Don Bradman missing , Brown led a team that included seven Test debutants . The hosts won the toss and elected to bat first on a wet wicket , which came about after a week of rain before the match . New Zealand managed to reach 4 / 37 at lunch , before the sun emerged and caused the wicket to turn into a sticky with unpredictable bounce . Leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly — in his last Test — and debutant Ernie Toshack , took 5 / 14 and 4 / 12 respectively as New Zealand were bowled out for only 42 , losing their last six wickets for five runs . In reply , Australia were 1 / 9 when Ken Meuleman was dismissed . Having been dropped on 13 , Brown then combined in a 109 @-@ run first @-@ wicket stand with Barnes , before falling for the innings top @-@ score of 67 . It was the only partnership for the Test that went beyond 32 . Barnes ' dismissal triggered a collapse of 6 / 57 , prompting Brown to declare Australia 's innings closed at 8 / 199 . Australia then dismissed New Zealand for 54 in the second innings in just two hours , resulting in victory by an innings and 54 runs in just two days . As the hosts ' batsmen fell quickly , many of the Australian bowlers had limited opportunities . With one wicket left in the match , Brown used the toss of a coin to determine which of the debutants Colin McCool and Ian Johnson would bowl in Tests for the first time . McCool was given the ball and ended the match on his second delivery . Brown 's solitary Test as captain makes him the first and the only native Queenslander to have led Australia . 
 Brown missed the entire 1946 – 47 Test series against England due to a thumb injury . This allowed young New South Wales opener Arthur Morris to make his Test debut . Morris ' performance in the series eventually displaced Brown from his position as a first @-@ choice opening batsman alongside Barnes . The injury meant that Brown was unable to play a single match for Queensland . 
 = = Mankad = = 
 Brown returned to first @-@ class cricket in 1947 – 48 , scoring 192 runs at 38 @.@ 40 in the first three matches of the season . The season saw an Indian tour of Australia . The selectors initially dropped Barnes to pair Brown with Morris to open the batting . Apart from two Tests during the 1936 – 37 season against England , Brown had not played Test cricket on Australian soil . He had only one opportunity with the bat in the First Test in Brisbane , making 11 as India fell to an innings defeat . It was to be his only innings and Test match on his home ground . Brown 's participation in the series was overshadowed by his controversial run out by Indian left arm orthodox spinner Vinoo Mankad in the Second Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground in December 1947 . Brown was run out for 18 , when in the act of delivering the ball , Mankad held on to it and whipped the bails off at the non @-@ striker 's end . Brown was well out of his crease while he was backing @-@ up the striker , so that he could get a head start in case he attempted a run . This was the second time during the season that Mankad had dismissed Brown in this fashion — as he had previously done so a match against an Australian XI in November . On that occasion , Mankad had warned Brown before running him out . The local press strongly accused Mankad of being unsportsmanlike , although some Australians — including Bradman — defended Mankad 's actions . For his part , Brown took full blame and made light of the incident through humorous gestures in later matches , which referred to the event . After this incident , if a batsman is given out this way , he is said to have been " <unk> " . 
 The dismissal ended another low @-@ scoring innings , and Australia batted only once in a shortened match . Brown was omitted from the team in favour of Barnes for the next two Tests . Morris — who had established himself as one of Australia 's first @-@ choice opening batsmen during Brown 's injury layoff during the previous season — was rested for the Fifth Test as the Australian Board trialled potential candidates for the 1948 tour of England . Morris was omitted after losing a coin toss to Barnes . Brown partnered Barnes , making 99 in the first innings before being run out . Brown had survived a confident appeal for caught behind before he had scored , and Barnes was convinced that his partner had edged the ball . Barnes claimed that had Brown failed to make an impact in the innings , he would have been overlooked for the 1948 tour . 
 During the first innings , Brown captained Australia while Bradman was absent with fibrositis . The tourists fell for 331 , with debutants Sam Loxton and Doug Ring taking three wickets apiece . India eventually fell to another innings defeat , so Brown did not have another opportunity to score a Test century on home soil . His Test aggregate in Australia stood at 223 runs at only 33 @.@ 86 , in contrast to his away average of 1 @,@ 369 runs at 50 @.@ 70 . His first @-@ class batting average of 43 @.@ 58 for the season was inferior to that of Barnes and Morris , both of whom averaged more than 50 . 
 = = Invincibles tour = = 
 In any case , Brown had done enough to be chosen to tour England with the Invincibles in 1948 , although Barnes and Morris were the first @-@ choice opening combination . Brown made a strong start in the tour matches preceding the Tests . In the fifth fixture , which was against Cambridge University , Brown top @-@ scored with 200 in an innings victory . In the following match against Essex , Brown combined with Bradman in a second @-@ wicket partnership of 219 in 90 minutes , ending with 153 as Australia scored a world @-@ record 721 runs in one day . Australia proceeded to another innings victory , and Brown completed his third century in as many innings with 108 against Oxford University . He preceded to add a fourth century in less than three weeks , with 122 against Nottinghamshire , and made an unbeaten 81 against Hampshire . In contrast , middle @-@ order batsman Neil Harvey had struggled in the initial stages of his first tour of England , failing to pass 25 in his first six innings . Thus , Brown gained selection in the First Test at Trent Bridge , batting out of position in the middle order , whereas Harvey was dropped despite making a century in Australia 's most recent Test against India . 
 Brown made 17 in his only innings as Australia won by eight wickets . Between Tests , Brown scored 113 in a slow innings against Yorkshire to retain his middle @-@ order position for the Second Test at Lord 's . He was unable to replicate the Test centuries he made in the preceding tours , scoring 24 and 32 . It was to be his last Test , as Sam Loxton top @-@ scored with 159 not out against Gloucestershire in the match before the Third Test , ousting Brown from his middle @-@ order position . Barnes was injured in the Third Test , but Brown was not recalled for the Fourth Test ; instead , Lindsay Hassett was promoted to open with Morris , while the teenaged Harvey came into the middle @-@ order and struck 112 . Brown then scored 140 against Derbyshire immediately after the Fourth Test , in a dour display that displeased spectators , and then scored consecutive centuries against Kent and the Gentlemen of England after the Tests . He ended with eight centuries and a total of 1 @,@ 448 runs on the tour at an average of 57 @.@ 92 , behind only Bradman , Hassett and Morris , with the 200 against Cambridge University his highest score . Brown took 4 / 16 against the South of England in his only bowling assignment of the tour . It was his best career bowling figures , having amassed only six wickets in his first @-@ class career . In three visits to England , Brown scored 18 centuries . 
 Upon returning to Australia , Bradman retired and Barnes took a break from cricket , thereby opening two vacancies in the Test team . Brown had a reasonable domestic season in 1948 – 1949 to press his claim for a Test recall . He scored 626 runs at 41 @.@ 73 , the sixth highest aggregate of the season , with a century and three fifties . Queensland won two and lost three games . Despite this , the 37 @-@ year @-@ old Brown was not named in the touring party for the Test tour of South Africa in 1949 – 50 . In the absence of the Test players , Brown scored 507 runs at 50 @.@ 70 in the Sheffield Shield season , with a top score of 190 , making him the third highest run @-@ getter . In their first five matches of the season , Queensland lost three times , before Brown 's 190 in the last match against South Australia set up a nine @-@ wicket win . It was his only century of the season after previously falling for 94 <unk> . 
 With his opportunities diminishing , he retired after captaining the Australian Second XI to New Zealand on an end @-@ of @-@ season tour , during which the team went undefeated . Most of the matches were not first @-@ class but Brown scored his final first @-@ class century against Otago , scoring 184 in an innings victory . He had been less effective in his later years , averaging 38 @.@ 29 in Tests following World War II . 
 = = Style = = 
 Brown was regarded as a cautious starter who was reluctant to use his full array of strokes . He had an upright stance and was known for his trademark leg glancing and placement of the ball . He hooked occasionally and scored the majority of his off @-@ side runs with the cut shot . Johnnie Moyes said that " even when slow , he never wearied , as some do , because his style was cultured and free from jarring faults " . Moyes felt that Brown 's superior record on English soil was a result of the crowd attitude , which was more respectful . At Australian grounds , impatient spectators who disliked Brown 's cautious batting frequently heckled him , blaming Brown for delaying Bradman 's arrival to the crease . Moyes felt that the more serene English gallery allowed Brown to play to his game plan without hastening to placate impatient spectators . " A placid chap was Brown , and he liked to play in peaceful surroundings . When on the job he was as emotionless as a stoic . " Moyes said that Brown was " always cool and thoughtful , he preferred finesse to force " . The English journalist Neville Cardus commented " His cricket is perpetually keeping an appointment leisurely with moments to spare . Does the bat have an engagement this over with a half @-@ volley ? Very well , then , put it down in the book . We 'll be there for it . Plenty of time . " Bradman also noted Brown 's ability to quickly get into position to play the ball , writing " One hallmark of good batting is that the player appears to have plenty of time in which to play his strokes . Bill Brown was an outstanding case of one who never seemed to be in a hurry for any stroke . " Ray Robinson said that Brown was " the most serene batsman I ever saw play for Australia " . Robinson said that " for artistry , Brown 's leg @-@ glancing could be mentioned in the same breath as Archie Jackson 's " . Brown 's placid nature extended to his observations of modern cricket — he disliked the emotional displays made by contemporary players . 
 Brown 's partnership with Fingleton was regarded as one of the great opening pairings in Australian Test cricket history . In ten Tests as an opening combination , the pair averaged 63 @.@ 75 for the first wicket , higher than any other Australian duo with more than 1000 runs . Brown was known for his self @-@ effacing nature and was well liked among teammates and opponents alike . Of his batting , Brown joked that " My wife said you could always tell when I was batting by the number of people leaving the ground " . During a domestic match at the Adelaide Oval in December 1938 , he deflected a ball onto his stumps without dislodging a bail . He added a further 147 runs to end unbeaten on 174 , eternally apologising for his luck . 
 In addition to his batting , Brown was a highly regarded fieldsman known for his fitness . He developed his skills through persistent training with professional sprinters in order to improve his anticipation and speed off the mark . Brown often fielded at slip or in the covers . With Australia boasting the leg spin pairing of O 'Reilly and Grimmett in the 1930s , close @-@ catchers were frequently used . Along with Fingleton , Brown often fielded in the leg trap position . 
 = = Off the field = = 
 In 1940 , Brown married Barbara Hart , a receptionist . The couple had three sons , whom Brown self @-@ deprecatingly noted were " well spaced ... like my centuries " . Outside cricket , Brown worked in a variety of jobs . When Bradman relocated from New South Wales to South Australia in 1935 , Brown took his job at the men 's clothing store FJ Palmer . Following his relocation to Queensland , Brown was a Brisbane car salesman , selling Chevrolets for <unk> , later running a sports store . 
 Brown was a Queensland selector from 1950 – 51 to 1959 – 60 , and an Australian selector in 1952 – 53 after defeating New South Wales ' Chappie Dwyer in an election . He was the first Queenslander in 23 years to serve as a national selector . His brief tenure as a national selector was marked by abuse and harassment from parochial Queenslanders , upset that he did not include his fellow statesmen in the Test team . Brown 's sports store was vandalised and he resigned as a selector within a year . In 1992 , Brown was elected a life member of the Queensland Cricket Association , and in 2000 was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia for his services to cricket . 
 Upon Bradman 's death in February 2001 , Brown became the oldest living Australian Test cricketer , greatly amused by the fame that came with the title . Highly regarded by Australian cricketers of the modern era , Steve Waugh invited Brown to present Test debutant Adam Gilchrist with his baggy green . The humble Brown was surprised , thinking himself an unworthy choice . Waugh disagreed , opining that " Bill is a baggy green icon who represents all that is good about playing for your country . He is humble , self @-@ effacing and respectful , proud to have been afforded the honour of being an Australian Test cricketer , and a man who always looks for the positive in people . " In March 2008 , Brown died in Brisbane at the age of 95 . He was the last surviving Invincible to have played Test cricket before World War II and his death leaves only four living members of Bradman 's 1948 team . 
 In 2009 Brown was inducted into the Queensland Sport Hall of Fame . 
 = = Test match performance = = 
 Key : * – not out 
 = Shaun Goater = 
 Leonard Shaun Goater MBE ( born 25 February 1970 ) is a Bermudian footballer who is now retired . He played as a striker for a number of English clubs in the 1990s and 2000s . He is currently assistant manager at New Mills . 
 Goater 's first professional club was Manchester United , but he did not reach the first team , making his League debut in 1989 after moving to Rotherham United . He played for Rotherham for seven years before moving to Bristol City in 1996 . Two years later he moved to Manchester City for a fee of £ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 He is most well known for his time at Manchester City , where he scored over 100 goals between 1998 and 2003 , finishing as the club 's top scorer for four consecutive seasons . After leaving City , Goater had spells with Reading , Coventry City and Southend United , before retiring in May 2006 . He represented Bermuda 36 times , scoring 32 goals . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Goater was born in the Bermudian capital Hamilton , living with his mother Lynette , his grandmother and two aunts . His introduction to English football came in April 1987 when he was invited to join the <unk> Grammar School football and basketball tour . He spent two weeks playing against various English high school teams , including the Leicester City youth team . At the age of 17 , he left home to further his education in the United States , where he had a soccer scholarship at Columbia High School , New Jersey . Whilst home in Bermuda during his Thanksgiving break , Goater was spotted by scouts from Manchester United , who invited him to England for a trial . With encouragement from his mother , who was a former football player herself , Goater accepted , forfeiting his scholarship by doing so . At this time , Goater did not play as a striker , but instead played as a creative midfielder . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Goater 's trial resulted in the offer of a professional contract , but he did not break into the first team . In 1989 , Goater signed for Rotherham United in order to play first team football . At this time , Goater suffered homesickness , finding it difficult to adapt to the English climate : " It took me a good two years to get used to life in England . At first I thought the sun never shone and it wasn 't for me . " However , he gradually got used to living in England , and over the course of seven seasons at Rotherham he gained a reputation as a reliable lower division striker , scoring 86 goals in 262 appearances , with a winner 's medal for the 1996 Auto <unk> Shield the highlight . A 1992 League Cup tie against Everton gave Goater his first experience of playing against a Premier League team . In the first leg , Goater scored the only goal of the game as Rotherham won 1 – 0 . However , Everton won the return leg 3 – 0 and Rotherham were eliminated . In 1993 , Goater also had a brief loan spell at Notts County , though he made only one appearance for the Nottingham club due to a work permit problem . Towards the end of the 1995 – 96 season , Goater had a disagreement with Rotherham manager Archie Gemmill , and decided his future lay elsewhere . 
 In the 1995 – 96 close season , Goater received offers from Spanish club Osasuna and newly formed South Koreans Suwon Samsung Bluewings , but having recently married , he decided to stay in England . Shortly after , he moved to Bristol City for a fee of £ 175 @,@ 000 . Goater 's Bristol City debut came against Gillingham . Goater scored , but Bristol City lost 3 – 2 . City finished the season in fifth , qualifying for the playoffs , but lost to Brentford . The following season Bristol City were pushing for promotion into the First Division , and Goater scored regularly , eventually being named in the PFA Team of the Year for the division . In a little under two years with the Bristol City , he scored 45 goals in 81 appearances . On 26 March 1998 , transfer deadline day , Goater signed for Manchester City , who paid Bristol City £ 400 @,@ 000 for his services . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Goater joined Manchester City at a turbulent point in their history , with newly appointed manager Joe Royle battling to save the club from relegation to Second Division . Goater scored three goals in the seven remaining matches of the 1997 – 98 season , but this was not enough to prevent the club from being relegated to the third tier of English Football for the first time ever . Fans were initially sceptical as to Goater 's ability , but as goals were scored supporters were gradually won over , creating a song in his honour , " Feed The Goat And He Will Score " ( to the tune Cwm Rhondda ) . The 1998 – 99 season saw Goater score 21 goals , finishing the season as Manchester City 's top goalscorer . The last of these was the winning goal in a play @-@ off semi @-@ final against Wigan Athletic , sending Manchester City to Wembley Stadium for a playoff final which saw City promoted after a penalty shootout . 
 The 1999 – 2000 season was even more successful for Goater . He was the club 's top goal score again , this time with 29 goals , and was named Manchester City 's Player of the Year by the supporters after Manchester City were promoted for the second successive year . In the summer , Goater was awarded the freedom of Bermuda , with 21 June declared as " Shaun Goater Day " on the island . The following season , Goater made his first appearance in top flight football at the age of 30 , though injury and the presence of new signings Paulo Wanchope and former World Player of the Year George Weah meant he had to wait three months to do so . Again established in the first team , Goater was Manchester City 's top goalscorer for the third consecutive season , but his 11 goals could not save the team from relegation . 
 During the 2000 – 01 close season , upheaval took place at Manchester City , with manager Royle departing to be replaced by Kevin Keegan . In the 2001 – 02 season , Goater became the first Manchester City player since Francis Lee in 1972 to score more than 30 goals in a season . City were promoted as champions , and he was the club 's top scorer for the fourth time in a row , as well as being the top scorer in the division . 
 Over the summer of 2001 – 02 , there was speculation that Goater would be transferred , as Manchester City had twice broken their transfer record by buying strikers Jon Macken and Nicolas Anelka . Goater stayed , but opportunities were limited . He started just 14 games , but scored seven goals , including his 100th for the club , which came in a derby match against local rivals Manchester United . In February 2003 , Goater struck against the same opposition to score the fastest goal by a substitute in Premier League history , just 9 seconds after coming onto the pitch . He also scored a goal that would have won City the match , but it was disallowed . 
 Shortly before the end of the 2002 – 03 season , Goater announced his intention to leave Manchester City when the season finished in order to seek regular first team football . In his final match for Manchester City , he was asked to captain the side in Manchester City 's final game at Maine Road . In total , Goater scored 103 goals in 212 appearances for Manchester City . Since ending his footballing career , Goater has been critical of both Kevin Keegan , who he claims never praised him and Nicolas Anelka , who he feels wanted to be ' the daddy ' of Manchester City . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Goater moved to Reading on 1 August 2003 . Reading chairman John Madejski described the transfer as " the biggest in Reading Football Club 's history " , but Goater 's time there was not a happy one . Shortly after Goater 's arrival , Reading manager Alan Pardew left for West Ham United , and Pardew 's replacement , Steve Coppell , did not regard Goater as part of his plans . In his second and final season at Reading , Goater played just four times , and was loaned to Coventry City . Goater then considered retirement , but instead moved to League One club Southend United for a final season as a professional . The move , a free transfer , was completed on 3 August 2005 . At Southend , Goater acted as a mentor for young striker Freddy Eastwood , and contributed towards a second successive promotion for the <unk> , scoring 11 goals . His final appearance before retirement was on 6 May 2006 , when Southend played Bristol City , one of Goater 's former clubs . The crowd included an estimated 400 Manchester City fans who travelled to Southend to mark the occasion . 
 After retiring , Goater returned to Bermuda , receiving an official welcome from the Premier of Bermuda Alex Scott on his arrival . A week later , Southend played the Bermuda national team in an appreciation game for their former striker . Goater has expressed a wish to enter coaching following his retirement , and studied for the UEFA B coaching licence in 2005 . Since 2003 , Goater has organised the annual Shaun Goater Grass @-@ roots Soccer Festival , a football coaching event for children in Bermuda . On 14 September 2006 , Goater and the United Soccer Leagues announced that Bermuda would receive a professional football team that would play in the third division of American football , the USL Second Division . Goater had roles as both a director and player of the team , the Bermuda <unk> . Goater left Bermuda <unk> in 2008 , to concentrate on youth coaching with North Village Rams in his home town . 
 Goater and three other partners in the Bermuda @-@ based East End Group Limited announced an amalgamation with Telecommunications Networks Limited ( now renamed East End Telecom ) on 9 November 2007 , which added to the group 's two other business subsidiaries , East End Asphalt and East End Aviation . Goater serves as the group 's Business Development Manager . 
 When in England , Goater has made regular appearances in local media covering the Manchester area . These have included a column entitled " Read the Goat " in the official Manchester City match programme , and a regular guest spot on the BBC Radio Manchester programme Blue Tuesday . 
 On 8 August 2015 , it was announced that Goater would join Northern Premier League Division One North club New Mills A.F.C. as assistant manager to Andy Fearn . In September 2015 , Fearn and Goater resigned from New Mills after nine defeats in nine games . 
 = = International career = = 
 Goater has also played for the Bermudian national team 36 times , scoring 32 goals , though due to Bermuda 's lowly standing in world football he never played in a major international tournament . He made his first international appearance at the age of 17 against Canada . 
 During the 1992 – 93 season , Goater missed eight weeks of the club season in order to represent his country in qualifying for the 1994 World Cup . However , Bermuda finished bottom of a group containing El Salvador , Canada and Jamaica . His final appearance was in June 2004 against El Salvador . 
 When playing for Bermuda , Goater was often the only professional player in the team . Bermudian journalist Chris Gibbons described the difference between Goater and his team @-@ mates : " He 's a class above every other player on the island . Before he went to England he was just quick , but now he 's a totally different player , a lot more aggressive and a much better header of the ball . The problem has been that he sets up chances for the others without them being on the same wavelength . " However , Goater noted that this had a detrimental aspect : " My fitness dropped off while I was with Bermuda . It was like being on holiday . The team just ate what they liked . I kept to my professional diet for about two or three weeks until peer pressure took over . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Goater is married to Anita , his childhood sweetheart , and has two daughters , Amaya and Anais ( born 3 October 2000 in Wythenshawe , Manchester ) . He was awarded the MBE in 2003 for services to sport and young people in Bermuda . His autobiography , Feed the Goat : The Shaun Goater Story was published in September 2006 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Bermuda 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Rotherham United 
 Football League Trophy : 1995 – 96 
 Manchester City 
 Football League Second Division play @-@ offs : 1998 – 99 
 Football League First Division : 2001 – 02 
 Southend United 
 Football League One : 2005 – 06 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Football League First Division Top Scorer : 2001 – 02 
 PFA Team of the Year : 1997 – 98 , 2001 – 02 
 = Carlton Hill , Brighton = 
 Carlton Hill is an inner @-@ city area of Brighton , part of the English city and seaside resort of Brighton and Hove . First developed in the early and mid @-@ 19th century on steeply sloping farmland east of central Brighton , it grew rapidly as the town became a fashionable , high @-@ class destination . Carlton Hill 's population was always poor , though , and by the early 20th century the area was Brighton 's worst slum : overcrowding , crime and disease were rife . Extensive slum clearance in the mid @-@ 20th century introduced high @-@ density tower blocks , but some old buildings remain : in 2008 , Brighton and Hove City Council designated part of Carlton Hill as the city 's 34th conservation area . The area now has housing of various styles and ages , large offices and small @-@ scale industry ; there are also churches , a school and some open space . 
 Carlton Hill 's pattern of development was defined by the long @-@ established structure of land ownership around Brighton , whereby land was divided into long , narrow strips with many different owners . This encouraged the development of terraced housing — the predominant housing pattern until the council undertook large @-@ scale demolition and high @-@ density rebuilding in the mid @-@ 20th century . This work introduced more open space and varied land uses : Brighton Art College was able to expand into the area , and American Express opened a large , visually dominant headquarters . 
 Buildings lost during the 20th century include schools and several chapels serving various Christian denominations . The former St John the Evangelist 's Anglican church was declared redundant and sold to Brighton 's Greek Orthodox community ; meanwhile , a distinctive Modernist church was built in the 1960s for Spiritualists . A cluster of historic early 19th @-@ century houses and other structures survived the redevelopment , and several were awarded listed status by English Heritage . These buildings and their surroundings were afforded further protection in 2008 when the city council designated the Carlton Hill conservation area . 
 = = Location = = 
 Carlton Hill stands on high ground immediately east of the centre of Brighton . Its western boundary , Grand Parade , is part of the main road to London ; Edward Street , a major road leading towards Kemp Town and the eastbound coast road , forms the southern boundary ; the Queen 's Park residential area is to the east ; and the densely populated terraced housing of Hanover lies to the north . The main road through the area runs from west to east and is also called Carlton Hill . Albion Hill , another steeply sloping west – east road , forms the northern boundary between Hanover and Carlton Hill ; the area north of Sussex Street is sometimes referred to as Albion Hill . The high ground of the area reaches a summit of 230 feet ( 70 m ) at Windmill Terrace , between Albion Hill and Richmond Street . The latter was Brighton 's steepest road until redevelopment in the 1960s severed it : its 1 : 5 gradient necessitated a full @-@ width wall halfway along , to intercept runaway handcarts and other vehicles . 
 The area is not prominent on Brighton 's skyline , but good views are possible from its streets , especially westwards and southwestwards towards the sea and across the valley floor in which Old Steine and the old town are situated . Tarner Park , an open space in the centre of the conservation area , offers long views through nearly 180 ° . 
 = = History = = 
 Brighton 's origins lie in the Saxon fishing and agricultural village of <unk> . The English Channel formed its southern limit , but on all other sides was farmland divided into open fields called laines . These were further subdivided into furlongs — wide parallel strips — and paul @-@ pieces , which were much narrower strips . Despite their small size , neighbouring paul @-@ pieces often had different owners . Wide paths ( <unk> ) ran at right @-@ angles to the furlongs , separating them . This ancient land @-@ use pattern , which survived until the 18th century despite its unsuitability for contemporary farming methods , significantly influenced the pattern of urban development in 18th- and 19th @-@ century Brighton . 
 Hilly Laine was one of Brighton 's five laines . It was northeast of the Steine ( later called Old Steine ) , the centre of fashionable society in the 18th century , and rose steeply eastwards from an area of sheltered flatter land close to the Steine . Some fields were used for small @-@ scale activities such as <unk> and market gardening , but most were farmed by individuals . The <unk> had several furlongs ; the second of these , which now forms the heart of the conservation area , was separated from its neighbours by <unk> which became Carlton Hill ( the road ) and Sussex Street . Much of the land in this area was owned by Dr Benjamin Scutt , whose landholdings extended into the neighbouring village of Hove ( the Brunswick estate was built on land he sold in the 1820s ) . Starting around 1800 , the land was gradually sold to developers ; Edward Street was laid out in 1804 and quickly experienced a " mini building boom " with inns , stables and small workshops . John Street , on the first ( westernmost ) furlong of Hilly Laine , was built up by 1810 : its developer , John Hall , laid out plots for 11 by 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m × 4 @.@ 6 m ) houses and started building and selling them in 1805 . Carlton Street , by another developer , followed by 1807 . Meanwhile , development continued slowly on the second furlong : four paul @-@ pieces were occupied with buildings by 1819 . 
 Scutt 's land sales helped him fund the development of Carlton Place , an architectural set @-@ piece consisting of a 20 @-@ house terrace surrounding a riding school , the Royal Circus ; the development took place between 1806 and 1808 . Named after Carlton House , the Prince Regent 's London home , the development was on a larger scale than the rest of Carlton Hill 's houses : each plot measured 17 by 60 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m × 18 @.@ 3 m ) . Each cost about £ 410 ( £ 30 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) to build , and proved to be profitable : one sold for £ 700 ( £ 51 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in 1806 to a local vicar , who later bought two more to rent out . A survey of the town 's housing by the Brighton Town Commissioners in 1814 valued Carlton Place within the top 25 % of all houses in Brighton . Scutt laid out three more streets nearby at the same time : Carlton Mews , Carlton Row and Woburn Place were narrow roads crowded with small houses , stables and workshops . Meanwhile , a farmhouse was built at an unknown time in the early 19th century on nearby Mighell Street ; it may have moved from agricultural to residential and commercial use later that century , and has an obscure early history . 
 Built as Patriot Place in the mid @-@ 1810s , Tilbury Place ( renamed in the 1860s ) and its five houses stood next to the farm and formed a pocket of high @-@ class residential development in a mostly working @-@ class area of small houses . Number 1 , also called St John 's Lodge , was the largest , and was built for Edward Tarner ( a merchant ) and his wife Laetitia , whose maiden name was Tilbury . It passed through the family until 1933 , when Laetitia Tilbury Tarner , a descendant , left it to Brighton Corporation for charitable purposes . It was converted into Tarner Home , a nursing and care institute for poor people , and later became a hostel . 
 Apart from some land north of Sussex Street that remained agricultural until the 20th century , the whole hillside was covered with ( mostly terraced ) houses , small workshops and industrial structures , inns and other modest buildings by the mid @-@ 19th century . As early as 1840 , the area was considered to be affected by poverty and its high population density . Brighton Corporation undertook some slum clearance in the 1880s , when White and <unk> Streets were laid out between Carlton Hill and Edward Street . By this time , Carlton Hill was known as Brighton 's " foreign quarter " , where many Italian and French street vendors — who sold food of various types on Brighton beach , in the town centre and from door to door — settled . Brighton 's fishing industry still thrived into the early 20th century , and many fishermen lived in Carlton Hill and used its workshops and warehouses to cure and smoke their herring catches . A contemporary writer , quoted by Brighton historian Clifford Musgrave , observed that " an aromatic and appetising pall would envelop the entire neighbourhood , <unk> both fish and residents alike " . 
 In the late 19th century and early 20th century , Carlton Hill 's notoriety as a slum increased . Poverty , drunkenness , disease and low living standards were rife . Brighton 's reputation was damaged by a disparaging article in The Lancet in 1882 : making reference to Carlton Hill , it criticised the town 's poor standards of health . Assisted by government funding , Brighton Corporation undertook extensive slum clearance from 1928 until the start of World War II , transforming the area 's appearance . Two large blocks of flats — Brighton Corporation 's first council flats — were built to rehouse many of the displaced residents . The Milner Flats , a long four @-@ storey block , stand on the site of Woburn Place , and were completed in 1934 . Alderman Hugh Milner Black , a Corporation member who campaigned for housing improvements in Brighton , was commemorated in the naming . Kingswood Flats , on the site of Nelson Place and a Primitive Methodist chapel , were built in 1938 . The name refers to Minister for Health Kingsley Wood . Some displaced residents were moved out of the area : the new council estates of Whitehawk and Moulsecoomb , built in the 1920s and early 1930s on the fringe of Brighton , accommodated many former Carlton Hill residents . An earlier low @-@ rise development took place in 1931 , when the small <unk> council estate was built on empty land near Tilbury Place . 
 The Corporation also provided non @-@ residential buildings on the cleared land . The Circus Street Municipal Market , on a wide street built behind Scutt 's Royal Circus riding school , opened in January 1937 and became one of Brighton 's main markets . A former chapel and many terraced houses had stood on the site , whose redevelopment cost £ 75 @,@ 000 ( £ 4 @,@ 364 @,@ 500 in 2016 ) . A fish market , moved from a site near the beach , was added in 1960 . The building closed in 2005 and has been empty since then , apart from its use as a temporary exhibition centre during the 2009 Brighton Festival — when sculptor Anish Kapoor showed a new work there . Two clinics , specialising in chest complaints and child welfare , opened on the north side of Sussex Street , opposite the market , in 1936 and 1938 respectively . The chest clinic closed in 1989 . The lower part of Sussex Street was renamed Morley Street at this time . Brighton Corporation compulsorily purchased Carlton Place in about 1955 and demolished the houses and former riding school in favour of new housing . John Street became the site of two important civic buildings in the mid @-@ 1960s : Brighton 's central police station was opened in 1965 , followed by the new county court building two years later . 
 Clearances around Albion Hill began in the 1950s . From 1959 , the narrow , densely populated terraces between Albion Hill and Morley Street were cleared and replaced with landscaped open space and seven tower blocks — Brighton 's first such buildings . The first , <unk> , opened on 11 May 1961 . Like its later neighbours , it has 11 storeys . The steep Richmond Street was severed as part of this redevelopment ; its lower section was replaced by a zig @-@ zag path down the hillside and a short road called Richmond Parade , and new roads ( Grove Hill and Ashton Rise ) were built between the tower blocks and across the slope of the hill . Similarly , the lowest section of Carlton Hill was renamed Kingswood Street when it was redeveloped in the 1960s : Brighton Art College ( now part of the University of Brighton ) was extended in 1967 by Brighton borough architect Percy Billington , taking up a large corner plot . 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , American Express sought land in Brighton to build a new European headquarters . The company had a long association with Sussex , and opened a mechanical accounting centre in a building on Edward Street in 1968 . Most of Mighell Street and all of its buildings — except the old farmhouse — and some neighbouring streets were demolished and replaced by the 300 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 28 @,@ 000 m2 ) Amex House , a nine @-@ storey office building designed by American architecture firm <unk> , Melvin , Ward and Partners . A legislative order was raised by the Secretary of State for the Environment in mid @-@ 1973 to allow Mighell Street to be severed . In September 2008 , American Express announced plans to demolish and replace the building . The new office will be set slightly further back , closer to Carlton Hill ( the road ) , and better road access will be provided by means of a new entrance from John Street . The city council granted planning permission in November 2009 , and preliminary building work started in early 2010 . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 Early in its development , Carlton Hill was provided with an Anglican church . St John the Evangelist 's Church , opposite the junction of Carlton Hill and White Street , was designed by George Cheesman junior in a " strangely bleak " Greek Revival / Neo @-@ Georgian style in 1838 , with Doric columns and a stuccoed and pedimented façade . Never successful in attracting large congregations , it was declared redundant by the Diocese of Chichester in 1980 . Proposals for its conversion into a drug detoxification centre were opposed , and in March 1986 the Greek Orthodox community , which had been worshipping elsewhere in Brighton , bought the church and rededicated it as the Church of the Holy Trinity . The building was severely damaged by fire in July 2010 . 
 The Ebenezer Reformed Baptist Church has occupied three buildings on two different sites in Carlton Hill . It was founded in 1825 , and the first service was held on 13 April of that year in a stuccoed Renaissance @-@ style building on the north side of Richmond Street . The chapel , with <unk> chapel erected <unk> 1825 prominently displayed on its entablature , was locally nicknamed " The Lemon <unk> " . It was demolished in 1966 during the redevelopment of the Richmond Street area . Architect C.J. Wood built a new church in the Vernacular style on the opposite side of Richmond Parade , backing on to Ivory Place , in the same year . It was in turn demolished in 2007 , and a six @-@ storey block of flats with a new church on the ground floor was built in its place . This opened in August 2010 . 
 Five other chapels were demolished during the area 's 20th @-@ century redevelopment . The Sussex Street Strict Baptist Chapel stood on the section of that road which is now named Morley Street . It had lancet windows and a stuccoed exterior , and opened in 1867 . The congregation moved out in 1895 , and St Margaret 's Church in Cannon Place established a mission hall in the building . The Circus Street market was built on the site after its demolition in 1937 . Also on Sussex Street , a Primitive Methodist chapel was founded in 1836 . The Kingswood Flats now occupy the site of the building , which closed in about 1950 . Mighell Street Hall , demolished in 1965 , stood on land now covered by Amex House . It was used by Baptists from 1878 , then as the church hall of St John the Evangelist 's , and finally ( from January 1949 ) by Spiritualists . When the new Brighton National Spiritualist Church , a figure @-@ of @-@ eight concrete building , opened on Edward Street in 1965 , the hall closed for good . The Carlton Hill Apostolic Church stood for 99 years until 1964 , although its Catholic Apostolic congregation moved out in 1954 . Latterly it was used as student housing for the adjacent Brighton Art College , which extended its premises onto the site when the building was demolished . The Salvation Army had a citadel at the junction of Edward Street and the now vanished Riding School Lane ( near Mighell Street ) from 1884 until 1965 , when it was demolished for road widening . The denomination registered another building for worship and marriages in 1971 : it stood at the junction of Carlton Hill and Mighell Street , and was <unk> in 1985 . 
 = = = Schools = = = 
 Carlton Hill Primary School was built by the Local education authority in 1963 . It is on the boundary of the conservation area , between Sussex Street and Carlton Hill ( the road ) on the west side of Tilbury Place , and is well screened by trees . It has a tall wooden fence that , according to the council 's Conservation Area Character Statement , " visually intrudes on the approach to the conservation area and harms its setting " . It recommends replacing the fence with a flint wall . The school adjoins the site that is being redeveloped for the new American Express headquarters : the company paid the school £ 300 @,@ 000 ( a condition of the council 's approval of the planning application ) to compensate for the effect on its playground , which will be overlooked by the building , and the building contractor Sir Robert McAlpine has paid for a school crossing patrol officer to help children cross Carlton Hill safely during the construction period . 
 Several schools were founded in the mid @-@ 19th century . A Ragged Schools Union school stood on Carlton Street from the mid @-@ 1850s , and St John the Evangelist 's Church established its own school in 1870 on Carlton Hill . This was rebuilt in 1914 , and later housed the American Express social club until its demolition in early 2010 . Board schools were set up in 1873 on Richmond Street and 1883 on Circus Street . The Richmond Street school was the first in Brighton to offer school meals . The two Board schools merged in 1926 and took the name Sussex Street School , after which the Circus Street building closed . It was later sold to Brighton Polytechnic ( now the University of Brighton ) . The Richmond Street school ran along the west side of Claremont Row between Richmond and Sussex Streets ; playgrounds separated the boys ' and girls ' sections . In October 1930 , a nursery section was added . The school was compulsorily purchased in 1959 and demolished for redevelopment ; Carlton Hill Primary School was built to replace it . 
 The Margaret Macmillan Open Air Nursery was built on part of the grounds of number 1 Tilbury Place in the 1930s , partly funded by Laetitia Tilbury Tarner ( who had bequeathed the house and its grounds to Brighton Corporation ) . A nursery school now stands on the site . 
 = = = Civic , commercial and public buildings = = = 
 Amex House " dominates the sweep of Carlton Hill " and is visible on the skyline from much of Brighton . Designed by British architecture firm <unk> Melvin and Ward , the building has prominent white horizontal bands of glass @-@ reinforced plastic and blue @-@ tinted glazing , and its corners are chamfered to give it a more rounded appearance . It is nicknamed " The Wedding Cake " , and its clean , futuristic design has been said to evoke Thunderbirds . The building is generally considered to be one of the better postwar additions to Brighton 's building stock , although it affects views into and out of the neighbouring conservation area . About 3 @,@ 000 people work at the building , making American Express the largest private employer in Brighton and Hove . 
 Prior House , at the north end of Tilbury Place , was built in 1936 for the Brighton Girl 's Club . This institution was founded in 1928 at Nelson Row , and was displaced from its original premises in 1934 when the Kingswood Flats were built on the site . In 1970 , Prior House became a centre for unemployed people , offering education and other social facilities ; it is now a base for voluntary and charitable groups under the aegis of the Resource Centre , a local organisation formed in 1975 . Architecturally , it is a plain red @-@ brick building with a large stuccoed extension on the second floor , affecting the ambience of Tilbury Place and the neighbouring listed buildings . 
 The former vicarage of St John the Evangelist 's Church , opposite the church on the south side of Carlton Hill , has been converted into an office . It dates from 1899 and is domestic in character , with bay windows containing original sashes , red @-@ brick walls and a steeply pitched roof . It is within the conservation area and is considered to make a " positive contribution " to its character . 
 Another building formerly associated with the church is the Edward Riley Memorial Hall , now the Sussex Deaf Centre . It has a steep clay @-@ tiled roof and brown brickwork . The high flint walls around it are described as a positive feature of the conservation area , although the building itself has a " neutral effect " according to the council 's character statement . The building was used as the church hall until the church closed in 1980 ; the Chichester Diocesan Centre for the Deaf was then established in it . 
 = = = Listed buildings = = = 
 A building or structure is defined as " listed " when it is placed on a statutory register of buildings of " special architectural or historic interest " by the Secretary of State for Culture , Media and Sport , a Government department , in accordance with the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . English Heritage , a non @-@ departmental public body , acts as an agency of this department to administer the process and advise the department on relevant issues . 
 In February 2001 , there were 24 listed buildings with Grade I status , 70 Grade II * -listed and 1 @,@ 124 Grade II @-@ listed buildings in Brighton and Hove . Grade I @-@ listed buildings are defined as being of " exceptional interest " and greater than national importance ; Grade II * , the next highest status , is used for " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " ; and the lowest grade , Grade II , is used for " nationally important buildings of special interest " . 
 Carlton Hill has nine listed buildings ( covered by five separate listings ) , all of which have Grade II status and lie within the conservation area . Number 1 Tilbury Place ( St John 's Lodge ) is listed together with its surrounding railings , garden wall and garden porch . The four neighbouring and contemporary houses at 2 – 5 Tilbury Place are also listed together under a single Grade II designation . Described by the council as an " impressive warm brick terrace " of " elegant townhouses " , they were much larger than the surrounding houses — especially number 1 , which also had extensive gardens . Number 5 is also slightly larger than the others , and originally had stables adjacent . They are in the Georgian style , built of pale yellow brick laid in the Flemish bond pattern . The roofs are slate @-@ tiled , but some are hidden behind parapets . The entrance doors have decorated fanlights and original windows with ogee @-@ shaped cast @-@ iron miniature balconies . All five houses are now owned by a housing association and have been divided into flats . 
 The former St John the Evangelist 's Church was listed at Grade II on 20 August 1971 . It is a Greek Revival @-@ style stucco @-@ clad building of stone and brick with a partly hipped roof . The three @-@ bay façade has four Tuscan pilasters beneath a substantial entablature and pediment . The frieze between them has metopes and triglyphs . Work by L.A. Mackintosh in 1957 altered the exterior ; the architect added his personal monogram and an eagle emblem ( representing John the Evangelist ) above the left and right entrances respectively . 
 Numbers 34 and 35 Mighell Street ( the former Mighell Farmhouse ) were jointly listed on 13 October 1952 . Described as a " surprising survival " , the now semi @-@ detached house is a two @-@ storey cobble @-@ fronted building with a prominent porch framed by Tuscan columns and topped by an entablature with a frieze and triglyph and a decorated pediment . An arched doorway with a keystone has a 19th @-@ century panelled door set into it , and the sash windows are also original and have similar arched surrounds made of bricks . The roof is tiled and has chimneys at each end . The farmhouse 's origins are unknown , although a Philip Mighell was a major landowner on Hilly Laine in the late 18th century , when some of the paul @-@ pieces bore his name . The building was apparently at least partly in commercial use by 1865 . 
 In Tarner Park , an area of open space formed from part of number 1 Tilbury Place 's grounds , there is a circular tower which is believed to have been built by Edward Tilbury Tarner ( son of the original occupants Edward and Laetitia Tarner ) as an observation tower so he could see ships in the English Channel . The mid @-@ 19th @-@ century structure has two storeys and about 70 steps ; the upper level is recessed and has a walkway around it . The walls are of knapped flint with some brick and stonework . Part of an iron weather vane remains at the top . Both storeys have segmental @-@ arched entrances , but these are now closed . The structure is in good condition but has some missing flints . 
 = = Conservation area = = 
 In the United Kingdom , a conservation area is a principally urban area " of special architectural or historic interest , the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance " . Such areas are identified by local authorities according to criteria defined by Sections 69 and 70 of the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . 
 On 4 July 2008 , 4 @.@ 05 acres ( 1 @.@ 64 ha ) at the heart of Carlton Hill was designated as the city of Brighton and Hove 's 34th conservation area . Its boundaries are ( clockwise from north ) Sussex Street , St John 's Place , Carlton Hill ( including the stub of Mighell Street ) and Tilbury Place , with the open space of Tarner Park at the centre . All of Carlton Hill 's listed buildings are within the designated area ; these , combined with the sheltered open space of Tarner Park , substantial tree cover , the survival of old street patterns and boundary walls , and the distinctive lie of the land , contribute to the area 's " special character " , as defined by Brighton and Hove City Council . 
 The area does not have a unified appearance or structure , owing to the large @-@ scale redevelopment carried out in the 20th century . Instead , a " disparate group of individually interesting buildings " and small spaces define the area ; together , they form " a fragment of early 19th @-@ century Brighton " . 
 Flint and brown or yellow brick is used extensively , both for buildings within the conservation area and in associated structures such as boundary walls and pavements . Some kerbs are of granite , limestone and flint , while some high @-@ quality Yorkstone paving slabs survive , along with some red @-@ brick pavements . 
 = White @-@ eyed river martin = 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin ( Pseudochelidon sirintarae ) is a passerine bird , one of only two members of the river martin subfamily of the swallows . Since it has significant differences from its closest relative , the African river martin , it is sometimes placed in its own genus , Eurochelidon . First found in 1968 , it is known only from a single wintering site in Thailand , and may be extinct , since it has not been seen since 1980 despite targeted surveys in Thailand and neighbouring Cambodia . It may possibly still breed in China or Southeast Asia , but a Chinese painting initially thought to depict this species was later reassessed as showing pratincoles . 
 The adult white @-@ eyed river martin is a medium @-@ sized swallow , with mainly glossy greenish @-@ black plumage , a white rump , and a tail which has two elongated slender central tail feathers , each widening to a racket @-@ shape at the tip . It has a white eye ring and a broad , bright greenish @-@ yellow bill . The sexes are similar in appearance , but the juvenile lacks the tail ornaments and is generally browner than the adult . Little is known of the behaviour or breeding habitat of this martin , although like other swallows it feeds on insects caught in flight , and its wide bill suggests that it may take relatively large species . It roosts in reed beds in winter , and may nest in river sandbanks , probably in April or May before the summer rains . It may have been overlooked prior to its discovery because it tended to feed at dawn or dusk rather than during the day . 
 The martin 's apparent demise may have been hastened by trapping , loss of habitat and the construction of dams . The winter swallow roosts at the only known location of this martin have greatly reduced in numbers , and birds using river habitats for breeding have declined throughout the region . The white @-@ eyed river martin is one of only two birds endemic to Thailand , and the country 's government has noted this through the issues of a stamp and a high @-@ value commemorative coin . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Within the swallow family , the white @-@ eyed river martin is one of only two members of the river martin subfamily Pseudochelidoninae , the other being the African river martin Pseudochelidon eurystomina of the Congo basin in Africa . These two species possess a number of distinctive features which mark them out from other swallows and martins , including their robust legs and feet , and stout bills . The extent of their differences from other swallows and the wide geographical separation of the two martins suggest that they are relict populations of a group of species that diverged from the main swallow lineage early in its evolution . The separation of this subfamily is supported by genetic evidence , and their habit of nesting in burrows is thought to be characteristic of the earliest members of the swallow family . 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin was discovered in 1968 by Thai ornithologist Kitti Thonglongya , who gave the bird its current binomial name . The genus name Pseudochelidon ( Hartlaub , 1861 ) comes from the Ancient Greek prefix ψευδο / pseudo " false " and χελιδον / chelidôn , " swallow " , and the species name sirintarae commemorates Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand . 
 The African and Asian Pseudochelidon species differ markedly in the size of their bills and eyes , suggesting that they have different feeding ecologies , with the white @-@ eyed river martin probably able to take much larger prey . The Thai species also has a swollen , hard gape ( fleshy interior of the bill ) unlike the softer , fleshier , and much less prominent gape of the African river martin . Thonglongya estimated the bill of the Thai species to be 17 @.@ 6 % wider than that of the African bird , but a later estimate , using specimens preserved in alcohol instead of dried skins ( to avoid shrinkage ) , gave a difference of 22 @.@ 5 % between the bills of the two swallows . Following a suggestion by Kitti in his original paper , Richard Brooke proposed in 1972 that the white @-@ eyed river martin was sufficiently different from the African species to be placed in a separate monotypic genus Eurochelidon , but this was contested by other authorities . The new genus was not subsequently widely adopted by other authors , although BirdLife International uses Eurochelidon . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult white @-@ eyed river martin is a medium @-@ sized swallow , 18 cm ( 7 in ) long , with mainly silky black plumage and a white rump . The back is green @-@ glossed black , and is separated from the similarly coloured upper tail by a narrow bright white rump band . The head is darker than the back , with a velvet @-@ black chin leading to blue @-@ green glossed black underparts . The wings are black , with brown inner edges to the flight feathers , and the tail is green @-@ glossed black with two elongated , slender , central tail feathers , up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long . These expand slightly at the tips to give narrow racquets 4 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 3 in ) long . The wing length averages 11 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail is 10 @.@ 7 cm ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) long , and the tarsus averages 1 @.@ 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) . 
 The iris and eyelid are white , giving the appearance of a white eye ring , and the broad , bright greenish @-@ yellow bill has a black hooked tip to the upper mandible . The large , strong feet and legs are flesh @-@ coloured . This species is silent when wintering , and its breeding vocalisations are unknown . The sexes are similar , but the juvenile lacks the tail racquets , has a brown head and chin , and is generally browner than the adult . Juveniles taken in January and February were moulting their body feathers . 
 The original Thai name for the Pseudochelidon , only known to local people in Bueng Boraphet , was <unk> Nok Ta Phong which may be roughly translated as " bird with enlarged eyes " . After its official discovery in 1968 , it was named เจ ้ <unk> ้ <unk> Nok <unk> Ying <unk> ( " Princess <unk> bird " ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin was discovered in 1968 by Kitti Thonglongya , who obtained nine specimens netted by professional bird @-@ hunters as part of a migratory bird survey at a night @-@ time roost at Thailand 's largest freshwater lake , Bueng Boraphet in Nakhon Sawan Province . It was first seen in the wild by ornithologists at the same wintering site in 1977 . The species has only been seen at the lake , always between the months of November and February , and the wintering habitat is assumed to be in the vicinity of open fresh water for feeding , with reed beds for the night @-@ time roost . 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin may be migratory , and if the breeding habitat resembles that of the African river martin , it is likely to be the forested valleys of large rivers ; these can provide sandbars and islands for nesting , and woodland over which the birds can catch insect prey . The breeding grounds and habitat are unknown , although river valleys in northern Thailand or southwestern China are possibilities . A claimed depiction of this species in a Chinese scroll painting initially appeared to support the possibility of the martin breeding in China . The bird in the painting had a similarly shaped head and bill , a white eye and a long tail , although it lacked the white rump , did not show the correct bill colour , and elongated the outer , rather than central , tail feathers . Painted before 1970 , it pre @-@ dated the publication of pictures of the Thai bird , so it must have been painted from life . It is now thought more likely that the scroll shows Oriental pratincoles ( <unk> <unk> ) . Cambodia and Burma have also been suggested as possible refuges for the martin , but there has also been speculation on whether it is migratory at all . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Since its breeding grounds are undiscovered , nothing is known about the white @-@ eyed river martin 's breeding biology , although it is suggested that it may nest in burrows in river sandbars , probably in April or May before the monsoon rain raises water levels . However , distinct differences in foot and toe morphology from its African relative have led some authorities to speculate that even the assumption that it nests in burrows could be incorrect . In winter , it roosts with barn swallows in reed beds . 
 Like other swallows , the white @-@ eyed river martin feeds on insects , including beetles , which are caught on the wing . Given its size and unusual mouth structure , it may well take larger insects than other swallows . This species is described as graceful and buoyant in flight , and , like its African relative , appears reluctant to use perches , behaviour that , together with its unusual toe @-@ shape and the fact that mud was found on the toes of one of the first specimens , suggest that this species may be relatively terrestrial . 
 Pamela C. Rasmussen suggested that , given its unusually large eyes , the species might be nocturnal or at least crepuscular , a factor that could make it very inconspicuous , and thus partly explain how it remained undetected for so long . Although the fact that the first specimens were supposedly collected roosting at night in reedbeds might appear to contradict this theory , it is possible that the birds might not have been caught at the roost . Alternatively , they might be capable of both diurnal and nocturnal behaviour , or be crepuscular , depending on the season or circumstance . 
 = = Status = = 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin was seen in Thailand in 1972 , 1977 and 1980 , but not definitely since , although there is an unconfirmed sighting from Thailand from 1986 . It is classified as Critically Endangered , which is the highest risk category assigned by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) for wild species . The designation means that a species ' numbers have decreased , or will decrease , by 80 % within three generations . The IUCN does not consider a species extinct until extensive targeted surveys have been conducted , but the white @-@ eyed river martin may well no longer exist in the wild , and was probably always rare . 
 There has been a drastic decline in the Bueng Boraphet swallow population from the hundreds of thousands reported to roost around 1970 to maximum counts of 8 @,@ 000 made in the winter of 1980 – 1981 , although it is not certain if this represents a real decline or a shift in site in response to hunting . Other potential causes for the martin 's decline include the disturbance of sand bars in the rivers , and the construction of dams ( which flood the area upstream and change the water flow downstream ) , deforestation , and increasing conversion of its habitat to agriculture . Other Southeast Asian species using riverine sand bars have also been adversely affected by disturbance and habitat degradation . Very few swallows of any kind now roost in the Bueng Boraphet reedbeds , preferring sugarcane plantations , and , despite searching , the white @-@ eyed river martin has not been found in other nearby large swallow roosts . 
 The martin is legally protected under Appendix 1 ( the highest category ) of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) agreement , and is one of 15 " Reserved Species " in Thailand which , under the provisions of the Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act , BE <unk> , cannot be legally hunted , collected , or kept in captivity under any circumstances . Despite official protection , the martin was captured by locals along with other swallows for sale as food or for release by devout Buddhists , and following its discovery by ornithologists , trappers were reported to have caught as many as 120 individuals and sold them to the director of the Nakhon Sawan Fisheries Station who was unable to keep them alive in captivity . Two birds sent to Bangkok Zoo in 1971 also soon died . The small population may therefore have become non @-@ viable . 
 Bueng Boraphet has been declared a Non @-@ Hunting Area in an effort to protect the species , but surveys to find this martin have been unsuccessful . These include several searches at the main site , a 1969 survey of the Nan , Yom and Wang Rivers of northern Thailand , and a 1996 survey of rivers in northern Laos . A possible sighting was made in Cambodia in 2004 , but a 2008 investigation using speedboat surveys and interviews with villagers in Cambodia near the location of the claimed sighting failed to find any positive evidence , and noted that the habitat was in poor condition . Nevertheless , animals as a large as the saola have been rediscovered in Southeast Asia , so it is conceivable that a small population of the martin survives . Despite the lack of records from China , a 2000 field guide covering the region included this species , since it is the mostly likely breeding area outside Thailand , although it is omitted from the 2008 Birds of East Asia . 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin and the Deignan 's babbler , <unk> <unk> , are the only bird species endemic to Thailand , and the martin has attracted sufficient interest to be featured on a 75 <unk> postage stamp in 1975 , as one of a set of four depicting Thai birds , and on a 5 @,@ 000 Thai baht conservation issue gold coin in 1974 . 
 = Italian battleship Vittorio Emanuele = 
 Vittorio Emanuele was an Italian pre @-@ dreadnought battleship , laid down in 1901 , launched in 1904 and completed in 1908 . She was the second member of the Regina Elena class , which included three other vessels : Regina Elena , Napoli , and Roma . Vittorio Emmanuele was armed with a main battery of two 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns and twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns . She was quite fast for the period , with a top speed of nearly 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Vittorio <unk> saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War as the flagship of the 1st Division . During the war , she participated in operations in Cyrenaica and the eastern Mediterranean Sea , including the seizure of the islands of Rhodes and the Dodecanese . She served during the First World War , but saw no combat during the war due to the hesitance of both the Italian and Austro @-@ Hungarian navies to risk their capital ships in pitched battle . She remained in service as a training ship until 1923 , when she was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Vittorio Emanuele was 144 @.@ 6 meters ( 474 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 4 m ( 73 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 58 m ( 28 @.@ 1 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 914 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 694 long tons ; 15 @,@ 338 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical triple expansion engines rated at 19 @,@ 424 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 484 kW ) . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 21 @.@ 36 knots ( 39 @.@ 56 km / h ; 24 @.@ 58 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 18 @,@ 520 km ; 11 @,@ 508 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Vittorio Emanuele had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with two 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . She was also equipped with two 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Vittorio Emanuele was protected with Krupp steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) thick , and the deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick plating , and the 8 @-@ inch gun turrets had 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Vittorio Emanuele was built by the Castellammare di Stabia shipyard ; her keel was laid on 18 September 1901 . The ship was launched on 12 October 1904 , and construction was completed on 1 August 1908 . Vittorio Emanuele served in the active duty squadron through 1910 , by which time her three sisters had been completed , bringing the total number of front @-@ line battleships to six , which also included the two Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships . The active duty squadron was typically in service for seven months of the year for training ; the rest of the year they were placed in reserve . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . Vittorio Emanuele served as the flagship of Vice Admiral Augusto Aubry , the commander of the 1st Division throughout the conflict . On 30 September , Vittorio Emanuele , her sister Roma , and the armored cruiser Pisa cruised in the Aegean Sea , searching for the Ottoman training squadron that had departed Beirut for Constantinople two days before , and did not know that war had been declared . The Italian flotilla failed to locate its prey , which managed to safely reach Constantinople . 
 On 18 October , Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters , along with three cruisers and several destroyers and torpedo boats escorted a convoy that carried half of the 2nd Infantry Division to Benghazi . When the Ottomans refused to surrender the city before the amphibious assault , the Italian fleet opened fire on the Turkish defenders at 08 : 00 , while landing parties from the ships and the Army infantry went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . 
 By December , Vittorio Emanuele and the other ships of the 1st Squadron were dispersed in the ports of Cyrenaica . Vittorio Emanuele , Pisa , and the protected cruisers Etruria and Etna were stationed in Tobruk . While there , they supported the Italian Army as it occupied the city and surrounding area by contributing landing parties and providing fire support to the ground troops . In early 1912 , most of the fleet had withdrawn to Italy for repairs and refit , leaving only a small force of cruisers and light craft to patrol the North African coast . On 4 March , Aubry died while aboard his flagship ; Admiral Luigi <unk> replaced him as the squadron commander . 
 On 13 April , the 1st Division left Taranto , bound for the island of Rhodes . Meanwhile , the 3rd Division escorted a convoy of troopships from Tobruk to the island . The Italian heavy ships demonstrated off the city of Rhodes while the transports landed the expeditionary force 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the south on 4 May ; the soldiers quickly advanced on the city , supported by artillery fire from the Italian fleet . The Turks surrendered the city the following day . Between 8 and 20 May , Vittorio Emanuele was involved in the seizure of several islands in the Dodecanese between Crete , Rhodes , and Samos . 
 In June , Vittorio Emanuele and the rest of the 1st Division was stationed at Rhodes . Over the next two months , the ships cruised in the Aegean to prevent the Turks from attempting to launch their own amphibious operations to retake the islands Italy had seized in May . The 1st Division returned to Italy in late August for repairs and refitting , and were replaced by the battleships of the 2nd Squadron . The 1st Division left port on 14 October , but was recalled later that day , when the Ottomans had agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , Italy 's traditional naval rival , was the primary opponent in the conflict . The Italian Naval Chief of Staff , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , believed that an active fleet policy was prohibited by the serious threat from submarines in the confined waters of the Adriatic Sea . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's capital ships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . As a result , the ship was not particularly active during the war . 
 During the war , Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division . They spent much of the war rotating between the bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona , but did not see combat . On 14 – 15 May 1917 , three light cruisers of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy raided the Otranto Barrage ; in the ensuring Battle of the Strait of Otranto , Vittorio Emanuele and her sisters raised steam to assist the Allied warships , but the Italian commander refused to permit them to join the battle for fear of risking their loss in the submarine @-@ infested Adriatic . 
 After the end of the war , Vittorio Emanuele was used as a training ship for a short period . In the summer of 1922 , she was in Constantinople when the American destroyer USS Bulmer accidentally collided with a cutter from Vittorio Emanuele , causing minor damage to the boat . Then @-@ Lieutenant Joseph J. Clark , Bulmer 's executive officer , came aboard Vittorio Emanuele to apologize for the incident . 
 In early 1922 , the world 's major navies , including Italy , signed the Washington Naval Treaty . According to the terms of the treaty , Italy could keep Vittorio Emanuele and her three sisters , along with the newer dreadnought battleships . Due to the small size and age of the ships , particularly in comparison to the modern dreadnoughts , the Italians could have kept the ships in service indefinitely . They could not , however , be replaced by new battleships under the normal practice of the Treaty system , which provided for replacements after a ship was 20 years old . Vittorio Emanuele was stricken from the naval register on 1 April 1923 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = M @-@ 49 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 49 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the south @-@ central portion of the US state of Michigan . It runs from the Ohio state line north to Litchfield through rural Hillsdale County . M @-@ 49 is the only Michigan highway in which the road crossing into another state has the same state highway number . M @-@ 49 continues as State Route 49 ( SR 49 ) , near the Indiana – Michigan – Ohio tripoint south of Camden . The highway dates back to 1930 and was only altered once in the 1940s . M @-@ 49 runs through Southern Michigan farmlands connecting several small towns along its path . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 49 starts as the continuation of SR 49 into Michigan from Ohio . The highway crosses the state line south of Camden east of the tripoint with Indiana and Ohio . Running north through rural Hillsdale County , the roadway follows Edon Road through farm land . The highway follows two sweeping curves to cross Territorial Road and continue into the village of Camden . M @-@ 49 follows Main Street through town and turns northeasterly on the north side of the village on the way to Reading . Returning to a due @-@ north course , the highway crosses a branch of the Indiana Northeastern Railroad on the south side of Reading . The Edon Road name gives way to Main Street through the city . M @-@ 49 runs north out of Reading , once again called Edon Road , through farm lands dotted with occasional trees . At Weston Road on the southeast side of Allen , the highway turns to the northeast to a junction with US 12 ( Chicago Road ) . M @-@ 49 turns west along US 12 , running concurrently into the village . M @-@ 49 resumes its northerly course at Railroad Street , separating from US 12 in the process . Outside of town , the roadway changes names to Allen Road , and through more Southern Michigan farmland , M @-@ 49 runs north to Genesee Road . The highway turns east on Genesee to Anderson Road , and then north to Litchfield . Crossing into that city , M @-@ 49 follows Chicago Street to the intersection with M @-@ 99 downtown . At that junction , M @-@ 49 terminates nearly 25 @.@ 5 miles ( 41 @.@ 0 km ) north of the state line . No part of the highway has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 49 was added to the state highway system in 1930 , running along its current routing between M @-@ 9 ( now M @-@ 99 ) in Litchfield and the Ohio state line south of Camden . Near the state line , the highway jogged along Territorial Road for a short distance to make the connection with the continuation of SR 49 . The second version of M @-@ 120 ran concurrently with M @-@ 49 on this section of Territorial Road starting in 1939 . This concurrency was removed in late 1946 or early 1947 when M @-@ 49 was realigned to smooth out the corners in the roadway at M @-@ 120 . The routing of M @-@ 49 has remained the same since . It is currently the only state highway that connects with a like @-@ numbered state highway from another state . The only other highways in Michigan to share a number with a cross @-@ border connection are components of the Interstate Highway System or the United States Numbered Highways . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Hillsdale County . 
 = Huletts Landing , New York = 
 Huletts Landing is a hamlet in the town of Dresden in northern Washington County , New York , United States . A lakeside community on the eastern shore of Lake George in the Adirondack Mountains , Huletts Landing is located entirely within the Adirondack Park . There is only one roadway access to the hamlet , County Route 6 and its suffixed routes , which head north @-@ south . Huletts Landing is geographically located at 43 ° 38 ′ 21 ″ N 73 ° 30 ′ 25 ″ W and has approximately two centuries of written history . 
 The hamlet derives its name from the Hulett family , which resided in the area for several generations after Revolutionary War soldier David Hulett moved near the lakeside and began farming . In 1874 his descendant Philander Hulett built a boat landing , a general store , and a post office . This opened the scenic corner of the lake to steamship traffic and tourism . This suffered a major setback in 1915 when the hamlet 's largest hotel burned to its foundation , but tourism remained an important factor to the local economy . The town ( Dresden ) population , not Huletts Landing , is 695 , according to 2007 U.S. Census Bureau estimates . 
 = = History = = 
 The Hulett family appears to have been of French origin and came to North America to avoid religious persecution for their Huguenot beliefs . David Hulett , the founder of Huletts Landing , was born in <unk> , Connecticut c . 1758 – 1762 and served as a private under General James Wadsworth during the American Revolution . For three years the unit where Pvt. Hulett served fought mainly in upstate New York . Oral history asserts that David Hulett fought heroically at the Battle of Saratoga where he refused to leave the field despite an injury to his neck . The Hulett family settled near Lake George c . 1804 , possibly because of a land grant offered to veterans in lieu of wages for service . Along with Bolton , New York and Putnam , New York , Hulett 's Landing is one of three place names on Lake George relating with Wadsworth 's Connecticut brigade . 
 Until 1874 the Huletts Landing area was known as Bosom Bay . Successive generations of the Hulett family lived by farming the area until Philander Hulett began to develop the area in the 1870s by building a steamship landing and submitting an application to build a post office . The post office application is the earliest document to use the Huletts Landing name . The existing Lake George Steamboat Company , which delivered mail as well as passengers , probably required either a post office or a tourism facility in order to justify adding a new stop to its schedule . An influential travelogue by Rev. William Henry Harrison Murray was published in 1868 and praised the Adirondacks for the relaxing effects of its picturesque wilderness . The first railroad service into the region was also built in the 1870s . The application received approval and Philander Hulett built the post office shortly afterward , housed in the same building as the community 's first store . He served as postmaster until his death in 1883 , but sold his property . 
 According to George T. <unk> in his history of the area : 
 Part of Philander Hulett ’ s property would be sold to businessman John W. Hall , but the bulk of the real estate would pass first to C.W. Wentz , an executive with the Delaware and Hudson Railroad , next to entrepreneur Henry W. Buckell , and finally by the early part of the 20th century to William H. Wyatt , an owner of hotels . All of these successive owners saw their first and primary role as marketing the property as a tourist attraction . 
 The first Lakeside Inn was constructed for John W. Hall in 1877 – 1878 on a 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 0040 km2 ) lot . Although the only direct access to Huletts Landing was by ferry , a combination of train , coach , and ferry was normal for Adirondack vacationers of the period . Huletts Hotel grew from expansions on the original farmhouse until a fire destroyed it on 14 November 1915 . It was hastily rebuilt for the 1916 tourist season , but questions of arson arose , and led to trial . Tourism has continued to be a mainstay of the community 's economy . Adirondack Park was originally established in 1892 . In 1931 an eastward expansion brought Lake George and its communities within park boundaries . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Huletts Landing is located at coordinates 43 @.@ 38 ° N 73 @.@ 30 ° W ﻿ / 43 @.@ 38 ; <unk> . It is located on the northern shore of Lake George , which is a 32 @-@ mile ( 51 km ) lake in the Adirondacks . Huletts Landing is entirely situated within the Adirondack Park , which is the largest state park in the United States . Nearly two @-@ thirds of the property within the park 's formal range is privately owned with various land use restrictions . 
 The climate of Huletts Landing is diverse . On average , the coolest month is January , while the warmest is July . The highest monthly precipitation in the area , on average , occurs in August . The lowest recorded temperature was − 38 ° F ( − 39 ° C ) in 1979 , while the highest was 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) in 1953 . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Huletts Landing is a remote hamlet , accessible by car only via Washington County Route 6 , which branches off of nearby New York State Route 22 . The main road is known as Huletts Landing Road , and spawns two suffixed routes which reach different parts of Huletts Landing . The first is County Route 6A , which is better known as Lands End Road , heads southward while the other , County Route 6B , which is better known as Bluff Head Road , brings the traveler northward , to locations such as Washington County Park and Huletts Landing Marina . Huletts Landing County Park is also on CR 6B . 
 The airport at Burlington , Vermont is approximately one @-@ hour drive from the eastern section of Adirondack Park , where Huletts Landing is located . A smaller airport within Adirondack Park is Adirondack Regional Airport in Saranac Lake . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The area sees most of its tourism during the summer and the fall foliage season , virtually shutting down in winter . Nearby attractions include lake cruises , canoeing , golf , and hiking . Historic attractions of Huletts Landing also included hunting and local proprietors of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries provided weekly fireworks displays during tourist season . 
 = Hello Good Morning = 
 " Hello Good Morning " is a song by American rapper and producer Diddy and his band Dirty Money , from their debut album , Last Train to Paris . It was released from March 30 , 2010 as the album 's third single . The electronic dance song incorporates an acid squelch section in the middle 8 , ad was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , Clifford " T.I. " Harris and Nathaniel " Danja " Hills who also produced the song . T.I. has a featured rap on the song . The song 's musical composition was inspired by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza night clubs ; its lyrics focus around sex and money . Three official remixes were released alongside the main single : the Official Remix with Rick Ross & Nicki Minaj , the " Grime Remix " with Skepta , and a " Team UK remix " with Tinchy Stryder and Tinie Tempah . Critics noted the track as one of the better songs from Last Train to Paris , particularly for Danja 's production , but criticized the lyrics for being superficial and for lacking substance . 
 " Hello Good Morning " was promoted with several live television performances including on season nine of American Idol and Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , amongst others . An accompanying music video , filmed by Hype Williams , features Diddy – Dirty Money parting in Los Angeles , with T.I. enjoying the company of two ladies in an apartment and Diddy driving through the city at night . It was inspired by the 1995 film Heat . An edited version of the clip was made for the official remix , and a completely new street party @-@ themed video was filmed for the grime remix . At the time of release , " Hello Good Morning " became the album and group 's first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching No. 27 . Commercially , the single was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling in excess of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Internationally , the single peaked at No. 22 in UK , and was particularly successful on the German Black Chart and UK R & B Chart , reaching number one and number eight respectively . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hello Good Morning " was written by Marcella Araica , Richard Butler , T.I. , Nathaniel " Danja " Hills . The song which features T.I. , and was produced by Danja , is an electro @-@ dance song influenced by Diddy 's experiences in Ibiza where he visited the <unk> nightclub . The music influences included " Felix da Housecat , Erick Morillo , Deep Dish and DJ Hell " . According to Rap @-@ Up magazine , the lyrics refer to " keeping a party going till early hours of the morning " and see Diddy return to using his signature ad @-@ libs . Nicki Escudero from The Phoenix New Times noted the song 's superficial themes which included lyrics about " sex , money and cheating " Brandon Soderberg from The Village Voice noted the song 's bridge where there was an " epic acid @-@ squelch breakdown " . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Several official remixes were released alongside the video to promote the song . The first of these remixes added an introduction verse from rapper Rick Ross and then a new verse later in the song from female rapper , Nicki Minaj . Labelled the " Official Remix " , it was released in the United States on June 29 , 2010 for digital download . A music video for this version was created by adding additional footage to the original video . It premiered on June 21 , 2010 . A second remix featuring just Ross 's additional verse was used for the song 's main music video which premiered on May 11 , 2010 A third remix was made for the UK , titled the " Team UK Remix " . This version featured Tinie Tempah and Tinchy Stryder in place of Minaj and Ross . It premiered on June 11 , 2010 on Tim Westwood 's Radio 1Xtra daytime show Westwood . It was released as track two on the UK Digital EP single , released June 20 , 2010 . A final remix was created after Diddy highlighted his intent to find a UK emcee to record a new version of the song with him . Skepta was chosen for the remix , which was released as the " Official Grime Remix " . It is the only remix which alters the song 's production , and was released only in the UK , on August 12 , 2010 . A video for the grime remix was released on November 5 , 2010 . On January 5 , 2010 , MTV reported the emergence of a new remix of " Hello Good Morning " . The new remix replaces T.I. ' s vocals with a new verse from Eminem . D.L. Chandler from MTV said " Slim Shady ’ s humorous verses sound right at home over producer Danja ’ s club @-@ ready banger . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a review by USA Today , " Hello Good Morning " was picked out as one of the best three songs on the Last Train to Paris . Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song three out of five stars in his review for the song , stating that although Dirty Money promised a new sound the song sounded like " Timba – pop , albeit one with a better @-@ than @-@ average hook . " He continued , " in Diddy 's final @-@ minute rap , [ it 's ] a reminder of how he jump @-@ started his journey towards a reported $ 300m fortune and a butler called Fonzworth Bentley . " Matt from Above & Beyond said it was the Danja @-@ produced beat and the T.I. feature that make the song good . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music said " Diddy seems to have abandoned conventional rapping in favour of some Kanye – style <unk> . He 's quite good at it , too . Adds a certain nasal edge to proceedings . There 's a middle bit , and it 's like nothing else in the song ... It sounds more like someone doing the " I 've lost my keys " song , just before they leave the house in the morning . The odd thing is that it was left in there . I mean if minimal is your bag , surely that 'd be the first bit to cut ? " He awarded in four out of five stars . Becky Bain of Idolator was also positive about the song , saying , " Lyrically and stylistically , it ’ s a pretty standard club track — over various synth beats , the song covers the usual topics : hot girls dancing , crowds waiting to have fun , and spending time in a five star suite with some five star freaks getting high all week ... But honestly , we ’ re just overjoyed this song isn ’ t just a thinly @-@ veiled four @-@ minute commercial for any one of Diddy ’ s various products . " 
 However Nicki Escudero of the Phoenix New Times said that although the song was good for what it is , it lacked substance . " Now that Diddy @-@ Dirty Money has had success with a superficial track about money , sex and cheating , here 's hoping the group will release a deeper song about something more meaningful . Unfortunately , hope can only go so far . " Meanwhile , Michael Cragg from The Guardian 's music blog commented that the UK remix featuring Skepta salvages what would otherwise be a boring Diddy track . " Thankfully , UK grime king , Skepta , has rescued the song by pushing Diddy to the periphery – his flow consists of going ' uh ' , ' Skepta ' and spelling out ' <unk> # – setting off a smorgasbord of sonic explosions , tightening the whole thing up and making it sound a lot darker and more thrilling than a host of US producers could manage . Skepta also drops the following immortal line in the first verse : ' I like tea , but I don 't like crumpets . ' A man after my own heart . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Two weeks after Diddy – Dirty Money 's appearance on American Idol , " Hello Good Morning " debuted on the U.S. Hot Digital Songs chart at No. 17 , and the single debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 at No. 34 . Eventually the song peaked at No. 27 on the Hot 100 in the chart week dated July 24 , 2010 . At the time of its charting , it was the first single from Last Train to Paris to appear on the Billboard Hot 100 . Consequently , the song became Diddy 's best charting Hot 100 single since his 2007 hit single " Last Night " with Keyshia Cole , as well as his eleventh top @-@ thirty Hot 100 single . In comparison , " Hello Good Morning " is Dawn Richard 's second lowest charting Hot 100 single , but first appearance on the chart since 2008 's " Damaged " as part of <unk> , <unk> Kane . For Kalenna Harper , it is her first Hot 100 chart appearance . T.I. , who is featured on the song , received his highest Hot 100 chart peak , since his 2009 single " Dead and Gone " with Justin Timberlake . On August 18 , 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single gold for selling at least 500 @,@ 000 copies . On the official end of year charts , compiled by Billboard , " Hello Good Morning " ranked at No. 29 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 65 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 Additionally the single proved successful on urban charts around the world . " Hello Good Morning " peaked at No. 8 on the U.S. Hot Rap Songs chart and No. 13 on the U.S. Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . In Germany , it topped the Deutsche Black Charts ( German Black Charts ) while reaching top @-@ ten on the United Kingdom 's R & B Singles Chart and No. 24 on Australia 's Urban Singles Chart . On the main singles charts , the song was most successful in the UK , where it charted at No. 22 on the UK Singles Chart . At the time of release , it became T.I. ' s best UK charting single since 2009 's " Dead and Gone " , and his overall joint sixth @-@ best charting UK single along with 2006 's " Why You Wanna " . In the rest of Europe the single had mixed success , reaching the top @-@ twenty in Belgium , on both the Ultratip Flemish and Wallonian single charts . In Canada the single managed to chart at No. 55 , and in Australia it peaked at No. 44 . According to a press release by Interscope Records , as of March 25 , 2011 , " Hello Good Morning " has sold 1 million digital downloads worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video for " Hello Good Morning " was directed by Hype Williams , and premiered on May 11 , 2010 , through the group 's official VEVO account . Later on May 23 , 2010 , a behind the scenes video was released , revealing that the video was filmed in Agua Dulce , California and Los Angeles . Swizz Beatz , Rico Love and Rick Ross all make cameos in the video . The video uses a remix of the song which is the same as the album version , but features an introduction rap from Ross . Dawn Richard said the concept of the video was based on the 1995 film Heat starring Robert De Niro and Al Pacino . T.I. ' s scenes were amongst the last to be filmed , and took place in an apartment in Bel Aire , CA . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The opening scene begins with panoramic camera shots of a helicopter flying over Los Angeles , at night . Then during Rick Ross 's verse the female members of the group appear posing in the background while Ross raps for the camera . Swizz Beatz and Rico Love make cameos alongside Ross . In a third scene , Diddy can be seen driving through the city at night in a black Bugatti Veyron . For the song 's chorus , Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper take the lead , ordering drinks in a bar and enjoying the night club . A forth scene for T.I. ' s verse sees the camera focus on T.I. serenading two women in an apartment . Throughout the video the images flicker between the various scenes . In the final part of the video , and during the bridge , all three members of the group appear outside against a backdrop of thick smoke and bright red fireworks . There is a final flash of fireworks before the camera fades completely , to black . 
 = = = Remix videos = = = 
 The official remix video premiered on June 21 , 2010 , this version features Rick Ross and Nicki Minaj . The music video takes footage from the original version , but adds several new scenes . When Diddy drives through LA at night , the scene was refilmed with Minaj as his front seat passenger . Additionally there is another new scene where Minaj , in a blue curly wig , raps some of her verse against a dark backdrop . For the " Grime Remix " of the song , a completely new video was filmed Glasgow , Scotland on November 5 , 2010 and features cameos from Boy Better Know & Chipmunk . In this version , Diddy @-@ Dirty Money and Skepta pose for the camera in an elevator before joining Chipmunk and Boy Better Know , backstage at a gig . The cameras follow the group and their guests as they move around backstage partying and walking the streets at night . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Diddy – Dirty Money performed " Hello Good Morning " live for the first time on March 31 , 2010 , on the ninth season of American Idol . The next performance did not come until June 4 , 2010 , this time on Good Morning America . They then reprised the performance five days later on French TV show , Le Grand Journal . On June 12 , 2010 , the group performed ( with guest drummer Matt Helders of Arctic Monkeys ) on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross . Dirty Money later performed " Hello Good Morning " at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards on August 9 , 2010 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " Hello Good Morning " was recorded at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California and mixed at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , California . 
 Marcella Araica – songwriter , engineer 
 Richard " Rico Love " Butler – songwriter , vocal production 
 Smith Carlson – assistant engineer 
 Sean " Diddy " Combs – lead vocals 
 Steve " Rock Star " Dickey – engineer 
 Clifford " T.I. " Harris – songwriter , featured vocals 
 Nathaniel " Danja " Hills – songwriter , producer , instruments 
 Jaycen Joshua – mixing 
 Giancarlo Lino – mixing 
 Dirty Money ( Dawn Richard , Kalenna Harper ) – lead vocals , vocal production 
 Jared Newcomb – assistant engineer 
 Edward Sanders – assistant engineer 
 Matthew Testa – engineer 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Living River Siam = 
 Living River Siam ( Thai : <unk> ่ <unk> ้ <unk> ่ <unk> ; formerly South East Asia Rivers Network , or <unk> ) is a Thai non @-@ governmental organization ( NGO ) which analyzes the impact of Thailand 's various dam projects and coordinates the research of indigenous peoples to give Thai villagers the power to document the influence of local rivers and dams . Founded in 1999 , it gained prominence during the Pak Mun Dam study period in 2001 , when it developed a method for instructing villagers on how to document the effects of the dammed river on their lives . When the Thai government proposed other dam sites , Living River Siam took its research methods to the villages surrounding those sites as well . Today , the organization works with other NGOs in Southeast Asia to counter government @-@ sponsored research that encourages dam construction . 
 = = Pak Mun Dam protests = = 
 Living River Siam was launched on March 14 , 1999 , the International Rivers Day of Action , by a group of NGO workers and Thai academics . Its first action , on March 23 , was to support an occupation of the Pak Mun Dam site by 5 @,@ 000 villagers . The Pak Mun Dam , funded partially by the World Bank , was built in 1994 and slowly became the focus of national controversy . It received widespread complaints from Thai villagers and was the focus of the Assembly of the Poor 's 99 @-@ day , 20 @,@ 000 @-@ person protest in Bangkok in 1997 . The dam generates 0 @.@ 5 percent of Thailand 's electric capacity ; 40 percent of Thailand 's total electric capacity goes unused on an everyday basis . 
 On June 16 , 2001 , the Thai government under Thaksin Shinawatra agreed to open the sluice gates of the Pak Mun Dam for four months to allow studies to be conducted on its social impact ; this was later extended to 13 months . Coinciding with this agreement , the government announced that official studies would be conducted by Ubon Ratchathani University and a private team contracted by the National Economic and Social Development Board . The university received a budget of 10 million baht ( roughly US $ 280 @,@ 000 ) , and the government contractors , alleged to be the same group that recommended damming another river , received 94 million baht ( roughly US $ 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 ) , raising suspicions . Villagers thought that outside academics would not be able to make an objective or accurate study of the river because they were unfamiliar with local fish migration and habitats . 
 = = Thai Baan research = = 
 In response , Living River Siam developed <unk> <unk> Thai Baan ( <unk> ้ <unk> ) , or " research by Thai villagers " . This research is meant to circumvent the traditional approach to anthropological study by allowing villagers to investigate and document , in their own language and on their own terms , every aspect of their life on the river . The only function of the overseeing organization is to compile the villagers ' data and publish it for others to read . Living River Siam refers to this in English as " Thai Baan research " . 
 The Mun River research documented the spawning grounds , migration patterns , habitats , and preferred baits of 137 species of fish . Originally , there were 265 species in the river ; 220 of these disappeared when the river was dammed , and only 92 reappeared when the sluice gates were opened , meaning that the diversity of the Mun ecosystem had already been severely reduced by the dam . There were 104 species that migrated between the Mekong and Mun rivers , meaning the dam endangered the Mekong 's ecosystem as well . Thai villagers took photos of all the fish and counted the number of fish caught before and after the opening of the gates . Over 200 villagers volunteered for the study , and divided themselves up into groups to survey the sub @-@ ecosystems of rapids , channels , eddies , small waterfalls , drinking wells , don islands , bok hin pools , <unk> pools , wang pools , huu holes , <unk> hin stone pockets , kon shallows , kan underwater rapids , and <unk> fishing grounds . 
 The use of small and large fish in the local economy was analyzed . Researchers found that while the less common large fish are sold for profit , the diet of Pak Mun villagers consisted mostly of small fish which can be caught in both the wet and dry seasons . Small fish are eaten , sold , and traded with the hill peoples for rice . 
 The villages documented changes in their towns as a result of the opening of the sluice gates . Fishermen who had been forced to leave for the city returned to their homes , the increase in fish caused a boom in the rural economy , in fishing and tourism . Villagers were able to hold religious ceremonies in important riverside spaces . 
 = = = Government reaction and other responses = = = 
 The results of the Thai Baan research were supported by several academics , including <unk> <unk> of Chulalongkorn University . The Ubon Ratchathani University study also recommended keeping the sluice gates open for at least five years . However , the Thai government rejected all of the studies for unclear reasons and instead conducted a three @-@ day opinion poll of a random sample of Thais , after which it decided that the gates would stay closed for eight out of twelve months of the year . In 2007 , Prime Minister Surayud Chulanont decided to close the gates permanently , citing an alleged secret agreement between thousands of villagers and the Internal Security Operations Command . 
 The response from non @-@ governmental organizations has been more favorable . The Mekong Wetlands Biodiversity Programme ( MWBP ) , an international alliance managed by the United Nations Development Programme and World Conservation Union , has published a study on the methodology of Thai Baan research and coordinated their own study in Sri <unk> district in 2004 , concluding that it was more useful than top @-@ down styles of village research . The study overseen by the MWBP was cited in an academic journal and submitted to an international conference . Living River Siam 's spokesperson <unk> <unk> was invited to a United Nations Environment Programme conference on dams . 
 In 2002 the Thai government ’ s department of irrigation met the demands of Living River Siam and the Assembly of the Poor with a promise to halt all future dam projects , which was accepted with cautious optimism . To circumvent the issue of domestic damming , in 2007 the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand ( EGAT ) announced plans to build a series of dams on Burma 's <unk> River along its border with Thailand . Living River Siam opposed this plan , citing the threat of environmental destruction in Burma 's Shan , <unk> , and Karen states as well as Mae Hong Son Province . 
 = = Additional research = = 
 Since 2004 , Living River Siam has employed its research methods in other threatened locations across rural Thailand . 
 = = = Amphoe Chiang Khong = = = 
 The Mekong River remained free of dams until 1993 because of its complex system of rapids which wreck boats , and the unusual monsoon season which reverses the course of some of its branches . In 2004 , the Thai government made an agreement with China to open the river to commercial navigation by destroying rapids , which Thai Baan research had identified as important fish spawning grounds . On the Chinese side , dams were constructed . Living River Siam gathered additional Thai Baan surveys from 146 villagers in Amphoe Chiang Khong , which determined that the blasting of rapids had made the river water unsuitable for drinking and bathing , washed away many local riverside gardens , and decimated the populations of local plants and fish . In response to the 2004 studies , the Thai government suspended blasting on one of the rapids , the <unk> Pi Luang . 
 = = = Kaeng Sua Ten = = = 
 In 2006 , in response to renewed plans for dam construction in Kaeng Sua Ten , Living River Siam released a report on the people of Sa @-@ iap , Amphoe Song , <unk> Province ( part of Mae Yom National Park ) , based on their own experiences and history . It was called <unk> research , but the methodology was equivalent to the Thai Baan research . The report examined the ecosystem of the residents of Sa @-@ iap , the vegetables and fungi they subsisted on , medicinal herbs they used , local fauna , wood resources , and their culture . 
 The report divided Sa @-@ iap history into four periods . Before 1937 , the village was self @-@ sustaining and used both farming and gathering for the overwhelming majority of its needs . In 1937 , the Thai government allowed private companies to log the forest , destroying part of the villages ' infrastructure . In 1957 , the villagers entered the employ of the logging companies , causing internal and external conflict as well as increased reliance on unsustainable practices . Finally , in 1991 the villagers formed a conservation group , the Forest Lover Group , which the <unk> researchers agreed cut down on conflict . The mood of the villages has returned to one of mutual assistance and traditional customs . 
 = = = Rasi Salai Dam = = = 
 The Rasi Salai Dam was completed in 1994 , around the same time as the Pak Mun Dam , and received similar local complaints . The dam 's central reservoir was occupied for two years by villagers , until a July 2000 decision opened the sluice gates . From 2003 to 2004 , Living River Siam coordinated Thai Baan research in three districts : Amphoe Rasi Salai , Amphoe <unk> , and Amphoe <unk> Sai . The report examined village culture , ecology , biodiversity , agriculture , and food and water management . The impact of the closing and opening of the sluice gates was also examined . It was concluded that the dam reduced fish populations , but more importantly , flooded natural salt pits and spread them into rice and vegetable fields , destroying trees and crops . The government has not made a commitment to keep the Rasi Salai Dam out of commission , but as of 2008 the gates have not yet been closed . 
 = = = Mekong flooding = = = 
 In 2005 , and again in 2008 , the Mekong River flooded its banks , damaging hundreds of rural villages . Living River Siam joined with other NGOs to form the Thai People 's Network for Mekong , which pointed to dams in China as the primary cause of the flooding . An intergovernmental working group called the Mekong River Commission opposed these claims , saying China 's dams had little to do with the flood , although they also pressed China for data on the floodwaters . The back @-@ and @-@ forth was covered heavily in Thai press , which gave ample space to the statements of the People 's Network . 
 = = Seminars , coordination , and publications = = 
 Beginning in 2006 , Living River Siam began training other grassroots organizations in Thai Baan research , beginning with the Vietnam Rivers Network and expanding to a Chinese group in 2007 . In 2008 they worked with the Burma Rivers Network to conduct research on the <unk> River . They also assisted a United Nations @-@ funded NGO , the Mekong Wetlands Biodiversity Programme ( MWBP ) , with running Thai Baan research in 2004 . Living River Siam , along with the MWBP , organizes cross @-@ basin coordination between Thai Baan research groups . 
 Living River Siam has compiled the research and oral accounts of Thai villagers into many publications , which they make available on their website . Its published books document local knowledge about fish , the results of village research , a how @-@ to manual for Thai Baan research , and citizens ' guides to defending Thai rivers and communities . They also have produced posters of fish species and dams , pamphlets on fishing gear , and short documentaries about the river . 
 = Battle of the Plains of Abraham = 
 The Battle of the Plains of Abraham , also known as the Battle of Quebec , ( Bataille des Plaines d <unk> or Première bataille de Québec in French ) was a pivotal battle in the Seven Years ' War ( referred to as the French and Indian War in the United States ) . The battle , which began on 13 September 1759 , was fought by the British Army and Navy against the French Army on a plateau just outside the walls of Quebec City , on land that was originally owned by a farmer named Abraham Martin , hence the name of the battle . The battle involved fewer than 10 @,@ 000 troops between both sides , but proved to be a deciding moment in the conflict between France and Britain over the fate of New France , influencing the later creation of Canada . 
 The culmination of a three @-@ month siege by the British , the battle lasted about 15 minutes . British troops commanded by General James Wolfe successfully resisted the column advance of French troops and Canadien militia under General Louis @-@ Joseph , Marquis de Montcalm , employing new tactics that proved extremely effective against standard military formations used in most large European conflicts . Both generals were mortally wounded during the battle ; Wolfe received three gunshot wounds that ended his life within minutes of the beginning of the engagement and Montcalm died the next morning after receiving a musket ball wound just below his ribs . In the wake of the battle , the French evacuated the city ; their remaining military force in Canada and the rest of North America came under increasing pressure from British forces . 
 While the French forces continued to fight and prevailed in several battles after Quebec was captured , the British did not relinquish their hold on the virtually impregnable Citadelle . That tenacity carried over to other areas in North America ; within four years , France ceded most of its possessions in eastern North America to Great Britain in the Treaty of Paris . 
 The decisive success of the British forces and the subsequent capture of Quebec City formed part of what became known as the " Annus Mirabilis " in Great Britain . 
 = = Overview = = 
 As the Seven Years ' War entered its later stages through 1758 and 1759 , French forces and colonies in northeastern North America came under renewed attacks from British armies . In 1758 after defeat in July at the Battle of Carillon , the British took Louisbourg in August , causing Atlantic Canada to fall into British hands , and opening the sea route to attack Quebec . Fort Frontenac fell to the British in the same month , costing the French supplies for the Ohio Valley campaign . When some of the Indian supporters of the French made peace with the British , France was forced to draw its troops back . French leadership , specifically Governor de Vaudreuil and General Montcalm , were unsettled by the British successes . However , Quebec was still able to protect itself as the British prepared a three @-@ pronged attack for 1759 . 
 James Wolfe expected to lead 12 @,@ 000 men , but was greeted by only approximately 400 officers , 7 @,@ 000 regular troops , and 300 gunners . Wolfe 's troops were supported by a fleet of 49 ships and 140 smaller craft led by Admiral Charles Saunders . 
 In preparation for the fleet 's approach to Quebec , James Cook surveyed a large portion of the river , including a dangerous channel known as The Traverse . Cook 's ship was one of the first ships up the river , sounding the channel and guiding the fleet as it moved up , eventually landing Wolfe and his men on the Île d 'Orléans on 28 June . The French attempted to attack the fleet by sending seven fire ships downriver to disrupt the landing , but the ships fired too early and British sailors in longboats were able to pull the flaming craft clear of the fleet . The following day , Wolfe 's troops landed on the south bank of the river at Point Levis , nearly directly across the river from Quebec ; an artillery battery was established there in early July that nearly levelled the lower town by bombardment . 
 Despite an air of defeatism among the leadership , the professional French troops and New French militia defenders focused preparations for the British attacks on the Beauport Shore . Montcalm and his staff , Major @-@ General François de Gaston , Chevalier de Lévis , Colonel Louis Antoine de Bougainville , and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel de <unk> , distributed some 12 @,@ 000 troops in a nine @-@ kilometre @-@ long collection of fortified redoubts and batteries from the Saint @-@ Charles River to the Montmorency Falls , along the shallows of the river in areas that had previously been targeted by British attempts to land . Prior to the arrival of the British , a small fleet of supply ships had arrived in Quebec with much needed supplies . Those supplies , along with 500 reinforcements , were likely behind the lengthened siege . 
 Wolfe , on surveying the town of Beauport , found that the houses there had been barricaded and organized to allow for musket fire from within ; they were built in an unbroken line along the road , providing a formidable barrier . In addition , a screen of trees along the Montmorency River made an approach on that route dangerous . On 31 July , the first serious attempt by Wolfe 's troops to land on the northern shore led to the Battle of Beauport , also known as the Battle of Montmorency . Approximately 3 @,@ 500 troops , supported by a heavy bombardment , attempted to land , but were caught under fire in the river shallows . Members of the Louisbourg Grenadiers , who reached the beach , attempted a generally undisciplined charge on the French positions , but came under heavy fire ; a thunderstorm ended the fight and allowed Wolfe to pull his troops back after taking some 450 casualties to Montcalm 's 60 . 
 Some French officers felt the Montmorency defeat would be the last British attack ; Vaudreuil wrote afterwards that " I have no more anxiety about Quebec . Wolfe , I assure you , will make no progress … He contented himself with losing about five hundred of his best soldiers . " He predicted another attack would come within days . Others in the French camp felt the campaign was over . 
 For the remainder of the summer , Wolfe 's focus changed , possibly due to frustration with Montcalm 's tactics . His troops , along with American Rangers , attacked and destroyed small French settlements along the St. Lawrence . An estimated 1 @,@ 400 stone houses and manors were destroyed , and many colonists killed . The effort was likely an attempt to force Montcalm 's army out of its fortifications , but was unsuccessful . However , the attacks did reduce the amount of supplies available to the French , especially as the British navy , unable to control the St. Lawrence entirely , was successfully blockading the ports in France . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Through the summer siege , illness spread through the British camps . In August , Wolfe himself was bedridden , causing already low morale to slump even further among the British troops . With many men in camp hospitals , British fighting numbers were thinned , and Wolfe personally felt that a new attack was needed by the end of September , or Britain 's opportunity would be lost . In addition , his frustration with Montcalm 's defensive stance continued to grow . In a letter to his mother , Wolfe wrote , " The Marquis of Montcalm is at the head of a great number of bad soldiers , and I am at the head of a small number of good ones that wish for nothing so much as to fight him ; but the wary old fellow avoids an action , doubtful of the behaviour of his army . " Montcalm also expressed frustration over the long siege , relating that he and his troops slept clothed and booted , and his horse was always saddled in preparation for an attack . 
 After considering and rejecting a number of plans for landings on the north shore , a decision was made in late August by Wolfe and his brigadiers to land upriver of the city . If successful , such a landing would force Montcalm to fight , as a British force on the north shore of the St. Lawrence would cut his supply lines to Montreal . Initial suggestions for landing sites ranged as far as 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) up the St. Lawrence , which would have given the French troops one or two days to prepare for the attack . Following the failed British assault on Montmorency , Montcalm altered his deployment , sending Bougainville and a column of approximately 1 @,@ 500 regular troops , 200 cavalry , and a group of New French militia — some 3 @,@ 000 men in all — upriver to Cap @-@ Rouge to monitor the British ships upstream . He further strengthened his defences of the Beauport shore following the abandonment of the British camp at Montmorency , which he regarded as preparations for a descent ( amphibious attack ) on Beauport . In spite of warnings from local commanders , he did not view an upstream landing as a serious possibility . 
 The British , meanwhile , prepared for their risky deployment upstream . Troops had already been aboard landing ships and drifting up and down the river for several days when Wolfe on 12 September , made a final decision on the British landing site , selecting L 'Anse @-@ au @-@ Foulon . L 'Anse @-@ au @-@ Foulon is a cove situated southwest of the city , three kilometres upstream from Cap Diamant . It lies at the bottom of a 53 @-@ metre ( 174 ft ) high cliff leading to the plateau above , and was protected by a battery of guns . It is not known why Wolfe selected Foulon , as the original landing site was to be further up the river , in a position where the British would be able to develop a foothold and strike at Bougainville 's force to draw Montcalm out of Quebec and onto the plains . Brigadier @-@ General George Townshend wrote that " by some intelligence the General had , he has changed his mind as to the place he intended to land . " In his final letter , dated HMS Sutherland , 8 : 30 p.m. 12 September , Wolfe wrote : 
 Wolfe 's plan of attack depended on secrecy and surprise . His plan required that a small party of men should land by night on the north shore , climb the tall cliff , seize a small road , and overpower the garrison that protected it , allowing the bulk of his army ( 5 @,@ 000 men ) to ascend the cliff by the small road and then deploy for battle on the plateau . Even if the first landing party succeeded in their mission and the army was able to follow , such a deployment would still leave his forces inside the French line of defense with no immediate retreat but the river . It is possible that Wolfe 's decision to change the landing site was owing less to a desire for secrecy and more to his general disdain for his brigadiers ( a feeling that was reciprocated ) ; it is also possible that he was still suffering the effects of his illness and the opiates he used as painkillers . Anderson believes Wolfe ordered the attack believing the advanced guard would be repulsed , and anticipated dying gallantly with his men rather than returning home in disgrace . 
 = = Landing = = 
 Bougainville , tasked with the defence of the large area between Cap Diamant and Cap Rouge , was upstream with his troops at Cap Rouge on the night of 12 September , and missed seeing numerous British ships moving downstream . A camp of approximately 100 militia led by Captain Louis Du Pont <unk> de Vergor , who had unsuccessfully faced the British four years previously at Fort Beauséjour , had been assigned to watch the narrow road at L 'Anse @-@ au @-@ Foulon which followed a streambank , the <unk> Saint @-@ Denis . On the night of 12 September and morning of 13 September , however , the camp may have contained as few as 40 men , as others were off harvesting . Vaudreuil and others had expressed their concern at the possibility of L 'Anse @-@ au @-@ Foulon being vulnerable , but Montcalm dismissed them , saying 100 men would hold off the army until daylight , remarking , " It is not to be supposed that the enemies have wings so that they can in the same night cross the river , disembark , climb the obstructed <unk> , and scale the walls , for which last operation they would have to carry ladders . " 
 Sentries did detect boats moving along the river that morning , but they were expecting a French supply convoy to pass that night — a plan that had been changed without Vergor being notified . When the boats , loaded with the first wave of British troops , were challenged , a French @-@ speaking officer , either a Captain Fraser or Captain Donald McDonald of the 78th Fraser Highlanders , was able to answer the challenge in excellent French , allaying suspicion . 
 The boats , however , had drifted slightly off course : instead of landing at the base of the road , many soldiers found themselves at the base of a slope . A group of 24 volunteers led by Colonel William Howe with fixed bayonets were sent to clear the picket along the road , and climbed the slope , a manoeuvre that allowed them to come up behind Vergor 's camp and capture it quickly . Wolfe followed an hour later when he could use an easy access road to climb to the plain . Thus , by the time the sun rose over the Plains of Abraham , Wolfe 's army had a solid foothold at the top of the cliffs . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The plateau was undefended save for Vergor 's camp , as Vaudreuil had ordered one of the French regiments to relocate to the east of the city not long before the landing . Had the immediate defenders been more numerous , the British might have been unable to deploy or even been pushed back . An officer who would normally have patrolled the cliffs regularly through the night was unable to on the night of the 12th because one of his horses had been stolen and his two others were lame . The first notice of the landing came from a runner who had fled from Vergor 's camp , but one of Montcalm 's aides felt the man was mad and sent him away , then went back to bed . Saunders had staged a diversionary action off Montmorency , firing on the shore emplacements through the night and loading boats with troops , many of them taken from field hospitals ; this preoccupied Montcalm . 
 Montcalm was taken aback to learn of the British deployment , and his response has been regarded as precipitate . Though he might have awaited reinforcement by Bougainville 's column ( allowing simultaneous frontal and rear attacks on the British position ) or avoided battle while he concentrated his forces , or even yielded the city to Wolfe , he instead elected to confront Wolfe 's force directly . Had he waited , the British would have been entirely cut off — they had nowhere to go but back down the Foulon , and would have been under fire the entire way . To an artillery officer named <unk> , Montcalm explained his decision thus : " We cannot avoid action ; the enemy is entrenching , he already has two pieces of cannon . If we give him time to establish himself , we shall never be able to attack him with the troops we have . " 
 = = = First engagements = = = 
 In total , Montcalm had 13 @,@ 390 regular troops , Troupes de la Marine , and militia available in Quebec City and along the Beauport shore , as well as 200 cavalry , 200 artillery ( including the guns of Quebec ) , 300 native warriors ( including many Odawa under Charles de Langlade ) , and 140 Acadian volunteers , but most of these troops did not participate in the action . Many of the militia were inexperienced ; the Acadian , Canadian , and indigenous irregulars were more used to guerilla warfare . By contrast , the British troops were almost all regulars . 
 On the morning of 13 September , Wolfe 's army formed a line first with their backs to the river , then spread out across the Plains with its right anchored by the bluff along the St. Lawrence and its left by a bluff and thick wood above the St. Charles River . While the regular French forces were approaching from Beauport and Quebec , the Canadian militia and native sharpshooters engaged the British left flank , sheltering in the trees and scrub ; the militia held these positions throughout the battle and fell back on this line during the general retreat , eventually holding the bridge over the St. Charles River . 
 The British troops , numbering approximately 3 @,@ 300 , formed into a shallow horseshoe formation that stretched across the width of the Plains , the main firing line being roughly one kilometre long . In order to cover the entire plain , Wolfe was forced to array his soldiers two ranks deep , rather than the more conventional three ranks . On the left wing , regiments under Townshend exchanged fire with the militia in the scrub and captured a small collection of houses and gristmill to anchor the line . The defenders pushed the British from one house , but were repelled and , in retreat , lit several houses on fire to keep them out of enemy hands . Smoke from these fires wound up masking the British left , and may have confused Montcalm as to the width of the lines . As Wolfe 's men waited for the defenders , the steady fire became intense enough that Wolfe ordered his men to lie down amid the high grass and brush . 
 As French troops arrived from Beauport , Montcalm , one of few mounted men on the field , decided that a swift assault was the only way to dislodge the British from their position . Accordingly , he deployed the forces immediately available in and near Quebec City and prepared an immediate attack , without waiting for further reinforcements from the Beauport shore . He arrayed his approximately 3 @,@ 500 soldiers into place , his best regulars three deep , others six deep and his poorest regiment in column . At approximately 10 a.m. , Montcalm , riding his dark horse and waving his sword to encourage his men , ordered a general advance on the British line . 
 As a European @-@ trained military leader , Montcalm 's instinct was for large , set @-@ piece battles in which regiments and soldiers moved in precise order . Such actions required a disciplined soldiery , painstakingly drilled for as long as 18 months on the parade ground , trained to march in time , change formation at a word , and retain cohesion in the face of bayonet charges and musket volleys . Though his regular regiments ( the " troupes de terre " or " metropolitans " ) were adept at such formal warfare , in the course of the campaign their ranks had been replenished by less professional militiamen , whose talents at forest warfare emphasised the individual : they tended to fire early and then drop to the ground to reload , thus reducing the effect of concentrated fire at close range . 
 = = = Battle on the plains = = = 
 As the French approached , the British lines held their fire . Wolfe had devised a firing method for stopping French column advances in 1755 that called for the centre — in this case , the 43rd and 47th Foot regiments — to hold fire while waiting for the advancing force to approach within 30 yards ( 27 m ) , then open fire at close range . 
 The French held their fire and both armies waited for two or three minutes . The French finally fired two disorganized volleys . 
 Wolfe had ordered his soldiers to charge their muskets with two balls each in preparation for the engagement . Captain John Knox , serving with the 43rd Foot , wrote in his journal that as the French came within range , the regiments " gave them , with great calmness , as remarkable a close and heavy discharge as I ever saw . " After the first volley , the British lines marched forward a few paces towards the shocked French force and fired a second general volley that shattered the attackers and sent them into retreat . 
 Wolfe , positioned with the 28th Foot and the Louisbourg Grenadiers , had moved to a rise to observe the battle ; he had been struck in the wrist early in the fight , but had wrapped the injury and continued on . Volunteer James Henderson , with the Louisbourg Grenadiers , had been tasked with holding the hill , and reported afterwards that within moments of the command to fire , Wolfe was struck with two shots , one low in the stomach and the second , a mortal wound in the chest . Knox wrote that one of the soldiers near Wolfe shouted " They run , see how they run . " Wolfe , on the ground , opened his eyes and asked who was running . Upon being told that the French had broken , he gave several orders , then turned on his side and said " Now , God be praised , I will die in peace " , and died . 
 With Wolfe dead and several other key officers injured , British troops fell into a disorganised pursuit of the retreating French troops . The 78th Fraser Highlanders were ordered by Brigadier @-@ General James Murray to pursue the French with their swords , but were met near the city by a heavy fire from a floating battery covering the bridge over the St. Charles River as well as militia that remained in the trees . The 78th took the highest number of casualties of all British units in the battle . 
 An eyewitness with the 78th Highlanders ( Dr. Robert Macpherson ) wrote three days after the battle : 
 The Highlanders pursued them to the very Sally Port of the town . The Highlanders returned towards the main body . When the highlanders were gathered together , they lay 'd on a separate attack against a large body of Canadians on our flank that were posted in a small village and a Bush of woods . Here , after a wonderful escape all day , we suffered great loss both in Officers and men but at last drove them under the cover of their cannon which <unk> did us considerable loss . " 
 Townshend took charge of the British forces and realised that Bougainville 's column was approaching from the British rear , having taken some time to arrive from Cap Rouge . He quickly formed up two battalions from the confused troops on the field and turned them to meet the oncoming French , a day @-@ saving manoeuvre ; instead of attacking with a well rested and ready force , Bougainville retreated while the rest of Montcalm 's army slipped back across the St. Charles . 
 During the retreat , Montcalm , still mounted , was struck by either canister shot from the British artillery or repeated musket fire , suffering injuries to the lower abdomen and thigh . He was able to make it back into the city , but his wounds were mortal and he died early the next morning . He was buried in a shell crater left in the floor of the Ursuline chapel by a British shell . The battle resulted in similar numbers of casualties on both sides of the field ; the French had 644 men killed or injured , while the British were left with 658 killed or wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the wake of the battle , a state of confusion spread through the French troops . Governor de Vaudreuil , who later wrote to his government and put the full blame for the French rout on the deceased Montcalm , decided to abandon Quebec and the Beauport shore , ordering all of his forces to march west and eventually join up with Bougainville , leaving the garrison in Quebec under the command of Jean @-@ Baptiste Nicolas Roch de Ramezay . 
 Meanwhile , the British , first under the command of Townshend and later with Murray in charge , settled in to besiege the city in conjunction with Saunders ' fleet . Within days , on 18 September , de Ramezay , Townshend and Saunders signed the Articles of Capitulation of Quebec and the city was turned over to British control . The remaining French forces positioned themselves on the Jacques @-@ Cartier River west of the city . 
 The British Navy was forced to leave the St. Lawrence shortly after the capture of Quebec due to pack ice closing the mouth of the river . Before the ice left the rivers in April , the Chevalier de Lévis , Montcalm 's successor as French commander , marched his 7 @,@ 000 troops to Quebec . James Murray , the British commander , had experienced a terrible winter , in which scurvy had reduced his garrison to only 4 @,@ 000 . On 28 April 1760 , Lévis ' forces met and defeated the British at the Battle of Sainte @-@ Foy , immediately west of the city ( near the site of Université Laval today ) . This battle proved bloodier than that of the Plains of Abraham , with about 850 casualties on the French side and 1 @,@ 100 on the British side . The British were defeated in the battle , but were able to withdraw within the walls of Quebec , which was now under siege . A lack of artillery and ammunition , combined with British improvements to the fortifications , meant that the French were unable to take the city before the arrival of the British fleet in mid @-@ May which defeated Levis ' support ships . A naval battle fought at Quiberon Bay , just off the coast of France , proved the decisive battle for this part of New France . The Royal Navy destroyed the French fleet , meaning France could not send a reserve force to save New France . The success of the French army 's offensive against Quebec in the spring of 1760 had depended on the dispatch of a French armada , with fresh troops and supplies . 
 At Montréal that September , Lévis and 2 @,@ 000 troops were confronted with 17 @,@ 000 British and American troops . The French capitulated on 8 September 1760 , and the British took possession of Montreal . The Treaty of Paris was signed in 1763 to end the war and gave possession of parts of New France to Great Britain , including Canada and the eastern half of French Louisiana — lying between the Mississippi River and the Appalachian Mountains . 
 = = Legacy of the Plains = = 
 Today , while much of the foreshore along the base of the cliffs that were scaled by William Howe 's men the morning of the battle has been taken over by industry , the Plains of Abraham themselves are preserved within one of Canada 's National Urban Parks . There is a monument on the site of the Battle of Sainte @-@ Foy . 
 In 2009 , a number of activities were proposed to commemorate the 250th anniversary of the Battle of the Plains of Abraham . A plan to hold a reenactment of the battle itself ( as well as a reenactment of the subsequent French victory of 1760 at the Battle of Sainte @-@ Foy ) was cancelled due to threats of public disorder . Leaders of separatist parties described the event as a slap in the face for Quebecers of French ancestry and as an insult for the francophone majority . Some sovereigntist groups threatened or made indirect threats by stating that if the event took place , there could be violence . The movement against re @-@ enactment and these threats of violence led the National Battlefields Commission to cancel the event . 
 Another commemorative event was proposed for the anniversary , the Moulin à paroles . Thousands gathered on the Plains of Abraham to listen to recitations of 140 significant texts from Quebec history , including the 1970 FLQ Manifesto . The inclusion of that document in the event led to condemnations and a boycott from federalist politicians and the withdrawal of some government funding for the event . The Moulin à paroles took place without incident . 
 = The Blessing Way ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " The Blessing Way " is the first episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on September 22 , 1995 . It was directed by R.W. Goodwin , and written by series creator Chris Carter . " The Blessing Way " featured guest appearances by Floyd Red Crow Westerman , Peter Donat and Jerry Hardin , and introduced John Neville as the Well @-@ Manicured Man . The episode helped explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " The Blessing Way " earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 3 , being watched by 19 @.@ 94 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder is found near death on a Navajo reservation , and is nursed back to health by the tribe , led by Albert Hosteen ( Westerman ) . Meanwhile , Scully investigates an implant found in her neck , and fears that her life — and those of her family — may be in danger . " The Blessing Way " is part of a three @-@ episode storyline , carrying on from the second season finale " Anasazi " , and continuing in the next episode , " Paper Clip " . 
 Series creator Chris Carter , who called the episode one of his favorite episodes to write , created the episode as a way to explore how the character of Fox Mulder would react to the death of his father . The episode contained several elaborate special effects ; effects producer Mat Beck considered the sequence where Mulder has a vision of Deep Throat and his father to be one of the most difficult of the season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Two Grey Hills , New Mexico , Albert Hosteen ( Floyd Red Crow Westerman ) and his family are beaten by the Men in Black as they search for the whereabouts of Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is pursued by a black helicopter before soldiers retrieve her printed copies of Albert 's translations of the digital tape . Scully denies having the original tape , saying it is in Mulder 's possession . Upon returning to Washington , the FBI puts Scully on mandatory leave and forces her to turn in her badge and gun . Upon entering Mulder 's office , she finds the tape missing . 
 Meanwhile , in New York City , The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) appears before the Syndicate , who question him over the whereabouts of the tape . Mulder , alive but severely wounded , is found buried under some rocks near the buried boxcar . Hosteen has Mulder taken to a Navajo sweat lodge to be healed during a " Blessing Way " ritual . During the ritual , Mulder has ghostly visions of Deep Throat and his father , who urge him to recover and continue his search for the truth . 
 Melvin Frohike visits Scully 's apartment and shows her a newspaper article about Kenneth Soona 's murder . When she returns to FBI headquarters , the metal detector curiously goes off . Scully presents Skinner with the newspaper article , thinking that the data from Soona 's death can clear Mulder in his father 's murder . Skinner , however , refuses to do any follow @-@ up on it . Leaving the building , Scully has a hunch upon seeing the metal detector again that leads to locating metal in the back of her neck . Scully sees a doctor , who removes a small metal implant . 
 Scully 's sister Melissa urges her to see a hypnotherapist to recover lost memories of her abduction . Scully heads there , but becomes scared and stops the session . Returning home , Scully finds Skinner leaving her apartment and driving off ; he later denies being there . Mulder , recovered from the Blessing Way ritual , is told by Albert that he cannot bathe or change clothes for four days . Scully heads to Boston to attend Bill 's funeral , where she introduces herself to Mulder 's mother , Teena . At the cemetery , Scully is approached by a Syndicate member known as the Well @-@ Manicured Man , who warns her that she is about to be killed , either by a pair of assassins or by someone she knows . Mulder goes to Connecticut and questions Teena about an old photo of his father standing with the other members of the Syndicate in front of a mysterious building . 
 Melissa calls Scully and tells her she is coming over . After receiving a call from someone who immediately hangs up , Scully leaves her apartment and tells Melissa that she 'll head to her home instead . As she leaves , Skinner pulls up in his car , telling her they need to speak in private . Melissa shows up soon afterwards and is mistakenly shot by Luis Cardinal , who is hiding there with Alex Krycek . Realizing they shot the wrong person , the two flee . Meanwhile , after taking Skinner to Mulder 's apartment , Scully holds him at gunpoint , believing he is the traitor the Well @-@ Manicured Man spoke of . Skinner tells Scully that he is in possession of the digital tape . Just then , someone steps outside the door . This distracts Scully enough for Skinner to pull out his gun on her . 
 = = Production = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter felt this was one of his favorite episodes to write , as he found it interesting to explore how the character of Fox Mulder would react to the death of his father . Carter had recently lost a parent himself when he began work on the episode . Frank Spotnitz said of the episode " The expectations were very high coming after a summer 's worth of anticipation to see how Mulder got out of the boxcar . We knew we had to answer that question and still leave an intriguing enough dilemma at the end of the show to bring viewers back for the third and final part . I also thought it was a big gamble to do all that Indian mysticism stuff . I thought a lot of people would not necessarily respond to that . So I was nervous about that , but very excited about the Scully storyline and the way all of that played out with Mulder and Skinner . " Carter attended Navajo chants and rituals to ensure the accuracy of the events in this episode , after being alerted to inaccuracies in the previous episode by Navajo scholars . A sand painter was brought in to create the two sand paintings for the Blessing Way sequence , which took an entire day to create . The scenes set in New Mexico were filmed in the same Vancouver quarry that had been used as a stand @-@ in in the previous episode , " Anasazi " , the repainting of which required only minor touch @-@ ups . 
 Visual effects producer Mat Beck considered the sequence where Fox Mulder has a vision of Deep Throat and his father the most difficult of the season . The end of the episode reads " In Memoriam , Larry Wells , 1946 - 1995 . " Wells was a costume designer on the show . Mark Snow slightly changed the piano melody from the opening theme music ( and the corresponding shortened theme in the credits ) from the first two seasons in this episode . The music would remain unchanged for several years . The title of the episode refers to the Navajo ceremony of the Blessing Way . This is the first episode where Mitch Pileggi is credited under Also Starring in the opening credits . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Blessing Way " premiered on the Fox network on September 22 , 1995 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on September 12 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 3 with a 22 share , meaning that roughly 12 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 22 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 19 @.@ 94 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing , making it the most viewed episode of the third season . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Blessing Way " received mixed reviews from critics . The episode , along with both other parts of the story arc , were listed concurrently as the second @-@ best episode of the series by Den of Geek 's Nina Sordi . Sordi noted that the plotline " laid the groundwork for the mythology arc for the rest of the series " , adding that it " brought much more significance to what is to come " . John Keegan , writing for Critical Myth , gave the episode a largely positive review and rated it a 10 out of 10 . Keegan described it as the " perfect counterpoint to Anasazi " and a " strong beginning to the third season " . Other reviews were more mixed . In an overview of the third season in Entertainment Weekly , " The Blessing Way " was rated a B + . The episode was derided for its " corny dream sequence and high @-@ flown cosmic hooey " , although the introduction of the Well @-@ Manicured Man and Mitch Pileggi 's portrayal of Walter Skinner were seen as highlights . Writing for the A.V. Club , Todd VanDerWerff panned the episode 's " pseudo @-@ mystical bullshit " , rating the episode a B- . He felt that the resolution of the cliffhanger from the previous episode " Anasazi " — that of Mulder 's apparent death — was poorly handled , and that the character of Albert Hosteen was perhaps the worst in the series . However , the introduction of plot threads such as Scully 's implant and the alien @-@ human hybrids were deemed positive factors . 
 David Duchovny was somewhat disappointed with the episode , hoping he would have had a chance to do more in an episode that was primarily a symbolic journey for him rather than a real one . The actor said " I like the psychology , and I like the thinking that went into the episode as a viewer . As an actor , I felt like an opportunity passed me by . If I had to do any episode over again , it would be that one . " The actor called the episode in 1995 the greatest missed opportunity they had . Chris Carter disagreed , stating that Fox Mulder 's role in the episode was the right way to do it , and that the dramatic weight for the episode had to shift from Mulder to Dana Scully . 
 = Ratu ( band ) = 
 Ratu was an Indonesian music duo formed in 1999 with Maia Estianty , then the wife of musician Ahmad Dhani , on instruments and Pinkan Mambo on vocals . Ratu entered the Indonesian musical scene with their first album , Bersama ( Together ; 2003 ) . After a short break caused by Mambo 's departure in 2004 , the group formed anew with Mulan Kwok as vocalist . This new line @-@ up proved more successful , with their most successful songs – " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends with Benefits " ) and " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " <unk> " ) – released in this period ; both song titles later became common terms in the Indonesian vocabulary . The group 's second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ; 2006 ) , sold 200 @,@ 000 copies on the day of its release , a record for an album by an Indonesian female group . The group dissolved in 2007 . 
 Ratu was the most successful female Indonesian music group of the 2000s . Aside from their music , they were known for their physical appearance and wide coverage in infotainment media . Through their choice in costumes , Ratu popularised Harajuku styles in Indonesia . Throughout their career , the band won numerous awards ; they were the first musical act to twice be declared " Artist of the Year " and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " at the MTV Ampuh music awards . This success inspired numerous other groups to follow in their tracks . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Formation and first record = = = 
 Maia Ahmad , at the time wife of the musician Ahmad Dhani , had been a background singer for her husband 's band Dewa 19 since 1993 . She had been musically inclined since childhood and had formed a band while a teenager . She intended to be like her husband and enter the music industry as a headline performer . In a later interview , she explained her motivations : " I wasn 't following on the success of Krisdayanti dan <unk> , a husband and wife who had made an album together . I just started when I did . Dhani only gave me the time then , as our children were getting older and I could focus on my music . " With Dhani 's guidance , in 1999 Maia decided to form a duo consisting of a singer and a musician , with the name Ratu . The concept was based on that of international bands like Roxette and Savage Garden . Maia set herself as a keyboardist , then began to look for a vocalist . 
 Pinkan Mambo , who at the time sang at a café , was working towards a career as a professional musician . In mid @-@ 1999 , she met Dhani at a café in Pondok Indah Mall , South Jakarta . She introduced herself to him , saying that she had a good voice . When Dhani asked how good , she replied " Amazing . [ ... ] as good as Mariah Carey . " Mambo then received Dhani 's number , which she used to call him repeatedly and ask for an album . On the fifth day , Maia answered the phone and eventually offered Mambo the position of vocalist with Ratu . Although Mambo wanted to be a soloist , she accepted and had an audition at Maia 's home , where she was accepted before she could finish singing . Before she began work with Ratu , Pinkan was given training as a backing vocalist for Dewa 19 . 
 After three years of preparation , in January 2003 Ratu launched their debut album Bersama with Sony Music Indonesia . The album included ten songs , seven written by Maia and three by Dhani ; Maia also did the arrangement and served as backing vocalist . Other musicians involved on the album included Bintang ( bass ) , Denny <unk> , Andra Ramadhan and Taras ( guitar ) , Agil <unk> ( drums ) , <unk> ( flute ) , Sa <unk> ( strings ) and Henry <unk> ( violin ) . The music was R & B @-@ influenced , with added piano for a " feminine touch . " With the album several singles , " Aku Baik @-@ Baik Saja " ( " I 'm Fine " ) , " <unk> Aku <unk> <unk> " ( " Blame Me For Loving You Too Much " ) and " Jangan Bilang Siapa Siapa " ( " Don 't Tell Anyone " ) , were released . This first album was well @-@ received and sold more than 250 @,@ 000 copies . Ratu also provided a new sound , as the Indonesian music industry of the time was dominated by male groups . Ratu won Best Newcomer at the 2003 Clear Top Ten Awards . At the 2006 MTV Ampuh awards , Ratu was awarded Artist of the Year and Group / Duo Artist of The Year . 
 After the success of Bersama , Maia and Mambo began to work on a second album , scheduled for a 2004 release . However , on 14 October 2004 Mambo announced she was leaving the group amidst widespread media coverage of her being pregnant outside of wedlock . Reports indicated that she may have left the group because of Maia 's more dominant personality and conflicts between the two . Maia , left as the only member of the band , insisted that it was not dissolving , and would soon hold auditions for a new vocalist . As a temporary measure , several singers were contracted to perform with Maia , although not signed as members . Tia , a finalist in Akademi <unk> <unk> ( AFI ) , came under consideration for the position , but was unable to accept as she was still contracted to AFI . 
 = = = Line @-@ up change and success = = = 
 While looking for a new vocalist , Maia met Mulan Kwok , a performer at Barbados Cafe in <unk> Kemang , Jakarta , in December 2004 . Of this meeting , Maia later recalled " When I met Mulan it was like meeting a new lover . I saw her and I liked her . Just fell in love . " Mulan was a café singer from Bandung who sang with <unk> Band . She was asked to audition for the role and ultimately selected ; her appointment was announced at a press conference on 7 April 2005 . With Mulan , the group 's concept , originally " elegant " , became " coquettish and sexy " . The group 's musical style also changed ; while originally R & B with light piano , it was changed to a rock sound with dominant guitars . 
 On 30 August 2005 Ratu released a compilation album entitled Ratu & Friends which included two new songs from the group , " Teman Tapi Mesra " ( " Friends With Benefits " ) and a cover of Vina Panduwinata 's " Di Dadaku Ada <unk> " ( " In My Chest there is You " ) . " Teman Tapi Mesra " was an overnight hit in Indonesia , Malaysia , and Singapore and enjoyed by both adults and children alike . The term " Teman Tapi Mesra " , often abbreviated TTM , became widely used to describe those in a physical relationship without an emotional one . The ringback tone for " Teman Tapi Mesra " held the top position in Malaysia for several weeks . In Indonesia , the ringback tone saw more than a million downloads . The album sold more than 400 @,@ 000 copies and was certified double platinum . Ratu then put on a forty @-@ city concert tour throughout Indonesia with the band <unk> ; the Rock in Love tour began with a concert at the Jakarta Convention Center on 20 February 2006 . 
 On 22 May 2006 Ratu released their second studio album , No . Satu ( Number One ) . Like on Bersama , most of the songs recorded were written by Maia . Dhani contributed three songs , while Mulan helped write the song " Seribu Cinta " ( " A Thousand Loves " ) . No . Satu also involved musicians such as Yoyo Padi , Denny <unk> , <unk> Item , and Bintang . Two singles from the album , " Lelaki Buaya Darat " ( " Womanizer " ) and " Dear Diary " , were hits , as was the album ; it sold 200 @,@ 000 copies on the day of its release , a record for a work by a female Indonesian group . " Lelaki Buaya Darat " was banned in Malaysia because of its perceived negative connotations . The band tried to change the song 's title , but this was unsuccessful . However , some radio stations in Malaysia still played the song . 
 Throughout 2005 and 2006 Ratu was one of Indonesia 's dominant bands and often used in product advertisements . Both members explored different aspects of show business . Maia acted in Extravaganza , a comedy show on Trans TV , while Mulan starred in several television films . The band 's clothing , inspired by the Harajuku fashion district in Japan , made teenagers interested in street clothing . The band also received widespread coverage in infotainment media , with much gossip about Dhani 's relationship with Mulan . Noting the role that infotainment media had played in the band 's success , Maia said " Ratu should give thanks to all those reporters who gave us fame with their gossip . " 
 Ratu received numerous awards during this period . At the tenth Anugerah Musik Indonesia , the band received three nominations and won Best Produced Work for " Teman Tapi Mesra " . Maia and Mulan were also awarded Top Singer at the SCTV Awards , winning over established stars Agnes Monica , Ari Lasso , Iwan <unk> , dan Krisdayanti . Ada the MTV Indonesia Awards , they were nominated in two categories . At the MTV Ampuh Awards , Ratu was declared Artist of the Year and " Group / Duo Artist of The Year " , making them the first group to win both awards twice . 
 = = = Dissolution = = = 
 At the end of 2006 , Ahmad Dhani threatened to disband the group if Maia did not cut back on her performance schedule ; he felt she was too busy , to the point of forgetting their children . Dhani later withdrew his threat , but – after becoming manager – limited the group to one performance a week . He then fired the group 's manager , Vita Ramona , who threatened to bring Dhani to court if he did not apologize for perceived defamation . This situation was exacerbated when Mulan publicly complained of not receiving her share of the band 's money and a lack of transparency in the management . She resigned on 30 January 2007 , after waiting ten days for her open letter to the management to receive a reply . Mulan then hired a lawyer and sued Dhani , resulting in her contract fee being returned . 
 After Mulan left , Maia continued to perform as Ratu own her own . She participated in the concert tour A Mild Live <unk> with Shanty , Bunga Citra <unk> , and <unk> — a winner of Indonesian Idol . Later domestic troubles between Dhani and Maia led to the group to dissolve . At the end of 2007 , the group 's name became an object of contention between the two . Dhani claimed the name " Ratu " as his intellectual right and said that he had registered it with the General Directorate of Intellectual Rights . He forbid Maia , who was then looking for a new partner , to use the name . 
 = = Later activities = = 
 At the beginning of 2008 , Maia launched Duo Maia with her new partner Mey Chan . Unlike Ratu , Duo Maia was conceived as a vocal group and Maia was predominantly a vocalist . Meanwhile , Mulan signed with Republik Cinta Management under Ahmad Dhani . Mulan released a solo album entitled <unk> Tuhan <unk> <unk> ( God 's Sexiest Creature ) in 2008 and changed her stage name to Mulan Jameela . Mambo , the Ratu 's original vocalist , had already released a solo album , entitled Aku Tahu Rasanya ( I Know How It Feels ) in 2006 . In 2009 , " Teman Tapi Mesra " was bought by <unk> , a Swedish girl band , and released in the European market as the English @-@ language " Dreaming of the Time " . 
 Ratu was followed by numerous Indonesian duos attempting to follow in its success . Towards the end of the 2000s , Ahmad Dhani did so as well , coaching the duos <unk> and The Virgin . None of these groups were as successful as Ratu , and , by 2011 , Korean @-@ inspired boy and girl bands had become dominant . Maia later said that Ratu had been successful because it was the only one of its kind , that " there were benefits to being a pioneer " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Bersama ( Together ; 2003 ) 
 Ratu & Friends ( 2005 ) 
 No . Satu ( Number One ; 2006 ) 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 Rock in Love ( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 A Mild Live <unk> ( 2007 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
