 = Cyclone Percy = 
 Cyclone Percy was the seventh named storm of the 2004 – 05 South Pacific cyclone season and the fourth and final severe tropical cyclone to form during the 2004 – 05 South Pacific cyclone season . 
 Percy was also the most damaging of the February cyclones as it battered the Cook Islands , which were still recovering from the impacts of Cyclones Meena , Nancy and Olaf . Percy then devastated the island of Tokelau , leaving many homeless and millions in dollars in property damages ( although exact damage figures are unavailable ) . Because of warnings in anticipation of the storm , there were no deaths and there were only a few injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On February 23 , the Fiji Meteorological Service 's Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre in Nadi reported that Tropical Disturbance 10F , had developed within the monsoon trough about 700 kilometres ( 435 mi ) to the west of the Tuvaluan atoll : Funafuti . 
 10F was first identified as a tropical disturbance embedded in an active monsoon trough at 23 / 0000 UTC , approximately 380 miles to the west of Funafuti and moving eastwards about 05 to 10 knots . The system was then located just south of a 250 @-@ hPa ridge axis , in a diffluent region . Shear and diurnal variations were evidently influencing development . SST was around 31 ° C. Later on the 24th , shear had decreased markedly . Outflow was favourable and developing in all quadrants . Overnight , the depression underwent explosive development with the deep convection increasing spatially and in organization whilst cooling . Spiral bands were also wrapping tightly around the <unk> . By 24 / 1800 UTC , <unk> was named Tropical Cyclone Percy , while located roughly 100 miles to the east of Funafuti and moving east @-@ southeast at 14 knots under a deep west @-@ northwest steering flow . 
 A discernible area of low pressure formed east of Tonga on February 23 . The area of low pressure moved eastward , where it strengthened into Tropical Depression 10F a day later . Since the depression was located in an area of low wind shear and warm water temperatures , it was able to quickly strengthen into Tropical Storm Percy . At this point in time , Percy was located 120 miles ( 190 km ) east of <unk> , Tuvalu , and was moving towards the east @-@ southeast at 14 kt ( 16 mph , 26 km / h ) . On February 26 , Percy reached Category 1 status , while located 400 miles ( 644 km ) north of American Samoa . While Percy moved east @-@ southeast , a shortwave trough developed southwest of the storm . The trough caused the cyclone to intensify even further to a Category 3 storm as it passed between <unk> and Swains Island . Percy then reached Category 4 status north of Pago Pago as it winds reached over 135 mph ( 115 knots , 213 km / h ) and the barometric pressure at its center fell to 925 millibars . On February 27 , Cyclone Percy encountered a high pressure ridge which slowed its forward speed . Because of this , the cyclone 's structure became elliptical , which caused the cyclone to weaken back to Category 3 status . By February 28 , Percy bypassed the Pukapuka and Nassau Islands as a Category 3 cyclone as it continued to move east @-@ southeast . 
 By then , the cyclone was re @-@ organizing as the storm steered to the southeast . On March 2 , Percy reached its second peak intensity . Its winds reached 160 mph ( 140 knots , 265 km / h ) on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and an estimated barometric pressure of 900 millibars . Cyclone Percy maintained Category 5 status for 18 hours , while located 110 mi ( 177 km ) west of Palmerston Island . After reaching Category 5 status , Percy began to weaken , due to increasing wind shear . During its weakening phase , Cyclone Percy passed south of Tropical Depression 20S . Pulled by an upper level trough , Percy swung to the east , passing Tropical Depression 24S in the process , before being caught up by another trough . By March 4 , the center of Percy became detached from the main area of convection and Percy quickly weakened to a tropical storm . Tropical Storm Percy then quickly accelerated to 20 kt ( 23 mph , 37 km / h ) as it became an extratropical storm . Percy briefly entered the New Zealand area of responsibility before becoming extratropical at 1200 UTC . By March 5 , the remnants of Percy finally dissipated 700 mi ( 1127 km ) southwest of Rarotonga . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 When Percy quickly reached cyclone strength , forecasters began to issue watches and warnings for the American Samoa and Tokelau areas , which were impacted by earlier storms Nancy and Olaf . As Percy continued to move eastward , forecasters predicted the storm to strengthen into a Category 2 or Category 3 storm within 12 – 24 <unk> meanwhile , forecasters issued gale warnings for Tokelau . On 26 February , forecasters predicted Percy would stay on its current track and miss the island of Atafu by 50 – 70 miles ( 80 – 113 km ) , even though the storm could bring damaging gale force winds and heavy rains to the island . However , forecasters predicted Percy would make landfall on Tokelau . In American Samoa , hurricane warnings were issued for Swains Island , while the rest of American Samoa remained under a hurricane watch . Later , the gale warnings for Tokelau were changed to hurricane warnings as Percy moved to within 75 miles ( 121 km ) north of Atafu . In <unk> and <unk> , forecasters predicted that the cyclone would bring 60 @-@ 70 mph ( 95 – 111 km / h ) winds , heavy rains and possible flooding in low lying areas . 
 Forecasters predicted that Cyclone Percy was going to turn to the southeast and hit the islands of Pukapuka and Nassau directly . Because of this , evacuations were ordered and emergency shelters were activated in Rarotonga . Forecasters also predicted that Percy was going to cause a strong storm surge . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center and NOAA also predicted that the storm was going to strengthen further within 12 – 24 hours . In addition , forecast models predicted that Cyclone Percy would take a similar track like Cyclone Olaf weeks earlier . That prompted officials in the southern Cook Islands to order evacuations . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Like the earlier cyclones Meena , Nancy , and Olaf , Percy left widespread damage across Swains Island , Tokelau , and the northern Cook Islands . However , because of well @-@ executed warnings , there were no deaths and there were only a few injuries . Percy was the worst cyclone to strike Tokelau since a similar cyclone hit the area in 1966 . 
 = = = American Samoa and Tokelau = = = 
 The strong winds from Percy knocked out power and communications infrastructure in Swains Island . Efforts to re @-@ establish contact with the island were unsuccessful for a week . After the storm , however , all eight people who rode out the storm survived , though nine of the eleven buildings on the islands were destroyed or severely damaged . Damage in American Samoa was minimal . In Tokelau , Percy damaged trees and knocked down powerlines . During the height of the storm , one person was injured by flying debris , and two others were swept out to sea , but all three survived . In <unk> , the cyclone destroyed the only school and damaged 80 % of the structures . The local hospital completely lost power during the storm and its emergency generator was overwhelmed by the flooding . 
 In <unk> , the storm surge from Percy damaged a sea wall and caused major beach erosion . One house was destroyed while others were severely damaged . Percy also damaged much of the coconut harvest and 50 % of the livestock were killed by the cyclone . Atafu also suffered similar damage as the storm damaged a UHF tower and several storage sheds . Damage to crops was also significant as the storm damaged much of the banana and pandanus harvests . The schools in Atafu suffered only minimal damage ( mostly wind damage ) . 
 = = = Cook Islands = = = 
 The northern Cook Islands were hardest hit by Percy as the storm left 640 people homeless , of which 600 were in Pukapuka , and 40 were in Nassau . Of the buildings and houses destroyed or severely damaged , only ten were left standing . One person was rescued when his fishing boat stalled during the storm . Percy also damaged a solar power station , making it inoperable . Percy also battered the southern Cook Islands while weakening , although the damage there was minimal . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Relief efforts followed after Cyclone Percy . In Swains Island , a rescue plane dropped food and supplies . In Tokelau and northern Cook Islands , the governments of Australia and New Zealand offered over $ 200 @,@ 000 dollars ( 2005 USD ) in relief aid . 
 In Tokelau , many of the local officials feared about contamination since the cyclone had scattered human waste , trash , and other debris in the ocean and across the island . There was also an increase of mosquitoes and other insects , increasing the threat of a dengue fever outbreak . In addition , the storm damaged many of the hospitals , making treatment of the injured or displaced difficult . Criticism of government preparedness followed after Percy as emergency plans were not easily understood by the local population . In <unk> , the school , which was destroyed by Percy , was poorly built and vulnerable , and there was no early warning system . Also , many of the population had little time to prepare for the storm because of a social event held hours earlier . 
 = OS T2000 = 
 T2000 was an electric train formerly used on the Oslo Metro of Oslo , Norway . Six double @-@ car multiple units were built by Strømmens Verksted and AEG in 1994 . Each was 18 metres ( 59 ft ) long , and could carry 185 passengers , of which 60 could be seated in two compartments per car . Maximum speed was 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) . Bought by Oslo Sporveier , they were owned by Kollektivtransportproduksjon , and operated by Oslo T @-@ banedrift . 
 The T2000 operated on Line 1 of the T @-@ bane , and replaced the aging HkB 600 teak wagons used on the Holmenkoll Line . The units were equipped with both third rail and overhead wire collectors , so they could operate on the Common Line and on the Holmenkoll Line . The trains were a prototype for a new design intended to replace the aging T1000 stock , but the MX3000 was chosen instead , as the T2000 did not perform satisfactorily . The T2000 were taken out of service in 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Holmenkolbanen , the operator of the Holmenkoll Line , was merged into Oslo Sporveier in 1975 , plans were put in place to replace the old teak cars with faster units that could operate from Nationaltheatret to Frognerseteren in 25 minutes — allowing a turn @-@ around time of one hour . At the time there had been two separate pools of trains for the eastern and western networks . On the eastern metro , the T1000 units were in use , while the western network was using older material . During the 1980s , some T1000 stock had been rebuilt with pantograph , and taken into use on the western network . 
 Oslo Sporveier was highly satisfied with the SL79 articulated trams that had been delivered during the 1980s . In 1985 , work started on the development of a modified version for the western suburban lines . The stock on the Holmenkoll and Kolsås Line was the first that needed to be replaced . The new stock was considered to be a limited trial . If it met performance expectations , future orders could be made to replace the T1000 stock when the latter reached the end of its economical life in around 2000 . The required specification for the new train was published in October 1988 . 
 On 22 October 1987 , a fatal accident occurred when one of the old HkB 600 units suffered a catastrophic failure of its braking system , and rolled down the Holmenkoll Line , finally tipping over at Midtstuen . One person was killed and four were seriously injured , leading to a safety inspection of the old teak cars used on the line ; the HkB 600 units were withdrawn from service , but were reintroduced after some refits . 
 The initial proposal had called for 22 units , to replace all of the Kolsås and Holmenkoll Line stock . However , the Sognsvann and Røa Line was upgraded to metro standard between 1992 and 1995 , and could start using T1000 stock with only third @-@ rail support . At the time , the eastern network used third @-@ rail , while the western network used overhead wire . The upgrade used non @-@ utilised stock , so the order for T2000 was reduced to 12 units . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The order was placed with ABB Strømmen and AEG in August 1991 . The high development cost was subsidised by the Norwegian government , who saw the project as potentially establishing a new industrial export product . Electrical components were built by AEG in Berlin , while the bogies were built by MAN in Nuremberg . The bodywork was built at Strømmen , with profiles from <unk> , and the trains were assembled in Strømmen . 
 The six two @-@ car sets were delivered between 2 November and 22 December 1994 . The first official public presentation was made on 8 December , but the units did not enter regular service until April 1995 . The cars were numbered 2001 – 2012 . In 1995 , a unit was test @-@ run in Paris during an International Association of Public Transport convention . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Each car 's aluminum body was 18 @,@ 000 mm ( 710 in ) long , 3 @,@ 650 mm ( 144 in ) high and 3 @,@ 300 mm ( 130 in ) wide . The latter was 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wider than the HkB 600 , since the new trains would no longer have ski boxes on the outside . The empty weight of a car was 31 t ( 31 long tons ; 34 short tons ) . Capacity was for 60 seated and 125 standing passengers . There was a driver 's cabin at one end of each car . Passengers sat in two compartments ; the forward had conventional 2 + 2 seating , while the back section had 1 + 2 + 1 seating with two aisles . Wagon 2012 was delivered with 2 + 3 seating in the forward section . Each car had three doors on each side . 
 Both cars had two bogies , with power on all axles , giving a Bo 'Bo ' wheel arrangement . Four traction motors , each of 143 kW ( 192 hp ) , powered the car , giving a top speed of 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) and an acceleration of 1 @.@ 3 m / s2 ( 4 @.@ 3 ft / s2 ) . The trains were equipped with both pantograph and contact shoe , the current for both of which is supplied at 750 volt direct current . The trains could not be connected for multiple running with the T1000 trains . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The T2000 class was prone to technical problems , and was not as reliable as the older T1000 stock . It soon became evident that no more would be ordered . The Norwegian State Railways had been considering a modified version for use on the Flåm and Voss Lines , but those plans were also soon abandoned . Another possibility considered was to build modified T2000 cars for use on the Oslo Metro Ring Line ; at the time it was planned that the Ring Line would share track with the mainline Gjøvik Line at Grefsen , so the Oslo Metro rolling stock using this section would need to be able to support 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC . However , a parallel section of dedicated metro track was built instead , at Grefsen . 
 Oslo Sporveier opted for the all @-@ new MX3000 from Siemens as a replacement for the T1000 stock instead of the T2000 . Although its design was found to be unsuitable , the T2000 was initially not planned to be replaced by the MX3000 , as the line was to remain with overhead wires and none of the new MX3000 trains are equipped with pantographs . However , following Oslo 's decision to host the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships 2011 , it was decided to upgrade the Holmenkollen Line to full metro standard , allowing longer than two @-@ car trains . A proposal to downgrade the line to light rail standard and make it part of the Oslo Tramway was rejected . 
 In 2009 , all twelve T2000 units were taken out of service , before the last of the much older T1300 . Kollektivtransportproduksjon , the successor of Oslo Sporveier , stated that procuring spare parts was becoming nearly impossible and that the small size of the series forced high maintenance costs . The initial orders for MX3000 trains did not call for sufficient numbers to replace the T2000 . Kollektivtransportproduksjon has estimated the cost of renovating the units so they can run for 15 more years at NOK 50 million . Alternatively , the city council has been recommended by Kollektivtransportproduksjon to purchase 15 new MX3000 three @-@ car trains for NOK 250 million . 
 In 2010 , Ruter decided to scrap all of the T2000 wagons , after only 16 years in operation , and ten of the wagons were sold for NOK 100 @,@ 000 a piece to the recycling company <unk> <unk> at <unk> . The two remaining wagons will be preserved and displayed at the Oslo Tramway Museum . Ruter stated that it would cost about NOK 50 million to keep them in operation . Nevertheless , Ruter was in 2011 forced by the owner Oslo Vognselskap to keep renting the wagons for 22 million NOK each year , even though they were not in operation . Oslo Vognselskap stated the reason behind this was the contract which lasted for 30 years . 
 = Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve = 
 Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve is an annual television special that airs every New Year 's Eve on ABC . The special broadcasts from New York City 's Times Square , and prominently features coverage of its annual ball drop event , along with live and pre @-@ recorded musical performances by popular musicians from Times Square and Hollywood , respectively . 
 Its creator and namesake was the entertainer Dick Clark , who conceived New Year 's Rockin ' Eve as a younger @-@ skewing competitor to Guy Lombardo 's popular and long @-@ running New Year 's Eve big band broadcasts on CBS . The first two editions , which were hosted by Three Dog Night and George Carlin , respectively , and featured Dick Clark assuming the role of Times Square reporter , were broadcast by NBC for 1973 and 1974 , respectively . In 1974 @-@ 75 , the program moved to its current home of ABC , and Clark assumed the role of host . 
 Following the death of Guy Lombardo and the decline of the Royal Canadians ' special , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve grew in popularity , and became ingrained in pop culture — even prompting Clark himself to make appearances on other programs in parody of his role . To this day , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve has consistently remained the highest @-@ rated New Year 's Eve special broadcast by the United States ' major television networks ; its 2012 edition peaked at 22 @.@ 6 million home viewers — not including viewers watching from public locations which are not measured by Nielsen . 
 Dick Clark hosted New Year 's Rockin ' Eve annually from 1973 through 2004 , and served as a Times Square correspondent alongside Peter Jennings for ABC News 's special coverage of year 2000 celebrations . The complications of a stroke suffered by Clark in December 2004 had a major effect on his role in the special . After having Regis Philbin serve as a guest host for 2005 , Clark returned for the 2006 edition to serve as a host : due to speech impediments that had resulted from his stroke , he ceded hosting duties to Ryan Seacrest . The death of Dick Clark on April 18 , 2012 left Ryan Seacrest as the sole host of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve beginning with its 2012 – 13 edition . Seacrest has most recently been joined by Jenny McCarthy as a correspondent from Times Square , with Fergie of The Black Eyed Peas serving as the presenter of the Hollywood concert segments . 
 = = Format = = 
 New Year 's Rockin ' Eve is primarily broadcast from Times Square in New York City , providing coverage of the New Year 's Eve festivities held there , culminating with the long @-@ running ball drop leading to midnight and the New Year . The special also features pre @-@ recorded segments featuring performances by popular musicians ; since the 2006 – 07 edition , these concert segments ( branded since the 2014 @-@ 15 edition as the " Billboard Hollywood Party " ) have been presented from a studio in Los Angeles by Fergie of The Black Eyed Peas . Since the 2005 – 06 edition , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve has also featured live performances from a stage in Times Square . 
 Since 2000 – 01 's edition , coverage has begun with a segment airing in primetime : initially airing at 10 : 00 p.m. ET / PT , beginning with the 2012 @-@ 13 edition , the show was extended to 8 : 00 p.m. ET / PT to accommodate musical retrospective specials that aired from the 2011 @-@ 12 to 2013 @-@ 14 editions . These specials primarily featured countdowns of archived music performances from the Dick Clark Productions library , including the top New Year 's Rockin ' Eve performances , and the " 30 Greatest Women in Music " . On the 2014 @-@ 15 edition , the retrospective specials were dropped , leaving the Primetime portion occupying the entire ABC primetime lineup . 
 Following late local programming , the main New Year 's Rockin ' Eve broadcast begins at 11 : 30 p.m. ET / PT ; this segment of the broadcast can be tape delayed ( either by ABC 's west coast feed , or at the discretion of affiliates in the Central and Mountain Time zones ) so the countdown corresponds to local time . After the conclusion of festivities from Times Square , the special continues into Part 2 , which consists of further pre @-@ recorded concert segments . Part 2 runs into the early morning hours — as late as 3 : 00 a.m. ET / PT . 
 Since 2005 , Ryan Seacrest has hosted the live show outside in Times Square ( along with a celebrity correspondent providing additional reports from attendees ) . From his return and until his death , Dick Clark hosted a limited number of segments from Times Square Studios approaching midnight , but still participated in the countdown and his tradition of kissing his wife , Kari Wigton , at midnight . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before Rockin ' Eve = = = 
 Prior to the premiere of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , the most well @-@ known New Year 's Eve program was the annual big band remote of bandleader Guy Lombardo and his Royal Canadians , broadcast from the ballroom of the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel . Guy Lombardo hosted 48 straight New Year 's Eve broadcasts on CBS until his death in 1977 , beginning on radio in 1928 ( and for a period , splitting with NBC Radio following midnight ET ) , and on CBS Television from 1956 to 1976 ( which also featured coverage of the ball drop in Times Square ) . Lombardo was also well known for his band 's performance of the song " Auld Lang Syne " at midnight , which helped make the standard synonymous with the New Year 's holiday in North America . 
 = = = Conception , premiere = = = 
 At the time , Dick Clark was well @-@ known to viewers as the host of American Bandstand , a music series produced from the studios of Philadelphia television station <unk> @-@ TV ( now WPVI @-@ TV ) and broadcast by ABC ( which itself aired a New Year 's Eve special on December 31 , 1959 ) . 
 In the 1970s , Clark felt that Guy Lombardo 's New Year 's specials were outdated and did not appeal well to younger viewers ; he believed that only older viewers would be interested in big band music accompanied by " people dancing cheek @-@ to @-@ jowl in their tuxedos and funny hats . " In response , he decided to produce a more youthful New Year 's Eve special of his own to compete . Clark 's new program would be known as New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , a name chosen to signify the major contrast between his special and the more formal atmosphere of Guy Lombardo 's special . The first edition , Three Dog Night 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 1973 , was aired by NBC on December 31 , 1972 and was hosted by the members of the rock band Three Dog Night . The special featured pre @-@ recorded musical performances from the ballroom of the Queen Mary in Long Beach , California by Blood , Sweat & Tears , Helen Reddy , Al Green , and Three Dog Night . Clark served as a reporter from Times Square for live coverage of the ball drop and arrival of 1973 . The second special , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 1974 , also on NBC , was hosted by comedian George Carlin and featured pre @-@ recorded musical performances by The Pointer Sisters , Billy Preston , Linda Ronstadt and Tower of Power once again from the Queen Mary ballroom . Beginning with the 1975 edition , the program moved to ABC and Clark assumed hosting duties . 
 = = = Rise in popularity = = = 
 After Guy Lombardo 's death in 1977 , CBS and the Royal Canadians attempted to continue their New Year 's Eve broadcasts from the Waldorf @-@ Astoria for 1977 – 78 . However , the effects of Lombardo 's absence led to a decline in viewership , allowing New Year 's Rockin ' Eve to overtake the Royal Canadians in viewership in only its fifth year on @-@ air . The threat of the new special also prompted CBS to drop the Royal Canadians entirely in 1979 in favor of a new special , Happy New Year , America , which premiered for New Year 's Eve 1979 – 80 . With its recent success , Clark began hoping that New Year 's Rockin ' Eve would become a television tradition of its own , lamenting that " Lombardo would always win [ in New York ] because of the Waldorf and 35 years of tradition , but we finally got it wrested . " Clark 's hopes soon became reality , as New Year 's Rockin ' Eve had displaced Guy Lombardo as the most popular and most @-@ watched New Year 's Eve special on American television in the years following . 
 The 1980 edition was co @-@ hosted by Erin Moran and John Schneider of Happy Days and The Dukes of Hazzard respectively , and continued with Clark 's goal to showcase acts that represented the previous year by featuring Barry Manilow , Blondie , Chic , The Oak Ridge Boys , and the Village People as performers . The 1988 edition was co @-@ hosted by China Beach cast members Marg Helgenberger and Brian Wimmer from the Cocoanut Grove club at the Ambassador Hotel . Mark Curry and Holly Robinson of the ABC sitcom Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper co @-@ hosted for 1993 – 94 , with segments at Walt Disney World featuring performances by acts such as Brooks and Dunn and Kiss , along with the marriage of two California firefighters , Laura Turpin and Bob <unk> . 
 The 1994 – 95 edition was co @-@ hosted with Margaret Cho and Steve Harvey , and included musical performances from Melissa Etheridge , Hootie & the Blowfish and Salt @-@ N @-@ Pepa . 
 The 1996 – 97 edition was co @-@ hosted by Stacey Dash and Donald Faison of the ABC comedy series Clueless , and included performances by Jann Arden , Kiss , " Weird Al " Yankovic , The Presidents of the United States of America , and The Tony Rich Project . This edition also marked the 25th anniversary of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve ; Clark marked this accomplishment by discussing the greatest challenges he had faced hosting the special ; including being unable to hear his director over the loud crowds of Times Square , harsh weather conditions , and a year where the emcee had to contend with a group of 30 nude attendees in the background . Clark aimed to continue hosting the special through the year 2000 . Ultimately , Clark hosted the program nearly uninterrupted through 2004 . 
 The popularity of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve also resulted in Clark making appearances on other television series to reference his role . In a Y2K @-@ themed segment of The Simpsons ' Halloween special " Treehouse of Horror X " entitled " Life 's a Glitch , Then You Die " , Clark made a cameo appearance hosting a New Year 's Eve event in Springfield . The Y2K bug caused the emcee to melt , exposing him as a robot . In an interview following the episode 's airing with its writer , Ron Hauge , Clark said that the episode gave the " biggest response " he had ever gotten from anything he had ever done . Clark made a further appearance during the pilot episode of fellow Matt Groening series Futurama , " Space Pilot 3000 " , where Clark 's head ( as preserved in a jar ) is seen hosting a version of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve leading into the year 3000 . In the 1994 film Forrest Gump , footage of Clark from the first edition of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve is seen on a television at a bar during a scene of the film taking place on New Year 's Eve in 1972 . New Year 's Rockin ' Eve was also the subject of an episode of the sitcom Friends , " The One with the Routine " , where characters Ross and Monica Geller attend a studio taping as audience members , and try to get on @-@ camera by performing a dance number to draw attention to themselves . 
 = = = ABC 2000 Today , 2001 primetime expansion = = = 
 New Year 's Rockin ' Eve was temporarily placed on hiatus for New Year 's Eve 1999 – 2000 . Instead , Clark participated in ABC News 's day @-@ long telecast , ABC 2000 Today , which as part of an international broadcast consortium , televised festivities from around the world celebrating the arrival of the year 2000 . Clark joined host Peter Jennings and ABC News reporter Jack Ford as correspondents for the festivities from Times Square . Clark took on a similar role on ABC 2000 Today as he did on New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , including conducting his traditional countdown alongside Ford at midnight on the East Coast . However , unlike New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , festivities from Times Square were also broadcast live across the entire country instead of tape @-@ delayed for the West Coast , since the special broadcast midnight festivities in other cities and time zones for the remainder of the night , as they had done throughout the day . 
 Clark , Ford , and Jennings were among a total of more than 1 @,@ 000 members of the ABC News division that were part of the broadcast . They were all under the direction of ABC 's Roger Goodman . The ABC 2000 Today telecast overall also received a Peabody Award . Reflecting on the event , Clark was enthusiastic about his participation , feeling that New Year 's Eve 2000 was one of the biggest nights he had ever spent in Times Square . 
 New Year 's Rockin ' Eve returned to ABC the following New Year 's Eve for the arrival of 2001 . The 2000 – 01 edition also introduced a new primetime hour at 10 : 00 p.m. ET / PT , which featured additional segments and music performances to lead into the main program . Clark felt positive about the program 's expansion into primetime – believing that viewers , no matter where they were , wanted to know what was going on in Times Square on New Year 's Eve . Clark was joined by Fox & Friends anchor Steve <unk> , and Michelle Madison as reporters in Times Square . Comedian Wayne Brady hosted concert segments in Hollywood , which included performances by Lonestar , Boyz II Men , 98 Degrees , Baha Men , and Third Eye Blind among others . 
 The 2002 edition of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , its 30th edition , featured pre @-@ recorded concert performances from tours by Aerosmith , Destiny 's Child , and Elton John during the primetime hour , followed by studio segments ( again hosted by Wayne Brady ) featuring performances by Blink @-@ 182 , Bush , Busta Rhymes , Jessica Simpson , LFO , The O 'Jays , and Pink . The primetime hour of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 2002 was also preceded by ABC 2002 , a follow @-@ up to the ABC 2000 special , hosted by Peter Jennings from the Rose Center for Earth and Space . The two @-@ hour special featured a " meaningful and reflective " view on New Year 's celebrations from around the world , and also included performances by Arlo Guthrie , Sting , and U2 . Clark personally felt that 2002 , since it was the first in the wake of the September 11 attacks , was the most " nerve @-@ racking " New Year 's Eve he had ever experienced . 
 = = = Dick Clark 's stroke , effects on Rockin ' Eve = = = 
 On December 6 , 2004 , it was reported that Clark had been hospitalized after suffering from a minor stroke . Despite Clark indicating his participation in New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 2005 in a prepared statement , reports soon surfaced that the stroke may had been serious enough to prevent him from hosting at all . It was officially announced on December 14 that Dick Clark would not be hosting , and that Regis Philbin would fill in for Clark . In a statement , Clark said that he was thankful that Philbin was able to quickly step in on short notice to host the show , and hoped that he would do a good job . Philbin was optimistic about his role , considering it the " best temp job ever . " 
 Various personalities paid tribute to Clark throughout the night on New Year 's Eve ; the New Year 's Rockin ' Eve broadcast featured special celebrity messages for Clark , and revelers in Times Square were seen with signs saluting Clark . During CNN 's coverage , revelers in Times Square told CNN 's Jason Carroll that Philbin was " all right " filling in for Clark ( but still had Anderson Cooper and Carroll too ) . Mayor Michael Bloomberg also spoke with Philbin on Clark 's absence during the show , noting that " it isn 't that we don 't like Regis , but we want [ Clark ] back next year . " Philbin 's hosting received mixed reviews : Richard Huff of the New York Daily News noted that Philbin 's hosting was " stiff " at first , and suggested that he would have performed better if he had a co @-@ host to interact with like his daytime talk show . In conclusion , he considered Philbin 's performance to be " suitable – although not spectacular . " Virginia Heffernan of The New York Times believed that Philbin was feeling " surprisingly nervous " in his role at host , and felt that " rowdy crowds " ( which Philbin chose to avoid by staying in the studio ) and the success of Rod Stewart 's career ( which Philbin pounced on to promote his new album , " When You 're Smiling " ) were bothering him . 
 = = = = Dick Clark 's return = = = = 
 In August 2005 , ABC announced that Dick Clark would return to New Year 's Rockin ' Eve for its 2006 edition , marking his first television appearance since the stroke . For that broadcast , it was also announced Clark would be joined by a new co @-@ host , media personality and American Idol host Ryan Seacrest . Seacrest had previously hosted Fox 's competing New Year 's Eve Live — which , ironically , would be hosted by Philbin that year . Speaking to USA Today , Seacrest reminisced on having watched New Year 's Rockin ' Eve in his childhood , stating that " I knew when I was on other shows , I knew we weren 't going to beat Dick Clark . He is New Year 's Eve . " As a part of a long @-@ term deal with Dick Clark Productions , Seacrest also became an executive producer for the special . In an interview with People Magazine in December 2005 , Seacrest revealed that while Clark had not completely recovered from the stroke , and that his speech was not exactly like how it was beforehand , Clark had made great progress since the original diagnosis . 
 Alongside pre @-@ recorded performances from Hollywood hosted by actress and pop singer Hilary Duff , the 2006 edition also featured a live performance by Mariah Carey directly inside Times Square – the first such performance in the show 's history . Live performances from Times Square became a regular feature during future editions of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve . 
 During the program , Clark made limited on @-@ air appearances , but still conducted his traditional countdown , and also recollected on his recent experiences : 
 Public curiosity over Clark 's condition ( how he talked ) and his return to television helped Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 2006 draw in over 20 million viewers throughout the night , and score a 7 @.@ 1 audience share among the key demographic of 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds . Reaction to Clark 's appearance was mixed . While some TV critics ( including Tom Shales of The Washington Post , in an interview with the CBS Radio Network ) felt he was not in good enough shape to do the broadcast , stroke survivors and many of Clark 's fans praised the emcee for being a role model for people dealing with post @-@ stroke recovery . The New York Times ' Brian Stelter compared Seacrest 's new role as co @-@ host of Rockin ' Eve to being like a " traffic cop " , " tossing to bands and correspondents and to Mr. Clark for the countdown . " 
 = = = = Ryan Seacrest becomes host = = = = 
 Following the 2006 edition , Dick Clark Productions announced that Seacrest had agreed to remain a host for future editions of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve . As he was still afflicted with speech impediments that resulted from dysarthria , a lingering effect of his stroke , Clark 's role in the special was reduced ; he continued to make limited on @-@ air appearances from Times Square Studios as co @-@ host near midnight , and still conducted his traditional countdown , but Seacrest hosted the majority of the program outside in Times Square itself . 
 The 2008 edition featured live performances from Times Square by Carrie Underwood , Miley Cyrus , and the Jonas Brothers . Fergie hosted concert segments from Hollywood , which also featured performances by Akon , Natasha Bedingfield , Sean Kingston , OneRepublic , Plain White T 's , Taylor Swift and will.i.am. Seacrest 's increased role as host was recognized beginning on the 2009 edition , where the special was officially re @-@ titled Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest . It featured live performances by the Jonas Brothers , Taylor Swift , and Lionel Richie , with Kellie Pickler serving as a correspondent . Hollywood segments featured performances by Fall Out Boy , Jesse McCartney , Natasha Bedingfield , Ne @-@ Yo , The Pussycat Dolls , Solange , Robin Thicke and will.i.am. 
 For its 2010 edition , headlining performances in Times Square included Daughtry , and Jennifer Lopez ( who infamously wore a dark @-@ colored catsuit for her performance to mixed reviews ) , while Melissa Rycroft served as a correspondent . Fergie hosted concert segments on @-@ location from Las Vegas , Nevada , featuring performances by her group The Black Eyed Peas , Colbie Caillat , Robin Thicke , Keri Hilson , Selena Gomez , Justin Bieber , David Guetta , and Orianthi . American Idol season 8 runner @-@ up Adam Lambert was also reportedly scheduled to perform , but was dropped from both Rockin ' Eve and a scheduled appearance on fellow ABC program Jimmy Kimmel Live ! in response to his controversial performance at the American Music Awards ( which are also produced by Dick Clark Productions ) . Neither ABC nor Dick Clark Productions ever confirmed whether or not Lambert had been booked at all , however . 
 The 2011 edition featured live performances by Kesha and Taio Cruz , and actress Jenny McCarthy served as a reporter from Times Square . Fergie reprised her role as host for the pre @-@ recorded Hollywood segments , which included performances by Avril Lavigne ( who performed the world premiere of " What the Hell " , the first single from her then @-@ upcoming album Goodbye Lullaby ) , Natasha Bedingfield ( who performed her latest single " Strip Me " ) , Jennifer Hudson , Ne @-@ Yo , Train , Mike Posner , Willow Smith , Jason Derülo , Far East Movement , La Roux , Kesha , Drake , and closing the show , the supergroup <unk> ( the combined Backstreet Boys and New Kids on the Block ) . Viewership for the 2011 edition peaked at around 19 million viewers . 
 = = = 40th anniversary ; death of Dick Clark = = = 
 Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest 2012 , was once again hosted by Seacrest , with Clark co @-@ hosting what would become his final appearance on the program . Fergie co @-@ hosted for the sixth consecutive year for the pre @-@ taped Hollywood segments , while comedian Jenny McCarthy returned for her second year corresponding from Times Square . Musical guests in Times Square included Lady Gaga ( who also joined Mayor Michael Bloomberg in activating the ball drop ) , Justin Bieber , Pitbull and Hot <unk> Rae . Performers in the Hollywood segments included Taio Cruz , Nicki Minaj , Blink @-@ 182 , Florence + the Machine , LMFAO , Gym Class Heroes , OneRepublic , The Band Perry , will.i.am , Christina Perri , and Robin Thicke . To celebrate the 40th anniversary of the first edition of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , the primetime portion of the show was preceded by a two @-@ hour retrospective special focusing on memorable music performances from the show 's 40 @-@ year history . 
 New Year 's Rockin ' Eve 2012 brought ABC 's highest ratings on New Year 's Eve since ABC 2000 Today ; an average 8 @.@ 4 million viewers watched the 40th anniversary retrospective , the primetime hour brought in 12 @.@ 9 million viewers , and the first hour of the main broadcast peaked at 22 @.@ 6 million viewers . These numbers exclude viewership from locations such as bars and New Year 's Eve parties , as they are not counted in the Nielsen ratings . 
 On April 18 , 2012 , Dick Clark died after suffering a heart attack following surgery to fix an enlarged prostate . Following Clark 's death , ABC declined to comment on future New Year 's coverage , nor did Dick Clark Productions comment on the future of the franchise . 
 = = = 2013 @-@ present = = = 
 In August 2012 , ABC confirmed via a press release that New Year 's Rockin ' Eve would return for its 2012 – 13 edition . Ryan Seacrest , Jenny McCarthy and Fergie reprised their roles as host , Times Square reporter and Hollywood host , respectively . Carly Rae Jepsen , Neon Trees , Psy with MC Hammer , and Taylor Swift performed live in Times Square , while the Hollywood segments of the show included performances by Brandy , Flo Rida , Ellie Goulding , Jason Aldean , Justin Bieber , Karmin , OneRepublic , Pitbull and The Wanted . The primetime hour of the program was preceded by a two @-@ hour tribute special , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve Celebrates Dick Clark . Clark 's legacy was also recognized by the Times Square Alliance , organizers of the ball drop : a triangular Waterford Crystal panel engraved with Dick Clark 's name was presented to his widow Kari Wigton , and installed on the ball . 
 On October 23 , 2013 , Dick Clark Productions confirmed the 2013 – 14 edition of New Year 's Rockin ' Eve , and announced that Ryan Seacrest had signed a multi @-@ year deal of unspecified length to continue serving as host and executive producer of the special . Seacrest stated that he would " forever be both sentimental and grateful " about his involvement in the special , and that he was " excited to work together to create new traditions and fun moments on the show that only live television can deliver . " Fellow producer Allen Shapiro credited Seacrest 's involvement in New Year 's Rockin ' Eve for its " extended and expanded " success . Fergie and McCarthy reprised their roles once again , and the primetime portion of the program was preceded by a two @-@ hour special , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve Presents the 30 Greatest Women in Music . The Hollywood segments included performances by Ariana Grande , Capital Cities , Daughtry , Fall Out Boy , The Fray , Enrique Iglesias , Jason Derülo , Jennifer Hudson , and Robin Thicke . Blondie , Icona Pop , Macklemore and Ryan Lewis , and Miley Cyrus performed in Times Square , and the special also featured a performance by Billy Joel , broadcast live from Barclays Center . In Canada , the special was aired in simulcast for first time by City , replacing its coverage of concert festivities at Toronto 's Nathan Phillips Square ( City continued to sponsor the event , however ) . While viewership was down by 5 % , New Year 's Rockin ' Eve was still the highest @-@ rated among the New Year 's specials . 
 On February 7 , 2014 , ABC reached a long @-@ term deal with Dick Clark Productions , seeing both New Year 's Rockin Eve and the DCP @-@ produced American Music Awards remain on the network through the end of 2023 . Taylor Swift and Florida Georgia Line headlined from Times Square for the 2014 @-@ 15 edition of New Year 's Rockin Eve ; they were among 38 acts featured in total during the special . Fergie hosted the re @-@ christened Billboard Hollywood Party segments of the special , and also performed . The special featured studio appearances by Bastille , Charli XCX , Idina Menzel , Iggy Azalea , Magic ! , Meghan Trainor , One Direction , Pentatonix , Ella Henderson , and Rixton . The special featured live performances by Gavin DeGraw and Lady Antebellum from the Bash on Broadway New Year 's festivities in Nashville , and a performance by Elton John from his New Year 's concert at Barclays Center . 
 On October 28 , 2015 , Carrie Underwood was announced as a live headliner from Times Square for the 2015 @-@ 16 edition . She was joined by Demi Lovato , Luke Bryan , and Wiz Khalifa , the last of whom performed " See You Again " with Charlie <unk> . On November 18 , One Direction was announced as a headliner for the Billboard Hollywood Party segments , in what was their final televised performance before their planned hiatus . Additional Los Angeles performers included Alessia Cara , Andy Grammer , <unk> , Ellie Goulding , Elle King , Fall Out Boy , Macklemore and Ryan Lewis , Nathan Sykes , Nick Jonas , Omi , Pentatonix , Rachel Platten , Tove Lo , and Walk the Moon . The special also featured a performance by Jimmy Buffett from his New Year 's concert at Barclays Center . New Year 's Rockin ' Eve was once again the highest rated of the New Year 's Eve specials across the major networks ; for the late @-@ night portion , while overall household viewership was down by 7 % , ratings in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic were up by 3 % . 
 = French battleship Charlemagne = 
 Charlemagne was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the French Navy in the mid @-@ 1890s , name ship of her class . She spent most of her career assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron ( escadre de la Méditerranée ) . Twice she participated in the occupation of the port of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos , then owned by the Ottoman Empire , once as part of a French expedition and another as part of an international squadron . 
 When World War I began in August 1914 , she escorted Allied troop convoys for the first two months . Charlemagne was ordered to the Dardanelles in November 1914 to guard against a sortie into the Mediterranean by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . In 1915 , she joined British ships in bombarding Turkish fortifications under the command of Rear Admiral ( contre @-@ amiral ) Emile Guépratte . The ship was transferred later that year to the squadron assigned to prevent any interference by the Greeks with Allied operations on the Salonica front . Charlemagne was placed in reserve and then disarmed in late 1917 . She was condemned in 1920 and later sold for scrap in 1923 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Charlemagne was 117 @.@ 7 metres ( 386 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 3 metres ( 66 ft 7 in ) . At deep load , she had a draught of 7 @.@ 4 metres ( 24 ft 3 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 4 metres ( 27 ft 7 in ) aft . She displaced 11 @,@ 275 metric tons ( 11 @,@ 097 long tons ) at deep load . Her crew consisted of 727 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship used three 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines , one engine per shaft . Rated at 14 @,@ 500 PS ( 10 @,@ 700 kW ) , they produced 15 @,@ 295 metric horsepower ( 11 @,@ 249 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials using steam generated by 20 Belleville water @-@ tube boilers . Charlemagne reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 14 knots ( 33 @.@ 60 km / h ; 20 @.@ 88 mph ) on her trials . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 050 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 030 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 200 miles ( 3 @,@ 600 nmi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Charlemagne carried her main armament of four 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . The ship 's secondary armament consisted of ten 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 138 mm Modèle 1893 guns , eight of which were mounted in individual casemates and the remaining pair in shielded mounts on the forecastle deck amidships . She also carried eight 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 100 mm Modèle 1893 guns in shielded mounts on the superstructure . The ship 's anti @-@ torpedo boat defences consisted of twenty 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 47 mm Modèle 1885 Hotchkiss guns , fitted in platforms on both masts , on the superstructure , and in casemates in the hull . Charlemagne mounted four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . Two of these were submerged , angled 20 ° from the ship 's axis , and the other two were above the waterline . They were provided with twelve Modèle 1892 torpedoes . As was common with ships of her generation , she was built with a plough @-@ shaped ram . 
 The Charlemagne @-@ class ships carried a total of 820 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 807 @.@ 7 long tons ) of Harvey armour . They had a complete waterline armour belt that was 3 @.@ 26 metres ( 10 ft 8 in ) high . The armour belt tapered from its maximum thickness of 400 mm ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) to a thickness of 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) at its lower edge . The armoured deck was 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick on the flat and was reinforced with an additional 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) plate where it angled downwards to meet the armoured belt . The main turrets were protected by 320 mm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) of armour and their roofs were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Their barbettes were 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The outer walls of the casemates for the 138 @.@ 6 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 46 in ) guns were 55 mm thick and they were protected by transverse bulkheads 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The conning tower walls were 326 mm ( 12 @.@ 8 in ) thick and its roof consisted of 50 mm armour plates . Its communications tube was protected by armour plates 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Charlemagne , named after the first Holy Roman Emperor , was authorised on 30 September 1895 as the name ship of the three battleships of her class . The ship was laid down at the Arsenal de Brest on 2 August 1894 and launched on 17 October 1895 . She was completed on 12 September 1897 and commissioned three days later . 
 Charlemagne was initially assigned to the Northern Squadron ( escadre du Nord ) , but , together with Gaulois , she was transferred to the 1st Battleship Division of the Mediterranean Squadron in January 1900 . On 18 July , after combined manoeuvres with the Northern Squadron , the ship participated in a naval review conducted by the President of France , Émile Loubet , at Cherbourg . She escorted Louis André , the Minister of War and Jean de Lanessan , the Minister of Marine on their tours of Corsica and Tunisia later in October . The following year , Charlemagne and the Mediterranean Squadron participated in an international naval review by President Loubet in Toulon with ships from Spain , Italy and Russia . 
 In October 1901 , the 1st Battleship Division , under the command of Rear Admiral Leonce Caillard , was ordered to proceed to the port of Mytilene . After landing two companies of marines that occupied the major ports of the island on 7 November , Sultan Abdul Hamid II agreed to enforce contracts made with French companies and to repay loans made by French banks . The 1st Division departed Lesbos in early December and returned to Toulon . In January – March 1902 , Charlemagne was deployed in Moroccan waters and participated in the summer fleet exercises later that year . Naval historians Paul Silverstone and Eric Gille claim that the ship collided with Gaulois on 2 March 1903 , but was not damaged . In April 1904 , she was one of the ships that escorted President Loubet during his state visit to Italy and participated in the annual fleet manoeuvers later that summer . A 100 mm cartridge spontaneously ignited in a magazine in January 1905 , but Charlemagne suffered no damage from the incident . Together with the destroyer Dart , the ship was the French contribution to an international squadron that briefly occupied Mytilene in November – December 1905 and participated in a naval review by President Armand Fallières in September of the following year . She engaged in the summer naval manoeuvres in 1907 and 1908 and was transferred to the 4th division in September 1908 . 
 Charlemagne was transferred back to the Northern Squadron in October 1909 . She made port visits to Oran , Cadiz , Lisbon and Quiberon before having her bottom cleaned in Brest in January 1910 . The ship participated in a large naval review by President Fallières off Cap Brun on 4 September 1911 . Charlemagne was placed in reserve in Brest in September 1912 for an overhaul ; the ship rolled 34 ° during sea trials in May 1913 , after completion of the overhaul . She was assigned to the training squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet from August 1913 until the beginning of World War I a year later . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Together with the older French pre @-@ dreadnoughts , Charlemagne escorted Allied troop convoys through the Mediterranean until November when she was ordered to the Dardanelles to guard against a sortie by the Goeben . During the bombardment on 25 February 1915 , the ship engaged the fort at Kum Kale with some effect . On 18 March , Charlemagne , together with Bouvet , Suffren , and Gaulois , was to penetrate deep into the Dardanelles after six British battleships suppressed the defending Turkish fortifications and attack those same fortifications at close range . After the French ships were ordered to be relieved by six other British battleships , Bouvet struck a mine and sank almost instantly while Gaulois was hit twice , one of which opened a large hole in her hull that began to flood the ship . Charlemagne escorted Gaulois to the Rabbit Islands , north of Tenedos , where the latter ship could be beached for temporary repairs . Charlemagne herself was moderately damaged during the bombardment and continued onwards to Bizerte for repairs that lasted through May . 
 Upon her return , she was assigned to the Dardanelles Squadron ( escadre des Dardanelles ) , although naval operations were limited to bombarding Turkish positions in support of Allied troops by that time . The ship was transferred to Salonica in October 1915 where she joined the French squadron assigned to prevent any interference by the Greeks with Allied operations in Greece . Charlemagne was relieved for a major refit at Bizerte in May 1916 that lasted until August . She returned to Salonica later that month and was assigned to the Eastern Naval Division ( division navale d 'Orient ) . The ship remained there until she was ordered to Toulon in August 1917 . Charlemagne was placed in reserve on 17 September and disarmed on 1 November . She was condemned on 21 June 1920 and later sold for scrap in 1923 . 
 = Emily ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Emily " is the seventh episode of the fifth season of American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz and directed by Kim Manners . The episode explores the series ' overarching mythology . The episode premiered in the United States on December 14 , 1997 on the Fox network , earning a Nielsen household rating of 12 @.@ 4 and being watched by 20 @.@ 94 million people in its initial broadcast . It received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Scully fights to protect her daughter ’ s life , while Mulder discovers her true origins . It is eventually discovered that Emily was created during Scully 's abduction . Emily suffers from a tumorous infection and subsequently dies . 
 " Emily " is the second of a two @-@ part story that began with episode six , " Christmas Carol " . The young actress who originally played Emily was terrified of the hospital setting in the episode 's sequel " Emily " , and as a result the producers had to recast the role and reshoot all footage featuring her including her scene featured in this episode . Filming for the episode was also disrupted when angry demonstrators protested at one of the show 's filming sites . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a dream @-@ like sequence , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) walks through a desert and picks up a gold cross necklace on the ground . 
 Continuing from the previous episode , agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) arrives at the hospital in San Diego where Scully introduces him to Emily . Mulder tells Scully that he had Melvin Frohike look into Emily 's case : her surrogate mother is a woman named Anna <unk> ( slang for fake ) , and there are no true records of how Emily came into the world . Mulder , along with Scully 's family , attend a meeting regarding Emily 's adoption at the San Diego Hall of Justice . Mulder tells the Judge that Emily was conceived from Scully 's ova , which was taken from her during her abduction , which the Judge does not believe . Later , Scully receives a call from the County Children 's Center that cuts off abruptly . She and Mulder head there , where they find Emily safe , but coming down with a fever . They find a greenish cyst on the back of Emily 's neck . Later , when a nurse pierces the cyst with a needle , green liquid comes out , causing her to become gravely ill , yet Emily appears unaffected . Mulder believes that Emily has the same body chemistry that they have seen before with alien @-@ human hybrids . 
 Dr. Calderon , Emily 's doctor who works for a company called Prangen , refuses to transfer Emily 's medical records to the County Children 's Center , prompting Mulder to rough him up . Later , Mulder follows Calderon after he leaves his office . Scully has imaging tests conducted on Emily . Calderon goes to see the Dark Suited Men , one of whom kills him by stabbing him in the neck with an alien stiletto ; both men then morph into Calderon . Mulder follows as one of them leaves . The results of Emily 's tests show her to be suffering from a tumorous infection . The other Calderon arrives at the hospital and injects Emily with an unknown green substance ; he escapes by morphing into someone else . Scully believes that he is continuing the treatments , and the Sims were murdered because they were trying to stop him . Mulder follows the first Calderon clone into a building , where he meets Anna <unk> , an elderly woman in a nursing home . 
 The doctor tells Scully that Emily is getting worse . A woman from the adoption agency arrives and wants to stop Scully from making decisions for Emily . Mulder connects the names of the women in the nursing home to recent births and finds that Dr. Calderon was treating them . Emily reacts badly to being placed in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber . Mulder finds medical records with Scully 's name on them at the nursing home , along with a live fetus in a refrigerated chamber . Mulder finds Calderon entering soon after , and Detective Kresge arrives as well . Mulder and Kresge confront Calderon , who attacks Kresge . Despite Mulder 's warning Kresge shoots Calderon , whose wounds cause him to spew green blood which incapacitates Kresge . Mulder quickly leaves the building to avoid being affected by the blood . Calderon morphs into Kresge , and deceives Mulder and escapes . Mulder returns to the hospital , where Emily has gone into a coma . Days later Emily has died . Mulder visits Scully at the funeral chapel , telling her that Kresge is recovering and all evidence at the nursing home and Prangen is gone . The only evidence left is Emily 's body , but the agents instead find sand bags in her coffin along with Scully 's cross necklace , which she had previously given to Emily . 
 = = Production = = 
 The young actress who originally played Emily was terrified of the hospital setting in this episode , and as a result the producers had to recast the role and reshoot all footage featuring her in the previous episode " Christmas Carol " . Director Kim Manners recalls , " I called Bob Goodwin and said , ' We 're dead in the water here , pal . This little actress is not cooperating at all ' . We recast that role and started up again the next day . " The show 's casters replaced her with Lauren Diewold , who had previously appeared on an episode of Millennium . Due to the show 's shooting schedule , the producers were unable to use Gillian Anderson to reshoot the previous episode 's scenes , resulting in Anderson 's double being used instead , with the footage pieced together in the editing room . 
 The building used for the nursing home in this episode was picketed by anti @-@ redevelopment protesters due to the building being converted into a condominium complex . As a result , the producers kept a low profile by removing all X @-@ Files insignia from their clothing . A number of protestors still arrived , forcing the police to get involved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Emily " premiered on the Fox network on December 14 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 4 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 12 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 20 @.@ 94 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics ; many were more critical of the episode than " Christmas Carol " . Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club gave the episode a B and wrote that he did not " totally buy “ Emily ” [ … ] even though I like large portions of " the episode . VanDerWerff wrote positively of " most of the Scully scenes " , noting that Anderson " found some of the raw sense of hope and loss " that the shots required . However , he was critical of the episode 's plot , arguing that it only " goes through the motions " and " is about everybody getting really worked up over a little girl we ’ ve just met . " He concluded that " two @-@ parter is strongest when it grabs hold of this notion . But it ’ s at its weakest when it turns into just another episode of The X @-@ Files . " John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a 7 out of 10 , and wrote " Overall , this episode was not as strong as the previous installment , largely due to the shift from in @-@ depth character exploration to a rehashing of earlier elements of the mythology . Emily is a good plot device in terms of personalizing the conspiracy ’ s depredations just a bit more , but at times , it seems like the writers are victimizing Scully a bit more than necessary . Unlike the later mythology episodes , however , this one manages to avoid any unnecessary new elements . " 
 Other reviews were decidedly more mixed to negative . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two wrote that " Mulder catches up with the store and immediately this all becomes a little more formulaic . " The two praised the episode 's teaser , referring to it as " deathless prose " , but were more critical of the plot , arguing that the episode " feels too soon to see yet more sequences of people standing around emoting as they watch the dying in the hospital " , a reference to the show 's earlier arc involving Scully 's cancer . Shearman and Pearson , however , did compliment the performance of both Diewold and Anderson , and called the finale scene " wonderful " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique , on the other hand , gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one star out of four . She heavily criticized the episode 's characterization , noting that the episode 's opening sequence was " ludicrous " and its revelations were " out of the blue " . Vitaris reasoned that , because Scully had spent time with her mother , remembered fondly her sister , and reconnected her faith in God in " Redux II " , " this development just doesn 't track . " Vitaris also criticized Mulder 's antics , calling him a " thug " for beating up " an unarmed man and kicking him while he 's down . " 
 = John Archibald Wheeler = 
 John Archibald Wheeler ( July 9 , 1911 – April 13 , 2008 ) was an American theoretical physicist . He was largely responsible for reviving interest in general relativity in the United States after World War II . Wheeler also worked with Niels Bohr in explaining the basic principles behind nuclear fission . Together with Gregory Breit , Wheeler developed the concept of Breit – Wheeler process . He is best known for linking the term " black hole " to objects with gravitational collapse already predicted early in the 20th century , for coining the terms " quantum foam " , " neutron moderator " , " wormhole " and " it from bit " , and for hypothesizing the " one @-@ electron universe " . 
 Wheeler earned his doctorate at Johns Hopkins University under the supervision of Karl Herzfeld , and studied under Breit and Bohr on a National Research Council fellowship . In 1939 he teamed up with Bohr to write a series of papers using the liquid drop model to explain the mechanism of fission . During World War II , he worked with the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago , where he helped design nuclear reactors , and then at the Hanford Site in Richland , Washington , where he helped DuPont build them . He returned to Princeton after the war ended , but returned to government service to help design and build the hydrogen bomb in the early 1950s . 
 For most of his career , Wheeler was a professor at Princeton University , which he joined in 1938 , remaining until his retirement in 1976 . At Princeton he supervised 46 PhDs , more than any other professor in the Princeton physics department . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Wheeler was born in Jacksonville , Florida on July 9 , 1911 to librarians Joseph Lewis Wheeler and Mabel Archibald ( Archie ) Wheeler . He was the oldest of four children , having two younger brothers , Joseph and Robert , and a younger sister , Mary . Joseph earned a Ph.D. from Brown University and a Master of Library Science from Columbia University . Robert earned a Ph.D. in geology from Harvard University and worked as a geologist for oil companies and at colleges . Mary studied library science at the University of Denver and became a librarian . They grew up in Youngstown , Ohio , but spent a year in 1921 to 1922 on a farm in Benson , Vermont , where Wheeler attended a one @-@ room school . After they returned to Youngstown he attended Rayen High School . 
 After graduating from the Baltimore City College high school in 1926 , Wheeler entered Johns Hopkins University with a scholarship from the state of Maryland . He published his first scientific paper in 1930 , as part of a summer job at the National Bureau of Standards . He earned his doctorate in 1933 . His dissertation research work , carried out under the supervision of Karl Herzfeld , was on the " Theory of the Dispersion and Absorption of Helium " . He received a National Research Council fellowship , which he used to study under Gregory Breit at New York University in 1933 and 1934 , and then in Copenhagen under Niels Bohr in 1934 and 1935 . In a 1934 paper , Breit and Wheeler introduced the Breit – Wheeler process , a mechanism by which photons can be potentially transformed into matter in the form of electron @-@ positron pairs . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill made Wheeler an associate professor in 1937 , but he wanted to be able work more closely with the experts in particle physics . He turned down an offer in 1938 of an associate professorship at Johns Hopkins University in favor of an assistant professorship at Princeton University . Although it was a lesser position , he felt that Princeton , which was building up its physics department , was a better career choice . He remained a member of the faculty there until 1976 . 
 In a 1937 paper " On the Mathematical Description of Light Nuclei by the Method of <unk> Group Structure " , Wheeler introduced the S @-@ matrix – short for scattering matrix – " a unitary matrix of coefficients connecting the asymptotic behavior of an arbitrary particular solution [ of the integral equations ] with that of solutions of a standard form . " Werner Heisenberg subsequently developed the idea of the S @-@ matrix in the 1940s . Due to the problematic divergences present in quantum field theory at that time , Heisenberg was motivated to isolate the essential features of the theory that would not be affected by future changes as the theory developed . In doing so he was led to introduce a unitary " characteristic " S @-@ matrix , which became an important tool in particle physics . 
 Wheeler did not develop the S @-@ matrix , but joined Edward Teller in examining Bohr 's liquid drop model of the atomic nucleus . They presented their results at a meeting of the American Physical Society in New York in 1938 . Wheeler 's Chapel Hill graduate student Katharine Way also presented a paper , which she followed up in a subsequent article , detailing how the liquid drop model was unstable under certain conditions . Due to a limitation of the liquid drop model , they all missed the opportunity to predict nuclear fission . The news of Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch 's discovery of fission was brought to America by Bohr in 1939 . Bohr told Leon Rosenfeld , who informed Wheeler . 
 Bohr and Wheeler set to work applying the liquid drop model to explain the mechanism of nuclear fission . As the experimental physicists studied fission , they uncovered puzzling results . George Placzek asked Bohr why uranium seemed to fission with both very fast and very slow neutrons . Walking to a meeting with Wheeler , Bohr had an insight that the fission at low energies was due to the uranium @-@ 235 isotope , while at high energies it was mainly due to the far more abundant uranium @-@ 238 isotope . They co @-@ wrote two more papers on fission . Their first paper appeared in the Physical Review on September 1 , 1939 , the day Germany invaded Poland , starting World War II in Europe . 
 Considering the notion that positrons were electrons that were traveling backwards in time , he came up in 1940 with his one @-@ electron universe postulate : that there was in fact only one electron , bouncing back and forth in time . His graduate student , Richard Feynman , found this hard to believe , but the idea that positrons were electrons traveling backwards in time intrigued him and Feynman incorporated the notion of the reversibility of time into his Feynman diagrams . 
 = = Nuclear weapons = = 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 Soon after the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor brought the United States into World War II , Wheeler accepted a request from Arthur Compton to join the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . He moved there in January 1942 , joining Eugene Wigner 's group , which was studying nuclear reactor design . He co @-@ wrote a paper with Robert F. Christy on " Chain Reaction of Pure <unk> Materials in Solution " , which was important in the plutonium purification process . It would not be declassified until December 1955 . He gave the neutron moderator its name , replacing the term " slower downer " used by Enrico Fermi . 
 After the United States Army Corps of Engineers took over the Manhattan Project , it gave responsibility for the detailed design and construction of the reactors to DuPont . Wheeler became part of the DuPont design staff . He worked closely with its engineers , commuting between Chicago and Wilmington , Delaware , where DuPont had its headquarters . He moved his family to Wilmington in March 1943 . DuPont 's task was not just to build nuclear reactors , but an entire plutonium production complex at the Hanford Site in Washington . As work progressed , Wheeler relocated his family again in July 1944 , this time to Richland , Washington , where he worked in the scientific buildings known as the 300 area . 
 Even before the Hanford Site started up the B Reactor , the first of its three reactors , on September 15 , 1944 , Wheeler had been concerned that some nuclear fission products might turn out to be nuclear poisons , the accumulation of which would impede the ongoing nuclear chain reaction by absorbing many of the thermal neutrons that were needed to continue a chain reaction . In an April 1942 report , he predicted that this would reduce the reactivity by less than one percent so long as no fission product had a neutron capture cross section of more than 100 @,@ 000 barns . After the reactor unexpectedly shut down , and then just as unexpectedly restarted about fifteen hours later , he suspected iodine @-@ 135 , with a half life of 6 @.@ 6 hours , and its daughter product , xenon @-@ 135 , which has a half life of 9 @.@ 2 hours . Xenon @-@ 135 turned out to have a neutron capture cross @-@ section of well over 2 million barns . The problem was corrected by adding additional fuel rods to burn out the poison . 
 Wheeler had a personal reason for working on the Manhattan Project . His brother Joe , fighting in Italy , sent him a postcard with a simple message : " Hurry up " . It was already too late : Joe was killed in October 1944 . " Here we were , " Wheeler later wrote , " so close to creating a nuclear weapon to end the war . I couldn 't stop thinking then , and haven 't stopped thinking since , that the war could have been over in October 1944 . " Joe left a widow and baby daughter , Mary Jo , who later married physicist James Hartle . 
 = = = Hydrogen bomb = = = 
 In August 1945 Wheeler and his family returned to Princeton , where he resumed his academic career . Working with Feynman , he explored the possibility of physics with particles , but not fields , and carried out theoretical studies of the muon with Jayme Tiomno , resulting in a series of papers on the topic , including a 1949 paper in which Tiomno and Wheeler introduced the " Tiomno Triangle " , which related different forms of radioactive decay . He also suggested the use of muons as a nuclear probe . This paper , written and privately circulated in 1949 but not published until 1953 , resulted in a series of measurements of the Chang radiation emitted by muons . <unk> are a component of cosmic rays , and Wheeler became the founder and first director of Princeton 's Cosmic Rays Laboratory , which received a substantial grant of $ 375 @,@ 000 from the Office of Naval Research in 1948 . He received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1946 , which allowed him to spend the 1949 – 50 academic year in Paris . 
 The 1949 detonation of Joe @-@ 1 by the Soviet Union prompted an all @-@ out effort by the United States , led by Teller , to develop the more powerful hydrogen bomb in response . Henry D. Smyth , Wheeler 's department head at Princeton , asked him to join the effort . Most physicists were , like Wheeler , trying to re @-@ establish careers interrupted by the war and were reluctant to face more disruption . Others had moral objections . Those who agreed to participate included Emil Konopinski , Marshall Rosenbluth , Lothar Nordheim and Charles Critchfield , but there was also now a body of experienced weapons physicists at the Los Alamos Laboratory , led by Norris Bradbury . Wheeler agreed to go to Los Alamos after a conversation with Bohr . Two of his graduate students from Princeton , Ken Ford and John Toll , joined him there . 
 At Los Alamos , Wheeler and his family moved into the house on " Bathtub Row " that had been occupied by Robert Oppenheimer and his family during the war . In 1950 there was no practical design for a hydrogen bomb . Calculations by Stan Ulam and others showed that Teller 's " Classical Super " would not work . Teller and Wheeler created a new design known as " Alarm Clock " , but it was not a true thermonuclear weapon . Not until January 1951 did Ulam come up with a workable design . 
 In 1951 Wheeler obtained permission from Bradbury to set up a branch office of the Los Alamos laboratory at Princeton , known as Project Matterhorn , which had two parts . Matterhorn S ( for <unk> , another name coined by Wheeler ) , under Lyman Spitzer , investigated nuclear fusion as a power source . Matterhorn B ( for bomb ) , under Wheeler , engaged in nuclear weapons research . Senior scientists remained disinterested and aloof from the project , so he staffed it with young graduate and post @-@ doctoral students . In January 1953 he was involved in a security breach when he lost a highly classified paper on lithium @-@ 6 and the hydrogen bomb design during an overnight train trip . This resulted in Wheeler being given an official reprimand . Matterhorn B 's efforts were crowned by the success of the Ivy Mike nuclear test at Enewetak Atoll in the Pacific , on November 1 , 1953 , which Wheeler witnessed . The yield of the Ivy Mike " Sausage " device was reckoned at 10 @.@ 4 megatons of TNT ( 44 PJ ) , about 30 percent higher than Matterhorn B had estimated . Matterhorn B was discontinued , but Matterhorn S endures as the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 For 72 years , Wheeler was married to Janette Hegner , a teacher and social worker . They became engaged on their third date , but agreed to defer marriage until after he returned from Europe . They were married on June 10 , 1935 , five days after his return . They had three children : Letitia , James English and Alison Wheeler . Jobs were hard to come by during the Great Depression , but Arthur Ruark offered him a position as an assistant professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , at an annual salary of $ 2 @,@ 300 , which was less than the $ 2 @,@ 400 Janette was offered to teach at the Rye Country Day School . In their later years , she accompanied him on sabbaticals to places such as France , Los Alamos , New Mexico , the Netherlands , and Japan . Wheeler and Hegner were founding members of the Unitarian Church of Princeton , and she initiated the Friends of the Princeton Public Library . Hegner died in October 2007 at the age of 99 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 After concluding his Matterhorn Project work , Wheeler resumed his academic career . In a 1955 paper he theoretically investigated the <unk> , an electromagnetic or gravitational wave that is held together in a confined region by the attraction of its own field . He coined the name as a contraction of " gravitational electromagnetic entity . " He found that the smallest <unk> was a <unk> the size of the Sun , but millions of times heavier . While working on mathematical extensions to Einstein 's Theory of General Relativity in 1957 , Wheeler introduced the concept and word wormhole to describe hypothetical " tunnels " in space @-@ time . Bohr asked if they are stable and further research by Wheeler determined that they are not . 
 During the 1950s Wheeler formulated <unk> , a program of physical and ontological reduction of every physical phenomenon , such as gravitation and electromagnetism , to the geometrical properties of a curved space @-@ time . Wormholes were just one manifestation of what Wheeler envisaged as the fabric of the universe , a chaotic sub @-@ atomic realm of quantum fluctuations , which he called " quantum foam " . For a few decades , general relativity had not been considered a very respectable field of physics , being detached from experiment . Wheeler was a key figure in the revival of the subject , leading the school at Princeton , while Dennis William <unk> and Yakov <unk> Zel 'dovich developed the subject at Cambridge University and the University of Moscow . The work of Wheeler and his students made high contributions to the Golden Age of General Relativity . His work in general relativity included the theory of gravitational collapse . He used the term black hole in 1967 during a talk he gave at the NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies ( <unk> ) . He was also a pioneer in the field of quantum gravity due to his development , with Bryce DeWitt , of the Wheeler – DeWitt equation , which is the equation governing the " wave function of the Universe " . 
 = = = Quantum = = = 
 Alluding to Wheeler 's " mass without mass " , the festschrift honoring his 60th birthday was titled Magic Without Magic : John Archibald Wheeler : A Collection of Essays in Honor of his <unk> Birthday ( 1972 ) . His writing style could also attract parodies , including one by " John Archibald Wyler " that was affectionately published by a relativity journal . Wheeler wrote <unk> ( 1962 ) , and teamed up with Edwin F. Taylor to write Spacetime Physics ( 1966 ) and Scouting Black Holes ( 1996 ) . With Kent Harrison , Kip Thorne and Masami <unk> he wrote Gravitation Theory and Gravitational Collapse ( 1954 ) . This led to the voluminous general relativity textbook Gravitation ( 1973 ) , co @-@ written with Misner and Thorne . Its timely appearance during the golden age of general relativity and its comprehensiveness made it an influential relativity textbook for a generation . 
 Wheeler retired from Princeton University in 1976 at the age of 65 . He was the director of the Center for Theoretical Physics at the University of Texas at Austin from 1976 until 1986 , when he retired and became a professor emeritus there . Misner , Thorne and Wojciech <unk> , all former students of Wheeler , wrote that : 
 Looking back on Wheeler 's 10 years at Texas , many quantum information scientists now regard him , along with IBM 's Rolf Landauer , as a grandfather of their field . That , however , was not because Wheeler produced seminal re @-@ search papers on quantum information . He did not — with one major exception , his delayed @-@ choice experiment . Rather , his role was to inspire by asking deep questions from a radical conservative viewpoint and , through his questions , to stimulate others ’ research and discovery . 
 Wheeler 's delayed choice experiment is actually several thought experiments in quantum physics that he proposed , with the most prominent among them appearing in 1978 and 1984 . These experiments are attempts to decide whether light somehow " senses " the experimental apparatus in the double @-@ slit experiment it will travel through and adjusts its behavior to fit by assuming the appropriate determinate state for it , or whether light remains in an indeterminate state , neither wave nor particle , and responds to the " questions " asked of it by responding in either a wave @-@ consistent manner or a particle @-@ consistent manner depending on the experimental arrangements that ask these " questions " . 
 Over the years , Wheeler 's graduate students included Katharine Way , Richard Feynman , David Hill , Bei @-@ Lok Hu , Kip Thorne , Jacob Bekenstein , John R. <unk> , William Unruh , Robert M. Wald , Arthur Wightman , Charles Misner and Hugh Everett . Wheeler gave a high priority to teaching , and continued to teach freshman and sophomore physics , saying that the young minds were the most important . At Princeton he supervised 46 PhDs , more than any other professor in the Princeton physics department . 
 In 1979 Wheeler spoke to the American Association for the Advancement of Science ( AAAS ) , asking it to expel parapsychology , which had been admitted ten years earlier at the request of Margaret Mead . He called it a pseudoscience , saying he did not oppose earnest research into the questions , but he thought the " air of legitimacy " of being an AAAS @-@ Affiliate should be reserved until convincing tests of at least a few so @-@ called psi effects could be demonstrated . During his presentation Wheeler incorrectly stated that J. B. Rhine had committed fraud as a student , and was forced to retract that statement in a letter to the journal Science . His request was turned down and the <unk> Association remained a member of the AAAS . 
 = = = It from bit = = = 
 In 1990 Wheeler suggested that information is fundamental to the physics of the universe . According to this " it from bit " doctrine , all things physical are information @-@ theoretic in origin . 
 Wheeler : It from bit . Otherwise put , every it — every particle , every field of force , even the space @-@ time continuum itself — derives its function , its meaning , its very existence entirely — even if in some contexts indirectly — from the apparatus @-@ elicited answers to yes @-@ or @-@ no questions , binary choices , bits . It from bit symbolizes the idea that every item of the physical world has at bottom — a very deep bottom , in most instances — an immaterial source and explanation ; that which we call reality arises in the last analysis from the posing of yes @-@ no questions and the registering of equipment @-@ evoked responses ; in short , that all things physical are information @-@ theoretic in origin and that this is a participatory universe . 
 Wheeler speculated that reality is created by observers in the universe . " How does something arise from nothing ? " , he asked about the existence of space and time . He also coined the term " Participatory <unk> Principle " ( PAP ) , a version of a Strong <unk> Principle . From a transcript of a radio interview on " The anthropic universe " : 
 Wheeler : We are <unk> in bringing into being not only the near and here but the far away and long ago . We are in this sense , <unk> in bringing about something of the universe in the distant past and if we have one explanation for what 's happening in the distant past why should we need more ? Martin Redfern : Many don 't agree with John Wheeler , but if he 's right then we and presumably other conscious observers throughout the universe , are the creators — or at least the minds that make the universe manifest . 
 Wheeler had repeatedly reflected , since 1981 , on Benjamin Gal @-@ Or 's " <unk> " that maintains that the expansion of the universe ( manifested by the expansion of the cold , dark voids between all non @-@ expanding , visible clusters of galaxies ) is the root @-@ cause of the Second Law of Thermodynamics and of all asymmetry in time , as an <unk> , expanding , universal " sink " : 
 " I continue to reflect , again and again , on your central thesis that expansion is the origin of all asymmetry in time . " 
 = = Death and Legacy = = 
 Over the years Wheeler gathered numerous prizes and awards , including the Enrico Fermi Award in 1968 , the Franklin Medal in 1969 , the National Medal of Science in 1971 , the Einstein Prize in 1969 , the Niels Bohr International Gold Medal in 1982 , the Oersted Medal in 1983 , the J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Prize in 1984 and the Wolf Foundation Prize in 1997 . He was a member of the American Philosophical Society , the Royal Academy , the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei , and the Century Association . He received honorary degrees from 18 different institutions and , in 2001 , Princeton used a $ 3 million gift to establish the John Archibald Wheeler / Battelle Professorship in Physics . After his death , the University of Texas named the John A. Wheeler Lecture Hall in his honor . He was influential in mentoring a generation of physicists of the Golden Age of General Relativity , who made notable contributions to quantum mechanics and gravitation . 
 On April 13 , 2008 , Wheeler died of pneumonia at the age of 96 in Hightstown , New Jersey . 
 = Niagara Parkway = 
 The Niagara Parkway , formerly known as Niagara Boulevard and historically as the Niagara Road , is a scenic road in the province of Ontario that travels on the Canadian side of the Niagara River from the town of Fort Erie to Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake . The portion north of Table Rock in Niagara Falls is designated as an Ontario Scenic Highway . The Niagara Boulevard was originally the section only from Fort Erie to Chippawa and the northern portion was referred to as the Niagara Parkway . 
 The Niagara Parkway begins at Fort Erie in the south . It passes through several villages along the river before passing through the tourist district of Niagara Falls . North of the city it provides access to several attractions , including the Whirlpool Rapids , Butterfly Conservatory , and Brock 's Monument at Queenston Heights . The route ends at Fort George , southeast of the urban centre of Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake . 
 Construction on the modern Niagara Parkway began in 1908 ; it was completed from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario in 1931 as a scenic road with gardens and manicured lawns throughout its length . The parkway was referred to by Sir Winston Churchill , having been driven down it , as " the prettiest Sunday afternoon drive in the world . " 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Niagara Parkway is a two @-@ lane minor arterial road with a 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) speed limit for the majority of its length , although the section from Hiram Avenue to Upper Rapids Boulevard in Niagara Falls is a four lane divided road signed at 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) . It is 55 km ( 34 mi ) in length , crossing the entire Niagara Peninsula between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario . The route falls under the jurisdiction of the Niagara Parks Commission , an agency of the Government of Ontario , for most of its length . However , the section from Hiram Street to Glenview Avenue belongs to the City of Niagara Falls . Despite this , it is still signed as part of the Niagara Parkway . The Niagara River Recreation Trail , a mixed @-@ use pedestrian and cycling path , follows 53 km ( 33 mi ) of the length of the parkway between Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake and Fort Erie . 
 The parkway begins at the old Fort Erie , south of the Peace Bridge , where it is known as Lakeshore Road and connects with the Queen Elizabeth Way and the former Highway 3 . East of the Mather Circle , the road becomes known as Niagara Parkway and proceeds north through downtown Fort Erie , beneath the International Railway Bridge . It gradually curves to the east opposite the southern shore of Grand Island . Houses line the southern side of the parkway along this section . The road curves back northward as it crosses the Black Creek and passes through a sparsely populated stretch . It passes the Willoughby Historical Museum followed by the Legends on the Niagara Golf Course . Shortly thereafter , it enters Niagara Falls and meets the Welland River . Traffic is diverted west to cross the river at Portage Road , where it then resumes on the Niagara Parkway at King 's Bridge Park . 
 The Niagara Parkway travels alongside the Upper Rapids and passes adjacent to Horseshoe Falls . It crosses a park and enters downtown Niagara Falls , where it is known as River Road north of Clifton Hill . The parkway passes below the Rainbow Bridge ; side streets provide access to Highway 420 , but River Road itself does not meet it . As it progresses north , it passes beneath the Whirlpool Rapids Bridge before wrapping around the Whirlpool Rapids . At Victoria Avenue , River Road becomes the Niagara Parkway again . The parkway passes the Butterfly Conservatory and the Niagara Floral Clock , one of the largest floral clocks in the world with a diameter of 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) . Shortly thereafter , the parkway crosses the Sir Adam Beck Hydroelectric Power Stations . It passes beneath Highway 405 at the Lewiston – Queenston Bridge , the interchange with which was removed by December 2006 . 
 North of the bridge , the route descends the Niagara Escarpment near Brock 's Monument , a column which commemorates the death of Sir Isaac Brock during the Battle of Queenston Heights . At the bottom of the escarpment , the route passes the village of Queenston . The parkway meanders north , parallel to the river , with houses lining the western side . Approaching the town of Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake , the road becomes known as Queen 's Parade . It diverges from the river and travels northwest towards the town , ending at Fort George . 
 = = History = = 
 The Niagara Parkway is one of the oldest roads in Ontario . Predating it , an aboriginal trail along the west side of the Niagara River existed before the arrival of Europeans . The first survey along the length of the river was done by Augustus Jones in 1786 . The survey set aside a one chain reserve along the bank of the river for military purposes ; one chain being equivalent to 20 metres ( 66 ft ) . Despite this reserve , early settlers extended their fences to the river . In 1791 , the Land Board ordered that the fences be removed to permit the reserve 's use as a public road . The Niagara Road quickly became the primary route between Fort Erie and Fort George . Its importance grew with the declaration of war against the Americans in June 1812 . During the war , the road became vital for the movement of militia and supplies , and accordingly it was one of the primary frontiers of the war . 
 When the First Welland Canal was opened in 1829 , the Niagara Road became a towpath for vessels exiting the Welland River . Oxen on the road would tow boats against the rapid current of the Niagara River as they exited the canal and continued south to Lake Erie . In 1833 , a large cut was made to connect the canal with Port Colborne , eliminating the use of the road as a towpath . It continued to be used as a public road until the government gave the reserve to the Niagara Parks Commission in 1891 . 
 In 1908 , after receiving approval from the government , the Parks Commission began to expropriate land along the length of the river . The broadened strip of land was used to construct a new paved parkway , which was opened in segments . The new parkway was ornamental and designed to be aesthetically pleasing , a prime consideration of road construction at that time . The section south of the falls was completed first , opening in 1912 . It was extended north to the Whirlpool Rapids , incorporating the existing River Road , by 1915 . The section between the rapids and Queenston was opened between 1921 and 1923 . Finally , the remaining section between Queenston and Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake opened in 1931 , completing the present parkway . 
 In mid @-@ August 1943 , Sir Winston Churchill came to Canada to attend the Quebec Conference , a then @-@ secret meeting in Quebec City to discuss a strategy for the invasion of France which would come to be known as D @-@ Day . Prior to the conference , he met with William Lyon Mackenzie King several times . Between the meetings and conference , Churchill visited Niagara Falls and was driven along the Niagara Parkway , after which he described it as " the prettiest Sunday afternoon drive in the world . " 
 On May 30 , 1977 , the City of Niagara Falls assumed River Road between Hiram Street , north of the Rainbow Bridge , and Glenview Avenue , east of Victoria Avenue . This section is still designated as part of the Niagara Parkway despite not being under the jurisdiction of the Niagara Parks Commission . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Niagara Parkway . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Niagara . 
 = The Sea ( Corinne Bailey Rae album ) = 
 The Sea is the second studio album by English singer @-@ songwriter Corinne Bailey Rae , released on 20 January 2010 by EMI . It is the follow @-@ up to her eponymous 2006 debut and was conceived following her hiatus from recording , taken in the wake of her husband Jason Rae 's death . She recorded the album at <unk> Studios in Manchester , England during 2009 , working mostly with a host of session musicians and the record producers Steve Brown and Steve <unk> . The Sea features songs written by Rae before and after her husband 's death , touching on themes of love , lament , and solace . 
 In the United Kingdom , The Sea debuted at number five on the UK Albums Chart and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . It also charted at number seven on the Billboard 200 in the United States , where it reached sales of 156 @,@ 000 by April 2010 . A critical success , The Sea received mostly positive reviews and was nominated for the 2010 Mercury Prize . Rae toured in promotion of the album on The Sea Tour in early 2010 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Following the multi @-@ platinum and award @-@ winning success of her eponymous debut album in 2006 , Corinne Bailey Rae began to work on songs for a follow @-@ up album at the end of 2007 . She took a hiatus from music , however , after the death of her husband , Scottish saxophonist Jason Rae , in March 2008 to an accidental overdose of methadone and alcohol . For a long period of time , Rae said , " I didn 't really hear any songs . Normally in my everyday life , I 'd be in the car and come up with a little line , or I 'd look at something and try to describe it ... I didn 't really think in that way anymore . Nothing was coming in . " After months of grief and isolation , Rae revisited her work the following year and composed additional material for The Sea . 
 The Sea contains songs written before and after the death of Rae 's husband , all of which she said resonated with her : " The circumstances have cast it all in a different light . It began as a ' before and after ' record , but it 's become an ' after ' record " . The ballad " I 'd Do It All Again " was written by Rae in January 2008 after an argument with her husband . She told NME that writing the rest of the album helped her handle the different emotions she felt after her husband 's death : " When I started writing that I was thinking , ' I don 't really want this song to go into the world , ' cause it 's so naked … ' But I had to " . " I Would Like to Call it Beauty " , she said , was written about finding beauty in the " darkest times " , later telling journalist Sean O 'Hagan : 
 " There is something miraculous that pushes you along , makes you keep going , makes you carry on . It 's really about the mystery of that . In fact , the whole album is about that in a way ; it 's about loss but it 's also about hope , about keeping going and trying to find that beauty . " 
 Rae recorded most of The Sea in 2009 at Manchester 's <unk> Studios . She co @-@ produced the record mostly with Steve Brown and Steve <unk> , both of whom had worked on her debut album . Rae pursued a sound more aggressive than on her debut . During the recording process , Rae listened to the 1973 Sly & the Family Stone record Fresh and Curtis Mayfield 's There 's No Place Like America Today ( 1975 ) , as well as the music of Nina Simone and Leonard Cohen . A live band was used in the album 's recording , which was also a departure from her debut . " On the first album , it was me and a producer in a basement going though hundreds of snare drum sounds to find the right one " , she recalled . " With a live band , you can stretch out more and try new things out without feeling you 're having to undo this meticulously built @-@ up track " . 
 The album was titled after the recurring theme of water in songs such as " Diving for Hearts " and " I Would Like to Call It Beauty " , while the music was said by Rae to possess " a kind of tidal movement to it too , in the way that we recorded the songs . You know , sometimes it would just be me and my guitar . Then we 'd really sort of swell up into these big arrangements , only to then retreat back to it just being me and my guitar again . " According to Chris Mugan from The Independent , The Sea was a departure from the polished sound of Rae 's debut album , while Paste magazine 's Steve <unk> said Rae expanded on her debut 's mix of contemporary R & B and older soul music by incorporating pop rock , singer @-@ songwriter influences , and occasional elements of bossa nova and trip hop . In the opinion of Craig McLean from The Daily Telegraph , the record 's music evoked Simone 's singing and the 1968 Van Morrison album Astral Weeks . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Before releasing The Sea , Rae showcased songs from the album on a preview concert tour in late 2009 , playing venues in England , Canada , Los Angeles , and New York . She premiered the songs during a 23 November 2009 performance at The Tabernacle in London , her first complete gig since her hiatus from the music scene . She also showcased its songs on 7 December at New York City 's Hiro Ballroom , which was recorded for the public television series Live from the Artists Den . Rae also promoted the album with guest performances on the talk shows Today and Later ... with Jools Holland . Three singles were released from the album : " I 'd Do It All Again " on 12 January , " Paris Nights / New York Mornings " on 29 March , and " Closer " on 2 August . Rae 's record label EMI sent the singles to music video / radio stations of multiple formats , including urban adult contemporary , smooth jazz and adult album alternative . 
 When The Sea was released in 2010 , it debuted at number five on the UK Albums Chart , and number seven on the Billboard 200 in the US , where it sold 53 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . On 19 February , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , and by April , it had sold 156 @,@ 000 copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . On 27 February 2010 , Rae embarked on the European leg of her supporting tour for the album , The Sea Tour , which featured singer @-@ songwriter Daniel Merriweather as her opening act ; the tour began its North American leg on 9 April . 
 The Sea received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 78 , based on 21 reviews . AllMusic 's David Jeffries called it " a testament to Rae 's artistic growth " , and Kitty Empire from The Observer found it " saturated in feeling and graced by superior musicianship " . Steve Leftridge of PopMatters said it was " richer " than her debut , with a " darker and more sophisticated sonic palette " . Q credited Rae for making the album never sound " exploitative or mawkish , just truthful and real " . In the Los Angeles Times , Powers deemed the album a " remarkable accomplishment " and " a step toward something — Rae 's inner peace , and her next artistic breakthrough — that has its own considerable rewards " . In a less enthusiastic review , The Observer 's Graeme Thompson felt the album 's strong points offered " glimpses of a new horizon shining beyond the riptides of pain and sorrow " , but at times it sounded " dull and flat " . Slant Magazine 's Nick Day was more critical , finding the music forgettable and the lyrics introspective but vague . Hot Press critic Patrick <unk> believed the music exhibited an " excessive tastefulness " while panning the contributions of the session musicians , whom he said were " technically proficient " but sounded soulless . 
 At the end of 2010 , The Sea was named the year 's best album by The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan , while Powers ranked it ninth on her year @-@ end list of 2010 's best albums . It was also nominated for the 2010 Mercury Prize , awarded annually for the best record from the UK or Ireland ; Rae lost out to The xx 's self @-@ titled 2009 album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Super Rich Kids = 
 " Super Rich Kids " is a song by American recording artist Frank Ocean , and the fifth single from his debut studio album , Channel Orange . It was first performed live by Ocean in 2011 and then on his channel ORANGE tour in 2012 . The single was released in March 2013 . The song is in the style of R & B and neo soul , and includes references to and samples of the songs " Bennie and the Jets " by Elton John , " Got to Give It Up " by Marvin Gaye , and " Real Love " by Mary J. Blige . It addresses young , wealthy characters ' ennui and fears of the financial crisis with dry humor . The song received positive critical responses and charted on the Billboard R & B Songs chart and the UK singles and R & B chart . The song also appeared on the TV show Gossip Girl and the film The Bling Ring . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Super Rich Kids " was written by Frank Ocean , Malay , Earl Sweatshirt , Kirk Robinson , Nathaniel Robinson Jr . , Roy Hammond , Mark Morales and Mark Rooney and produced by Malay . Ocean and Malay came up with " Super Rich Kids " on their first day working together on Ocean 's debut album , channel ORANGE . According to Ocean , the 2000 film Traffic was an inspiration for the song . Ocean first performed the song during his debut solo tour in 2011 , and later performed it on the Channel Orange tour . The single release was originally announced on January 23 , 2013 . It was released in Britain on March 11 , and in the United States on the 17th . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 " Super Rich Kids " is an R & B and neo soul ballad set in common time and a slow half @-@ time groove tempo of 60 beats per minute . The key the song is in is E ♭ major , with a chord progression of E ♭ maj9 − G ♭ 6 / A ♭ − D ♭ maj7 − B ♭ <unk> − B ♭ aug followed throughout the song . The song includes a piano part that references the thumping piano line of Elton John 's 1973 song " Bennie and the Jets " , and horns and synth arpeggios are also present . According to The Quietus , " a stomping piano and the steady smack of <unk> anchors the ghostly crowd noise from a vast débutantes ball , as the synths quiver both <unk> and as subtly as candle @-@ smoke in a floor draft . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 " Super Rich Kids " addresses young , wealthy characters ' ennui and fears of the financial crisis with dry humor . The song 's chorus takes the lyrics from Mary J. Blige 's " Real Love " . The track includes a verse from Earl Sweatshirt , which , according to Complex , is a reminder of Ocean as " OFWGKTA at the end of the day . " Paste Magazine said that " Earl 's low verses push Ocean way up into his vocal range . " 
 According to Sound and Motion Magazine , the track 
 " is exactly as the title suggests ; Frank ’ s view on the children of parents who have inherited massive trust funds without the grasp of what a huge responsibility it is and the good they could do . From expensive cars to a different woman every night , the alleged social elite stumble through a charmed existence where the real world is buffered from them and then they breed a new generation with the same attitude . The track also contains brief glimpses into what he perceives as an alternative view of loneliness and isolation where all the super rich want is a love that ’ s not about money or anything material . " 
 " Super Rich Kids " is described by Muso 's Guide as " a contemporary version of a Jay McInerney novel , " and by The Independent as " something Carole King knocked out in the 1970s . " <unk> said that " at no point are the lyrics judgemental . If anything they ’ re compassionate . " The song also takes samples from Marvin Gaye 's " Got to Give It Up " , and a reference to the 1970s sitcom Good Times ( the " Dy @-@ no @-@ mite ! " catchphrase of the character J.J. Evans ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The single was positively reviewed by critics . Sound and Motion magazine said that it " could easily be listened to repeatedly or just set on in the background for an evening 's entertainment . " Muso 's Guide said the song " could be viewed as one of those tail end singles from a brilliant album that doesn 't stand strong on its own ( Can anyone remember ' Until The End of Time ' from FutureSex / LoveSounds or ' Broken @-@ Hearted Girl ' from I am ... Sasha Fierce ? ) . Ocean , proving his talent as a songwriter , and a jaded voice for this frustrated introspective generation is able to find something profound from a superficial world . " The song became an Editor 's Pick on <unk> 
 Critical reactions of the song in reviews of channel ORANGE were also positive . Time called the track a " stand out , tying together the album ’ s two themes of class and love . " Billboard , in a track @-@ by @-@ track review , said that " the steadiness of the beat is immediately familiar but wholly fresh -- it 's like Ocean snatched ' Benny and the Jets ' and threw the composition down a trap door into another universe . " No Ripcord said that " it 's so incongruous against the crass commercialism and consuming greed that pervades so much of popular culture that it 's astonishing . " 
 Complex listed Earl Sweatshirt 's appearance in the song # 15 on their " 25 Best Guest Verses of 2012 " . 
 = = In other media = = 
 " Super Rich Kids " appeared on the Gossip Girl episode " Monstrous Ball " , along with four other Frank Ocean tracks : " Lost " , " Pyramids " , " Sweet Life " and " Thinkin Bout You " . The song also appears as the seventeenth track on the soundtrack for the film The Bling Ring . The song was also covered by Misha B. 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 In 2014 , record label <unk> filled a copyright lawsuit against Vivendi and Universal Music Group for the sampling of Mary J. Blige 's " Real Love " in " Super Rich Kids " . This was because , according to the lawsuit , the sample included a sample of " <unk> the President " . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Jovan Vladimir = 
 Jovan Vladimir or John Vladimir ( Serbian Cyrillic : Јован <unk> ; c . 990 – 22 May 1016 ) was the ruler of Duklja , the most powerful Serbian principality of the time , from around 1000 to 1016 . He ruled during the protracted war between the Byzantine Empire and the First Bulgarian Empire . Vladimir was acknowledged as a pious , just , and peaceful ruler . He is recognized as a martyr and saint , with his feast day being celebrated on 22 May . 
 Jovan Vladimir had a close relationship with Byzantium but this did not save Duklja from the expansionist Tsar Samuel of Bulgaria , who conquered the principality in around 1010 and took Vladimir prisoner . A medieval chronicle asserts that Samuel 's daughter , Theodora Kosara , fell in love with Vladimir and begged her father for his hand . The tsar allowed the marriage and returned Duklja to Vladimir , who ruled as his vassal . Vladimir took no part in his father @-@ in @-@ law 's war efforts . The warfare culminated with Tsar Samuel 's defeat by the Byzantines in 1014 and death soon after . In 1016 , Vladimir fell victim to a plot by Ivan Vladislav , the last ruler of the First Bulgarian Empire . He was beheaded in front of a church in Prespa , the empire 's capital , and was buried there . He was soon recognized as a martyr and saint . His widow , Kosara , reburied him in the Prečista Krajinska Church , near his court in southeastern Duklja . In 1381 , his remains were preserved in the Church of St Jovan Vladimir near Elbasan , and since 1995 they have been kept in the Orthodox cathedral of Tirana , Albania . The saint 's remains are considered Christian relics , and attract many believers , especially on his feast day , when the relics are taken to the church near Elbasan for a celebration . 
 The cross Vladimir held when he was beheaded is also regarded as a relic . Traditionally under the care of the Andrović family from the village of Velji Mikulići in southeastern Montenegro , the cross is only shown to believers on the Feast of Pentecost , when it is carried in a procession to the summit of Mount Rumija . Jovan Vladimir is regarded as the first Serbian saint and the patron saint of the town of Bar in Montenegro . His earliest , lost hagiography was probably written sometime between 1075 and 1089 ; a shortened version , written in Latin , is preserved in the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja . His hagiographies in Greek and Church Slavonic were first published , respectively , in 1690 and 1802 . The saint is classically depicted in icons as a monarch wearing a crown and regal clothes , with a cross in his right hand and his own head in his left hand . He is fabled to have carried his severed head to his place of burial . 
 = = Life = = 
 Duklja was an early medieval Serbian principality whose borders coincided for the most part with those of present @-@ day Montenegro . The state rose greatly in power after the disintegration of Serbia that followed the death of its ruler , Prince Časlav , around 943 . Though the extent of Časlav 's Serbia is uncertain , it is known that it included at least Raška ( now part of Central Serbia ) and Bosnia . Raška had subsequently come under Duklja 's political dominance , along with the neighboring Serbian principalities of Travunia and Zachlumia ( in present @-@ day Herzegovina and south Dalmatia ) . The Byzantines often referred to Duklja as Serbia . 
 Around 1000 , Vladimir , still a boy , succeeded his father Petrislav as the ruler of Duklja . Petrislav is regarded as the earliest ruler of Duklja whose existence can be confirmed by primary sources , which also indicate that he was in close relations with Byzantium . The principality consisted of two provinces : Zenta in the south and <unk> in the north . A local tradition has it that Vladimir 's court was situated on the hillock called Kraljič , at the village of <unk> near Lake Skadar , in the Krajina region of southeastern Montenegro . Near Kraljič lie the ruins of the Prečista Krajinska Church ( dedicated to Theotokos ) , which already existed in Vladimir 's time . According to Daniele <unk> , an 18th @-@ century ecclesiastical historian , the court and residence of Serbian rulers once stood in Krajina . 
 Vladimir 's reign is recounted in Chapter 36 of the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja , completed between 1299 and 1301 ; Chapters 34 and 35 deal with his father and uncles . These three chapters of the chronicle are most likely based on a lost biography of Vladimir written in Duklja sometime between 1075 and 1089 . Both the chronicle and the 11th @-@ century Byzantine historian John Skylitzes described Vladimir as a wise , pious , just , and peaceful ruler . 
 Vladimir 's reign coincided with a protracted war between the Byzantine Emperor Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) and the ruler of the First Bulgarian Empire , Tsar Samuel ( r . 980 – 1014 ) . Basil II might have sought the support of other Balkan rulers for his fight against Samuel , and he intensified diplomatic contacts with Duklja for this purpose . A Serbian diplomatic mission , most likely sent from Duklja , arrived in the Byzantine capital of Constantinople in 992 and was recorded in a charter of the Great Lavra Monastery , written in 993 . 
 In 1004 or 1005 , Emperor Basil recovered from Samuel the city of Dyrrhachium , the major stronghold on the Adriatic coast , south of Duklja . Since 1005 , Basil had also controlled the coastal lands north and south of that city , parts of the Byzantine Theme of Dyrrhachium . Byzantium thus established a territorial contact with Prince Vladimir 's Duklja , which was in turn connected to the Byzantine Theme of Dalmatia , consisting of Adriatic towns northwest of Duklja . The Republic of Venice , an ally of Byzantium , militarily intervened in Dalmatia in 1000 to protect the towns from attacks by Croats and <unk> . Venetian rule over Dalmatia on behalf of Basil was confirmed by the emperor in 1004 or 1005 . Svetoslav <unk> , a Venetian ally , was crowned Croatian king . Venice , the Dalmatian towns , Croatia , and Vladimir 's Duklja , were thus aligned in a compact pro @-@ Byzantine bloc connected to Byzantium via Dyrrhachium . 
 The close relations with Byzantium , however , did not help Prince Vladimir . Samuel attacked Duklja in 1009 or 1010 , as part of his campaign aimed at breaking up that pro @-@ Byzantine bloc , which could have threatened him . Vladimir retreated with his army and many of his people to his fortress on a hill named <unk> , close to the southeastern tip of Lake Skadar . According to the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja , he performed a miracle there : the hill was infested with venomous snakes , but when he offered up a prayer to the Lord , their bites became harmless . 
 Part of Samuel 's army lay siege to the hill , and the remainder attacked the nearby coastal town of Ulcinj , which was part of the fortification system of the Theme of Dyrrhachium . Vladimir eventually surrendered , a decision the chronicle attributed to his wish to deliver his people from famine and the sword . He was sent to a prison in Samuel 's capital of Prespa , located in western Macedonia . Having failed to conquer Ulcinj , which received men and supplies by sea from Dalmatian towns , the tsar directed his forces towards Dalmatia . There , he burned the towns of Kotor and Dubrovnik , and ravaged the region as far northwest as Zadar . He then returned to Bulgaria via Bosnia and Raška . A consequence of this campaign was the Bulgarian occupation of Duklja , Travunia , Zachlumia , Bosnia , and Raška . Venetian , and indirectly Byzantine power in Dalmatia was weakened . Samuel had succeeded in breaking up the pro @-@ Byzantine bloc . 
 The chronicle states that while Vladimir languished in the Prespa prison , praying day and night , an angel of the Lord appeared to him and foretold that he would shortly be freed , but that he would die a martyr 's death . His fate in captivity was described in a romantic story involving him and Theodora Kosara , Tsar Samuel 's daughter . This is the chronicle 's description of how they met : 
 It came to pass that Samuel 's daughter , <unk> , was animated and inspired by a beatific soul . She approached her father and begged that she might go down with her maids and wash the head and feet of the chained captives . Her father granted her wish , so she descended and carried out her good work . Noticing Vladimir among the prisoners , she was struck by his handsome appearance , his humility , gentleness and modesty , and the fact that he was full of wisdom and knowledge of the Lord . She stopped to talk to him , and to her his speech seemed sweeter than honey and the honeycomb . 
 Kosara then begged her father for Vladimir 's hand , and the tsar granted her request . He restored his new son @-@ in @-@ law to the throne of Duklja . In reality , the marriage was probably a result of Samuel 's political assessment : he may have decided that Vladimir would be a more loyal vassal if he was married to his daughter . Resolving thus the question of Duklja , Samuel could concentrate more troops in Macedonia and Thessaly , the main site of his conflict with Byzantium . The chronicle claims that the tsar also gave Vladimir the whole territory of Dyrrachium . The prince could in fact have been given a northern part of that territory , which was partially under Samuel 's rule . A brief note on Vladimir by John Skylitzes may indicate that the prince also received some territory in Raška . His paternal uncle Dragimir , ruler of Travunia and Zachlumia , who had retreated before Samuel 's army , was given back his lands to rule , also as the tsar 's vassal . 
 Thereafter , as recorded in the chronicle , " Vladimir lived with his wife <unk> in all sanctity and chastity , worshipping God and serving him night and day , and he ruled the people entrusted to him in a <unk> and just manner . " There are no indications that Vladimir took any part in his father @-@ in @-@ law 's war efforts . The warfare culminated in Samuel 's disastrous defeat by the Byzantines in 1014 , and on 6 October that same year , the tsar died of a heart attack . He was succeeded by his son , Gavril Radomir , whose reign was short : his cousin Ivan Vladislav killed him in 1015 and ruled in his stead . Vladislav sent messengers to Vladimir demanding his attendance at the court in Prespa , but Kosara advised him not to go and went there herself instead . Vladislav received her with honor and urged Vladimir to come as well , sending him a golden cross as a token of safe conduct . The chronicle relates the prince 's reply : 
 We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ , who died for us , was suspended not on a golden cross , but on a wooden one . Therefore , if both your faith and your words are true , send me a wooden cross in the hands of religious men , then in accordance with the belief and conviction of the Lord Jesus Christ , I will have faith in the life @-@ giving cross and holy wood . I will come . 
 Two bishops and a hermit came to Vladimir , gave him a wooden cross , and confirmed that the tsar had made a pledge of faith on it . Vladimir kissed the cross and clutched it to his chest , collected a few followers , and set off for Prespa . As he arrived , on 22 May 1016 , he went into a church to pray . When he exited the church , he was struck down by Vladislav 's soldiers and beheaded . According to Skylitzes , Vladimir believed Vladislav 's pledge , told to him by the Bulgarian archbishop David . He then allowed himself to fall into Vladislav 's hands , and was executed . The motivation behind the murder is unclear . Since Samuel 's defeat in 1014 , the Bulgarians had been losing battle after battle , and Vladislav probably suspected or was informed that Vladimir planned to restore Duklja 's alliance with Byzantium . This alliance would be particularly disturbing for Tsar Vladislav because of the proximity of Duklja to Dyrrhachium , which was a target of the tsar 's war efforts . 
 In early 1018 Vladislav led an unsuccessful attack against Dyrrhachium , outside whose walls he found his death . The chronicle asserts that Vladimir appeared before Vladislav when he dined in his camp outside Dyrrhachium , and slew him while he cried for help . In the same year , the Byzantine army — led by the victorious Emperor Basil — terminated the First Bulgarian Empire . As Vladimir and Kosara had no children , his successor was his uncle Dragimir , ruler of Travunia and Zachlumia . Accompanied by soldiers , he set off for Duklja to establish himself as its ruler , probably in the first half of 1018 . When he came to Kotor , the town 's inhabitants ambushed and killed him after inviting him to a banquet , and his soldiers returned to Travunia . Duklja was not mentioned again in the sources until the 1030s . Some scholars believe that it was placed under direct Byzantine rule around 1018 , while others believe it remained a Byzantine vassal state under an unknown native ruler . 
 = = Cult = = 
 Jovan Vladimir was buried in Prespa , in the same church in front of which he was martyred . His relics soon became famous as miraculously healing , attracting many people to his tomb . Shortly after his death he was recognized as a martyr and saint , being commemorated on 22 May , his feast day . At that time , saints were recognized without any formal rite of canonization . Vladimir was the first ruler of a Serbian state who was elevated to sainthood . The rulers from the Nemanjić dynasty , who reigned over the Serbian state which grew around Raška , would almost all be canonized — starting with Nemanja , the saintly founder of the dynasty . 
 Several years after his burial , Kosara transported the remains to Duklja . She interred him in the Prečista Krajinska Church , near his court , in the region of <unk> Krajina . The relics drew many devotees to the church , which became a center of pilgrimage . Kosara did not remarry ; at her request , she was interred in Prečista Krajinska , at the feet of her husband . In around 1215 — when Krajina was under the rule of Serbian Grand Prince Stefan Nemanjić — the relics were presumably removed from this church and transported to Dyrrhachium by the troops of Michael I , the despot of Epirus . At that time Despot Michael had briefly captured from Serbia the city of Skadar , which is only about 20 km ( 12 mi ) east of the church . Jovan Vladimir was mentioned as the patron saint of Dyrrhachium in a Greek liturgical text . 
 In 1368 Dyrrhachium was taken from the Angevins by Karlo Thopia , an Albanian lord . In 1381 he rebuilt , in Byzantine style , a church ruined in an earthquake in the narrow valley of the stream Kusha , a tributary of the <unk> River — near the site of the town of Elbasan in central Albania ( built in the 15th century ) . The church was dedicated to Saint Jovan Vladimir , as the inscription which Thopia placed above its south entrance declared in Greek , Latin , and Serbian . The saint 's relics were kept in a reliquary , a wooden casket , which was enclosed in a shrine , 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in height , within the church . 
 Serbian scholar Stojan Novaković theorized that Vladimir was buried near Elbasan immediately after his death . Novaković conjectured that the earthquake which ruined the old church happened during Thopia 's rule , and that Thopia reinstated the relics in the rebuilt church . If Vladimir was previously buried in Duklja , Novaković reasoned , he would not be absent , as he was , from Serbian sources written during the reign of the Nemanjić dynasty , who ruled over Duklja ( later named Zeta ) from 1186 to 1371 . Novaković did not consider the idea that the relics might have been removed from Duklja to Dyrrhachium in around 1215 . He commented on the chronicle 's account that Kosara transported Vladimir 's body " to a place known as Krajina , where his court was " : While his court was possibly in the region of Krajina before his captivity , after he married Kosara it could have been near Elbasan , in the territory of Dyrrachium he received from Tsar Samuel . He was interred near the latter court , which was replaced in the chronicle with the former . 
 An Orthodox monastery grew around the church near Elbasan , and became the center of veneration of Saint Jovan Vladimir , which was limited to an area around the monastery . In the latter half of the 15th century , the territory of present @-@ day Albania was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire , in which Islam was the privileged religion . After losing the Battle of Vienna in 1683 , the Ottomans went on the defensive in Europe . In the climate of revival of Christianity in the Ottoman Empire , a hagiography of the saint and a service to him were written in Greek in 1690 at the monastery . It stood under the jurisdiction of the Archbishopric of Ohrid , which became a notable spiritual and artistic force during the leadership of Archbishop Joasaph from 1719 to 1745 . In this period , the veneration of Saint Jovan Vladimir was promoted in southern Albania and western Macedonia , as well as beyond the archbishopric , in Bulgaria and among the Serbs in the Kingdom of Hungary . 
 The monastery became the see of the newly founded Archbishopric of Dyrrhachium in the second half of the 18th century . In more recent times the monastery fell into disrepair , and in the 1960s it was closed by Albania 's Communist authorities ; in 1967 the reliquary with the saint 's relics was moved to St Mary 's Church in Elbasan . The dilapidated monastery was returned to the Church in the 1990s . The restoration of its church and other buildings was completed in 2005 . Since around 1995 the relics have been kept in the Orthodox cathedral of Tirana , the capital of Albania , and are brought back to the monastery only for the saint 's feast day . 
 Each year on the Feast of Saint Jovan Vladimir , a great number of devotees come to the monastery , popularly known as <unk> among Albanians . In the morning , the reliquary is placed at the center of the church under a canopy , before being opened . After the morning liturgy has been celebrated , chanting priests carry the reliquary three times around the church , followed by the devotees , who hold lit candles . The reliquary is then placed in front of the church , to be kissed by the believers . The priests give them pieces of cotton that have been kept inside the reliquary since the previous feast . There are numerous stories about people , both Christians and Muslims , who were healed after they prayed before the saint 's relics . 
 On the eve of the Feast of Saint Jovan Vladimir , an all @-@ night vigil is celebrated in the churches dedicated to the saint , as is celebrated in other Orthodox churches on the eves of their patron saints ' feasts . The liturgical celebration of Vladimir 's feast day begins on the evening of 21 May , because , in the Orthodox Church , the liturgical day is reckoned from one evening to the next . Despite the name of the service , the all @-@ night vigil is usually not held throughout the entire night , and may last only for two hours . In the Church of St Jovan Vladimir near Elbasan , it lasts from 9 pm to 3 am . Hymns either to Jovan Vladimir or to another saint whose commemoration falls on 22 May , are chanted , on that liturgical day , at set points during services in all Orthodox churches . 
 Saint Jovan Vladimir is the patron saint of the modern @-@ day town of Bar in south Montenegro , built at its present location in 1976 about 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the site of the old town of Bar , which was destroyed in a war and abandoned in 1878 . A religious procession celebrating the saint passes on his feast day through the town 's streets with church banners and icons . The procession is usually led by the Serbian Orthodox Metropolitan of Montenegro and the Littoral . The bronze sculpture King Jovan Vladimir , 4 m ( 13 ft ) in height , was installed at the central square of Bar in 2001 ; it is a work by sculptor Nenad <unk> . Although Vladimir was only a prince , he is referred to as " king " in the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja . He is called the Holy King in southeastern Montenegro , and hence the hillock thought to be the site of his court is named Kraljič ( <unk> means " king " ) . 
 = = = Cross of Vladimir = = = 
 A cross , held by tradition to be the one that Jovan Vladimir received from Ivan Vladislav , and had in his hands when he was martyred , is a highly valued relic . It is under the care of the Andrović family from the village of Velji Mikulići near Bar and , according to the <unk> , has been for centuries . The cross is made of yew wood plated with silver , with a brass ball attached to its lower arm , into which a stick is inserted when the cross is carried . The cross is 45 cm ( 18 in ) high , 38 cm ( 15 in ) wide , and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 According to Russian scholars Ivan <unk> and Pavel Rovinski , the cross was originally kept in the Prečista Krajinska Church , in which Kosara had interred Vladimir . The peak of Islamization of the Krajina region was reached at the end of 18th century . The church was torn down , though it is uncertain when and by whom , but the cross was preserved by the people of the region . They believed that it could protect against evil and ensure a rich harvest , and kept it as sacred , although they had converted to Islam . The cross was later taken from them by the neighboring clan of Mrkojevići . As they too converted to Islam , they entrusted the cross to the Andrović family — their Orthodox Christian neighbors . The Mrkojevići considered it more appropriate for the cross to be kept in a Christian home , rather than in a Muslim one . 
 The cross , followed by a religious procession , is carried each year on the Feast of Pentecost from Velji Mikulići to the summit of Mount Rumija . The procession is preceded by a midnight liturgy in the village 's Church of St Nicholas . After the liturgy , the ascent begins up a steep path to the 1 @,@ 593 m ( 5 @,@ 226 ft ) summit of Rumija . The cross , carried by a member of the Andrović family , leads the procession , followed by an Orthodox priest and the other participants . Catholics and Muslims of the region have traditionally participated in the procession . It is carefully observed that no one precedes the cross ; to do so is considered a bad omen . The ascending devotees sing : 
 In the past , the standard @-@ bearer of the Mrkojevići clan , a Muslim , walked next to the cross with a flag in his left and a knife in his right hand , ready to use it if anyone attempted to take the cross . The clan especially feared that the participants from Krajina might try to recover the sacred object . At the end of 19th century the number of Muslims in the procession dropped as their religious and political leaders disapproved of their participation in it . After World War II , Yugoslavia 's socialist government discouraged public religious celebrations , and the procession was not held between 1959 and 1984 . 
 Tradition has it that a church dedicated to the Holy Trinity stood at the summit until it was razed by the Ottomans ; in another version , the church crumbled after a boy and a girl sinned within . Before 2005 , there was a custom to pick up a stone at a certain distance from the peak and carry it to the supposed site of the church in the belief that when a sufficient quantity of stones were collected , the church would rebuild itself . A new church dedicated to the Holy Trinity was consecrated on the site by the Serbian Orthodox Church on 31 July 2005 . 
 The procession arrives at the peak before dawn , and at sunrise the morning liturgy begins . After prayers have been offered , the procession goes back to Velji Mikulići , again following the cross . The participants would formerly gather on a flat area 300 m ( 980 ft ) from the peak , where they would spend some five or six hours in a joyous celebration and sports , and have a communal meal . On the way back , some people pick the so @-@ called herb of Rumija ( <unk> <unk> ) , whose root is reputed for its medicinal properties . The procession ends at the Church of St Nicholas , and folk festivities at Velji Mikulići continue into the night . Until the next Feast of Pentecost , the cross is kept at a secret location . It was formerly known only to two oldest male members of the Andrović family , and since around 2000 the <unk> have appointed a committee to keep the cross . 
 = = = <unk> and iconography = = = 
 The oldest preserved hagiography of Saint Jovan Vladimir is contained in Chapter 36 of the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja . This chronicle , written in Latin , was completed between 1299 and 1301 in the town of Bar , then part of the Serbian Kingdom . Its author was <unk> , the Catholic Archbishop of Bar , who was probably of Czech origin . He wrote Chapter 36 as a summary of an older hagiography of Vladimir , written in Duklja most likely sometime between 1075 and 1089 . This is the period when Duklja 's rulers from the <unk> dynasty endeavored to obtain the royal insignia from the Pope , and to elevate the Bar Bishopric to an archbishopric . They represented Prince Vladimir as the saintly founder of their dynasty ; they were , according to the chronicle , descendants of his uncle Dragimir . The <unk> succeeded in those endeavors , though Vladimir was not recognized as a saint by the Catholic Church . Despite its hagiographic nature , Chapter 36 contains a lot of reliable historical data . Chapters 34 and 35 , which deal with Vladimir 's father and uncles , are probably based on the prologue of the 11th @-@ century hagiography . Chapters 1 – 33 of the chronicle are based on oral traditions and its author 's constructions , and are for the most part dismissed by historians . 
 The hagiography in the chronicle is the source for the " Poem of King Vladimir " composed in the 18th century by a Franciscan monk from Dalmatia , Andrija Kačić Miošić . The poem is part of Miošić 's history of the South Slavs in prose and verse , written in the Croatian vernacular of Dalmatia . This book was first printed in Venice in 1756 and was soon read beyond Dalmatia , including Serbia and Bulgaria ( then under Ottoman rule , as was most of the Balkans ) . The " Poem of King Vladimir " is composed in a manner derived from the style of the South Slavic oral epics . It describes Vladimir 's captivity in Bulgaria , the love between Kosara and him , Tsar Samuel 's blessing of their marriage , and their wedding . It concludes with the newlyweds setting off for Vladimir 's court , which Miošić places in the Herzegovinian city of Trebinje . 
 The Greek akolouthia on Saint Jovan Vladimir , containing his hagiography , prayers to him , and hymns to be chanted in church services on his feast day , was printed in Venice in 1690 . The book was reprinted with small changes in 1774 and 1858 . It was written from oral traditions by the deputy of the Orthodox Archbishop of Ohrid , Cosmas , who resided at the Monastery of St Jovan Vladimir , near Elbasan . Copies of the book were distributed to other Orthodox churches and individuals . The akolouthia was also published in 1741 in Moscopole , an Aromanian center in southeastern Albania , as part of a compilation dedicated to saints popular in that region . A shorter hagiography of the saint , based on his life contained in this akolouthia , was included in the <unk> composed by Nicodemus the <unk> , printed in Venice ( 1819 ) and Athens ( 1868 ) . Cosmas 's text was the basis for the Church Slavonic <unk> on the saint , which appeared in Venice ( 1802 ) and Belgrade ( 1861 ) . The latter was printed as part of the third edition of <unk> , a compendium of <unk> on Serb saints , published by the Serbian Orthodox Church . The saint 's life in English , translated from Church Slavonic , appeared in the book Lives of the Serbian Saints , published in London in 1921 by the Anglican Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge . 
 In Cosmas 's writing , the saint was named " Jovan from Vladimir " ; his father was Nemanja ( historically , Grand Prince of Raška from 1166 to 1196 ) , and his grandfather was Simeon ( Bulgarian Tsar from 893 to 927 ) . He married a daughter of Samuel , the tsar of Bulgaria and Ohrid . He succeeded his father as emperor of Albania , Illyria , and Dalmatia . After Byzantine Emperor Basil defeated Tsar Samuel , Emperor Jovan defeated Basil . He also fought against the Bogomil and <unk> heretics . From his early youth , Jovan Vladimir longed for the Kingdom of God . After he was married , he prayed day and night , and abstained from intercourse with his wife . She was a heretic like her brother , whom she incited to kill Jovan . When the two brothers @-@ in @-@ law rode together , accompanied by soldiers , the heretic suddenly struck Jovan with a sword at a mountain pass named <unk> , but could not cut him . Only when Jovan gave him his own sword was the murderer able to cut off his head . Jovan caught it in the air and rode on to the church he had built near Elbasan . There he put his head down , saying , " Lord Jesus Christ , in your hands I place my spirit , " and died ; it was AD 899 . He was buried in the church , which then became the scene of many miracles . The saint 's beneficent power is described in the hagiography : 
 According to Vladimir 's life in Church Slavonic , he succeeded his father Petrislav as the ruler of Serbian lands ; he ruled from the town of Alba . He was captured and imprisoned by the Bulgarian ruler Samuel . After marrying Samuel 's daughter Kosara , he returned to his country . Emperor Basil , having overcome Bulgaria , attacked the Serbian lands , but Vladimir repulsed him . Basil advised the new Bulgarian ruler , Vladislav , to kill Vladimir by trickery . Vladislav invited Vladimir to visit him , as if to discuss the needs of their peoples . When Kosara came to him instead , Vladislav received her with apparent kindness ; therefore Vladimir came as well . Vladislav was able to cut off his head only after Vladimir gave him his own sword . The saint then carried his severed head to the church he had built near Alba , and died there ; it was AD 1015 . He was buried in the church . During Vladislav 's siege of Dyrrachium , Vladimir appeared before his murderer when he dined , and slew him while he cried for help . The saint 's relics then gushed myrrh , curing various illnesses . The <unk> which is contained , among other hymns , in the Church Slavonic akolouthia published as part of <unk> , praises the saint : 
 In a Bulgarian liturgical book written in 1211 , Vladimir was included in a list of tsars of the First Bulgarian Empire : " To Boris , . . . Samuel , Gavril Radomir , Vladimir , and Vladislav , ancient Bulgarian tsars , who inherited both the earthly and the heavenly empires , Memory Eternal . " According to the earliest work of Bulgarian historiography composed in 1762 by Paisius of <unk> , Vladimir , also named Vladislav , was a Bulgarian tsar and saint . His father was Aron , Tsar Samuel 's brother . His wife and her brother murdered him because of his pure life and Orthodox faith . Paisius combined Ivan Vladislav and Jovan Vladimir into one character attributed with Vladislav 's parentage and Vladimir 's sainthood . 
 An important model for the iconography of Saint Jovan Vladimir is an engraving in the 1690 edition of the Greek akolouthia . It is a work by Venetian engraver Isabella <unk> . She depicted the saint with a mustache and short beard , wearing a cloak and a crown inscribed with lilies , holding a cross in his right hand , and his severed head in his left hand . A portable icon in Saint Catherine 's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula , dated around 1700 , shows the saint mounted on horseback . 
 An icon of Saints Marina and Jovan Vladimir , dated 1711 , is part of the iconostasis of the Monastery of St Naum near Ohrid in western Macedonia . The icon 's position on the iconostasis indicates that Vladimir was an important figure of local veneration . He was often depicted in the company of Saints Clement and Naum in Macedonian churches . A number of 18th @-@ century painters from central and southern Albania painted the saint in churches of the region , especially in the area of Moscopole . A portable icon of the saint was created in 1739 at the <unk> Monastery in southwestern Albania . It depicts him seated on a throne , surrounded by twelve panels showing scenes of his life and miracles . Saint Jovan Vladimir is represented on frescos in three monasteries of Mount Athos : Hilandar , <unk> , and <unk> ; and three Bulgarian monasteries : Rila , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 <unk> Žefarović , an artist from Macedonia , painted the frescos in the rebuilt church of the Serbian Monastery of <unk> , in the Bačka region ( then part of the Kingdom of Hungary ) in 1737 . There , he depicted Jovan Vladimir in a row of six Serb saints , wearing a crown and sceptre , clad in a full @-@ length tunic , <unk> ( a type of stole ) , and chlamys . In the same row stands another Serb saint from present @-@ day Montenegro , Stefan <unk> . Žefarović 's frescos in <unk> are regarded as the earliest work showing Baroque traits in the Serbian art . Žefarović created in 1742 in Vienna a copperplate with scenes of the saint 's life and miracles . Its printed impressions were disseminated to many Orthodox Christian homes in the Balkans . The same author included him among the rulers and saints whom he illustrated in his <unk> . 
 A lithography in the 1858 edition of the Greek akolouthia shows the saint wearing a crown with a double lily wreath , his right foot on a sword . He holds a cross , a sceptre , and an olive branch in his right hand , while his crowned severed head is in his left hand . He wears an ermine cloak and a robe with floral designs , adorned with large gems surrounded by pearls . The Greek text beneath the illustration names the saint as Jovan Vladimir , the pious Emperor of all Albania and Bulgaria , the graceful <unk> and Great Martyr , and true Myrrh @-@ gusher . In his hagiography included in the <unk> of Nicodemus the <unk> , the saint is referred to as Emperor of the Serbs ( τῶν <unk> βασιλεύς ) . 
 = = = Legends = = = 
 Several legends about Jovan Vladimir have been recorded in western Macedonia . One has it that , after he was beheaded , he brought his head to the Monastery of St John of <unk> . On a hill above the village of <unk> in the Municipality of <unk> , there is a locality called <unk> , at which some ruins can be seen . The locals claimed that Vladimir was born there , and brought his severed head there . The Church of St Athanasius near <unk> , now in ruins , is reputed to have been built by Vladimir . People from the region gathered there each year on the eve of his feast day . They lit candles on the remains of the church 's walls , and prayed to the saint . Tradition has it that the Monastery of St Naum had a bell tower named after the saint , in the foundation of which a portion of his relics was placed . 
 In the western fringe of Macedonia , which is now part of Albania , Jovan Vladimir was remembered as a saintly ruler , cut down by his father @-@ in @-@ law , an emperor , who believed some slander that he was a womanizer . The enraged emperor , accompanied by soldiers , found Vladimir on a mountain pass named <unk> <unk> ( also known as <unk> ) , on the road between the Macedonian town of Struga and Elbasan . He struck his son @-@ in @-@ law with a sword , but could not cut him . Only when Vladimir gave him his own sword was the emperor able to cut off his head . Vladimir took his severed head and went toward the site of his future church . There stood an oak , under which he fell after the tree bowed down before him . The saint was interred in the church which was subsequently built at that place and dedicated to him . 
 According to a legend recorded in the Greek hagiography , Jovan Vladimir built the church near Elbasan . Its location , deep in a dense forest , was chosen by God , and an eagle with a shining cross on its head showed it to Vladimir . After the saint was decapitated , he brought his head to the church , and was buried inside . A group of Franks once stole the casket with his miraculous relics . The casket turned out to be extremely heavy , breaking the backs of <unk> on which the Franks carried it . They eventually put it in the <unk> River to take it to the sea , but the river flooded , and the casket — radiating light — went back upstream toward the church . The inhabitants of that area took it out of the water and returned it to the church in a festive procession . 
 A group of thieves stole , on a summer day , horses that belonged to the Monastery of St Jovan Vladimir . When they came to the nearby stream of Kusha to take the horses across , it appeared to them like an enormous river . They moved away from it in fear , but when they looked back from a distance , the stream appeared small . As they approached it again , the Kusha again became huge and impassable . After several such attempts to cross the stream , the thieves realized that this was a miracle of the saint , so they released the monastery 's horses and ran away in horror . 
 A possible legend of Prince Vladimir was recorded by Branislav Nušić in the 19th century in the city of Korçë , southeastern Albania , close to Macedonia . Ruins on top of a hill above Korçë were said to be remains of the court of a Latin ( Catholic ) king , whose kingdom neighbored the state of an Orthodox emperor . The king asked the hand of the emperor 's daughter , who agreed to become his wife only if he built an Orthodox church . He did so , and she married him , but on the first night of marriage she killed him . She then became a nun , and the king 's body was taken somewhere — he was not buried near his court . Macedonian Slavs inhabiting Saint <unk> Island in the Small Prespa Lake in Greece told of an emperor named <unk> . He lived on their island , where he was killed by a cousin of his out of jealousy , and his body was taken via Ohrid to Albania . 
 = United States at the 2008 Summer Paralympics = 
 The United States sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , China . A total of 213 U.S. competitors took part in 18 sports ; the only 2 sports Americans did not compete in were soccer 5 @-@ a @-@ side and 7 @-@ a @-@ side . The American delegation included 16 former members of the U.S. military , including 3 veterans of the Iraq War . Among them were shot putter Scott Winkler , who was paralyzed in an accident in Iraq , and swimmer Melissa Stockwell , a former United States Army officer who lost her left leg to a roadside bomb in the war . 
 The United States finished third in the gold and overall medal count , behind host nation China and Great Britain . The finish was an improvement from the 2004 Paralympics , where the U.S. finished fourth in the gold and overall medal count . The U.S. saw significant gains in Paralympic swimming , winning 17 gold medals and 44 total medals , 9 more than they took home from Athens . U.S. swimmers set a total of 16 world records , 23 Paralympic records , 48 Pan American records and 99 American records . U.S. coverage of the Games was provided by the Universal Sports Television Network and the official website of the U.S. Paralympic Team , <unk> 
 = = Disability classifications = = 
 Every participant at the Paralympics had their disability grouped into one of five disability categories : amputation ( either congenital or sustained through injury or illness ) ; cerebral palsy ; wheelchair athletes ( often overlapping with other categories ) ; visual impairment ( including blindness ) ; and les autres ( any physical disability that does not fall strictly under one of the other categories , for example dwarfism or multiple sclerosis ) . Each Paralympic sport then had its own classifications , depending on the specific physical demands of the competition . Events were given a code , made of numbers and letters , describing the type of event and classification of the athletes competing . Some sports , such as athletics , divided athletes by both the category and severity of their disabilities . Other sports , such as swimming , grouped competitors from different categories together , the only separation being based on the severity of the disability . 
 Athletes may have competed against individuals with different classifications in the same event . For example , track and field athlete Jim Bob Bizzell competed in the men 's 200 meters T44 ; the prefix T designated a track event and 44 was the disability classification . Although he finished behind Oscar Pistorius ( competing under the T43 class ) , <unk> set a world record in the T44 classification . For specific classification information , see the pages for individual sports at 2008 Summer Paralympics # Sports . 
 = = Medalists = = 
 The following American athletes won medals at the games ; all dates are for September 2008 . In the ' by discipline ' sections below , medalists ' names are in bold . 
 = = Archery = = 
 The American archery team consisted of seven men and one woman . The highest placed finishers were Lindsey Carmichael and Jeff Fabry , who each won a bronze medal . T. J. Pemberton and Joe Bailey competed against each other in the quarterfinals of the men 's individual compound open , with Pemberton winning and going on to finish fourth in that event . 
 = = Track and field ( athletics ) = = 
 The American track and field team consisted of 26 men and 17 women . Among them was shot putter Scott Winkler , a U.S. Army veteran who was paralyzed in Tikrit , Iraq in 2003 after he fell off a truck while holding 50 pounds of ammunition . The team set six world records and won a total of nine gold , fourteen silver , and five bronze medals , two more medals than the team won in Athens . Jessica Galli won five medals , more than any other team member , while Amanda McGrory , Tatyana McFadden , and Jim Bob Bizzell each won at least three medals . Jeremy Campbell was the only U.S. track and field athlete to win two golds . 
 Men 
 Legend : Q – Qualifiers for the final as decided on a basis of rank within heat ; WR = World Record ; PR = Paralympic Record 
 Women 
 Legend : Q – Qualifiers for the final as decided on a basis of rank within heat ; WR = World Record ; PR = Paralympic Record 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The U.S. boccia team consisted of a single competitor , T. J. Hawker . Hawker lost his four pool stage matches and did not advance to the knock @-@ out stage . 
 = = Cycling = = 
 The initial members of the 2008 U.S. Paralympic Cycling Team were named on June 6 , 2008 after the 2008 U.S. Paralympics Cycling National Championships in Morrison , Colorado . The final roster included thirteen athletes ( seven men and six women ) . The team entered the Games with a goal of two gold and ten medals total . They surpassed their goal , finishing with fourteen medals : five gold , five silver , and four bronze . 
 Factor time 
 To ensure a fair event when athletes with differing disabilities compete , times achieved were sometimes modified by a percentage rate , to produce a result known as " Factor Time " . It is this time that decided the result of the races , and is listed below . Where this differs from the actual time recorded , actual time is also listed . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = = Track = = = 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Equestrian = = 
 The only equestrian events held in the Paralympic Games are in the Dressage discipline . Five American riders competed , in both individual and team events . 
 = = Goalball = = 
 Goalball is a Paralympic sport played by athletes who are blind and visually impaired . At the 2008 Paralympics , the U.S. men 's goalball team hoped to repeat their bronze medal performance in Athens , but lost to Sweden in the final . The U.S. women 's goalball team improved on their silver medal performance in Athens , defeating China in the gold medal match . 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Judo = = 
 Jordan Mouton was selected as the only U.S. representative in the women 's division at the 2008 U.S. Paralympic Trials for Judo . All four American men went uncontested at the Trials and were automatically selected for the team . Greg <unk> , a first @-@ time Paralympian , won a bronze medal in the Men 's + 100 kilogram class . 
 = = Powerlifting = = 
 The U.S. powerlifting team consisted of two competitors , Mary Stack and Andy Wise . All of Stack 's lifts were declared invalid . She faltered and missed on her first two attempts to lift 110 kg . On her third attempt , Stack managed to lift the weight but the judges did not accept the lift and she was disqualified . Wise completed two valid lifts , the maximum of which was 150 kg , and finished in eleventh place . 
 Key : NMR = No marks recorded 
 = = Rowing = = 
 The 2008 U.S. Paralympic Rowing Team was selected after the 2008 U.S. Rowing National Championships in West Windsor , N.J. and was composed of nine athletes . This was the first time rowing has appeared as a medal sport in the Paralympic Games . Laura <unk> , who has multiple sclerosis and won ten medals in track and field across three Paralympics , battled back from breast cancer treatment to win a bronze medal in women 's single sculls at age 49 . The U.S. mixed coxed four team rallied in the final 100 m of their 1000 m race to take the silver medal . 
 Qualification Legend : R = Repechage ; FA = Final A ( medal ) ; FB = Final B ( non @-@ medal ) 
 = = Sailing = = 
 The United States entered crews in all three of the sailing events , held in the Qingdao International Sailing Centre . Maureen McKinnon @-@ Tucker and Nick <unk> clinched a gold medal in the <unk> @-@ 18 class with two races left in the series . First @-@ time Paralympian John Ruf won a bronze medal in a competitive 2 @.@ 4 mR final race , where the top seven players of the fleet started within single @-@ digit points of each other . 
 = = Shooting = = 
 The U.S. sent two athletes ( one man and one woman ) to compete in the shooting events at the Paralympics . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 The 2008 U.S. Paralympic Swimming Trials were held on April 3 – 5 at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis , Minnesota . A total of 38 swimming athletes ( 20 male and 18 female ) were selected to represent the U.S. at the 2008 Paralympic Games . Melissa Stockwell , a former United States Army officer who lost her left leg to a roadside bomb , became the first Iraq War veteran to be selected for the Paralympics . The roster also included Dave Denniston , an NCAA champion in the 200 @-@ yard breast stroke , two @-@ time Olympic hopeful , and world record breaker who was paralyzed in a 2005 sledding accident . 
 The U.S. Paralympic Swimming Team left Beijing with 17 gold , 14 silver and 13 bronze medals . The total of 44 medals was 9 more than they took home from Athens . Out of the 38 athletes on the team , 19 received a medal . U.S. swimmers set a total of 16 world records , 23 Paralympic records , 48 Pan American records and 99 American records . 
 Men 
 * Listed as finishing heats in ninth place , but started the final in place of eighth @-@ place qualifier Rudy Garcia @-@ Tolson Legend : Q – Qualifiers for the next round as decided on a time only basis . Ranks shown are overall rank against competitors in all heats ; WR = World Record ; PR = Paralympic Record 
 Women 
 Legend : Q – Qualifiers for the next round as decided on a time only basis . Ranks shown are overall rank against competitors in all heats ; WR = World Record ; PR = Paralympic Record 
 = = Table tennis = = 
 The United States sent four athletes ( three men and one woman ) to compete in Paralympic table tennis . 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Volleyball = = 
 The U.S. women 's sitting volleyball team upset world number one Netherlands in five sets to reach the gold medal match , where they lost to China for a silver medal . The men 's sitting volleyball team failed to qualify for the Paralympics after losing to Brazil at the 2007 Parapan American Games . 
 Women 's sitting volleyball 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 The United States qualified for both men 's and women 's wheelchair basketball tournaments at the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation qualifying tournaments for the Americas . The men 's team finished in fourth place after losing to Great Britain in the bronze final . The women 's team successfully defended their 2004 gold medal with a win over Germany . 
 Men 
 * Iran withdrew from its quarterfinal match against the United States on September 19 , 2008 . The match had been rescheduled from 11 : 15am to 9 : 00am , but was changed without any logical reason according to the head of Iran 's delegation . As a result , the U.S. was awarded the win by the score of 20 – 0 and automatically advanced to the semi @-@ finals . 
 Women 
 = = Wheelchair fencing = = 
 The United States sent five athletes ( four men and one woman ) to compete in wheelchair fencing . 
 = = Wheelchair rugby = = 
 At the Paralympics teams in the sport of wheelchair rugby are made up of mixed classification quadriplegic athletes of both sexes . The United States qualified by winning the 2006 World Wheelchair Rugby Championships and went on to win its third gold medal since wheelchair rugby was introduced as a demonstration sport at the 1996 Atlanta Paralympics . 
 = = Wheelchair tennis = = 
 The American wheelchair tennis team consisted of nine players . Lee Hinson , Paul Moran , Jon Rydberg and Stephen Welch competed in the men 's events , Beth <unk> and Kaitlyn <unk> competed in the women 's events , and Brent Poppen , Nick Taylor and David Wagner competed in the mixed quadriplegic events . The tennis team was coached by Dan James , with Jason Hartnett as assistant coach , David <unk> as team leader , and Bill Taylor as the personal care assistant . Taylor and Wagner successfully defended their title in mixed doubles , which they had won four years earlier at the 2004 Paralympics . The two men competed against each other in the bronze medal match of the mixed singles event , with Wagner prevailing . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 U.S. coverage of the 2008 Paralympic Games was provided by the Universal Sports Television Network . Daily live and delayed highlight shows as well as coverage of the opening and closing ceremonies was available on @-@ demand at <unk> from September 6 – 17 . Daily video highlights were also available at the official website of the U.S. Paralympic Team , <unk> The Universal Sports television broadcast began on October 8 , followed by seven days of three @-@ hour segments of coverage and a special presentation highlighting the events that was broadcast by NBC on October 18 . A 90 @-@ minute documentary was presented by NBC on November 9 , and was followed by another broadcast of the Games on Universal Sports from November 10 – 16 . 
 = Wendover Cut @-@ off = 
 The Wendover Cut @-@ off , also called the Wendover Road or Wendover Route , is a two @-@ lane highway in the western part of Tooele County in the U.S. state of Utah . Stretching 40 @.@ 3 miles ( 64 @.@ 9 km ) from Wendover to Knolls across the Bonneville Salt Flats , a part of the Great Salt Lake Desert , the cut @-@ off was once part of the primary link between the Nevada state line and Salt Lake City . In 2012 , between 240 and 250 vehicles used the cut @-@ off near its western terminus in Wendover on an average day . 
 The first roadway across the Great Salt Lake Desert was completed in 1917 as a single @-@ lane highway . It was added to the Utah state highway system in 1919 , and replacement plans had begun to arise as soon as 1921 . In 1923 , the current cut @-@ off was approved for construction and was opened to the traveling public in 1925 . The United States Numbered Highway System brought the arrival of the U.S. Route 40 ( US @-@ 40 ) designation to the highway , on the same day the Lincoln Highway Association agreed to abandon their southerly route to Ely , and route the Lincoln Highway along the cut @-@ off . Later , the cut @-@ off was also designated as part of US @-@ 50 and US @-@ 50 Alternate ( US @-@ 50 Alt ) . Upon the completion of the parallel Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) , the previous U.S. Route designations were deleted from the United States Numbered Highway System , and the cut @-@ off was turned over to the county . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Wendover Cut @-@ off begins at a T @-@ intersection with concurrent Utah State Route 58 ( SR @-@ 58 ) and I @-@ 80 Business in the eastern portion of Wendover , south of Danger Cave . The cut @-@ off travels due east by I @-@ 80 to the north and the now Union Pacific Central Corridor railroad tracks to the south . Leppy Pass Road , exit 4 on I @-@ 80 , provides access to the Bonneville Speedway north of the Interstate . Between SR @-@ 58 and Leppy Pass Road , the highway is designated Federal Aid Route 2654 . Further south , a rest area was built along the southern side of I @-@ 80 , however no road access was provided between the rest area and the cut @-@ off . Metaphor : The Tree of Utah was built on the northern side of I @-@ 80 in the middle of the salt flats further east from the rest area . Before terminating at I @-@ 80 the highway veers north and forms a diamond interchange in the unincorporated community of Knolls . A frontage road continues on the northern side of I @-@ 80 after this interchange . The land that the cut @-@ off was built upon was once compared to as being " as flat as a billiard table . " Unlike more traditional steel or iron culverts , the cut @-@ off uses all timber culverts , as the salt erodes the metal ones too quickly . 
 Although maintained as part of the Tooele County road network , the portion of the cut @-@ off designated Federal Aid Route 2654 is surveyed by the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) to measure traffic volumes . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , UDOT calculated between 240 and 250 vehicles used the cut @-@ off near its western terminus . By comparison , traffic on the parallel I @-@ 80 between the Nevada state line and Leppy Pass Road ( the Bonneville Speedway exit , and the end of Federal Aid Route 2654 on the cut @-@ off ) ranges between 6 @,@ 765 and 7 @,@ 345 vehicles per day . 
 = = History = = 
 The Western Pacific Railroad line , part of the Feather River Route , that parallels the cut @-@ off was built between 1906 and 1907 , filling a causeway with rock and gravel at a great cost . Along the route across the Great Salt Lake Desert , the railroad served the communities of <unk> , Barro , and Salduro , which were also served by the new road . The Union Pacific Railroad merged with the Missouri Pacific Railroad and the Western Pacific in December 1982 . 
 = = = First roads = = = 
 The Lincoln Highway was the first modern interstate highway completed across the Great Salt Lake Desert , however it was quickly succeeded by the Victory Highway upon its completion . The route of the Lincoln Highway was about 40 miles ( 64 km ) further south of the Victory Highway , and present day I @-@ 80 , and is mostly inaccessible since it lies inside of military areas . The Lincoln Highway also terminated in Ely and not in Wendover . The original route west of Dugway was part of the Pony Express Trail , used between 1860 and 1861 by the Pony Express , and travelers who became disabled near Fish Springs were told to set fire to tumbleweed , as it could be seen by rescuers up to 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . 
 In December 1919 , the Utah State Legislature approved the newly constructed single @-@ lane Victory Highway as part of the state 's highway system . The Victory Highway was a 3 @,@ 271 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 5 @,@ 264 km ) interstate highway linking New York City to San Francisco in honor of those who served during Great War . The road was constructed after $ 30 thousand ( equivalent to $ 4 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) was approved by the legislature , and another $ 10 thousand ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) was approved by the Salt Lake City Council in September 1914 . Heavy equipment from the nearby Utah @-@ Salduro Company , a potash company , were used during the construction of the single @-@ lane roadway . Tooele County had originally proposed a new gravel road along the salt flats to replace the single @-@ lane highway in 1921 ; however this was met with resistance from county residents , citing the lack of necessity . 
 = = = Current road = = = 
 Secretary of Agriculture Henry C. Wallace approved construction of the current two @-@ lane Wendover Cut @-@ Off in 1923 , and the Western Pacific Railroad provided a discounted freight rate to bring in the construction materials to construct the cut @-@ off . Sodium chloride was used as a binder in the road which was under construction by October 1924 , and the $ 380 thousand ( equivalent to $ 26 @.@ 8 million in 2015 ) road was opened by Secretary of Agriculture William M. Jardine and Bureau of Public Roads commissioner Thomas MacDonald on June 13 , 1925 . The cost of the road was part of an estimated $ 1 @.@ 07 billion ( equivalent to $ 75 @.@ 6 billion in 2015 ) 57 @,@ 063 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 91 @,@ 834 km ) road network across the contiguous United States . The opening ceremony of the highway was held in Salduro . The Engineering News @-@ Record called the road " a remarkable piece of construction . " 
 The Lincoln Highway Association lobbied the U.S. Government to get the Lincoln Highway route to Ely added to the United States Numbered Highway System after the passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 , however the Wendover Cut @-@ off along the Victory Highway was selected instead . The Victory Highway Association called the cut @-@ off the " shortest and most feasible route across the Great Salt Lake Desert " . The US @-@ 40 designation was applied to the Wendover Cut @-@ off on October 20 , 1926 , the same day the Lincoln Highway Association conceded and approved the routing of the Lincoln Highway along the cut @-@ off , abandoning their southerly route to Ely . The US @-@ 50 designation had been applied to the cut @-@ off by 1939 , and by 1957 the US @-@ 50 designation had given way to US @-@ 50 Alt . 
 In 1959 , radiation clouds crossed the cut @-@ off , spreading radiation between Knolls and Wendover from nuclear tests being conducted at the nearby Dugway Proving Ground . Estimates by the Deseret News put the exposure at 215 @.@ 5 curies ( 7 @.@ 97 TBq ) ; by comparison the Three Mile Island accident only released 15 curies ( 0 @.@ 56 TBq ) of radiation . 
 During the construction of I @-@ 80 , the cut @-@ off was identified as a frontage road for the new controlled @-@ access highway . One @-@ hundred sixty thousand dollars ( equivalent to $ 2 @.@ 3 million in 2015 ) was spent to repave the cut @-@ off during construction of I @-@ 80 . The US @-@ 40 designation was deleted by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) , in concurrence with UDOT , on August 18 , 1974 , and the US @-@ 50 Alt designation was deleted by AASHTO , also in concurrence with UDOT , on August 27 , 1976 , in effect turning the cut @-@ off over to Tooele County as a county road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Tooele County . 
 = Garry Schyman = 
 Garry Schyman ( born 1954 ) is an American film , television , and video game music composer . He graduated from the University of Southern California with a degree in music composition in 1978 , and began work in the television industry , writing music for such television series as Magnum , P.I. and The A @-@ Team . By 1986 , he was composing for movies such as Judgement and Hit List . At the request of a friend in 1993 , he composed the music for the video game <unk> , but after creating the music for two more games he left the industry , citing the low budgets and poor quality of video game music at the time . He continued to compose for film and television , only to return to video games for 2005 's Destroy All Humans ! . Finding that in his absence the quality and perceived importance of video game music had risen substantially , he has since composed for several games , writing the scores to BioShock and Dante 's Inferno among others . He still composes for film however , his latest being Brush with Danger directed by young Indonesian director Livi Zheng . He has won numerous awards for his video game scores , including several " soundtrack of the year " awards . Throughout his career , he has worked on over 25 television shows , 10 films , and 13 video games . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Schyman graduated from the University of Southern California in 1978 with a degree in music composition . He intended to compose music for film and television , going so far as to present two student film scores at his senior recital , which was an unconventional move at the time . Upon graduation , through one of his friend 's father , the actor Dennis Weaver , he was invited to watch a recording session for the music of a television show Weaver was working in . There , he met a ghost composer for the show , who in turn told him about a job composing for Lutheran television which he applied for and was hired . He also met the composers Pete Carpenter and Mike Post , the titled composers for the show Weaver had been acting in . They were working on four to five shows each week , and brought him on board as a ghost composer to help them create music for several shows , such as Magnum , P.I. and The Greatest American Hero , for which he is credited for starting in 1980 . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Schyman continued to work in television music composition for the next two decades , working on shows such as The A @-@ Team and Land 's End . Beginning in 1986 he also began to compose music for movies such as Never Too Young to Die . Schyman moved into video game composition with <unk> , released in 1993 , after being asked to by his friend Robert Weaver , an executive at Philips , which was creating and publishing the game for its CD @-@ i system . He used a live orchestra to score the game , one of the first video games to do so . The soundtrack won the <unk> Award for best soundtrack . He scored the sequel , released in 1996 , and 1995 's Off @-@ World Interceptor , but afterward Weaver left the company and the games division of Phillips was shut down . Rather than move to a new video game company Schyman left the industry and did not return for almost a decade , later stating that he felt that it was " not a very interesting place for composers at that time " as the budgets were low and the technical music quality poor . 
 After " orchestral work in TV took a nosedive " , according to Variety , he returned to the industry in 2005 when THQ approached him to compose the soundtrack to Destroy All Humans ! after his agent sent them a demo tape . They offered him a budget large enough for an orchestra and were looking for a style that he found interesting , reminiscent of 1950s movies , and he eagerly accepted the opportunity . The score was appreciated by critics , and was nominated for the Game Audio Network Guild 's " Best Original Instrumental Song " and " Music of the Year " awards . Feeling that in his absence the industry had moved towards wanting " strong orchestral music that is iconic and interesting " and that television music was moving towards " ambient music " that he found uninteresting to compose , he went on to compose scores for several more video games since then . He has composed the score for all three Destroy All Humans ! games as well as several others such as BioShock and Dante 's Inferno . His score for Destroy All Humans ! 2 was nominated for the Game Audio Network Guild 's " Music of the Year " award , while his score for BioShock won numerous awards , including several soundtrack of the year awards . 
 In addition to his commercial work , he has written a 15 @-@ minute viola concerto entitled " <unk> " , published by Century City Masterworks . He also composed the song " <unk> " , originally written by Rabindranath Tagore for Matt Harding 's " Dancing 2008 " viral video , which earned him the " Best Music Video " award at the Hollywood Music Awards , and the song " Trip the Light " ( sung by Alicia Lemke ) for Matt Harding 's " Dancing 2012 " . Some of Schyman 's work from BioShock has been performed by a live orchestra in the Video Games Live international concert tour from 2007 to date . In addition , " Welcome to Rapture " from BioShock was performed by the Metropole Orchestra at the Games in Concert 3 event in Utrecht , The Netherlands on November 15 , 2008 . In 2010 music from BioShock 2 and Dante 's Inferno had their live performance premieres in Sweden with the Malmo symphony orchestra . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Though he is not opposed to doing work on TV or film scores , Schyman currently prefers to compose music for video games as he feels video game soundtracks give him more freedom and a greater technical challenge . He has said that the video games industry is filled with " nice people whose egos were in check " , which was not always his experience in the film and television industries . However , he feels that his television and film career has been " a great experience " and he " still love [ s ] scoring film and TV " . He names his favorite composer " at the moment " as Gustav Mahler , and some of his favorite music as that from artists such as Prokofiev and Bartók . He enjoys music from the early to mid @-@ 20th century , and finds that it influences many of his scores , such as the ones to BioShock and Dante 's Inferno . 
 When he first started composing Schyman scored his music by playing it on the piano without the aid of computers , but now he composes digitally using Digital Performer and " the latest technology " . He considers himself to be a " very intuitive composer " , in that he has " something in my mind ’ s ear that I want to achieve " and improvises until the music he is creating matches up with it . He finds that the hardest part of composing for a project is finding the basic concept for the music that he wants to use , rather than composing any of the individual pieces . Although he has written a concerto , Schyman does not regularly compose " art music " pieces , as he finds his commercial work to be " satisfying music from a creative standpoint " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Reckoning ( Smallville ) = 
 " Reckoning " is the twelfth episode of the fifth season of the superhero television series Smallville and the hundredth episode of the overall series . It originally aired on The WB in the United States on January 26 , 2006 , and on E4 in the United Kingdom on March 27 , 2006 . The episode was written by Kelly Souders and Brian Peterson , and directed by Greg Beeman . The series follows the adventures of the young Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) in the town of Smallville , Kansas , before he becomes Superman . In this episode , Clark reveals his secret to Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) , but there are consequences . Jonathan Kent ( John Schneider ) and Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) learn the results of the senatorial election and the life of someone Clark loves is taken from him . 
 There were originally two potential plotlines for the episode before it was decided that one of the main characters would be killed . This concept was positively received by studio executives . Schneider compared his departure to that of John Wayne in The Cowboys . The theme of the episode was that Clark had to accept the consequences of his decisions . To keep the identity of the imminently deceased secret , the script was given to fewer people and the network issuing promotional trailers that featured the possible deaths of both Lana and Jonathan . 
 Upon its premiere , " Reckoning " earned a Nielsen household rating of 2 @.@ 2 , and was watched by approximately 6 @.@ 28 million viewers in the United States ; along with an estimated 375 @,@ 000 viewers in the United Kingdom . The episode received generally positive reviews from commentators , who felt that Jonathan 's death was both emotional and pivotal . One faction of fans was unhappy with the choice of Jonathan , preferring that Lana would have been killed instead . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) sits in his loft holding a piece of coal , waiting for Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) to arrive . He then takes her to the Kawatche Caves , where they are transported to the Fortress of Solitude . Lana is in shock as she looks around at the Fortress . Clark expresses fear that Lana is drifting away because of his secret , so he decides to reveal his powers to her . Clark then uses the coal to make a diamond ring and proposes marriage . Afterward , Clark reveals what he did to his parents , Jonathan and Martha Kent ( John Schneider and Annette O 'Toole ) , who tell him that he is old enough to make decisions on his own without the advice of his father . After some initial doubt , Lana returns to the Kent farm to accept Clark 's proposal . 
 Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) holds an election party for Jonathan at the Talon , where his supporters learn that he defeated Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) in the Kansas State Senate race . Lana gets a call from Lex and meets him at his mansion . After seeing Lana 's engagement ring , Lex realizes that Lana knows Clark 's secret and reacts aggressively . Lana leaves , but Lex follows in an attempt to apologize . Distracted , she does not see the school bus as it hits her car and she is killed . Clark realizes that Lana 's life is the price that Jor @-@ El ( Terence Stamp ) promised to collect when he resurrected Clark in " Hidden " . Jor @-@ El provides a crystal that will allow Clark to reset the day , but warns him that the universe will find someone else 's life to exchange for hers . When Clark takes the crystal , he is sent back to the moment that Lana appeared in his barn . This time , Clark decides not to reveal his secret , which causes Lana to break up with him . Upset , Clark goes to Metropolis and tells Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) everything , including how he had already lived the day , and his proposal to Lana . Chloe promises to keep an eye on Lana to prevent the accident . 
 At the election party , Lana arrives with Chloe , but she leaves again when Lex calls . This time Lex kisses her when he learns of her break up , which causes Lana to leave . Lex pursues Lana again , but this time Clark arrives in time to stop the bus . Jonathan goes to the farm after receiving a mysterious call during the party , and is greeted by Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) . Lionel insinuates he knows Clark 's secret and shows a picture to Jonathan , which causes Jonathan to begin punching Lionel in anger . Jonathan dismisses Lionel and laboriously walks into the yard , breathing heavily . Martha and Clark drive up and catch him as he stumbles to the ground . After taking a final look at his family , Jonathan dies in the arms of Martha and Clark . At Jonathan 's funeral , all of Clark 's close friends attend , as well as the <unk> . Clark is the last person at the grave site as everyone leaves . He picks up a handful of dirt to sprinkle into his father 's grave . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Originally , the writers developed two potential plotlines for the episode : Clark and Lana would get married and one of Clark 's parents would die . The producers eventually chose only to kill one of the parents . The producers also debated the idea of other characters dying , but realized that none would have as much resonance as one of Clark 's parents . Once the basic plot was decided , a group of Smallville writers used whiteboards to flesh out the story . The story went into development , and the details were arranged . After the main story line was developed , the supervising producers presented it to several of the executive vice presidents at The WB Television Network . The executives enjoyed the story : Michael Roberts , a senior executive , called the episode 's plot " great " and noted that " the conceit is really cool " . 
 Writers Kelly Souders and Brian Peterson explained that the title , " Reckoning " , had been decided on before the script was finalized . Peterson explained that the theme revolved around the idea that " you reap what you sow " . The idea was an expansion from " Hidden " , in which Clark was resurrected by his biological father Jor @-@ El , who also informed Clark that the life of someone he loves would be exchanged in the future as payment for bringing Clark back . Peterson expounded further that the plot of the episode would show that " Clark is not God " . Jonathan Kent 's death had been requested by executive producers Alfred Gough and Miles Millar at the " beginning of the season " according to Souders . The idea was specifically chosen to be featured in the show 's 100th episode . 
 Gough explained that the reason Jonathan Kent was chosen to die was because " going into season five , this is the year the boy becomes the man , so at some point the mentor / father figure has to die , in order for Clark to ultimately step up and really embrace his destiny . " Schneider was happy with the way Jonathan Kent was killed . He argued that his character exited the show " like a hero " . Furthermore , he drew comparisons to John Wayne , finding it " An empowering death . " Originally , a scene had been shot featuring Clark bringing his father 's dead body to the Fortress of Solitude . However , the scene was ultimately cut because , according to Gough , " It was something that sounded great on paper , but it felt like a bit of a stutter step in the episode . " Gough later called the scene " morbid " . 
 Once the rough script was formulated it was sent to Gough and Millar for additional notes . Next , drafts were sent to the production studio and the network , who also made notes . Finally , Souders and Peterson re @-@ wrote the episode ; the script went through 10 drafts . The final version was finished " two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half [ to ] three weeks " before production began . Normally a script for a Smallville episode would go to about 40 different people , including " sets , props , and wardrobe " , but because the episode featured the death , the production staff and writers kept it " top secret " . In fact , the script for the episode was printed on red paper in an attempt to keep it " under wraps " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Director Greg Beeman found shooting the episode difficult , because his father had recently died . Beeman noted , " I left from his funeral to go to Vancouver to direct the episode , so the emotions were very poignant for me . " During filming , artificial snow had to be continuously shoveled on the sets because the cast and crew kept trampling through it . Steve <unk> , the costume set supervisor for the series , jokingly called the Fortress of Solitude the " Fortress of Styrofoam " and explained that a huge hurdle for the scenes in the fortress was to make sure that the synthetic snow would not stick to the actors during filming . 
 Souders stated that the production staff wanted the climactic scene of Lana 's death to be a " big event " . Originally , staff wanted the car accident to be caused by a train . However , the show was not able to afford the special effects to pull the scene off , and so , the sequence was re @-@ written to feature a bus crash . Souders noted that if the show had been unable to afford the bus wreck , it would have been re @-@ written into a " little car wreck " . The Lana 's entire sequence death was choreographed by Christopher <unk> — series stunt coordinator and Welling 's stunt double . <unk> described the scene as " important to me and important to a lot of people " . The car crash was a collage of several different shots . First , Kreuk was filmed driving a car on a process trailer with a mounted camera . A separate shot was filmed with a stunt double driving a lead car that was attached to a dummy car driving down a road at high speed . A bus was then driven in a perpendicular direction . The dummy car was attached with a detonator so that when the bus hit it , it would detach and not pull the lead car with it . The timing for the crash was practiced several times during rehearsals . After the car was smashed by the bus , Kreuk was positioned on the ground to give the effect that she was actually in the car wreck . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Reckoning " originally aired in the United States on January 26 , 2006 on The WB . The network promoted the episode with videos of " snowy coffins " suggesting that either Lana or Jonathan would die . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 2 , meaning that roughly 2 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 6 @.@ 28 million viewers and ranked as the seventy @-@ first most – watched episode of the week . The episode was the second @-@ most watched fifth season episode , after the earlier entry , " Aqua " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 40 million viewers . It aired in the United Kingdom on E4 on March 27 , 2006 and reached 375 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the fourth most – watched program that week . 
 " Reckoning " received mostly positive reviews from commentators . Various critics felt that the death of Jonathan Kent was a poignantly emotional choice , although others expressed their preference that Lang would have died . This was especially true for fans , who angrily opined their views on various Smallville fan sites . Michael Ausiello from TV Guide wrote , " Watch [ ' Reckoning ' ] because it 's one of the best hours of TV this season — and I 'm not even a big Smallville fan . " Vic <unk> from Screenrant gave the episode a largely positive review and called it " a great episode overall " . He called the scenes leading up to the funeral " quite moving " and noted that the loss of Jonathan Kent was a blow , not only for the emotional state of the series ' main characters , but also for the audience . However , <unk> mocked the " old moon @-@ pie eye ’ d Clark / Lana situation " and the fact that " Lana didn 't die " . Omar <unk> from Television Without Pity gave the episode a B – and noted that the death of Jonathan Kent " still stings " . Chris Carabott from TV Fanatic named the episode the second best Smallville episode , coming after ninth season entry " Absolute Justice " . He wrote that " The death of Jonathan Kent is one of the most pivotal moments of Smallville . " Carabott noted that the ramifications of the episode helped to " shape [ Clark into ] the man he has become " . Michael Duffy , in the chapter " Sacrifice or Salvation ? Smallville 's Heroic Survival amid Changing Television Trends " of the book called The Smallville Chronicles : Critical Essays on the Television Series , called the episode " momentous " and noted that the presence of clips at Jonathan 's funeral from " Reckoning " in the eighth season premiere " Odyssey " helped to " subtly <unk> and creatively reboot the Smallville universe " during the show 's later life . 
 The production staff for Smallville were very happy with the finished result . Gough and Millar wrote that the episode was a " tour de force of writing , directing , and acting . " They jokingly noted that if , by the end of the episode , the audience was not " weeping " , then " shame on you " . Allison Mack called the entry " thrilling and exciting " . Welling noted that Schneider 's departure from the series was " bittersweet " . Producer Rob Maier was particularly proud of the final cut , noting , " The highlight of season five was the hundredth episode [ ' Reckoning ' ] . It was a remarkable show . " 
 = Gila monster = 
 The Gila monster ( Heloderma suspectum , / <unk> / <unk> @-@ lə ) is a species of venomous lizard native to the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexican state of Sonora . A heavy , slow @-@ moving lizard , up to 60 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) long , the Gila monster is the only venomous lizard native to the United States and one of only two known species of venomous lizards in North America , the other being its close relative , the Mexican beaded lizard ( H. horridum ) . Though the Gila monster is venomous , its sluggish nature means it represents little threat to humans . However , it has earned a fearsome reputation and is sometimes killed despite being protected by state law in Arizona . 
 = = Description , taxonomy and etymology = = 
 In this species , the largest extant lizard native to North America north of the Mexican border ( non @-@ natives like green iguanas are larger ) , snout @-@ to @-@ vent length is from 26 to 36 cm ( 10 to 14 in ) . The tail is about 20 % of the body size and the largest specimens may reach 51 to 56 cm ( 20 to 22 in ) in total length . Body mass is typically in the range of 350 to 700 g ( 0 @.@ 77 to 1 @.@ 54 lb ) , with 11 males having been found to average 468 g ( 1 @.@ 032 lb ) . Reportedly , the very heaviest , largest specimens can weigh as much as 2 @,@ 300 g ( 5 @.@ 1 lb ) . 
 The Gila monster has one close living relative , the beaded lizard ( H. horridum ) , as well as many extinct relatives in the <unk> , the evolutionary history of which may be traced back to the Cretaceous period . The genus Heloderma has existed since the Miocene , when H. texana lived , and fragments of osteoderms from the Gila monster have been found in late Pleistocene ( 10 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 years ago ) deposits near Las Vegas , Nevada . Because the <unk> have remained relatively unchanged morphologically , they are occasionally regarded as living fossils . Although the Gila monster appears closely related to the monitor lizards ( varanids ) of Africa , Asia and Australia , their wide geographical separation and the unique features not found in the varanids indicate the Gila monster is better placed in a separate family . 
 The name " Gila " refers to the Gila River Basin in the U.S. states of New Mexico and Arizona , where the Gila monster was once plentiful . Heloderma means " studded skin " , from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( <unk> ) , " the head of a nail or stud " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , " skin " . <unk> comes from the describer , paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope , who suspected the lizard might be venomous due to the grooves in the teeth . 
 = = Distribution and habitats = = 
 The Gila monster is found in the Southwestern United States and Mexico , a range including Sonora , Arizona , parts of California , Nevada , Utah , and New Mexico ( potentially including Baja California ) . They inhabit scrubland , succulent desert , and oak woodland , seeking shelter in burrows , thickets , and under rocks in locations with ready access to moisture . In fact , Gila monsters seem to like water and can be observed immersing themselves in puddles of water after a summer rain . They avoid living in open areas such as flats and farmland . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Gila monsters spend 90 % of their time underground in burrows or rocky shelters . They are active in the morning during the dry season ( spring and early summer ) ; later in the summer , they may be active on warm nights or after a thunderstorm . They maintain a surface body temperature of about 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . Gila monsters are slow in sprinting ability , but they have relatively high endurance and maximal aerobic capacity ( VO2 max ) for a lizard . They are preyed upon by coyotes and raptors . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The Gila monster eats small birds , mammals , frogs , lizards , insects , and carrion . The Gila monster feeds primarily on bird and reptile eggs , and eats infrequently ( only five to ten times a year in the wild ) , but when it does feed , it may eat up to one @-@ third of its body mass . It uses its extremely acute sense of smell to locate prey , especially eggs . Its sense of smell is so keen , it can locate and dig up chicken eggs buried 15 cm ( 6 in ) deep and accurately follow a trail made by rolling an egg . 
 Prey may be crushed to death if large or eaten alive if small , swallowed head @-@ first , and helped down by muscular contractions and neck flexing . Unusually , after food has been swallowed , the Gila monster immediately resumes tongue flicking and search behavior , probably as a result of a history of finding clumped prey such as eggs and young in nests . Gila monsters are able to climb trees and cacti in search of eggs . 
 = = Venom = = 
 = = = Pioneer beliefs = = = 
 In the Old West , the pioneers believed a number of myths about the Gila monster , including that the lizard had foul or toxic breath and that its bite was fatal . The Tombstone Epitaph of Tombstone , Arizona , wrote about a Gila monster that a local person caught on May 14 , 1881 : 
 This is a monster , and no baby at that , it being probably the largest specimen ever captured in Arizona . It is 27 inches long and weighs 35 lb . It was caught by H. C. Hiatt on the road between Tombstone and Grand Central Mill and was purchased by Messrs. Ed Baker and Charles Eastman , who now have it on exhibition at Kelley 's Wine House , next door above Grand Hotel , Allen Street . Eastern people who have never seen one of these monsters should not fail to inspect his <unk> , for they might accidentally stumble upon one some fine day and get badly frightened , except they know what it is . 
 On May 8 , 1890 , southeast of Tucson , Arizona Territory , Empire Ranch owner Walter Vail captured and thought he had killed a Gila monster . He tied it to his saddle and it bit the middle finger of his right hand and wouldn 't let go . A ranch hand pried open the lizard 's mouth with a pocketknife , cut open his finger to stimulate bleeding , and then tied saddle strings around his finger and wrist . They summoned Dr. John C. Handy of Tucson , who took Vail back to Tucson for treatment , but Vail experienced swollen and bleeding glands in his throat for sometime afterward . 
 Dr. Handy 's friend , Dr. George Goodfellow of Tombstone , was among the first to research the actual effects of Gila monster venom . Scientific American reported in 1890 that " The breath is very fetid , and its odor can be detected at some little distance from the lizard . It is supposed that this is one way in which the monster catches the insects and small animals which form a part of its food supply — the foul gas overcoming them . " Goodfellow offered to pay local residents $ 5 @.@ 00 for Gila monster specimens . He bought several and collected more on his own . In 1891 he purposefully provoked one of his captive lizards into biting him on his finger . The bite made him ill and he spent the next five days in bed , but he completely recovered . When Scientific American ran another ill @-@ founded report on the lizard 's ability to kill people , he wrote in reply and described his own studies and personal experience . He wrote that he knew several people who had been bitten by Gila monsters but had not died from the bite . 
 Goodfellow published articles about rattlesnake and Gila monster bites in Scientific American and Southern California Practitioner . 
 = = = Delivery = = = 
 The Gila monster produces venom in modified salivary glands in its lower jaw , unlike snakes , whose venom is produced in the upper jaw . The Gila monster lacks the musculature to forcibly inject the venom ; instead , the venom is propelled from the gland to the tooth by chewing . Capillary action brings the venom out of the tooth and into the victim . The teeth are loosely anchored , which allows them to be broken off and replaced throughout life . Gila monsters have been observed to flip over while biting the victim , presumably to aid the flow of the venom into the wound . Because the Gila monster 's prey consists mainly of eggs , small animals , and otherwise " helpless " prey , the Gila monster 's venom is thought to have evolved for defensive rather than for hunting use . A defensive use would explain the Gila monster 's bright warning coloration . 
 = = = Toxicity = = = 
 Although the venom is a neurotoxin as toxic as that of a coral snake , H. suspectum produces only small amounts . The Gila monster 's bite is not fatal to healthy adult humans . No reports of fatalities have been confirmed after 1939 , and those recorded prior to that year are possibly iatrogenic , or resulting from attempts to treat the bite itself . The Gila monster can bite quickly ( especially by swinging its head sideways ) and hold on tenaciously and painfully . If bitten , the victim may need to fully submerge the attacking lizard in water to break free from its bite . Symptoms of the bite include excruciating pain , edema , and weakness associated with a rapid drop in blood pressure . 
 More than a dozen peptides and other substances have been isolated from the Gila monster 's venom , including hyaluronidase , serotonin , phospholipase A2 , and several <unk> @-@ like glycoproteins responsible for the pain and edema caused by a bite . Four potentially lethal toxins have been isolated from the Gila monster 's venom , including horridum venom , which causes hemorrhage in internal organs and <unk> ( bulging of the eyes ) , and <unk> , which causes lethargy , partial paralysis of the limbs , and hypothermia in rats . Most are similar in form to vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) , which relaxes smooth muscle and regulates water and electrolyte secretion between the small and large intestines . These bioactive peptides are able to bind to VIP receptors in many different human tissues . One of these , <unk> , has been shown to inhibit the growth of lung cancer . 
 The constituents of the lizard 's venom that have received the most attention from researchers are the bioactive peptides , including <unk> , <unk> , exendin @-@ 3 , and exendin @-@ 4 . <unk> @-@ 4 has formed the basis of a class of medications for the treatment of type 2 diabetes , known as <unk> @-@ like peptide @-@ 1 agonists . <unk> was the first product in the class to reach the market and was launched in 2005 . 
 = = = Drug research = = = 
 In 2005 , the US Food and Drug Administration approved the drug exenatide ( marketed as <unk> ) for the management of type 2 diabetes . It is a synthetic version of a protein , exendin @-@ 4 , derived from the Gila monster 's saliva . In a three @-@ year study with people with type 2 diabetes , exenatide led to healthy sustained glucose levels and progressive weight loss . The effectiveness is because the lizard protein is about 50 % identical to glucagon @-@ like peptide @-@ 1 analog ( <unk> @-@ 1 ) , a hormone released from the human digestive tract that helps to regulate insulin and glucagon . The lizard protein remains effective much longer than the human hormone , helping diabetics keep their blood sugar levels under control . <unk> slows the emptying of the stomach and causes a decrease in appetite , contributing to weight loss . The saliva of the Gila monster contains many chemicals which can be deadly . One of these has been shown to affect memory . Several companies have been researching the abilities of this chemical to help memory loss due to various diseases such as Alzheimer ’ s disease , schizophrenia , and ADHD . <unk> , derived from exendin @-@ 4 , has been shown to dramatically heighten memory in a study with mice . <unk> is likely to be researched further to provide help to Alzheimer ’ s patients . 
 = = Life history = = 
 The Gila monster emerges from hibernation in January or February and mates in May and June . The male initiates courtship by flicking his tongue to search for the female 's scent . If the female rejects his advances , she will bite him and crawl away . When successful , copulation has been observed to last from 15 minutes to as long as two and a half hours . The female lays eggs in July or August , burying them in sand 5 in ( 13 cm ) below the surface . The clutch consists of two to 12 eggs : five is the average . The incubation lasts nine months , as the hatchlings emerge during April through June the following year . The hatchlings are about 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) long and can bite and inject venom upon hatching . The juveniles typically have larger bands of pink scales than adults , although the banded Gila monster ( H. s. <unk> ) has a tendency to retain the band pattern . H. suspectum sexually matures at three to five years old . After egg @-@ laying , adult Gila monsters gradually spend less time on the surface to avoid the hottest part of the summer ( although they may be active in the evening ) , eventually starting their hibernation around November . 
 Little is known about the social behavior of H. suspectum , but they have been observed engaging in male @-@ male combat , in which the dominant male lies on top of the subordinate one and pins it with its front and hind limbs . Both lizards arch their bodies , pushing against each other and twisting around in an effort to gain the dominant position . A wrestling match ends when the pressure exerted forces them to separate , although bouts may be repeated one after the other . These bouts are typically observed just before the mating season . Those with greater strength and endurance are thought to win more often and enjoy greater reproductive success . Although the Gila monster has a low metabolism and one of the lowest lizard sprint speeds , it has one of the highest aerobic scope values ( the increase in oxygen consumption from rest to maximum metabolic exertion ) among lizards , allowing them to engage in intense aerobic activity for a sustained period of time . Males have been observed to have higher aerobic scopes than females , presumably because of sexual selection for a trait advantageous in prolonged combat . The Gila monster may live up to 20 years in the wild , or 30 in captivity . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Urban sprawl and habitat destruction has adversely affected Gila monster numbers . In 1952 , they became the first venomous animal to be given legal protection . Gila monsters are listed as Near Threatened by the IUCN . In 1963 , the San Diego Zoo became the first zoo to successfully breed Gila monsters in captivity . 
 = = = Relationship with humans = = = 
 Though the Gila monster is venomous , its <unk> movement means it poses little threat to humans . However , it has earned a fearsome reputation and is often killed by humans because of fear . Among Native American tribes , the Gila monster had a mixed standing . The Apache believed its breath could kill a man , and the Tohono O <unk> and the Pima believed it possessed a spiritual power that could cause sickness . In contrast , the Seri and the Yaqui believed the Gila monster 's hide had healing properties . The Gila monster has even starred as a monster in a B movie , The Giant Gila Monster ( though the titular monster was actually portrayed by a Mexican beaded lizard ) . It played a minor role in the motion picture The Treasure of the Sierra Madre . Myths about the animal include that the animal 's breath is toxic enough to kill humans , that it can spit venom and that it can leap several feet in the air to attack . Another myth held that the Gila monster did not have an anus and therefore expelled waste from its mouth , the source of its venom and " fetid breath " . The official mascot of Eastern Arizona College located in Thatcher , Arizona is Gila Hank , a gun @-@ toting , cowboy hat @-@ wearing Gila monster . A similar character as an old western outlaw was seen in 2011 animated film Rango , called Bad Bill ; the character was voiced by Ray Winstone . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = ACC Championship Game = 
 The Dr Pepper ACC Football Championship Game is an American college football game held on the first Saturday in December by the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) each year to determine its football champion . The game pits the champion of the Coastal Division against the champion of the Atlantic Division in a game that follows the conclusion of the regular season . The game 's corporate sponsor is Dr Pepper . The current champion are the Clemson Tigers of the Atlantic Division . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the 2004 college football season , the Atlantic Coast Conference determined its champion via round @-@ robin play during the course of the regular season and there was no conference championship game . In 2004 , the Atlantic Coast conference added two teams — Virginia Tech and Miami — expanding the league to 11 teams . At the time , college football teams were limited by the NCAA to 11 regular @-@ season games , three or four of which typically featured teams outside the home team 's conference . Following the 2004 season , the league added a 12th team — Boston College — and became eligible to hold a championship game at the conclusion of the 2005 season . 
 The conference was divided into two divisions of six teams each . The team with the best conference record in each division is selected to participate in the championship game . In the inaugural championship game , which took place at the end of the 2005 college football season , the Florida State Seminoles defeated Virginia Tech 27 – 22 at Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida . In the 2006 game , two other teams faced off as Georgia Tech played Wake Forest . Wake defeated Georgia Tech 9 – 6 . For the 2007 game , Jacksonville was awarded a one @-@ year extension as host , and the game remained in Jacksonville . Virginia Tech returned to the ACC Football Championship game and faced off against Boston College . Tech won the game , 30 – 16 , and returned to the championship in 2008 to defeat Boston College again 30 – 12 . In 2009 , Georgia Tech defeated Clemson , 39 – 34 , but was forced to vacate the ACC championship by the NCAA . 
 Following the 2007 game the Gator Bowl Committee — organizers of the ACC Football Championship game in Jacksonville — announced they would not seek another contract extension due to falling attendance . With Jacksonville 's withdrawal from future site selection , the ACC selected Tampa , Florida and Charlotte , North Carolina as future sites of the game . The 2008 and 2009 games were held in Tampa , while the 2010 and 2011 games were held in Charlotte . In 2008 , the Coastal Division champion was the designated " home " team . 
 = = Conference expansion = = 
 In 1990 , the eight @-@ team Atlantic Coast Conference added Florida State to the league , creating a new nine @-@ team ACC . Though Florida State was the only school added to the conference , some league officials discussed offering one or more other schools — Navy , Pittsburgh , Syracuse , South Carolina , Miami , West Virginia , Boston College , Rutgers , or Virginia Tech — an offer to join the league . For various reasons , however , no other team was extended an offer . Throughout the 1990s , the Atlantic Coast Conference remained at nine members . Ironically , South Carolina was a charter member of the ACC that left in 1971 . 
 The nearby Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) , which also encompasses college football teams in the American South , also expanded in 1990 . Instead of adding one team , as did the ACC , the then 10 @-@ team SEC added two — the University of Arkansas and the University of South Carolina . The expansion made the SEC the first 12 @-@ school football conference and thus the first eligible to hold a conference championship game under NCAA rules ( the first game was held in 1992 ) . The SEC enjoyed increased television ratings and revenue through the 1990s and by 2003 was earning over $ 100 million annually , with revenues shared out among member schools . 
 Officials of other leagues took note of the financial boon that followed SEC expansion to twelve teams . Atlantic Coast Conference representatives began discussing expansion to twelve schools in the first years of the new century , who began publicly pursuing the possibility of expansion anew in 2003 . On May 13 , 2003 , representatives voted in favor of extending invitations to three schools . The only certain school was the University of Miami , while the other two spots were still being debated . Initially , the league favored admitting Miami , Syracuse University , and Boston College . After a month of debate , however , the ACC elected to extend formal invitations to Miami , Boston College , and Virginia Tech , which joined after initially being overlooked . This came years after these schools were considered for ACC membership in the early 1990s but nothing had ever came to fruition . Pittsburgh and Syracuse would also eventually join the ACC after rejections in 1990 and 2003 , becoming members in 2013 . 
 Miami and Virginia Tech began official ACC play with the 2004 college football season . After the league settled a lawsuit resulting from the departure of the three former Big East Conference teams , Boston College began ACC play in the 2005 season . With the league officially at 12 teams , it became eligible to hold a conference championship football game . 
 = = Site selection = = 
 Even before the announcement proclaiming the ACC 's expansion to 12 teams , several cities and sports organizations were preparing bids to host the ACC Football Championship Game . The prospect of tens of thousands of visitors could provide a multimillion @-@ dollar economic boost for a host city and region while requiring few , if any , additional facilities . One early contender was the city of Charlotte , North Carolina . Even before Virginia Tech , Miami , and Boston College were chosen as the ACC 's picks to expand , Carolinas Stadium Corporation , the owner and operator of Charlotte 's Ericsson Stadium ( as it was called then ) lobbied heavily for Charlotte 's selection . Other early options included Orlando , Tampa , Atlanta , and Jacksonville . 
 Shortly after negotiations for the location of the game began during the spring of 2004 , the ACC announced that it had signed a new , seven @-@ year television contract with ABC @-@ TV and ESPN . As part of the deal , the ACC would earn over $ 40 million in revenue a year in exchange for the networks ' exclusive right to televise the ACC Football Championship Game along with several high @-@ profile regular season games . Revenues would be divided among the 12 ACC member schools . 
 In July 2004 the ACC began deliberations about which bid to accept . On August 19 , 2004 , league officials announced that Jacksonville would host the game in 2005 and 2006 . The league would then have the option to re @-@ select Jacksonville for an additional one or two @-@ year contract . Charlotte was the first runner @-@ up in the competition . 
 For its first three years , the championship game was held at EverBank Field ( known as Alltel Stadium in 2005 and 2006 and Jacksonville Municipal Stadium in 2007 ) . That contract expired after the 2007 season . In December 2007 , the ACC awarded the next four games to Tampa ( first two ) and Charlotte ( next two ) . Raymond James Stadium was the venue for the Tampa games in 2008 and 2009 , while the Bank of America Stadium provided the venue for the Charlotte games in 2010 and 2011 . Charlotte hosted the game again in 2012 and 2013 . In February 2014 it was announced that Charlotte would continue to host the game through at least 2019 . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 Following the absorption of Virginia Tech and Miami into the ACC , questions arose about how an 11 @-@ team league could fairly select participants in the conference championship game . A divisional structure involving two six @-@ team divisions competing for two championship @-@ game slots would not be possible . In addition , the ACC could not continue to select its champion via round @-@ robin play since there were now 11 teams and only seven or eight conference games available per team . Even the NCAA 's addition of a 12th game to the regular season did little to relieve the conference 's problem . Prior to the 2004 college football season , the ACC requested a waiver to the NCAA 's rule requiring conferences to have 12 @-@ plus teams before having a conference championship game . Before the season began , however , the NCAA rejected the ACC 's application , and the league had to use a semi @-@ round @-@ robin format to select a champion during the 2004 football season . After that season , the inclusion of Boston College as the ACC 's 12th team solved the problem of enabling the ACC to have a championship football game . 
 On October 18 , 2004 , the ACC announced its new football structure with two divisions . Each six @-@ team division plays a round @-@ robin schedule within the division and a rotation of three conference games against teams from the opposing division . The two teams with the best conference records in each division earn places to the championship game . In the event of a tie in records within one division , divisional records and the results of head @-@ to @-@ head games are considered . 
 Also , in the games between the two divisions , each team has a permanent rival team that is played every year . Hence , every year , there are these football games : Georgia Tech vs. Clemson ; North Carolina vs. North Carolina State ; Louisville vs. Virginia ; Syracuse vs. Pittsburgh ; Duke vs. Wake Forest ; Florida State vs. Miami ; and Boston College vs. Virginia Tech . 
 Notre Dame joined the conference as a non @-@ divisional member in 2014 and , while playing five ACC teams each season , is not eligible for the championship game . 
 = = = Divisions = = = 
 Non @-@ divisional : 
 Notre Dame 
 = = Results = = 
 Winners are listed in bold . Rankings are from the Coaches Poll released prior to the game . 
 * Georgia Tech was forced to vacate this win due to NCAA violations . 
 = = Results by team = = 
 * Georgia Tech appeared in four ACC Football Championship Games , but the Yellow Jackets ' one win was later vacated . 
 Louisville , Miami , North Carolina State , Pittsburgh , Syracuse , and Virginia have yet to make an appearance in an ACC Football Championship Game . 
 = 1986 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1986 Giro d 'Italia was the 69th running of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours races . The Giro started in Palermo , on 12 May , with a 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) prologue and concluded in Merano , on 2 June , with a 108 @.@ 6 km ( 67 @.@ 5 mi ) mass @-@ start stage . A total of 171 riders from nineteen teams entered the 22 @-@ stage race , that was won by Italian Roberto Visentini of the Carrera – Inoxpran team . The second and third places were taken by Italian riders Giuseppe Saronni and Francesco Moser , respectively . 
 Swiss rider Urs Freuler was the first rider to wear the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . The race lead was passed between five riders across the first five days of racing . Saronni gained the overall lead after the conclusion of the sixth stage and maintained an advantage through the fifteenth day of racing . As the race crossed several Alpine passes in the sixteenth stage , Visentini gained the race lead due to his strong performance on the stage . Visentini then defended the race lead until the race 's conclusion on 2 June . 
 Amongst the other classifications that the race awarded , Guido Bontempi of Carrera – Inoxpran won the points classification , Pedro Muñoz of Fagor won the mountains classification , and Gis Gelati @-@ <unk> 's Marco Giovannetti completed the Giro as the best neo @-@ professional in the general classification , finishing eighth overall . Supermercati Brianzoli finishing as the winners of the team classification , ranking each of the twenty teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . 
 = = Teams = = 
 A total of nineteen teams were invited to participate in the 1986 Giro d 'Italia . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 171 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager are introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place at the Palazzo dei <unk> on 11 May . From the riders that began this edition , 143 made it to the finish in Merano . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The starting peloton did not include the 1985 winner , Bernard Hinault . An El Mundo Deportivo writer believed LeMond , Moser , and Saronni to be the favorites to win the overall crown . In addition , the writer felt that Pedro Muñoz had the best chances to win the race , out of all the Spanish riders entering the event . Atala @-@ Ofmega sports director Franco <unk> believed that Saronni 's results would depend on what form he could maintain in the mountains . In addition , <unk> thought Dutchman Johan van der Velde and Swiss rider Niki <unk> were two foreigners to consider for a high place in the general classification . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1986 edition of the Giro d 'Italia was revealed to the public on television by head organizer Vincenzo Torriani on 8 February 1986 . It contained four time trials , three of which were individual and one of which was a team event . There were twelve stages containing categorized climbs , of which three had summit finishes : stage 14 , to <unk> d <unk> ; stage 16 , to <unk> ; and stage 19 , to <unk> . The organizers chose to include no rest days . Torriani did not want to interfere with the World Cup being held in Mexico . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 140 km ( 87 mi ) shorter , contained two less rest days , and the same amount of time trials . In addition , this race contained the same amount of stages , but one less set of half stages . 
 l <unk> writer Gino Sala believed the route to be more challenging than the routes within the past few years . He criticized the route for the stage three team time trial for going over dangerous roads . Author Bill McGann believed Torriani designed the route to be relatively flat in order to increase the likelihood of Italian riders Giuseppe Saronni and Francesco Moser winning the race . Five @-@ time champion Eddy Merckx believed the route to be " decapitated . " 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) prologue that navigated through the streets of Palermo , which was won by Urs Freuler by one second over the second @-@ placed finisher . Later that day , the first mass @-@ start stage was raced . The leg was marred by a large crash about 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) from the finish which saw Emilio <unk> sustain heavy injuries and continue to race until the end of the leg . Shortly after the stage , he fell into a coma , only to die two weeks later . Sergio <unk> won the stage through a field sprint , and , with the time bonus , he earned race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) . Stage 2 also culminated with a bunch sprint where <unk> @-@ Skil 's Jean @-@ Paul van Poppel took the lead with 150 m ( 492 @.@ 1 ft ) left and held on to win , as well as take the overall lead . The third stage was a team time trial that traveled around Sicily . Del Tongo @-@ Colnago won the time trial by nine seconds over Supermercati Brianzoli @-@ <unk> , which put their rider Giuseppe Saronni into the pink jersey . Gianbattista Baronchelli rode away on a climb late into the fourth stage and rode by himself to victory , earning the race lead in the process . American Greg LeMond won the fifth stage after attacking a few kilometers from the finish . Saronni led the peloton across the finish line two seconds after LeMond crossed the finish line . 
 In the race 's sixth stage , Roberto Visentini won the leg after attacking a few kilometers from the finish . Saronni regained the race lead after finishing second on the stage and earning a fifteen @-@ second time bonus . The next two stages both resulted in a bunch sprint , with Guido Bontempi winning stage 7 and Franco Chioccioli , stage 8 . The ninth stage contained the climbs of Monte Terminillo and La <unk> and was considered one of the tougher stages in the race . Malvor @-@ Bottecchia @-@ <unk> rider <unk> da Silva won the stage as the top of the general classification rankings remained unchanged from the previous days . 
 The twelfth stage of the race was a 46 km ( 28 @.@ 6 mi ) individual time trial that stretched from <unk> to Siena . Lech Piasecki of Del Tongo @-@ Colnago won the stage and was one of five riders to complete the course in under an hour . Due to his strong time on the stage , Saronni increased his advantage over all of his rivals except for Visentini who finished quicker . The next day of racing saw several breakaway groups try to form , but all with no success as the main field finished the stage together with a field sprint that was won by van Poppel . The race 's fourteenth stage saw the race head back into the mountains , with a summit finish to <unk> d <unk> . As the peloton made its way up the final <unk> , Pedro Muñoz , Martin Earley , and Stefano Giuliani formed a breakaway group out in front . With about three kilometers left in the stage , Earley attacked and went on to win the stage after riding by himself for the remainder of the stage . Dag Erik Pedersen won the next stage through a bunch sprint . 
 The sixteenth stage saw the race travel across several mountain passes in the Alps , with Muñoz winning the stage after attacking on the day 's final climb of the day . Visentini , who finished third on the stage , gained enough time on Saronni to take the overall lead from him by over a minute . Bontempi won his fourth stage of the race after out @-@ sprinting the rest of the peloton for the victory the day after . The next leg of the race was another individual time trial that was 36 km ( 22 mi ) in length and very flat . Francesco Moser won the stage by forty @-@ nine seconds over the second placed rider and his time , when coupled with the performance of the other riders , moved him into third overall . Panasonic – Merckx – Agu rider Johan van der Velde won the next leg of the race after attacking on a descent before the stage 's final climb to <unk> . 
 The twentieth stage of the race came down to a field sprint that was won by Bontempi . The penultimate stage of the race traversed several mountain passes in the Dolomites . Four riders escaped off the front of the peloton , meanwhile the general classification contenders remained together behind the leading group . As the leading group neared the finish , da Silva attacked and went on to win the stage by seven seconds . The general classification contenders finished together , despite attacks from LeMond . The race 's final stage began and ended in Merano and 108 @.@ 6 km ( 67 @.@ 5 mi ) . Belgian Eric Van <unk> won the leg by means of a bunch sprint . 
 Three riders achieved multiple stage victories : Bontempi ( stages 7 , 10 , 11 , 17 , and 20 ) , da Silva ( stages 9 and 21 ) , and van Poppel ( stages 2 and 13 ) . Stage wins were achieved by eleven of the nineteen competing squads , eight of which won multiple stages . Carrera @-@ Inoxpran collected a total of six stage wins through two riders , Bontempi and Visentini ( stage 6 ) . Del Tongo @-@ Colnago amassed a total of two stage victories through the team time trial and Piasecki ( stage 12 ) . <unk> @-@ Skil also collected two stage successes with van Poppel . Ariostea – Gres achieved the same feat with individual stage wins from <unk> ( stage 1 ) and Pedersen ( stage 15 ) . Fagor also secured two stage wins through Earley ( stage 14 ) and Muñoz ( stage 16 ) . Supermercati Brianzoli @-@ <unk> obtained two stage victories with Baronchelli ( stage 4 ) and Moser ( stage 18 ) . Malvor @-@ Bottecchia @-@ <unk> also collected two stage successes with da Silva . Panasonic @-@ Merckx @-@ Agu recorded two stage victories with van der Velde ( stage 19 ) and Van <unk> ( stage 22 ) . Atala @-@ Ofmega , La Vie Claire , and <unk> @-@ Jollyscarpe @-@ BFB <unk> all won a single stage at the Giro , the first through Freuler ( prologue ) , the second through LeMond ( stage 5 ) , and the third by Chioccioli ( stage 8 ) . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Four different jerseys were worn during the 1986 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category ( first being the highest ) , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo Pordoi . The first rider to cross the Pordoi Pass was Spanish rider Pedro Muñoz . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but considering only neo @-@ professional cyclists ( in their first three years of professional racing ) . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = Roza Shanina = 
 Roza <unk> Shanina ( Russian : <unk> ́ за <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> , IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 3 April 1924 – 28 January 1945 ) was a Soviet sniper during World War II who was credited with fifty @-@ nine confirmed kills , including twelve soldiers during the Battle of Vilnius . Shanina volunteered for the military after the death of her brother in 1941 and chose to be a marksman on the front line . Praised for her shooting accuracy , Shanina was capable of precisely hitting enemy personnel and making doublets ( two target hits by two rounds fired in quick succession ) . 
 In 1944 , a Canadian newspaper described Shanina as " the unseen terror of East Prussia " . She became the first Soviet female sniper to be awarded the Order of Glory and was the first servicewoman of the 3rd Belorussian Front to receive it . Shanina was killed in action during the East Prussian Offensive while shielding the severely wounded commander of an artillery unit . Shanina 's bravery received praise already during her lifetime , but came at odds with the Soviet policy of sparing snipers from heavy fights . Her combat diary was first published in 1965 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Roza Shanina was born on 3 April 1924 in the Russian village of Yedma ( Arkhangelsk Oblast ) to Anna <unk> Shanina , a kolkhoz milkmaid , and Georgiy ( Yegor ) Mikhailovich <unk> , a logger who had been disabled by a wound received during World War I. Roza was reportedly named after the Marxist revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg and had six siblings : one sister Yuliya and five brothers : Mikhail , Fyodor , Sergei , Pavel and Marat . The <unk> also raised three orphans . Roza was above average height , with light brown hair and blue eyes , and spoke in a Northern Russian dialect . After finishing four classes of elementary school in Yedma , Shanina continued her education in the village of Bereznik . As there was no school transport at the time , when she was in grades five through seven Roza had to walk 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) to Bereznik to attend middle school . On Saturdays , Shanina again went to Bereznik to take care of her ill aunt <unk> <unk> . 
 At the age of fourteen , Shanina , against her parents ' wishes , walked 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) across the taiga to the rail station and travelled to Arkhangelsk to study at the college there ( the trek was later attested by Shanina 's school teacher Alexander <unk> ) . Shanina left home with little money and almost no possessions ; and before moving to the college dormitory she lived with her elder brother Fyodor . Later in her combat diary Shanina would recall Arkhangelsk 's stadium Dinamo , and the cinemas , Ars and Pobeda . Shanina 's friend Anna <unk> remembered that Roza sometimes returned from her friends in Ustyansky District to her college dormitory between 2 : 00 and 3 : 00 am . As the doors were locked by that time , the other students tied several bedsheets together to help Roza climb into her room . In 1938 , Shanina became a member of the Soviet youth movement Komsomol . 
 Two years later , Soviet secondary education institutes introduced tuition fees , and the scholarship fund was cut . Shanina received little financial support from home and on 11 September 1941 , she took a job in kindergarten No. 2 ( lately known as <unk> ) in Arkhangelsk , with which she was offered a free apartment . She studied in the evenings and worked in the kindergarten during the daytime . The children liked Shanina and their parents appreciated her . Shanina graduated from college in the 1941 – 42 academic year , when the Soviet Union was in the grip of World War II . 
 = = Tour of duty = = 
 Following the German invasion of the Soviet Union , Arkhangelsk was bombed by the Luftwaffe , and Shanina and other townspeople were involved in firefighting and mounted voluntary vigils on rooftops to protect the kindergarten . Shanina 's two elder brothers had volunteered for the military . In December 1941 , a death notification was received for her 19 @-@ year @-@ old brother Mikhail , who had died during the Siege of Leningrad . In response , Shanina went to the military commissariat to ask for permission to serve . Two more of Shanina 's brothers died in the war . At that time the Soviet Union had begun deploying female snipers because they had flexible limbs , and it was believed that they were patient , careful and cunning . In February 1942 , Soviet women between the ages of 16 and 45 became eligible for the military draft , but Shanina was not drafted that month as the local military commissariat wanted to pinion her out of war 's way . She first learned to shoot at a shooting range . On 22 June 1943 , while still living in the dormitory , Shanina was accepted into the <unk> program for universal military training . After Shanina 's several applications , the military commissariat finally allowed her to enroll in the Central Female Sniper Academy , where she met Aleksandra " Sasha " <unk> and <unk> " <unk> " Petrova , who became her closest friends , with Shanina calling them " the vagrant three " . <unk> to a fine point , Shanina scored highly in training and graduated from the academy with honours . She was offered to stay as an instructor there , but refused due to a call of duty . In 1941 – 1945 a total of 2 @,@ 484 Soviet female snipers were deployed for the war and their combined tally of kills is estimated to be at least 11 @,@ 280 . 
 After the momentous victory in the Battle of Stalingrad the Soviet troops proceeded to nationwide counter @-@ offensives and Shanina on 2 April 1944 joined the 184th Rifle Division , where a separate female sniper platoon had been formed . Shanina was appointed a commander of that platoon . Three days later , southeast of Vitebsk , Shanina killed her first German soldier . In Shanina 's own words , recorded by an anonymous author , her legs gave way upon that first encounter and she slid down into the trench , saying , " I 've killed a man . " Concerned , the other women ran up saying , " That was a fascist you finished off ! " Seven months later , Shanina wrote in her diary that she was now killing the enemy in cold blood and saw the meaning of her life in her actions . She wrote that if she had to do everything over again , she would still strive to enter the sniper academy and would go to the front again . 
 For her actions in the battle for the village of <unk> Gory ( Smolensk Oblast ) , Shanina was awarded her first military distinction , the Order of Glory 3rd Class on 17 April 1944 . She became the first Soviet female sniper and the first servicewoman of the 3rd Belorussian Front to receive that order . According to the report of Major Degtyarev ( the commander of the <unk> Rifle Regiment ) for the corresponding commendation list , between 6 and 11 April Shanina killed 13 enemy soldiers while subjected to artillery and machine gun fire . By May 1944 , her sniper tally increased to 17 confirmed enemy kills , and Shanina was praised as a precise and brave soldier . The same year , on 9 June , Shanina 's portrait was featured on the front page of the Soviet newspaper <unk> <unk> . 
 When Operation Bagration commenced in the Vitebsk region on 22 June 1944 , it was decided that female snipers would be withdrawn . They voluntarily continued to support the advancing infantry anyway , and despite the Soviet policy of sparing snipers , Shanina asked to be sent to the front line . Although her request was refused , she went anyway . Shanina was later sanctioned for going to the front line without permission , but did not face a court martial . She wanted to be attached to a battalion or a reconnaissance company , turning to the commander of the 5th Army , Nikolai Krylov . Shanina also wrote twice to Joseph Stalin with the same request . 
 From 26 to 28 June 1944 , Shanina participated in the elimination of the encircled German troops near Vitebsk during the Vitebsk – Orsha Offensive . As the Soviet army advanced further westward , from 8 to 13 July of the same year , Shanina and her sisters @-@ in @-@ arms took part in the struggle for Vilnius , which had been under German occupation since 24 June 1941 . The Germans were finally driven out from Vilnius on 13 July 1944 . During the Soviet summer offensives of that year Shanina managed to capture three Germans . 
 From her time at the military academy , Shanina became known for her ability to score doublets ( two target hits made in quick succession ) . During one period she crawled through a muddy communications trench each day at dawn to a specially camouflaged pit which overlooked German @-@ controlled territory . She wrote , " the unconditional requirement — to outwit the enemy and kill him — became an irrevocable law of my hunt " . Shanina successfully used counter @-@ sniper tactics against a German cuckoo sniper hidden in a tree , by waiting until dusk when the space between the tree branches would be backlit by sunlight and the sniper 's nest became visible . On one occasion , Shanina also made use of selective fire from a submachine gun . 
 = = = Diary = = = 
 Shanina enjoyed writing and would often send letters to her home village and to her friends in Arkhangelsk . She started writing a combat diary ; although diaries were strictly prohibited in the Soviet military , there were some furtive exceptions , such as The Front Diary of <unk> <unk> and The Chronicle of War of <unk> <unk> . To preserve military secrecy , Shanina termed the killed and wounded " blacks " and " reds " respectively in her diary . Shanina kept the diary from 6 October 1944 to 24 January 1945 . 
 After Shanina 's death , the diary , consisting of three thick notebooks , was kept by the war correspondent Pyotr <unk> for twenty years in Kiev . An abridged version was published in the magazine <unk> in 1965 , and the diary was transferred to the Regional Museum of Arkhangelsk Oblast . Several of Shanina 's letters and some data from her sniper log have also been published . 
 = = = East Prussia = = = 
 In August 1944 advancing Soviet troops had reached the Soviet border with East Prussia and by 31 August of that year Shanina 's battle count reached 42 kills . The following month the <unk> River was crossed . Shanina 's 184th Rifle Division became the first Soviet unit to enter East Prussia . At that time , two Canadian newspapers , the Ottawa Citizen and Leader @-@ Post , reported that according to an official dispatch from the <unk> River front , Shanina killed five Germans in one day as she crouched in a sniper hideout . Later in September her sniper tally had reached 46 kills , of which 15 were made on German soil and seven during an offensive . On 17 September , <unk> <unk> credited Shanina with 51 hits . In the third quarter of 1944 , Shanina was given a short furlough and visited Arkhangelsk . She returned to the front on October 17 for one day , and later received an honourable certificate from the Central Committee of Komsomol . On 16 September 1944 , Shanina was awarded her second military distinction , the Order of Glory 2nd Class for intrepidity and bravery displayed in various battles against the Germans in that year . 
 On 26 October 1944 Shanina became eligible for the Order of Glory 1st Class for her actions in a battle near Schlossberg ( now <unk> ) , but ultimately received the Medal for Courage instead . Shanina was awarded the medal on 27 December for the gallant posture displayed during a German counter @-@ offensive on 26 October . There Shanina fought together with Captain Igor <unk> , a Hero of the Soviet Union , and witnessed his death on 26 October . Shanina , who served as an assistant platoon commander , was ordered to commit the female snipers to combat . She was among the first female snipers to receive the Medal for Courage . Schlossberg was finally retaken from Germans by the troops of the 3rd Belorussian Front on 16 January 1945 during the Insterburg – Königsberg Operation . 
 On 12 December 1944 , an enemy sniper shot Shanina in her right shoulder . She wrote in her diary that she had not felt the pain , " the shoulder was just scalded with something hot . " Although the injury , which Shanina described as " two small holes " , seemed minor to her , she needed an operation and was incapacitated for several days . She reported in her diary that the previous day she had a prophetic dream in which she was wounded in exactly the same place . 
 On 8 January 1945 Nikolai Krylov formally allowed Shanina to participate in front @-@ line combat , albeit with great reluctance : previously Shanina was denied that permission by the commander of the 184th Rifle Division and the military council of the 5th Army as well . Five days later , the Soviets launched the East Prussian Offensive , which prompted heavy fighting in East Prussia . By 15 January , travelling with divisional logistics , Shanina reached the East Prussian town of <unk> ( now <unk> ) , where she used white military camouflage . Several days later , she experienced friendly fire from a Katyusha rocket launcher and wrote in her diary , " Now I understand why the Germans are so afraid of Katyushas . What a fire ! " At the border of East Prussia , Shanina killed 26 enemy soldiers . The last unit she served in was the 144th Rifle Division . According to the online Book of Memory of Arkhangelsk Oblast , Shanina served in the 205th Special Motorized Rifle Battalion of that division . Shanina had hoped to go to university after the war , or if that was not possible , to raise orphans . 
 In the course of her tour of duty Shanina was mentioned in despatches several times . Her final sniper tally reached fifty @-@ nine confirmed kills ( fifty @-@ four , according to other sources ) , including twelve kills during the Battle of Vilnius , with sixty @-@ two enemies knocked out of action . Domestically her achievements were acknowledged particularly by the war correspondent Ilya Ehrenburg and in the newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda , which said that Shanina was one of the best snipers in her unit and that even veteran soldiers were inferior to her in shooting accuracy . Shanina 's exploits were also reported in the Western press , particularly in Canadian newspapers , where she was called " the unseen terror of East Prussia " . She paid no special attention to the achieved renown , and once wrote that she had been overrated . On 16 January 1945 Shanina wrote in her combat diary : " What I 've actually done ? No more than I have to as a Soviet man , having stood up to defend the motherland . " She also wrote , " The essence of my happiness is fighting for the happiness of others . It 's strange , why is it that in grammar , the word " happiness " can only be singular ? That is counter to its meaning , after all . ... If it turns necessary to die for the common happiness , then I 'm braced to . " 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In the face of the East Prussian Offensive , the Germans tried to strengthen the localities they controlled against great odds . In a diary entry dated 16 January 1945 , Shanina wrote that despite her wish to be in a safer place , some unknown force was drawing her to the front line . In the same entry she wrote that she had no fear and that she had even agreed to go " to a melee combat " . The next day , Shanina wrote in a letter that she might be on the verge of being killed because her battalion had lost 72 out of 78 people . Her last diary entry reports that German fire had become so intense that the Soviet troops , including herself , had sheltered inside self @-@ propelled guns . On 27 January Shanina was severely injured while shielding a wounded artillery officer . She was found by two soldiers disemboweled , with her chest torn open by a shell fragment . Despite attempts to save her , Shanina died the following day near the <unk> estate ( later a Soviet settlement of <unk> ) , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) southeast of the East Prussian village of <unk> ( <unk> ) . Nurse Yekaterina <unk> remembered Shanina telling her that she regretted having done so little . By the day of Shanina 's death the Soviets had overtaken several major East Prussian localities , including Tilsit , Insterburg and Pillau , and approached Königsberg . Recalling the moment Shanina 's mother received notification of her daughter 's death , her brother Marat wrote : " I clearly remembered mother 's eyes . They weren 't teary anymore . ... ' That 's all , that 's all ' — she repeated " . Shanina was buried under a spreading pear tree on the shore of the Alle River — now called the Lava — and was later reinterred in the settlement of <unk> , Kaliningrad Oblast . 
 = = Posthumous honours = = 
 In 1964 – 65 a renewed interest in Shanina arose in the Soviet press , largely due to the publication of her diary . The newspaper <unk> Komsomolets asked Shanina 's contemporaries to write what they knew about her . Streets in Arkhangelsk , <unk> and <unk> were named after her , and the village of Yedma has a museum dedicated to Shanina . The local school where she studied in 1931 – 35 has a commemorative plate . In Arkhangelsk , regular shooting competitions were organized among members of the paramilitary <unk> sport organisation for the Roza Shanina Prize , while <unk> organized an open shooting sports championship in her memory . The village of <unk> in Ustyansky District started to hold annual cross @-@ country ski races for the Roza Shanina Prize . 
 In 1985 , the Council of Veterans of the Russian Central Women Sniper Academy unsuccessfully requested the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union to posthumously bestow the Order of Glory 1st Class on Shanina ( which would have made her a Full Cavalier of that order ) . In the same year , Russian author Nikolai <unk> published the book <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Returned After Battle ) . Its title refers to Shanina 's words , " I will return after the battle , " which she uttered after receiving a note from her battalion commander urging her to return to the rear immediately . Verses have been composed about Shanina , such as those by writer Nikolai <unk> . A small memorial stele dedicated to Shanina ( part of a three @-@ piece monument ) was erected in <unk> settlement , Ustyansky District . 
 In 2000 , Shanina 's name appeared on the war memorial stone of the Siberian State Technological University , although there is no evidence she had any affiliation with it during her life . Russian author Viktor <unk> controversially wrote in the 1970s that Shanina had studied in the Siberian Forestry Institute and that she was the daughter of an " old Krasnoyarsk communist " . The claim was continued by Krasnoyarsk publications in later years , particularly in 2005 . In 2013 , a wall of memory , featuring graffiti portraits of six Russian war honorees , including Roza Shanina , was opened in Arkhangelsk . 
 = = Character and personal life = = 
 The war correspondent Pyotr <unk> , who had frequently met Shanina at the front , described her as a person of unusual will with a genuine , bright nature . Shanina described herself as " boundlessly and recklessly talky " during her college years . She typified her own character as like that of the Romantic poet , painter and writer Mikhail Lermontov , deciding , like him , to act as she saw fit . Shanina dressed modestly and liked to play volleyball . According to Shanina 's sister @-@ in @-@ arms Lidiya <unk> , Roza used to sing her favourite war song " Oy <unk> moi , <unk> " ( " O My Mists " ) each time she cleaned her weapon . Shanina had a straightforward character and valued courage and the absence of egotism in people . She once told a story when " about half a hundred frenzied fascists with wild cries " attacked a trench accommodating twelve female snipers , including Shanina : " Some fell from our well @-@ aimed bullets , some we finished with our bayonets , grenades , shovels , and some we took prisoners , having restrained their arms . " 
 Shanina 's personal life was thwarted by war . On 10 October 1944 , she wrote in her diary , " I can 't accept that Misha <unk> doesn 't live anymore . What a good guy ! [ He ] has been killed ... He loved me , I know , and I him ... My heart is heavy , I 'm twenty , but I have no close [ male ] friend " . In November 1944 , Shanina wrote that she " is flogging into her head that [ she ] loves " a man named Nikolai , although he " doesn 't shine in upbringing and education " . In the same entry she wrote that she did not think about marriage because " it 's not the time now " . She later wrote that she " had it out " with Nikolai and " wrote him a note in the sense of ' but I 'm given to the one and will love no other one ' " . Ultimately in her last diary record , filled with sombre tones , Shanina wrote that she " cannot find a solace " now and is " of no use to anyone " . 
 = Holliday junction = 
 A Holliday junction is a branched nucleic acid structure that contains four double @-@ stranded arms joined together . These arms may adopt one of several conformations depending on buffer salt concentrations and the sequence of nucleobases closest to the junction . The structure is named after the molecular biologist Robin Holliday , who proposed its existence in 1964 . 
 In biology , Holliday junctions are a key intermediate in many types of genetic recombination , as well as in double @-@ strand break repair . These junctions usually have a symmetrical sequence and are thus mobile , meaning that the four individual arms may slide though the junction in a specific pattern that largely preserves base pairing . Additionally , four @-@ arm junctions similar to Holliday junctions appear in some functional RNA molecules . 
 Immobile Holliday junctions , with asymmetrical sequences that lock the strands in a specific position , were artificially created by scientists to study their structure as a model for natural Holliday junctions . These junctions also later found use as basic structural building blocks in DNA nanotechnology , where multiple Holliday junctions can be combined into specific designed geometries that provide molecules with a high degree of structural rigidity . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Holliday junctions may exist in a variety of conformational isomers with different patterns of coaxial stacking between the four double @-@ helical arms . <unk> stacking is the tendency of nucleic acid blunt ends to bind to each other , by interactions between the exposed bases . There are three possible stacking conformers : an unstacked form and two stacked forms . The unstacked form dominates in the absence of divalent cations such as Mg2 + , because of electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged backbones of the strands . In the presence of at least about 0 @.@ 1 mM Mg2 + , the electrostatic repulsion is counteracted and the stacked structures predominate . As of 2000 , it was not known with certainty whether the electrostatic shielding was the result of site @-@ specific binding of cations to the junction , or the presence of a diffuse collection of the ions in solution . 
 The unstacked form is a nearly square planar , extended conformation . On the other hand , the stacked conformers have two continuous double @-@ helical domains separated by an angle of about 60 ° in a right @-@ handed direction . Two of the four strands stay roughly helical , remaining within each of the two double @-@ helical domains , while the other two cross between the two domains in an antiparallel fashion . 
 The two possible stacked forms differ in which pairs of the arms are stacked with each other ; which of the two dominates is highly dependent on the base sequences nearest to the junction . Some sequences result in an equilibrium between the two conformers , while others strongly prefer a single conformer . In particular , junctions containing the sequence A @-@ CC bridging the junction point appear to strongly prefer the conformer that allows a hydrogen bond to form between the second cytosine and one of the phosphates at the junction point . While most studies have focused on the identities of the four bases nearest to the junction on each arm , it is evident that bases farther out can also affect the observed stacking conformations . 
 In junctions with symmetrical sequences , the <unk> is mobile and can migrate in a random walk process . The rate of branch migration varies dramatically with ion concentration , with single @-@ step times increasing from 0 @.@ 3 − 0 @.@ 4 ms with no ions to 270 − 300 ms with 10 mM Mg2 + . The change in rate is correlated with the formation of the stacked versus the unstacked structures . 
 Holliday junctions with a nick , or break in one of the strands , at the junction point adopt a perpendicular orientation , and always prefer the stacking conformer that places the nick on a crossover strand rather than a helical strand . 
 RNA Holliday junctions assume an antiparallel stacked conformation at high magnesium concentrations , a perpendicular stacked conformation at moderate concentrations , and rotate into a parallel stacked conformation at low concentrations , while even small calcium ion concentrations favor the antiparallel conformer . 
 = = Biological function = = 
 The Holliday junction is a key intermediate in homologous recombination , a biological process that increases genetic diversity by shifting genes between two chromosomes , as well as site @-@ specific recombination events involving <unk> . They are additionally involved in repair of double @-@ strand breaks . In addition , cruciform structures involving Holliday junctions can arise to relieve helical strain in symmetrical sequences in DNA <unk> . While four @-@ arm junctions also appear in functional RNA molecules , such as U1 <unk> RNA and the hairpin ribozyme of the tobacco ringspot virus , these usually contain unpaired nucleotides in between the paired double @-@ helical domains , and thus do not strictly adopt the Holliday structure . 
 The Holliday junctions in homologous recombination are between identical or nearly identical sequences , leading to a symmetric arrangement of sequences around the central junction . This allows a branch migration process to occur where the strands move through the junction point . Cleavage , or resolution , of the Holliday junction can occur in two ways . Cleavage of the original set of strands leads to two molecules that may show gene conversion but not chromosomal crossover , while cleavage of the other set of two strands causes the resulting recombinant molecules to show crossover . All products , regardless of cleavage , are <unk> in the region of Holliday junction migration . 
 Many proteins are able to recognize or distort the Holliday junction structure . One such class contains junction @-@ resolving enzymes that cleave the junctions , sometimes in a sequence @-@ specific fashion . Such proteins distort the structure of the junction in various ways , often pulling the junction into an unstacked conformation , breaking the central base pairs , and / or changing the angles between the four arms . Other classes are branch migration proteins that increase the exchange rate by orders of magnitude , and site @-@ specific <unk> . In prokaryotes , Holliday junction <unk> fall into two families , <unk> and nucleases , that are each structurally similar although their sequences are not conserved . 
 In eukaryotes , two primary models for how homologous recombination repairs double @-@ strand breaks in DNA are the double @-@ strand break repair ( DSBR ) pathway ( sometimes called the double Holliday junction model ) and the synthesis @-@ dependent strand annealing ( SDSA ) pathway . In the case of double strand breakage , the 3 ' end is degraded and the longer 5 ' end invades the contiguous sister chromatid , forming a replication bubble . As this bubble nears the broken DNA , the longer 5 ' antisense strand again invades the sense strand of this portion of DNA , transcribing a second copy . When replication ends , both tails are reconnected to form two Holliday Junctions , which are then cleaved in a variety of patterns by proteins . An animation of this process can be seen here . 
 Double @-@ strand DNA breaks in bacteria are repaired by the RecBCD pathway of homologous recombination . Breaks that occur on only one of the two DNA strands , known as single @-@ strand gaps , are thought to be repaired by the RecF pathway . Both the RecBCD and RecF pathways include a series of reactions known as branch migration , in which single DNA strands are exchanged between two intercrossed molecules of duplex DNA , and resolution , in which those two intercrossed molecules of DNA are cut apart and restored to their normal double @-@ stranded state . Homologous recombination occurs in several groups of viruses . In DNA viruses such as herpesvirus , recombination occurs through a break @-@ and @-@ rejoin mechanism like in bacteria and eukaryotes . In bacteria , branch migration is facilitated by the RuvABC complex or <unk> protein , molecular motors that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move the junction . The junction must then be resolved into two separate duplexes , restoring either the parental configuration or a crossed @-@ over configuration . Resolution can occur in either a horizontal or vertical fashion during homologous recombination , giving patch products ( if in same orientation during double strand break repair ) or splice products ( if in different orientations during double strand break repair ) . RuvA and RuvB are branch migration proteins , while RuvC is a junction @-@ resolving enzyme . 
 There is evidence for recombination in some RNA viruses , specifically positive @-@ sense ssRNA viruses like retroviruses , picornaviruses , and coronaviruses . There is controversy over whether homologous recombination occurs in negative @-@ sense ssRNA viruses like influenza . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 In budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Holliday junctions can be resolved by four different pathways that account for essentially all Holliday junction resolution in vivo . The pathway that produces the majority of crossovers in S. cerevisiae budding yeast , and possibly in mammals , involves proteins <unk> , MLH1 @-@ MLH3 heterodimer ( called <unk> gamma ) and <unk> ( <unk> of Bloom syndrome helicase ) . The MLH1 @-@ MLH3 heterodimer binds preferentially to Holliday junctions . It is an endonuclease that makes single @-@ strand breaks in <unk> double @-@ stranded DNA . The MLH1 @-@ MLH3 heterodimer promotes the formation of crossover recombinants . While the other three pathways , involving proteins MUS81 @-@ <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , respectively , can promote Holliday junction resolution in vivo , absence of all three nucleases has only a modest impact on formation of crossover products . 
 Double mutants deleted for both MLH3 ( major pathway ) and <unk> ( minor pathway ) showed dramatically reduced crossing over compared to wild @-@ type ( 6- to 17 @-@ fold ) ; however spore viability was reasonably high ( 62 % ) and chromosomal disjunction appeared mostly functional . 
 Although MUS81 is a component of a minor crossover pathway in the meiosis of budding yeast , plants and vertebrates , in the protozoan <unk> <unk> , MUS81 appears to be part of an essential , if not the predominant crossover pathway . The MUS81 pathway also appears to be the predominant crossover pathway in the fission yeast <unk> pombe . 
 The MSH4 and MSH5 proteins form a hetero @-@ oligomeric structure ( heterodimer ) in yeast and humans . In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae MSH4 and MSH5 act specifically to facilitate crossovers between homologous chromosomes during meiosis . The MSH4 / MSH5 complex binds and stabilizes double Holliday junctions and promotes their resolution into crossover products . An MSH4 <unk> ( partially functional ) mutant of S. cerevisiae showed a 30 % genome wide reduction in crossover numbers , and a large number of <unk> with non exchange chromosomes . Nevertheless , this mutant gave rise to spore viability patterns suggesting that segregation of non @-@ exchange chromosomes occurred efficiently . Thus in S. cerevisiae proper segregation apparently does not entirely depend on crossovers between homologous pairs . 
 = = Use in DNA nanotechnology = = 
 DNA nanotechnology is the design and manufacture of artificial nucleic acid structures as engineering materials for nanotechnology rather than as the carriers of genetic information in living cells . The field uses branched DNA structures as fundamental components to create more complex , rationally designed structures . Holliday junctions are thus components of many such DNA structures . As isolated Holliday junction complexes are too flexible to assemble into large ordered arrays , structural motifs with multiple Holliday junctions are used to create rigid " tiles " that can then assemble into larger " arrays " . 
 The most common such motif is the double crossover ( DX ) complex , which contains two Holliday junctions in close proximity to each other , resulting in a rigid structure that can self @-@ assemble into larger arrays . The structure of the DX molecule forces the Holliday junctions to adopt a conformation with the double @-@ helical domains directly side @-@ by @-@ side , in contrast to their preferred angle of about 60 ° . The complex can be designed to force the junctions into either a parallel or antiparallel orientation , but in practice the antiparallel variety are more well @-@ behaved , and the parallel version is rarely used . 
 The DX structural motif is the fundamental building block of the DNA origami method , which is used to make larger two- and three @-@ dimensional structures of arbitrary shape . Instead of using individual DX tiles , a single long scaffold strand is folded into the desired shape by a number of short staple strands . When assembled , the scaffold strand is continuous through the double @-@ helical domains , while the staple strands participate in the Holliday junctions as crossover strands . 
 Some tile types that retain the Holliday junction 's native 60 ° angle have been demonstrated . One such array uses tiles containing four Holliday junctions in a parallelogram arrangement . This structure had the benefit of allowing the junction angle to be directly visualized via atomic force microscopy . Tiles of three Holliday junctions in a triangular fashion have been used to make periodic three @-@ dimensional arrays for use in X @-@ ray crystallography of biomolecules . These structures are named for their similarity to structural units based on the principle of tensegrity , which utilizes members both in tension and compression . 
 = = History = = 
 Robin Holliday proposed the junction structure that now bears his name as part of his model of homologous recombination in 1964 , based on his research on the organisms Ustilago maydis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae . The model provided a molecular mechanism that explained both gene conversion and chromosomal crossover . Holliday realized that the proposed pathway would create heteroduplex DNA segments with base mismatches between different versions of a single gene . He predicted that the cell would have a mechanism for mismatch repair , which was later discovered . Prior to Holliday 's model , the accepted model involved a copy @-@ choice mechanism where the new strand is synthesized directly from parts of the different parent strands . 
 In the original Holliday model for homologous recombination , single @-@ strand breaks occur at the same point on one strand of each parental DNA . Free ends of each broken strand then migrate across to the other DNA helix . There , the invading strands are joined to the free ends they encounter , resulting in the Holliday junction . As each crossover strand <unk> to its original partner strand , it displaces the original complementary strand ahead of it . This causes the Holliday junction to migrate , creating the heteroduplex segments . Depending on which strand was used as a template to repair the other , the four cells resulting from meiosis might end up with three copies of one allele and only one of the other , instead of the normal two of each , a property known as gene conversion . 
 Holliday 's original model assumed that heteroduplex DNA would be present on both chromosomes , but experimental data on yeast refuted this . An updated model by Matt Meselson and Charley <unk> in 1975 introduced the idea of branch migration . Further observations in the 1980s led to the proposal of alternate mechanisms for recombination such as the double @-@ strand break model ( by Jack Szostak , Frank Stahl , and others ) and the single @-@ strand annealing model . A third , the synthesis @-@ dependent strand annealing model , did not involve Holliday junctions . 
 The first experimental evidence for the structure of the Holliday junction came from electron microscopy studies in the late 1970s , where the four @-@ arm structure was clearly visible in images of plasmid and bacteriophage DNA . Later in the 1980s , enzymes responsible for initiating the formation of , and binding to , Holliday junctions were identified , although as of 2004 the identification of mammalian Holliday junction <unk> remained elusive ( however , see section " Resolution of Holliday junctions , " above for more recent information ) . In 1983 , artificial Holliday junction molecules were first constructed from synthetic oligonucleotides by Nadrian Seeman , allowing for more direct study of their physical properties . Much of the early analysis of Holliday junction structure was inferred from gel electrophoresis , FRET , and hydroxyl radical and nuclease <unk> studies . In the 1990s , crystallography and nucleic acid NMR methods became available , as well as computational molecular modelling tools . 
 Initially , geneticists assumed that the junction would adopt a parallel rather than antiparallel conformation , because that would place the homologous duplexes in closer alignment to each other . Chemical analysis in the 1980s showed that the junction actually preferred the antiparallel conformation , a finding that was considered controversial , and Robin Holliday himself initially doubted the findings . The antiparallel structure later became widely accepted due to X @-@ ray crystallography data on in vitro molecules , although as of 2004 the implications for the in vivo structure remained unclear , especially the structure of the junctions is often altered by proteins bound to it . 
 The conceptual foundation for DNA nanotechnology was first laid out by Nadrian Seeman in the early 1980s . A number of natural branched DNA structures were known at the time , including the DNA replication fork and the mobile Holliday junction , but Seeman 's insight was that immobile nucleic acid junctions could be created by properly designing the strand sequences to remove symmetry in the assembled molecule , and that these immobile junctions could in principle be combined into rigid crystalline lattices . The first theoretical paper proposing this scheme was published in 1982 , and the first experimental demonstration of an immobile DNA junction was published the following year . Seeman developed the more rigid double @-@ crossover ( DX ) motif , suitable for forming two @-@ dimensional lattices , demonstrated in 1998 by him and Erik Winfree . In 2006 , Paul Rothemund first demonstrated the DNA origami technique for easily and robustly creating folded DNA structures of arbitrary shape . This method allowed the creation of much larger structures than were previously possible , and which are less technically demanding to design and synthesize . The synthesis of a three @-@ dimensional lattice was finally published by Seeman in 2009 , nearly thirty years after he had set out to achieve it . 
 = Power : A New Social Analysis = 
 Power : A New Social Analysis by Bertrand Russell ( 1st imp . London 1938 , Allen & Unwin , 328 pp . ) is a work in social philosophy written by Bertrand Russell . Power , for Russell , is one 's ability to achieve goals . In particular , Russell has in mind social power , that is , power over people . 
 The volume contains a number of arguments . However , four themes have a central role in the overall work . The first theme given treatment in the analysis is that the lust for power is a part of human nature . Second , the work emphasises that there are different forms of social power , and that these forms are substantially interrelated . Third , Power insists that " organisations are usually connected with certain kinds of individuals " . Finally , the work ends by arguing that " arbitrary rulership can and should be subdued " . 
 Throughout the work , Russell 's ambition is to develop a new method of conceiving the social sciences as a whole . For him , all topics in the social sciences are merely examinations of the different forms of power – chiefly the economic , military , cultural , and civil forms ( Russell 1938 : 4 ) . Eventually , he hoped that social science would be robust enough to capture the " laws of social dynamics " , which would describe how and when one form of power changes into another . ( Russell 1938 : 4 – 6 ) As a secondary goal of the work , Russell is at pains to reject single @-@ cause accounts of social power , such as the economic determinism he attributes to Karl Marx . ( Russell 1938 : 4 , 95 ) 
 = = The work = = 
 The new social analysis examines at least four general topics : the nature of power , the forms of power , the structure of organisations , and the ethics of power . 
 = = = Nature of power = = = 
 Russell 's view of human nature , like that of Thomas Hobbes , is somewhat pessimistic . By Russell 's account , the desire to empower oneself is unique to human nature . No other animals besides Homo sapiens , he argues , are capable of being so unsatisfied with their lot , that they should try to accumulate more goods than meet their needs . The " impulse to power " , as he calls it , does not arise unless one 's basic desires have been sated . ( Russell 1938 : 3 ) Then the imagination stirs , motivating the actor to gain more power . In Russell 's view , the love of power is nearly universal among people , although it takes on different guises from person to person . A person with great ambitions may become the next Caesar , but others may be content to merely dominate the home . ( Russell 1938 : 9 ) 
 This impulse to power is not only " explicitly " present in leaders , but also sometimes " implicitly " in those who follow . It is clear that leaders may pursue and profit from enacting their own agenda , but in a " genuinely cooperative enterprise " , the followers seem to gain vicariously from the achievements of the leader . ( Russell 1938 : 7 – 8 ) 
 In stressing this point , Russell is explicitly rebutting Friedrich Nietzsche 's infamous " master @-@ slave morality " argument . Russell explains : 
 " Most men do not feel in themselves the competence required for leading their group to victory , and therefore seek out a captain who appears to possess the courage and sagacity necessary for the achievement of supremacy ... Nietzsche accused Christianity of inculcating a slave @-@ morality , but ultimate triumph was always the goal . ' Blessed are the meek , for they shall inherit the earth . ' " ( Russell 1938 : 9 , emphasis his ) . 
 The existence of implicit power , he explains , is why people are capable of tolerating social inequality for an extended period of time ( Russell 1938 : 8 ) . 
 However , Russell is quick to note that the invocation of human nature should not come at the cost of ignoring the exceptional personal temperaments of power @-@ seekers . Following Adler ( 1927 ) — and to an extent echoing Nietzsche – he separates individuals into two classes : those who are imperious in a particular situation , and those who are not . The love of power , Russell tells us , is probably not motivated by Freudian complexes , ( i.e. , resentment of one 's father , lust for one 's mother , drives towards Eros and Thanatos ( Love and Death drives , which constitute the basis of all human drives , etc . , ) but rather by a sense of entitlement which arises from exceptional and deep @-@ rooted self @-@ confidence . ( Russell 1938 : 11 ) 
 The imperious person is successful due to both mental and social factors . For instance , the imperious tend to have an internal confidence in their own competence and decisiveness which is relatively lacking in those who follow . ( Russell 1938 : 13 ) In reality , the imperious may or may not actually be possessed of genuine skill ; rather , the source of their power may also arise out of their hereditary or religious role . ( Russell 1938 : 11 ) 
 Non @-@ imperious persons include those who submit to a ruler , and those who withdraw entirely from the situation . A confident and competent candidate for leadership may withdraw from a situation when they lack the courage to challenge a particular authority , are timid by temperament , simply do not have the means to acquire power by the usual methods , are entirely indifferent to matters of power , and / or are moderated by a well @-@ developed sense of duty . ( Russell 1938 : 13 – 17 ) 
 Accordingly , while the imperious orator will tend to prefer a passionate crowd over a sympathetic one , the timid orator ( or subject ) will have the opposite preferences . The imperious orator is interested mostly in a mob that is more given to rash emotion than to reflection . ( Russell 1938 : 18 ) The orator will try to engineer two ' layers ' of belief in his crowd : " a superficial layer , in which the power of the enemy is magnified so as to make great courage seem necessary , and a deeper layer , in which there is a firm conviction of victory " ( Russell 1938 : 18 ) . By contrast , the timid will seek a sense of belonging , and " the reassurance which is felt in being one of a crowd who all feel alike " ( Russell 1938 : 17 ) . 
 When any given person has a crisis in confidence , and is placed in a terrifying situation , they will tend to behave in a predictable way : first , they submit to the rule of those who seem to have greater competence in the most relevant task , and second , they will surround themselves with that mass of persons who share a similarly low level of confidence . Thus , people submit to the rule of the leader in a kind of emergency solidarity . ( Russell 1938 : 9 – 10 ) 
 = = = Forms of power = = = 
 To begin with , Russell is interested in classifying the different ways in which one human being may have power over another — what he calls the " forms of power " . The forms may be subdivided into two : influence over persons , and the psychological types of influence . ( Russell 1938 : 24 @,@ 27 ) 
 To understand how organisations operate , Russell explains , we must first understand the basic methods by which they can exercise power at all — that is , we must understand the manner in which individuals are persuaded to follow some authority . Russell breaks the forms of influence down into three very general categories : " the power of force and coercion " ; the " power of inducements " , such as operant conditioning and group conformity ; and " the power of propaganda and / or habit " ( Russell 1938 : 24 ) . 
 To explain each form , Russell provides illustrations . The power of mere force is like the tying of a rope around a pig 's belly and lifting it up to a ship while ignoring its cries . The power of inducements is likened to two things : either conditioning , as exemplified by circus animals which have been trained to perform this @-@ or @-@ that trick for an audience , or group acquiescence , as when the leader among sheep is dragged along by chains to get the rest of the flock to follow . Finally , the power of propaganda is akin to the use of carrot and stick to influence the behaviour of a donkey , in the sense that the donkey is being persuaded that making certain actions ( following the carrot , avoiding the stick ) would be more or less to their benefit . ( Russell 1938 : 24 ) 
 Russell makes a distinction between traditional , revolutionary , and naked forms of psychological influence . ( Russell 1938 : 27 ) These psychological types overlap with the forms of influence in some respects : for instance , " naked power " can be reduced to coercion alone . ( Russell 1938 : 63 ) But the other types are distinct units of analysis , and require separate treatments . 
 = = = = Naked and economic power = = = = 
 When force is used in the absence of other forms , it is called " naked power " . In other words , naked power is the ruthless exertion of force without the desire for , or attempt at , consent . In all cases , the sources of naked power are the fears of the powerless and the ambitions of the powerful ( Russell 1938 : 127 ) . As an example of naked power , Russell recalls the story of Agathocles , the son of a potter who became the tyrant of Syracuse . ( Russell 1938 : 69 – 72 ) 
 Russell argues that naked power arises within a government under certain social conditions : when two or more fanatical creeds are contending for governance , and when all traditional beliefs have decayed . A period of naked power may end by foreign conquest , the creation of stability , and / or the rise of a new religion ( Russell 1938 : 74 ) . 
 The process by which an organisation achieves sufficient prominence that it is able to exercise naked power can be described as the rule of three phases ( Russell 1938 : 63 ) . According to this rule , what begins as fanaticism on the part of some crowd eventually produces conquest by means of naked power . Eventually , the acquiescence of the outlying population transforms naked power into traditional power . Finally , once a traditional power has taken hold , it engages in the suppression of dissent by the use of naked power . 
 For Russell , economic power is parallel to the power of conditioning . ( Russell 1938 : 25 ) However , unlike Marx , he emphasises that economic power is not primary , but rather , derives from a combination of the forms of power . By his account , economics is dependent largely upon the functioning of law , and especially , property law ; and law is to a large degree a function of the power over opinion , which cannot be entirely explained by wage , labour , and trade . ( Russell 1938 : 95 ) 
 Ultimately , Russell argues that economic power is attained through the ability to defend one 's territory ( and to conquer other lands ) , to possess the materials for the cultivation of one 's resources , and to be able to satisfy the demands of others on the market . ( Russell 1938 : 97 – 101 , 107 ) 
 = = = = The power of ( and over ) opinion = = = = 
 In Russell 's model , power over the creeds and habits of persons is easy to <unk> . He claims that , on the one hand , the economic <unk> had underestimated the power of opinion . However , on the other hand , he argues that the case is easy to make that all power is power over opinion : for " Armies are useless unless the soldiers believe in the cause for which they are fighting ... Law is impotent unless it is generally respected . " ( Russell 1938 : 109 ) Still , he admits that military force may cause opinion , and ( with few exceptions ) be the thing that imbues opinion with power in the first place : 
 " We thus have a kind of see @-@ saw : first , pure persuasion leading to the conversion of a minority ; then force exerted to secure that the rest of the community shall be exposed to the right propaganda ; and finally a genuine belief on the part of the great majority , which makes the use of force again unnecessary . " ( Russell 1938 : 110 ) 
 Thus , although " the power over opinion " may occur with or without force , the power of a creed arises only after a powerful and persuasive minority has willingly adopted the creed . 
 The exception here is the case of Western science , which seemingly rose in cultural appeal despite being unpopular with establishment forces . Russell explains the popularity of science is not grounded on a general respect for reason , but rather is grounded entirely on the fact that science produces technology , and technology produces things that people desire . Similarly , religion , advertising , and propaganda all have power because of their connections with the desires of their audiences . Russell 's conclusion is that reason has very limited , though specific , sway over the opinions of persons . For reason is only effective when it appeals to desire . ( Russell 1938 : 111 – 112 ) 
 Russell then inquires into the power that reason has over a community , as contrasted with fanaticism . It would seem that the power of reason is that it is able to increase the odds of success in practical matters by way of technical efficiency . The cost of allowing for reasoned inquiry is the tolerance of intellectual disagreement , which in turn provokes scepticism and dims the power of fanaticism . Conversely , it would seem that a community is stronger and more cohesive if there is widespread agreement within it over certain creeds , and reasoned debate is rare . If these two opposing conditions are both to be fully exploited for short @-@ term gains , then it would demand two things : first , that some creed be held both by the majority opinion ( through force and propaganda ) , and second , that the majority of intellectual class concurs ( through reasoned discussion ) . In the long @-@ term , however , creeds tend to provoke weariness , light scepticism , outright disbelief , and finally , apathy . ( Russell 1938 : 123 – 125 ) 
 Russell is acutely aware that power tends to coalesce in the hands of a minority , and no less so when it comes to power over opinion . The result is " systematic propaganda " , or the monopoly over propaganda by the state . Perhaps surprisingly , Russell avers that the consequences of systematic propaganda are not as dire as one might expect . ( Russell 1938 : 114 – 115 ) A true monopoly over opinion leads to careless arrogance among leaders , as well as to indifference to the well @-@ being of the governed , and a lack of credulity on behalf of the governed towards the state . In the long @-@ term , the net result is : 
 " [ to ] delay revolution , but to make it more violent when it comes . When only one doctrine is officially allowed , men get no practice in thinking or in weighing alternatives ; only a great wave of passionate revolt can dethrone orthodoxy ; and in order to make the opposition sufficiently whole @-@ hearted and violent to achieve success , it will seem necessary to deny even what was true in governmental dogma " ( Russell 1938 : 115 ) . 
 By contrast , the shrewd propagandist of the contemporary state will allow for disagreement , so that false established opinions will have something to react to . In Russell 's words : " Lies need competition if they are to retain their vigour . " ( Russell 1938 : 115 ) 
 = = = = Revolutionary versus traditional power = = = = 
 Among the psychological types of influence , we have a distinction between " traditional , naked , and revolutionary power " . ( Naked power , as noted earlier , is the use of coercion without any pretense to legitimacy . ) 
 By " traditional power " , Russell has in mind the ways in which people will appeal to the force of habit to justify a political regime . It is in this sense that traditional power is psychological and not historical ; since traditional power is not entirely based on a commitment to some linear historical creed , but rather , on mere habit . Moreover , traditional power need not be based on actual history , but rather be based on imagined or fabricated history . Thus he writes that " Both religious and secular innovators – at any rate those who have had most lasting success – have appealed , as far as they could , to tradition , and have done whatever lay in their power to minimise the elements of novelty in their system . " ( Russell 1938 : 40 ) 
 The two clearest examples of traditional power are the cases of " kingly power " and " priestly power " . Russell traces both back historically to certain roles which served some function in early societies . The priest is akin to the medicine man of a tribe , who is thought to have unique powers of cursing and healing at their disposal ( Russell 1938 : 36 ) . In most contemporary cases , priests rely on religious social movements grounded in charismatic authority , which have been more effective at usurping power than those religions that lack iconic founders ( Russell 1938 : 39 – 40 ) . The history of the king is more difficult to examine , and the researcher can only speculate on their origins . At the very least , the power of kingship seems to be advanced by war , even if <unk> was not the king 's original function ( Russell 1938 : 56 ) . 
 When the forms of traditional power come to an end , there tends to be a corresponding change in creeds . If the traditional creeds are doubted without any alternative , then the traditional authority relies more and more on the use of naked power . And where the traditional creeds are wholly replaced with alternative ones , traditional power gives rise to revolutionary power ( Russell 1938 : 82 ) . 
 " Revolutionary power " contrasts with traditional power in that it appeals to popular assent to some creed , and not merely popular acquiescence or habit . Thus , for the revolutionary , power is a means to an end , and the end is some creed or other . Whatever its intentions , the power of the revolutionary tends to either devolve back into naked power over time , or else to transform into traditional power ( Russell 1938 : 82 ) . 
 The revolutionary faces at least two special problems . First , the transformation back into naked power occurs when revolutionary power has been around for a long period without achieving a resolution to its key conflict . At some point , the original goal of the creed tends to be forgotten , and consequently , the fanatics of the movement change their goals and aspire toward mere domination ( Russell 1938 : 92 ) . Second , the revolutionary must always deal with the threat of counter @-@ revolutionaries , and is hence faced with a dilemma : because revolutionary power must by definition think that the original revolution was justified , it " cannot , logically , contend that all subsequent revolutions must be wicked " ( Russell 1938 : 87 ) . 
 A transition into traditional power is also possible . Just as there are two kinds of traditional power — the priestly and the kingly — there are two kinds of revolutionary power , namely , the " soldier of fortune " and " the divine conqueror " . Russell classes Benito Mussolini and Napoleon Bonaparte as soldiers of fortune , and Adolf Hitler , Oliver Cromwell , and Vladimir Lenin as divine conquerors ( Russell 1938 : 12 ) . Nonetheless , the traditional forms bear only an imperfect relationship , if any , to the revolutionary forms . 
 = = = Structure of organisations = = = 
 Having introduced the reader to the forms of power , Russell applies those forms to a selection of organisations . The purpose of discussing organisations is that they seem to be one of the most common sources of social power . By an " organization " , Russell means a set of people who share some activities , and directed at common goals , which is typified by a redistribution of power ( Russell 1938 : 128 ) . Organizations differ in size and type , though common to them all is the tendency for inequality of power to increase as membership increases . 
 An exhaustive list of the types of organisation would be impossible , since the list would be as long as a list of human reasons to organise themselves in groups . However , Russell takes interest in only a small sample of organisations . The army and police , economic organisations , educational organisations , organisations of law , political parties , and churches are all recognised as societal entities . ( Russell 1938 : 29 – 34 @,@ 128 @,@ 138 @-@ 140 ) 
 The researcher might also measure the organisation by its use of communication , transportation , size , and distribution of power relative to the population . ( Russell 1938 : 130 @,@ 132 @-@ 134 ) Improved abilities to communicate and transport tend to stabilise larger organisations and disrupt smaller ones . 
 Any given organisation cannot be easily reduced to a particular form of power . For instance , the police and army are quite obviously instruments of force and coercion , but it would be facile to say that they have power simply because of their ability to physically coerce . Rather , the police are regarded as instruments of a legitimate institution by some population , and the organisation depends upon propaganda and habit to maintain popular deference to their authority . Similarly , economic organisations operate by the use of conditioning , in the form of money ; but the strength of an economy arguably depends in large part on the functional operation of law enforcement which makes commerce possible , by the regulation of peace and property rights . ( Russell 1938 : 25 @,@ 95 ) 
 The general effect of an organisation , Russell believes , is either to increase the well @-@ being of persons , or to aid the survival of the organisation itself : " [ I ] n the main , the effects of organisations , apart from those resulting from governmental self @-@ preservation , are such as to increase individual happiness and well @-@ being . " ( Russell 1938 : 170 ) 
 = = = = Organizations and individuals = = = = 
 The types of relationship which any given individual may share with any given organisation can be assessed according to whether the organisation facilitates or suppresses the will of the person . The line between suppression and facilitation of the will is not absolute , but relative . An organisation may benefit one person or class of persons , while doing harm to another . Thus , for example , the police exist to enforce law and order , and this facilitates the will of the general populace ; yet they also suppress the will of the criminal . ( Russell 1938 : 166 – 171 ) 
 Of those whose wills are facilitated by an organisation , kinds include " the gentleman , the sage , the economic magnate , the political statesman " , and " the covert manager " ( or political wire @-@ puller ) . Each beneficiary of power is parasitic upon certain kinds of organisations , and has certain key traits which uniquely put them at advantage ( Russell 1938 : 29 – 34 ) : 
 Thus , a political wire @-@ puller such as Grigori Rasputin enjoys power best when playing off another person 's hereditary power , or when the organisation benefits largely from an air of mystery . By contrast , the <unk> suffers a wane in power when the organizational élite is made up of competent individuals ( Russell 1938 : 34 ) . 
 Of those whose wills may be suppressed , we may include " customers , voluntary members , involuntary members " , and " enemies " ( in order of ascending severity ) . Each form of membership is paired with typical forms of suppression . The will of the customer may be thwarted through fraud or deception , but this at least may be beneficial in providing the customer with the symbolic pleasure of some material goods . Voluntary organisations are able to threaten sanctions , such as expulsion , on its members . Voluntary organisations serve the positive function of providing relatively benign outlets for the human passion for drama , and for the impulse to power . Involuntary membership abandons all pretense to the benign . The clearest example of this kind of organisation , for Russell , is the State . ( Russell 1938 : 171 – 173 ) 
 Organizations may also be directed specifically at influencing persons at some stage of life . Thus , we have midwives and doctors who are legally obliged to deliver the baby ; as the child grows , the school , parents , and mass media come to the fore ; as they reach working age , various economic organisations pull for the agent 's attention ; the church and the institution of marriage impact the actor in obvious ways ; and finally , the State may provide a pension to the elderly ( Russell 1938 : 166 – 168 ) . 
 = = = = Forms of governance = = = = 
 The forms of governance are the familiar ways in which organisations set up their leadership structures : as monarchies , oligarchies , and democracies . In these ways , any organisation – be it economic , or political – is able to seek out its goals . 
 Each form of government has its own merits and failings : 
 Russell notes that monarchy arises more naturally than any other form of government , and is most cohesive . All that a monarchy requires to remain in power is , first , for the population to be afraid of the monarch ; and second , that the inner circle of supporters be inspired with both confidence and an implicit lust for power . ( Russell 1938 : 149 – 150 ) 
 However , monarchies have severe problems . Contra Hobbes , no monarchy can be said to arise from a [ [ social contract ] ] within the wide population . Moreover , if a monarchy is hereditary , then the royal offspring will likely have no skill at governance ; and if not , then civil war will ensue to determine the next in line . Finally , and perhaps most obviously , the monarch is not necessarily compelled to have any regard for the well @-@ being of his or her subjects ( Russell 1938 : 150 – 151 ) . 
 <unk> , or rule of a few over the many , comes in many different guises : 
 Hereditary landed aristocracy , which ( Russell argues ) tends to be " conservative , proud , stupid , and rather brutal " ( Russell 1938 : 151 ) ; 
 The bourgeoisie , a merchant class who had to earn their wealth . Historically , by Russell 's account , they have tended to be more clever , astute , and diplomatic ; 
 The industrial class , who are of " a totally different type " from the bourgeoisie , and are more apt to coerce than to behave diplomatically , due in large part to the impersonal relationships they have with their employees ; and 
 The ideological élite . Ideological élites tend to allow for the reversion into monarchy , as well as admit to heavy censorship . However , their rule also has certain strengths . For instance , they are more likely to arrive at common agreement immediately after a revolution ; they cannot represent a hereditary or economic minority of the population ; and they tend towards being more politically conscious and active . ( Russell 1983 : 152 – 153 ) 
 Democracy , or the rule of the many over themselves . The rule of the masses is positive , in that it is less likely to lead to civil war than the alternatives . An ambivalent feature of democracy is the fact that representatives are forced to compromise their ideologies to stay in power , which can curb both positive and negative tendencies . On the negative side , democracies are not very good at dealing with subjects that demand expert authority or quick decisions . Moreover , a democracy is easily corruptible by politicians with agendas . Also , a democracy may easily slip into popular apathy which allows for corrupt politicians to go unchecked ( Russell 1938 : 154 – 159 ) . 
 = = = Ethics of power = = = 
