 Having completed those chapters which analyse the relevant aspects of power in social life , Russell shifts his focus onto the philosophical issues that are connected with those problems . Moving into this new terrain , he wonders what can be done to curb the efforts of those who love power . The answers can be found either in possible collective actions , or in individual duties . 
 = = = = Positive and private morality = = = = 
 There is a distinction between positive and private forms of morality . Positive morality tends to be associated with traditional power and following ancient principles with a narrow focus ; for example , the norms and taboos of marital law . Personal morality is associated with revolutionary power and the following of one 's own conscience . ( Russell 1938 : 186 – 206 ) 
 The dominant social system will have some impact on the reigning positive moral codes of the population . In a system where filial piety is dominant , there will be greater emphasis in a culture upon the wisdom of the elderly . ( Russell 1938 : 188 – 189 ) In a monarchy , the culture will be encouraged to believe in a morality of submission , with cultural taboos placed upon use of the imagination ; both of which increase social cohesion by encouraging the self @-@ censorship of dissent . ( Russell 1938 : 190 – 191 ) Priestly power is not as impressive , even when it is in full bloom . At its peak , priestly power depends on not being opposed by kingly power and not being usurped by a morality of conscience ; and even then , it faces the threat of wide scepticism . ( Russell 1938 : 192 – 193 ) Still , some moral convictions do not seem to have any source at all in the power elite : for example , the treatment of homosexuality in the early twentieth century does not seem to be tied to the success of a particular rulership . ( Russell 1938 : 194 ) 
 Russell wonders whether some other basis for ethics can be found besides positive morality . Russell associates positive morality with conservatism , and understands it as a way of acting which stifles the spirit of peace and fails to curb strife . ( Russell 1938 : 197 ) Meanwhile , personal morality is the ultimate source of positive morality , and is more grounded in the intellect . ( Russell 1938 : 198 – 199 ) However , personal morality is so deeply connected with the desires of individuals that , if it were left to be the sole guide to moral conduct , it would lead to the social chaos of the " anarchic rebel " . ( Russell 1938 : 206 ) 
 Advocating a compromise between positive and private morality , Russell first emphasises that there is such a thing as moral progress , a progress which may occur through revolutions . ( Russell 1938 : 199 ) Second , he provides a method by which we can test whether a particular sort of private morality is a form of progress : 
 " An individual may perceive a way of life , or a method of social organisation , by which more of the desires of mankind could be satisfied than under the existing method . If he perceives truly , and can persuade men to adopt his reform , he is justified [ in rebellion ] . " ( Russell 1938 : 206 ) 
 = = = = Philosophy of power = = = = 
 Individual resistance to power can take two diametrically opposed forms : those which indulge the impulse to power , and those who seek to quell the impulse to power entirely . 
 Some of those who have attempted to find an escape from the impulse to power have resorted to forms of quietism or pacifism . One major proponent of such approaches was the philosopher Laozi . From Russell 's perspective , such views are incoherent , since they only deny themselves coercive power , but retain an interest in persuading others to their cause ; and persuasion is a form of power , for Russell . Moreover , he argues that the love of power can actually be a good thing . For instance , if one feels a certain duty towards their neighbours , they may attempt to attain power to help those neighbours ( Russell 1938 : 215 – 216 ) . In sum , the focus of any policy should not be on a ban on kinds of power , but rather , on certain kinds of use of power ( Russell 1938 : 221 ) . 
 Other thinkers have emphasised the pursuit of power as a virtue . Some philosophies are rooted in the love of power because philosophies tend to be coherent unification in the pursuit of some goal or desire . Just as a philosophy may strive for truth , it may also strive for happiness , virtue , salvation , or , finally , power . Among those philosophies which Russell condemns as rooted in love of power : all forms of idealism and anti @-@ realism , such as Johann Gottlieb Fichte 's solipsism ; certain forms of Pragmatism ; Henri Bergson 's doctrine of Creative evolution ; and the works of Friedrich Nietzsche ( Russell 1938 : 209 – 214 ) . 
 According to Russell 's outlook on power , there are four conditions under which power ought to be pursued with moral conviction . First , it must be pursued only as a means to some end , and not as an end in itself ; moreover , if it is an end in itself , then it must be of comparatively lower value than one 's other goals . Second , the ultimate goal must be to help satisfy the desires of others . Third , the means by which one pursues one 's goal must not be egregious or malign , such that they outweigh the value of the end ; as ( for instance ) the gassing of children for the sake of future democracy ( Russell 1938 : 201 ) . Fourth , moral doctrines should aim toward truth and honesty , not the manipulation of others ( Russell 1938 : 216 – 218 ) . 
 To enact these views , Russell advises the reader to discourage cruel temperaments which arise out of a lack of opportunities . Moreover , the reader should encourage the growth of constructive skills , which provide the person with an alternative to easier and more destructive alternatives . Finally , they should encourage cooperative feeling , and curb competitive desires ( Russell 1938 : 219 – 220 , 222 ) . 
 = = = = Taming arbitrary rule = = = = 
 Among the issues demanding collective ethical action , Russell identifies " political rule " , " economic competition " , " propagandistic competition " , and " psychological life " . To make positive changes in each of these spheres of collective behaviour , Russell believed that power would need to be made more diffuse and less arbitrary . 
 To succeed in the taming of arbitrary political rule , Russell says , a community 's goal ought to be to encourage democracy . Russell insists that the beginning of all <unk> reforms to government must presuppose democracy as a rule . Even lip service to oligarchies – for example , support for purportedly benevolent dictators – must be dismissed as fantastic . ( Russell 1938 : 226 ) 
 Moreover , democracy must be infused with a respect for the autonomy of persons , so that the political body does not collapse into the tyranny of the majority . To prevent this result , people must have a well @-@ developed sense of separation between acquiescence to the collective will , and respect for the discretion of the individual . ( Russell 1938 : 227 ) 
 Collective action should be restricted to two domains . First , it should be used to treat problems that are primarily " geographical " , which include issues of sanitation , transportation , electricity , and external threats . Second , it ought to be used when a kind of individual freedom poses a major threat to public order ; for instance , speech that incites the breaking of law ( Russell 1938 : 227 – 228 ) . The exception to this rule is when there is a minority which densely populates a certain well @-@ defined area , in which case , political devolution is preferable . 
 In formulating his outlook on the preferable size of government , Russell encounters a dilemma . He notes that , the smaller the democracy , the more empowerment the citizen feels ; yet the larger the democracy , the more the citizen 's passions and interests are inflamed . In both situations , the result is voter fatigue . ( Russell 1938 : 229 ) There are two possible solutions to this problem : to organise political life according to vocational interests , as with unionisation ; or to organise it according to interest groups . ( Russell 1938 : 229 – 230 ) 
 A federal government is only sensible , for Russell , when it has limited but well @-@ defined powers . Russell advocates the creation of a world government made up of sovereign nation @-@ states ( Russell 1938 : 197 , 230 – 31 ) . On his view , the function of a world government should only be to ensure the avoidance of war and the pursuit of peace ( Russell 1938 : 230 @-@ 31 ) . On the world stage , democracy would be impossible , because of the negligible power any particular individual could have in comparison with the entire human race . 
 One final suggestion for political policy reform is the notion that there ought to be a political balance in every branch of public service . Lack of balance in public institutions creates havens for reactionary forces , which in turn undermine democracy . Russell emphasises two conditions necessary for the achievement of balance . He advocates , first , the abolition of the legal standing of confessions as evidence , to remove the incentive for extraction of confession under torture by the police ( Russell 1938 : 232 ) . Second , the creation of dual branches of police to investigate particular crimes : one which presumes the innocence of the accused , the other presuming guilt ( Russell 1938 : 233 ) . 
 Competition , for Russell , is a word that may have many uses . Although most often meant to refer to competition between companies , it may also be used to speak of competition between states , between ideologues , between classes , rivals , trusts , workers , etc . On this topic , Russell ultimately wishes to answer two questions : " First , in what kinds of cases is competition technically wasteful ? Secondly , in what cases is it desirable on non @-@ technical grounds ? " ( Russell 1938 : 176 ) . In asking these questions , he has two concerns directly in mind : economic competition , and the competition of propaganda . 
 The question of whether or not economic competition is defensible requires an examination from two perspectives : the moral point of view and the technical point of view . 
 From the view of the technician , certain goods and services can only be provided efficiently by a centralised authority . For Russell , it seems to be an economic fact that bigger organisations were capable of producing items at a certain standard , and best suited to fill needs that are geographical in nature , such as railways and water treatment . By contrast , smaller organisations ( like businesses ) are best suited to create products that are customised and local . ( Russell 1938 : 176 – 177 ; 234 ) 
 From the view of the ethicist , competition between states is on the same moral plane as competition between modern businesses ( Russell 1938 : 177 ) . Indeed , by Russell 's account , economic power and political power are both capable of devastation : 
 " In democratic countries , the most important private organisations are economic . Unlike secret societies , they are able to exercise their terrorism without illegality , since they do not threaten to kill their enemies , but only to starve them . " ( Russell 1938 : 147 ) 
 Since they are morally equivalent , perhaps it is not surprising that the cure for political injustices is identical to the cure for economic ones : namely , the institution of democracy in both economic and political spheres ( Russell 1938 : 234 ) . 
 By ' economic democracy ' , Russell means a kind of democratic socialism , which at the very least involves the nationalisation of select industries ( railways , water , television ) . In order for this to operate effectively , he argues that the social system must be such that power is distributed across a society of highly autonomous persons . ( Russell 1938 : 238 – 240 ) 
 Russell is careful to indicate that his support for nationalisation rests on the assumption that it can be accomplished under the auspices of a robust democracy , and that it may be safeguarded against statist tyranny . If either condition fail , then nationalisation is undesirable . In delivering this warning , Russell emphasises the distinction between ownership and control . He points out that nationalisation – which would allow the citizens to collectively own an industry – would not guarantee any of them control over the industry . In the same way , shareholders own parts of companies , but the control of the company ultimately rests with the CEO ( Russell 1938 : 235 ) . 
 Control over propaganda is another matter . When forming his argument here , Russell specifically targets the doctrines of John Stuart Mill . Russell argues that Mill 's argument for the freedom of speech is too weak , so long as it is balanced against the harm principle ; for any speech worth protecting for political reasons is likely to cause somebody harm . For example , the citizen ought to have the opportunity to impeach malicious governors , but that would surely harm the governor , at the very least ( Russell 1938 : 179 ) . 
 Russell replaces Mill 's analysis with an examination of the issue from four perspectives : the perspective of the governor , the citizen , the innovator , and the philosopher . The rational governor is always threatened by revolutionary activities , and can always be expected to ban speech which calls for assassination . Yet the governor would be advised to allow freedom of speech to prevent and diminish discontent among the subjects , and has no reason to suppress ideas which are unrelated to his governance , for instance the Copernican doctrine of heliocentrism . Relatedly , the citizen mainly understands free speech as an extension of the right to do peaceably that which could only otherwise be done through violence ( Russell 1938 : 179 – 182 ) . 
 The innovator does not tend to care much about free speech , since they engage in innovation despite social resistance . Innovators may be separated into three categories : the hard millenarians , who believe in their doctrine to the exclusion of all others , and who only seek to protect the dissemination of their own creeds ; the virtuous millenarians , who emphasise that revolutionary transitions must begin through rational persuasion and the guidance of sages , and so are supportive of free speech ; and the progressives , who cannot foresee the direction of future progress , but recognise that the free exchange of ideas is a prerequisite to it . For the philosopher , free speech allows people to engage in rational doubt , and to grow in their prudential duties . ( Russell 1938 : 182 – 185 ) 
 In any case , the citizen 's right to dissent and to decide their governor is sacrosanct for Russell . He believes that a true public square could be operated by state @-@ run media outlets , like the BBC , which would be charged with the duty to provide a wide range of points of view on political matters . For certain other topics , like art and science , the fullest and freest competition between ideas must be guaranteed . ( Russell 1938 : 185 ) 
 The final discussion in the work is concerned with Russell 's views on education . ( Russell 1938 : 242 – 251 ) Citizens of a healthy democracy must have two virtues , for Russell : the " sense of self @-@ reliance and confidence " necessary for autonomous action ; and the humility required to " submit to the will of the majority " when it has spoken . ( Russell 1938 : 244 ) The last chapter of Power : A New Social Analysis concentrates significantly on the question of how to inspire confidence in students , from an educator 's point of view . 
 Two major conditions are necessary . First , the citizen / student must be free from hatred , fear , and the impulse to submit . ( Russell 1938 : 244 – 245 ) Economic opportunities will have some impact on the student 's temperament in this regard , and so , economic reforms need to be made to create more opportunities . But reform to the education system is also necessary , in particular , to foster in the student a kindness , curiosity , and intellectual commitment to science . The common trait of students with the scientific mind is a sense of balance between dogmatism and scepticism . ( Russell 1938 : 246 ) 
 Moreover , the student must have good instructors , who emphasise reason over rhetoric . Russell indicates that the critical mind is an essential feature of the healthy citizen of a democracy , since collective hysteria is one of the greatest threats to democracy ( Russell 1938 : 248 ) . To foster a critical mind , he suggests , the teacher ought to show the students the consequences of pursuing one 's feelings over one 's thoughts . For example , the teacher might allow students to choose a field trip between two different locations : one fantastic place which is given a dull overview , and a shabby place which is recommended by impressive advertisements . In teaching history , the teacher might examine a particular event from a multitude of different perspectives , and allow the students to use their critical faculties to make assessments of each . ( Russell 1938 : 247 ) In all cases , the object would be to encourage self @-@ growth , a willingness to be " tentative in judgment " , and " responsiveness to evidence " . ( Russell 1938 : 250 ) 
 The work ends with the following words : 
 Fichte and the powerful men who have inherited his ideals , when they see children , think : ' Here is material that I can manipulate ' ... All this , to any person with natural affection for the young , is horrible ; just as we teach children to avoid being destroyed by motor cars if they can , so we should teach them to avoid being destroyed by cruel fanatics ... This is the task of a liberal education : to give a sense of the value of things other than domination , to help create wise citizens of a free community , and through the combination of citizenship with liberty in individual creativeness to enable men to give to human life that splendour which some few have shown that it can achieve ( Russell 1938 : 251 ) . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Power ( 1938 ) is written with a mind toward the political ills that marred the headlines of the day . The work appeared at the brink of World War II , and contains more than one pointed reference to the dictatorships of Nazi Germany and fascist Italy , and one reference to the persecution of German Czechoslovakians . ( Russell 1938 : 147 ) When his remarks treat of current affairs , they are often pessimistic . " Although men hate one another , exploit one another , and torture one another , they have , until recently , given their reverence to those who preached a different way of life . " ( Russell 1938 : 204 ; emphasis added ) As Kirk Willis remarked on Russell 's outlook during the 1930s , " the foreign and domestic policies of successive national governments repelled him , as did the triumph of totalitarian regimes on the continent and the seemingly inexorable march to war brought in their wake ... Despairing that war could be avoided and convinced that such a European @-@ wide conflict would herald a new dark age of barbarism and bigotry , Russell gave voice to his despondency in Which Way to Peace ? ( 1936 ) – not so much a reasoned defence of appeasement as an expression of defeatism " . ( Russell 1938 : <unk> @-@ xxiii ) 
 Ultimately , with his new analysis in hand , Russell hoped to instruct others on how to tame arbitrary power . He hoped that a stable world government composed of sovereign nation @-@ states would eventually arise which would dissuade nations from engaging in war . In context , this argument was made years after the dissolution of the League of Nations ( and years before the creation of the United Nations ) . Also , at many times during the work , Russell also mentions his desire to see a kind of socialism take root . This was true to his convictions of the time , during a phase in his career where he was convinced in the plausibility of guild socialism . ( Sledd 1994 ; Russell 1918 ) 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Russell , a famous logician and <unk> , had many side @-@ interests in history , politics , and social philosophy . The paradigmatic public intellectual , Russell wrote prolifically in the latter topics to a wide and receptive audience . As one scholar writes , " Russell 's prolific output spanned the whole range of philosophical and political thought , and he has probably been more widely read in his own lifetime than any other philosopher in history " . ( Griffin : 129 ) 
 However , his writings in political philosophy have been relatively neglected by those working in the social sciences . From the point of view of many commentators , Power : A New Social Analysis has proven itself to be no exception to that trend . Russell would later comment that his work " fell rather flat " ( Russell 1969 ) . Both Samuel Brittan and Kirk Willis , who wrote the preface and introduction to the 2004 edition ( respectively ) , both observed the relative lack of success of the work ( Russell 1938 : viii , <unk> – <unk> ) . 
 One reason why Power might be more obscure than competing texts in political philosophy is that it is written in a historical style which is not in keeping with its own theoretical goals . Willis remarked that , with hindsight , " Some of the responsibility for its tepid reception ... rests with the book itself . A work of political sociology rather than of political theory , it does not in fact either offer a comprehensive new social analysis or fashion new tools of social investigation applicable to the study of power in all times or places . " ( Russell 1938 : <unk> ) 
 Willis 's review , written more than half a century past the original writing of the volume , is in some respects a gentler way of phrasing the work 's immediate reception . One of Russell 's contemporaries wrote : " As a contribution to social science ... or to the study of government , the volume is very disappointing ... In this pretentious volume , Russell shows only the most superficial familiarity with progress made in the study of social phenomena or in any special field of social research , either with techniques of inquiry , or with materials assembled , or with interpretations developed ... it seems doubtful that the author knows what is going on in the world of social science . " ( Merriam , 1939 ) Indeed , the very preface of the work candidly states : " As usual , those who look in Russell 's pronouncements for <unk> opinions will be able to find a few " . ( Russell 1938 : x ) Still , some scholars , like Edward Hallet Carr , found the work of some use . ( Carr 2001 : 131 ) 
 Russell is routinely praised for his analytic treatment of philosophical issues . One commentator , quoted in ( Griffin : 202 ) , observes that " In the forty @-@ five years preceding publication of Strawson 's ' On Referring ' , Russell 's theory was practically immune from criticism . There is not a similar phenomenon in contemporary analytic philosophy " . Yet Power , along with many of his later works in social philosophy , is not obviously analytic . Rather , it takes the form of a series of examinations of semi @-@ related topics , with a narrative dominated by historical illustrations . Nevertheless , Brittan emphasised the strengths of the treatise by remarking that it can be understood as " an enjoyable romp through history , in part anticipating some of the 1945 History of Western Philosophy , but ranging wider " ( Russell 1938 : vii ) . 
 In his autobiography ( 1967 – 69 ) , Russell summarised the implications of Power , a new social analysis : 
 = = Chapter listing = = 
 = Gobrecht dollar = 
 The Gobrecht dollar , minted from 1836 to 1839 , was the first silver dollar struck for circulation by the United States Mint since production of that denomination was officially halted in 1806 . The coin was struck in small numbers to determine whether the reintroduced silver dollar would be well received by the public . 
 In 1835 , Director of the United States Mint Samuel Moore resigned his post , and Robert M. Patterson assumed the position . Shortly after , Patterson began an attempt to redesign the nation 's coinage . After Mint Chief Engraver William Kneass suffered a stroke later that year , Christian Gobrecht was hired as an engraver . On August 1 , Patterson wrote a letter to Philadelphia artist Thomas Sully laying out his plans for the dollar coin . He also asked Titian Peale to create a design for the coin . Sully created an obverse design depicting a seated representation of Liberty and Peale a reverse depicting a soaring bald eagle , which were converted into coin designs by Gobrecht . After the designs were created and trials struck , production of the working dies began in September 1836 . 
 After a small quantity was struck for circulation , the Mint received complaints regarding the prominent placement of Gobrecht 's name on the dollar , and the design was modified to incorporate his name in a less conspicuous position . In January 1837 , the legal standard for the percentage of precious metal in silver coins was changed from 89 @.@ 2 % to 90 % , and the Gobrecht dollars struck after that point reflect this change . In total , 1 @,@ 900 Gobrecht dollars were struck during the official production run . Production of the Seated Liberty dollar , which utilized the same obverse design as the Gobrecht dollar , began mintage in 1840 . In the 1850s , Mint officials controversially re @-@ struck the coins without authorization . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = 1804 dollar = = = 
 The first silver dollars struck by the United States Mint were minted in 1794 . In 1804 , the Mint unofficially ended production of silver dollars because many of the coins produced since that denomination had first been struck in 1794 were exported for their silver content to Eastern Asia , especially Canton ( modern day Guangzhou ) . In 1806 , then Secretary of State James Madison issued an order officially halting mintage of the coins . In 1831 , Mint Director Samuel Moore noticed a reversal ; a large shipment of Spanish dollars had recently been shipped from Canton to the United States . Later that year , President Andrew Jackson , at Moore 's request , lifted the prohibition . 
 No further action was taken until the summer of 1834 , when officials suggested that proof coin sets be prepared as gifts for Asian dignitaries . After examining Mint records , personnel incorrectly concluded that the last Draped Bust dollars minted were dated 1804 , so they chose that date for the coins . It is unknown why the current date was not used , but numismatic historian R.W. Julian suggests the coins were predated to prevent coin collectors from becoming angered when they would be unable to obtain the newly dated coins , which were struck in very small numbers . It is unknown precisely how many 1804 dollars were struck , though eight are known to be extant . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Later , in 1835 , Mint officials began preparations for a series of silver dollars which , unlike the 1804 dollar , were intended to enter circulation in order to determine whether the denomination would be well received by the public . In June 1835 , Moore resigned his post as director , and was replaced by Robert M. Patterson . Shortly thereafter , Director Patterson approached two well @-@ known Philadelphia artists , Titian Peale and Thomas Sully , to create a design that would be used to overhaul most of the American coins then in production . Mint Chief Engraver Kneass prepared a sketch based on Patterson 's conception , but soon suffered a stroke , leaving him partially incapacitated . Following Kneass ' stroke , government officials approved Patterson 's urgent request that Philadelphia medallist Christian Gobrecht be hired immediately to fulfill the duties of engraver ; Director Moore requested the same prior to his resignation , but no action was taken immediately . 
 In a letter dated August 1 , 1835 , Patterson proposed that Sully create a Seated Liberty figure for the obverse , suggesting that the " figure be in a sitting posture — sitting , for example , on a rock . " Patterson also suggested that the seated figure should hold in her right hand a pileus atop a pole to be " emblematic of Liberty " . Numismatic historian Don Taxay notes the similarity between Patterson 's Seated Liberty concept and designs already in use on British copper coinage : " Liberty thus emerged as a refurbished Britannia , her trident replaced by a staff and pileus . " In the same letter , Patterson also informed Sully of his vision for the reverse , which Peale would execute : " I propose an Eagle flying , and rising in flight , amidst a constellation , irregularly dispersed , of 24 stars [ representing the number of states then forming the Union ] , and carrying in its claws a scroll with the words E PLURIBUS UNUM " . Patterson preferred a soaring eagle because he believed that the heraldic eagle commonly used on American coins , which he dismissed as a " mere creature of imagination " , was unappealing as a design . According to a common story , the flying eagle seen on the Gobrecht dollar was modeled after Peter , the Mint 's pet eagle , who was taxidermied after his death by becoming caught in a coining press and remains on display at the Mint to this day . 
 In September 1835 , Thomas Sully received from Patterson a set of British coins and medals to help guide him while creating the Seated Liberty design . Sully sent Patterson three rough sketches near the beginning of October , and those were given to Gobrecht , who in turn set about making a copper engraving of the design . Gobrecht completed the engraving on October 14 , and Patterson presented prints created from it to several government officials in an effort to gain their approval . President Jackson , Treasury Secretary Levi Woodbury , and the rest of the cabinet all approved of the design . On October 17 , while Jackson and his cabinet were reviewing the design , Woodbury wrote Patterson giving permission to proceed with creating dies for the new coins based on the prints . In January 1836 , die trials were conducted in soft metal . These pieces were then circulated among the public for suggestions . Patterson then authorized production of a steel obverse die ; the reverse could not yet be created because Peale had yet to complete his design to Patterson 's satisfaction . While Peale continued his work , Gobrecht began work on a design for a gold dollar , which occupied much of his time at the Mint . On April 9 , Patterson wrote a letter to the Treasury secretary in which he included several of Peale 's drawings ; Patterson viewed one of the designs as the best created to date . Despite the director 's approval of the design , he instructed Peale to continue until Patterson was satisfied . This was evidently achieved , because Patterson had Gobrecht to begin work on a reverse die in June . In August , Patterson sent a <unk> striking of the reverse die to President Jackson , who approved designs for both sides of the coin 
 = = Production = = 
 In September 1836 , Chief Coiner Adam Eckfeldt began sinking the working dies that would be used to strike the coins . However , before production could begin , Patterson ordered that Gobrecht 's name be added to the dollar . His name appeared as " C. <unk> F " , short for " Christian Gobrecht Fecit " , meaning " Christian Gobrecht made it " . The Gobrecht dollar was first struck in December 1836 . Several pieces were produced and distributed throughout Philadelphia . Despite a positive reception for the overall design , many criticized the prominent display of Gobrecht 's name on the coin . Gobrecht requested that his name be removed entirely from the face of the coin ; instead , the engraver was instructed to change its size and placement at the behest of Patterson . 
 When the full @-@ scale production began , the reverse eagle was surrounded by 26 stars rather than 24 as Patterson had originally requested of Sully , as the states of Arkansas and Michigan had been admitted to the Union since Patterson 's letter was penned in 1835 . Some of the Gobrecht dollars produced were struck with ' medal alignment ' , meaning that the obverse and reverse images both face upward when the coin is rotated around its vertical axis . For the 1837 production ( which kept the 1836 date ) , Patterson ordered that the coins be struck in coin alignment , the opposite of medal alignment , and the practice with current US coins ( the two faces both are upright when the coin is rotated about its horizontal axis ) . An act of January 18 , 1837 , officially changed the legal standard for silver coins from 89 @.@ 2 % to 90 % silver . Numismatic historian Walter Breen asserts that those pieces struck before the passage of this act are technically patterns ( or coins created to test their design , composition or other points ) , as they were not authorized by Congress . In total , 1 @,@ 000 pieces dated 1836 were struck in 89 @.@ 2 % silver and 600 in 90 % silver . Gobrecht dollars struck prior to passage of the act weighed 26 @.@ 96 grams ( 0 @.@ 951 oz ) , while those struck later weighed 26 @.@ 73 grams ( 0 @.@ 943 oz ) . 
 Persistent public demand for the new coins prompted Woodbury to contact Patterson , requesting more silver dollars . In 1838 , the design was modified to remove the stars from the reverse . Throughout the production run , a number of different Gobrecht dollar patterns , which differed from the general issues , were struck . A small number were struck bearing the date of 1838 that did not bear Gobrecht 's initials in any form . In total , 300 dollars of this type dated 1839 were struck for circulation , all in medal alignment . Patterson 's trial issue had evidently been a success , as full @-@ scale production of the Seated Liberty dollar began in 1840 . The Seated Liberty dollar utilized an obverse design based on that of the Gobrecht dollar , though the reverse was altered from a soaring to a heraldic eagle . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Following an increase in coin collecting among the public in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , there arose considerable demand for older American coins . Mint Director James Ross Snowden began selling restrikes of Gobrecht dollars and trading them for rare medals ( especially those depicting or relating to former President George Washington ) , which were then added to the Mint 's coin collection , then known as a coin cabinet . The money generated from selling the restrikes went toward purchasing new items for the coin cabinet . The restrikes created under Snowden 's tenure were likely struck in 1859 and 1860 , but the practice was largely halted after the eruption of a public scandal ; other Mint employees were creating and selling restrikes of early American coins for their own profit . All Gobrecht dollar restrikes , when tilted on their axis , depict the reverse eagle flying level , rather than upward as it is depicted on the coins struck during the official production run . It is unknown precisely why the orientation of the eagle was altered , though it is believed by many numismatists that Snowden did this intentionally to make restrikes distinguishable from originals . Numismatic historian Walter Breen suggests that Snowden simply used the alignment because that was the same used on the Flying Eagle cent , which began production in 1856 . Mint Engraver James B. Longacre , its designer , had borrowed Gobrecht and Peale 's eagle reverse for the one @-@ cent coin 's obverse . 
 = Oscar Wilde = 
 Oscar Fingal O <unk> Wills Wilde ( 16 October 1854 – 30 November 1900 ) was an Irish playwright , novelist , essayist , and poet . After writing in different forms throughout the 1880s , he became one of London 's most popular playwrights in the early 1890s . He is remembered for his epigrams , his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray , his plays , as well as the circumstances of his imprisonment and early death . 
 Wilde 's parents were successful Anglo @-@ Irish Dublin intellectuals . Their son became fluent in French and German early in life . At university , Wilde read Greats ; he proved himself to be an outstanding classicist , first at Dublin , then at Oxford . He became known for his involvement in the rising philosophy of aestheticism , led by two of his tutors , Walter Pater and John Ruskin . After university , Wilde moved to London into fashionable cultural and social circles . 
 As a spokesman for aestheticism , he tried his hand at various literary activities : he published a book of poems , lectured in the United States and Canada on the new " English Renaissance in Art " , and then returned to London where he worked prolifically as a journalist . Known for his biting wit , flamboyant dress and glittering conversation , Wilde became one of the best @-@ known personalities of his day . 
 At the turn of the 1890s , he refined his ideas about the supremacy of art in a series of dialogues and essays , and incorporated themes of decadence , duplicity , and beauty into his only novel , The Picture of Dorian Gray ( 1890 ) . The opportunity to construct aesthetic details precisely , and combine them with larger social themes , drew Wilde to write drama . He wrote Salome ( 1891 ) in French in Paris but it was refused a licence for England due to the absolute prohibition of Biblical subjects on the English stage . Unperturbed , Wilde produced four society comedies in the early 1890s , which made him one of the most successful playwrights of late Victorian London . 
 At the height of his fame and success , while his masterpiece , The Importance of Being Earnest ( 1895 ) , was still on stage in London , Wilde had the Marquess of Queensberry prosecuted for libel . The Marquess was the father of Wilde 's lover , Lord Alfred Douglas . The charge carried a penalty of up to two years in prison . The trial unearthed evidence that caused Wilde to drop his charges and led to his own arrest and trial for gross indecency with men . After two more trials he was convicted and imprisoned for two years ' hard labour . 
 In 1897 , in prison , he wrote De Profundis , which was published in 1905 , a long letter which discusses his spiritual journey through his trials , forming a dark counterpoint to his earlier philosophy of pleasure . Upon his release he left immediately for France , never to return to Ireland or Britain . There he wrote his last work , The Ballad of Reading Gaol ( 1898 ) , a long poem commemorating the harsh rhythms of prison life . He died destitute in Paris at the age of 46 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oscar Wilde was born at 21 Westland Row , Dublin ( now home of the Oscar Wilde Centre , Trinity College ) , the second of three children born to Sir William Wilde and Jane Wilde , two years behind William ( " Willie " ) . Wilde 's mother , under the pseudonym " Speranza " ( the Italian word for ' Hope ' ) , wrote poetry for the revolutionary Young <unk> in 1848 and was a lifelong Irish nationalist . She read the Young <unk> ' poetry to Oscar and Willie , inculcating a love of these poets in her sons . Lady Wilde 's interest in the neo @-@ classical revival showed in the paintings and busts of ancient Greece and Rome in her home . William Wilde was Ireland 's leading <unk> @-@ <unk> ( ear and eye ) surgeon and was knighted in 1864 for his services as medical adviser and assistant commissioner to the censuses of Ireland . He also wrote books about Irish archaeology and peasant folklore . A renowned philanthropist , his dispensary for the care of the city 's poor at the rear of Trinity College , Dublin , was the forerunner of the Dublin Eye and Ear Hospital , now located at Adelaide Road . On his father 's side Wilde was descended from a Dutchman , Colonel de Wilde , who went to Ireland with King William of Orange 's invading army in 1690 . On his mother 's side Wilde 's ancestors included a bricklayer from County Durham who emigrated to Ireland sometime in the 1770s . 
 Wilde was baptised as an infant in St. Mark 's Church , Dublin , the local Church of Ireland ( Anglican ) church . When the church was closed , the records were moved to the nearby St. Ann 's Church , Dawson Street . Davis Coakley references a second baptism by a Catholic priest , Father Prideaux Fox , who befriended Oscar 's mother circa 1859 . According to Fox 's own testimony written by him years later in Donahoe 's Magazine in 1905 , Jane Wilde would visit his chapel in Glencree , Co Wicklow for Mass and would take her sons with her . She then asked Father Fox to baptise her sons . Fox described it in this way : 
 " I am not sure if she ever became a Catholic herself but it was not long before she asked me to instruct two of her children , one of them being the future erratic genius , Oscar Wilde . After a few weeks I baptized these two children , Lady Wilde herself being present on the occasion . " 
 In addition to his children with his wife , Sir William Wilde was the father of three children born out of wedlock before his marriage : Henry Wilson , born in 1838 , and Emily and Mary Wilde , born in 1847 and 1849 , respectively , of different maternity to Henry . Sir William acknowledged paternity of his illegitimate children and provided for their education , but they were reared by his relatives rather than with his wife and legitimate children . 
 In 1855 , the family moved to No. 1 Merrion Square , where Wilde 's sister , Isola , was born in 1857 . The Wildes ' new home was larger and , with both his parents ' sociality and success , it soon became a " unique medical and cultural milieu " . Guests at their salon included Sheridan Le Fanu , Charles Lever , George Petrie , Isaac Butt , William Rowan Hamilton and Samuel Ferguson . 
 Until he was nine , Oscar Wilde was educated at home , where a French bonne and a German governess taught him their languages . He then attended Portora Royal School in Enniskillen , County Fermanagh . Until his early twenties , Wilde summered at the villa , <unk> House , his father built in Cong , County Mayo . There the young Wilde and his brother Willie played with George Moore . 
 Isola died aged nine of meningitis . Wilde 's poem " <unk> " is written to her memory . 
 " Tread lightly , she is near 
 Under the snow 
 Speak gently , she can hear 
 the daisies grow " 
 = = University education : 1870s = = 
 = = = Trinity College , Dublin = = = 
 Wilde left Portora with a royal scholarship to read classics at Trinity College , Dublin , from 1871 to 1874 , sharing rooms with his older brother Willie Wilde . Trinity , one of the leading classical schools , placed him with scholars such as R. Y. Tyrell , Arthur Palmer , Edward Dowden and his tutor , J. P. Mahaffy who inspired his interest in Greek literature . As a student Wilde worked with Mahaffy on the latter 's book Social Life in Greece . Wilde , despite later reservations , called Mahaffy " my first and best teacher " and " the scholar who showed me how to love Greek things " . For his part , Mahaffy boasted of having created Wilde ; later , he named him " the only blot on my tutorship " . 
 The University Philosophical Society also provided an education , discussing intellectual and artistic subjects such as Rossetti and Swinburne weekly . Wilde quickly became an established member – the members ' suggestion book for 1874 contains two pages of banter ( sportingly ) mocking Wilde 's emergent aestheticism . He presented a paper entitled " Aesthetic Morality " . At Trinity , Wilde established himself as an outstanding student : he came first in his class in his first year , won a scholarship by competitive examination in his second , and then , in his finals , won the Berkeley Gold Medal , the University 's highest academic award in Greek . He was encouraged to compete for a <unk> to Magdalen College , Oxford – which he won easily , having already studied Greek for over nine years . 
 = = = Magdalen College , Oxford = = = 
 At Magdalen , he read Greats from 1874 to 1878 , and from there he applied to join the Oxford Union , but failed to be elected . 
 Attracted by its dress , secrecy , and ritual , Wilde petitioned the Apollo Masonic Lodge at Oxford , and was soon raised to the " Sublime Degree of Master Mason " . During a resurgent interest in Freemasonry in his third year , he commented he " would be awfully sorry to give it up if I secede from the Protestant Heresy " . He was deeply considering converting to Catholicism , discussing the possibility with clergy several times . In 1877 , Wilde was left speechless after an audience with Pope Pius IX in Rome . He eagerly read Cardinal Newman 's books , and became more serious in 1878 , when he met the Reverend Sebastian Bowden , a priest in the Brompton Oratory who had received some high profile converts . Neither his father , who threatened to cut off his funds , nor Mahaffy thought much of the plan ; but mostly Wilde , the supreme individualist , balked at the last minute from pledging himself to any formal creed . On the appointed day of his baptism , Father Bowden received a bunch of altar lilies instead . Wilde retained a lifelong interest in Catholic theology and liturgy . 
 While at Magdalen College , Wilde became particularly well known for his role in the aesthetic and decadent movements . He wore his hair long , openly scorned " manly " sports though he occasionally boxed , and decorated his rooms with peacock feathers , lilies , sunflowers , blue china and other objets d 'art , once remarking to friends whom he entertained lavishly , " I find it harder and harder every day to live up to my blue china . " The line quickly became famous , accepted as a slogan by aesthetes but used against them by critics who sensed in it a terrible vacuousness . Some elements disdained the aesthetes , but their languishing attitudes and showy costumes became a recognised pose . Wilde was once physically attacked by a group of four fellow students , and dealt with them single @-@ handedly , surprising critics . By his third year Wilde had truly begun to create himself and his myth , and saw his learning developing in much larger ways than merely the prescribed texts . This attitude resulted in his being rusticated for one term , when he nonchalantly returned to college late from a trip to Greece with Prof. Mahaffy . 
 Wilde did not meet Walter Pater until his third year , but had been enthralled by his Studies in the History of the Renaissance , published during Wilde 's final year in Trinity . Pater argued that man 's sensibility to beauty should be refined above all else , and that each moment should be felt to its fullest extent . Years later , in De Profundis , Wilde called Pater 's Studies ... " that book that has had such a strange influence over my life " . He learned tracts of the book by heart , and carried it with him on travels in later years . Pater gave Wilde his sense of almost flippant devotion to art , though it was John Ruskin who gave him a purpose for it . Ruskin despaired at the self @-@ validating aestheticism of Pater , arguing that the importance of art lies in its potential for the betterment of society . Ruskin admired beauty , but believed it must be allied with , and applied to , moral good . When Wilde eagerly attended Ruskin 's lecture series The Aesthetic and <unk> Schools of Art in Florence , he learned about aesthetics as simply the non @-@ mathematical elements of painting . Despite being given to neither early rising nor manual labour , Wilde volunteered for Ruskin 's project to convert a swampy country lane into a smart road neatly edged with flowers . 
 Wilde won the 1878 Newdigate Prize for his poem " Ravenna " , which reflected on his visit there the year before , and he duly read it at Encaenia . In November 1878 , he graduated with a double first in his B.A. of Classical Moderations and Literae Humaniores ( Greats ) . Wilde wrote to a friend , " The dons are ' <unk> ' beyond words – the Bad Boy doing so well in the end ! " 
 = = Apprenticeship of an aesthete : 1880s = = 
 = = = Debut in society = = = 
 After graduation from Oxford , Wilde returned to Dublin , where he met again Florence Balcombe , a childhood sweetheart . She became engaged to Bram Stoker and they married in 1878 . Wilde was disappointed but stoic : he wrote to her , remembering " the two sweet years – the sweetest years of all my youth " they had spent together . He also stated his intention to " return to England , probably for good . " This he did in 1878 , only briefly visiting Ireland twice . 
 Unsure of his next step , he wrote to various acquaintances enquiring about Classics positions at Oxford or Cambridge . The Rise of Historical Criticism was his submission for the Chancellor 's Essay prize of 1879 , which , though no longer a student , he was still eligible to enter . Its subject , " Historical Criticism among the Ancients " seemed ready @-@ made for Wilde – with both his skill in composition and ancient learning – but he struggled to find his voice with the long , flat , scholarly style . Unusually , no prize was awarded that year . With the last of his inheritance from the sale of his father 's houses , he set himself up as a bachelor in London . The 1881 British Census listed Wilde as a boarder at 1 ( now 44 ) Tite Street , Chelsea , where Frank Miles , a society painter , was the head of the household . Wilde spent the next six years in London and Paris , and in the United States where he travelled to deliver lectures . 
 He had been publishing lyrics and poems in magazines since his entering Trinity College , especially in <unk> and the Dublin University Magazine . In mid @-@ 1881 , at 27 years old , Poems collected , revised and expanded his poetic efforts . The book was generally well received , and sold out its first print run of 750 copies , prompting further printings in 1882 . It was bound in a rich , enamel , parchment cover ( embossed with gilt blossom ) and printed on hand @-@ made Dutch paper ; Wilde presented many copies to the dignitaries and writers who received him over the next few years . The Oxford Union condemned the book for alleged plagiarism in a tight vote . The librarian , who had requested the book for the library , returned the presentation copy to Wilde with a note of apology . Richard Ellmann argues that Wilde 's poem " <unk> ! " was a sincere , though flamboyant , attempt to explain the dichotomies he saw in himself : 
 To drift with every passion till my soul 
 Is a stringed lute on which all winds can play 
 Punch was less enthusiastic , " The poet is Wilde , but his poetry 's tame " was their verdict . 
 = = = America : 1882 = = = 
 Aestheticism was sufficiently in vogue to be caricatured by Gilbert and Sullivan in Patience ( 1881 ) . Richard D 'Oyly Carte , an English impresario , invited Wilde to make a lecture tour of North America , simultaneously priming the pump for the US tour of Patience and selling this most charming aesthete to the American public . Wilde journeyed on the SS Arizona , arriving 2 January 1882 , and disembarking the following day . Originally planned to last four months , it continued for almost a year due to the commercial success . Wilde sought to transpose the beauty he saw in art into daily life . This was a practical as well as philosophical project : in Oxford he had surrounded himself with blue china and lilies , and now one of his lectures was on interior design . When asked to explain reports that he had paraded down Piccadilly in London carrying a lily , long hair flowing , Wilde replied , " It 's not whether I did it or not that 's important , but whether people believed I did it " . Wilde believed that the artist should hold forth higher ideals , and that pleasure and beauty would replace utilitarian ethics . 
 Wilde and aestheticism were both mercilessly caricatured and criticised in the press ; the Springfield Republican , for instance , commented on Wilde 's behaviour during his visit to Boston to lecture on aestheticism , suggesting that Wilde 's conduct was more a bid for notoriety rather than devotion to beauty and the aesthetic . T.W. Higginson , a cleric and abolitionist , wrote in " <unk> Manhood " of his general concern that Wilde , " whose only distinction is that he has written a thin volume of very mediocre verse " , would improperly influence the behaviour of men and women . Though his press reception was hostile , Wilde was well received in diverse settings across America ; he drank whiskey with miners in Leadville , Colorado and was fêted at the most fashionable salons in every city he visited . 
 = = = London life and marriage = = = 
 His earnings , plus expected income from The Duchess of Padua , allowed him to move to Paris between February and mid @-@ May 1883 . Whilst there he met Robert Sherard , whom he entertained constantly . " We are dining on the Duchess tonight " , Wilde would declare before taking him to a fancy restaurant . In August he briefly returned to New York for the production of Vera , his first play , after it was turned down in London . He reportedly entertained the other passengers with " Ave <unk> ! , A Poem on England " , about the rise and fall of empires . E.C. Stedman , in Victorian Poets describes this " lyric to England " as " manly verse – a poetic and eloquent invocation " . The play was initially well received by the audience , but when the critics wrote lukewarm reviews attendance fell sharply and the play closed a week after it had opened . 
 Wilde was left to return to England and lecturing on topics including Personal Impressions of America , The Value of Art in Modern Life , and Dress . 
 In London , he had been introduced in 1881 to Constance Lloyd , daughter of Horace Lloyd , a wealthy Queen 's Counsel . She happened to be visiting Dublin in 1884 , when Wilde was lecturing at the Gaiety Theatre . He proposed to her , and they married on 29 May 1884 at the Anglican St. James Church in Paddington in London . Constance 's annual allowance of £ 250 was generous for a young woman ( equivalent to about £ 23 @,@ 500 in current value ) , but the Wildes had relatively luxurious tastes , and they had preached to others for so long on the subject of design that people expected their home to set new standards . No. 16 , Tite Street was duly renovated in seven months at considerable expense . The couple had two sons , Cyril ( 1885 ) and Vyvyan ( 1886 ) . Wilde became the sole literary signatory of George Bernard Shaw 's petition for a pardon of the anarchists arrested ( and later executed ) after the Haymarket massacre in Chicago in 1886 . 
 Robert Ross had read Wilde 's poems before they met , and was unrestrained by the Victorian prohibition against homosexuality , even to the extent of estranging himself from his family . By Richard Ellmann 's account , he was a precocious seventeen @-@ year @-@ old " so young and yet so knowing , was determined to seduce Wilde " . According to Daniel Mendelsohn , Wilde , who had long alluded to Greek love , was " initiated into homosexual sex " by Ross , while his " marriage had begun to unravel after his wife 's second pregnancy , which left him physically repelled " . 
 = = Prose writing : 1886 – 91 = = 
 = = = Journalism and editorship : 1886 – 89 = = = 
 Criticism over artistic matters in the Pall Mall Gazette provoked a letter in self @-@ defence , and soon Wilde was a contributor to that and other journals during the years 1885 – 87 . He enjoyed reviewing and journalism ; the form suited his style . He could organise and share his views on art , literature and life , yet in a format less tedious than lecturing . Buoyed up , his reviews were largely chatty and positive . Wilde , like his parents before him , also supported the cause of Irish Nationalism . When Charles Stewart Parnell was falsely accused of inciting murder Wilde wrote a series of astute columns defending him in the Daily Chronicle . 
 His flair , having previously only been put into socialising , suited journalism and did not go unnoticed . With his youth nearly over , and a family to support , in mid @-@ 1887 Wilde became the editor of The Lady 's World magazine , his name prominently appearing on the cover . He promptly renamed it The Woman 's World and raised its tone , adding serious articles on parenting , culture , and politics , keeping discussions of fashion and arts . Two pieces of fiction were usually included , one to be read to children , the other for the ladies themselves . Wilde worked hard to solicit good contributions from his wide artistic acquaintance , including those of Lady Wilde and his wife Constance , while his own " Literary and Other Notes " were themselves popular and amusing . 
 The initial vigour and excitement he brought to the job began to fade as administration , commuting and office life became tedious . At the same time as Wilde 's interest flagged , the publishers became concerned anew about circulation : sales , at the relatively high price of one shilling , remained low . Increasingly sending instructions to the magazine by letter , he began a new period of creative work and his own column appeared less regularly . In October 1889 , Wilde had finally found his voice in prose and , at the end of the second volume , Wilde left The Woman 's World . The magazine outlasted him by one volume . 
 If Wilde 's period at the helm of the magazine was a mixed success from an organizational point of view , one can also argue that it played a pivotal role in his development as a writer and facilitated his ascent to fame . Whilst Wilde the journalist supplied articles under the guidance of his editors , Wilde the editor is forced to learn to manipulate the literary marketplace on his own terms . 
 = = = Shorter fiction = = = 
 Wilde published The Happy Prince and Other Tales in 1888 , and had been regularly writing fairy stories for magazines . In 1891 he published two more collections , Lord Arthur Savile 's Crime and Other Stories , and in September A House of Pomegranates was dedicated " To Constance Mary Wilde " . " The Portrait of Mr. W. H. " , which Wilde had begun in 1887 , was first published in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine in July 1889 . It is a short story , which reports a conversation , in which the theory that Shakespeare 's sonnets were written out of the poet 's love of the boy actor " Willie Hughes " , is advanced , retracted , and then propounded again . The only evidence for this is two supposed puns within the sonnets themselves . 
 The anonymous narrator is at first sceptical , then believing , finally flirtatious with the reader : he concludes that " there is really a great deal to be said of the Willie Hughes theory of Shakespeare 's sonnets . " By the end fact and fiction have melded together . Arthur Ransome wrote that Wilde " read something of himself into Shakespeare 's sonnets " and became fascinated with the " Willie Hughes theory " despite the lack of biographical evidence for the historical William Hughes ' existence . Instead of writing a short but serious essay on the question , Wilde tossed the theory amongst the three characters of the story , allowing it to unfold as background to the plot . The story thus is an early masterpiece of Wilde 's combing many elements that interested him , conversation , literature and the idea that to shed oneself of an idea one must first convince another of its truth . Ransome concludes that Wilde succeeds precisely because the literary criticism is unveiled with such a deft touch . 
 Though containing nothing but " special pleading " , it would not , he says " be possible to build an <unk> castle in Spain than this of the imaginary William Hughes " we continue listening nonetheless to be charmed by the telling . " You must believe in Willie Hughes , " Wilde told an acquaintance , " I almost do , myself . " 
 = = = Essays and dialogues = = = 
 Wilde , having tired of journalism , had been busy setting out his aesthetic ideas more fully in a series of longer prose pieces which were published in the major literary @-@ intellectual journals of the day . In January 1889 , The Decay of Lying : A Dialogue appeared in The Nineteenth Century , and Pen , Pencil and Poison , a satirical biography of Thomas Griffiths Wainewright , in the Fortnightly Review , edited by Wilde 's friend Frank Harris . Two of Wilde 's four writings on aesthetics are dialogues : though Wilde had evolved professionally from lecturer to writer , he retained an oral tradition of sorts . Having always excelled as a wit and raconteur , he often composed by assembling phrases , bons mots and witticisms into a longer , cohesive work . 
 Wilde was concerned about the effect of moralising on art , he believed in art 's redemptive , developmental powers : " Art is individualism , and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force . There lies its immense value . For what it seeks is to disturb monotony of type , slavery of custom , tyranny of habit , and the reduction of man to the level of a machine . " In his only political text , The Soul of Man Under Socialism , he argued political conditions should establish this primacy , and concluded that the government most amenable to artists was no government at all . Wilde envisions a society where mechanisation has freed human effort from the burden of necessity , effort which can instead be expended on artistic creation . George Orwell summarised , " In effect , the world will be populated by artists , each striving after perfection in the way that seems best to him . " 
 This point of view did not align him with the Fabians , intellectual socialists who advocated using state apparatus to change social conditions , nor did it endear him to the monied classes whom he had previously entertained . Hesketh Pearson , introducing a collection of Wilde 's essays in 1950 , remarked how The Soul of Man Under Socialism had been an inspirational text for Tsarist revolutionaries in Russia but laments that in the Stalinist era " it is doubtful whether there are any <unk> places in which it could now be hidden " . 
 Wilde considered including this pamphlet and The Portrait of Mr. W.H. , his essay @-@ story on Shakespeare 's sonnets , in a new anthology in 1891 , but eventually decided to limit it to purely aesthetic subjects . Intentions packaged revisions of four essays : The Decay of Lying , Pen , Pencil and Poison , The Truth of Masks ( first published 1885 ) , and The Critic as Artist in two parts . For Pearson the biographer , the essays and dialogues exhibit every aspect of Wilde 's genius and character : wit , <unk> , talker , lecturer , humanist and scholar and concludes that " no other productions of his have as varied an appeal " . 1891 turned out to be Wilde 's annus mirabilis , apart from his three collections he also produced his only novel . 
 = = = The Picture of Dorian Gray = = = 
 The first version of The Picture of Dorian Gray was published as the lead story in the July 1890 edition of Lippincott 's Monthly Magazine , along with five others . The story begins with a man painting a picture of Gray . When Gray , who has a " face like ivory and rose leaves " , sees his finished portrait , he breaks down . Distraught that his beauty will fade while the portrait stays beautiful , he inadvertently makes a Faustian bargain in which only the painted image grows old while he stays beautiful and young . For Wilde , the purpose of art would be to guide life as if beauty alone were its object . As Gray 's portrait allows him to escape the corporeal ravages of his hedonism , Wilde sought to juxtapose the beauty he saw in art with daily life . 
 Reviewers immediately criticised the novel 's decadence and homosexual allusions ; The Daily Chronicle for example , called it " unclean " , " poisonous " , and " heavy with the <unk> odours of moral and spiritual putrefaction " . Wilde vigorously responded , writing to the editor of the Scots Observer , in which he clarified his stance on ethics and aesthetics in art – " If a work of art is rich and vital and complete , those who have artistic instincts will see its beauty and those to whom ethics appeal more strongly will see its moral lesson . " He nevertheless revised it extensively for book publication in 1891 : six new chapters were added , some overtly decadent passages and homo @-@ eroticism excised , and a preface was included consisting of twenty two epigrams , such as " Books are well written , or badly written . That is all . " Contemporary reviewers and modern critics have postulated numerous possible sources of the story , a search <unk> McCormack argues is futile because Wilde " has tapped a root of Western folklore so deep and ubiquitous that the story has escaped its origins and returned to the oral tradition . " Wilde claimed the plot was " an idea that is as old as the history of literature but to which I have given a new form " . Modern critic Robin McKie considered the novel to be technically mediocre , saying that the conceit of the plot had guaranteed its fame , but the device is never pushed to its full . 
 = = Theatrical career : 1892 – 95 = = 
 = = = Salomé = = = 
 The 1891 census records the Wildes ' residence at 16 Tite Street , where he lived with his wife Constance and two sons . Wilde though , not content with being better known than ever in London , returned to Paris in October 1891 , this time as a respected writer . He was received at the salons <unk> , including the famous <unk> of Stéphane Mallarmé , a renowned symbolist poet of the time . Wilde 's two plays during the 1880s , Vera ; or , The <unk> and The Duchess of Padua , had not met with much success . He had continued his interest in the theatre and now , after finding his voice in prose , his thoughts turned again to the dramatic form as the biblical iconography of Salome filled his mind . One evening , after discussing depictions of Salome throughout history , he returned to his hotel and noticed a blank <unk> lying on the desk , and it occurred to him to write in it what he had been saying . The result was a new play , Salomé , written rapidly and in French . 
 A tragedy , it tells the story of Salome , the stepdaughter of the <unk> Herod Antipas , who , to her stepfather 's dismay but mother 's delight , requests the head of <unk> ( John the Baptist ) on a silver platter as a reward for dancing the Dance of the Seven Veils . When Wilde returned to London just before Christmas the Paris Echo referred to him as " le great event " of the season . Rehearsals of the play , starring Sarah Bernhardt , began but the play was refused a licence by the Lord Chamberlain , since it depicted biblical characters . Salome was published jointly in Paris and London in 1893 , but was not performed until 1896 in Paris , during Wilde 's later incarceration . 
 = = = Comedies of society = = = 
 Wilde , who had first set out to irritate Victorian society with his dress and talking points , then outrage it with Dorian Gray , his novel of vice hidden beneath art , finally found a way to critique society on its own terms . Lady Windermere 's Fan was first performed on 20 February 1892 at St James 's Theatre , packed with the cream of society . On the surface a witty comedy , there is subtle subversion underneath : " it concludes with collusive concealment rather than collective disclosure " . The audience , like Lady Windermere , are forced to soften harsh social codes in favour of a more nuanced view . The play was enormously popular , touring the country for months , but largely trashed by conservative critics . It was followed by A Woman of No Importance in 1893 , another Victorian comedy , revolving around the spectre of illegitimate births , mistaken identities and late revelations . Wilde was commissioned to write two more plays and An Ideal Husband , written in 1894 , followed in January 1895 . 
 Peter Raby said these essentially English plays were well @-@ pitched , " Wilde , with one eye on the dramatic genius of Ibsen , and the other on the commercial competition in London 's West End , targeted his audience with adroit precision " . 
 = = = Queensberry family = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1891 Lionel Johnson introduced Wilde to Lord Alfred Douglas , an undergraduate at Oxford at the time . Known to his family and friends as " Bosie " , he was a handsome and spoilt young man . An intimate friendship sprang up between Wilde and Douglas and by 1893 Wilde was infatuated with Douglas and they consorted together regularly in a tempestuous affair . If Wilde was relatively indiscreet , even flamboyant , in the way he acted , Douglas was reckless in public . Wilde , who was earning up to £ 100 a week from his plays ( his salary at The Woman 's World had been £ 6 ) , indulged Douglas 's every whim : material , artistic or sexual . 
 Douglas soon dragged Wilde into the Victorian underground of gay prostitution and Wilde was introduced to a series of young , working class , male prostitutes from 1892 onwards by Alfred Taylor . These infrequent rendezvous usually took the same form : Wilde would meet the boy , offer him gifts , dine him privately and then take him to a hotel room . Unlike Wilde 's idealised , pederastic relations with Ross , John Gray , and Douglas , all of whom remained part of his aesthetic circle , these consorts were uneducated and knew nothing of literature . Soon his public and private lives had become sharply divided ; in De Profundis he wrote to Douglas that " It was like feasting with panthers ; the danger was half the excitement ... I did not know that when they were to strike at me it was to be at another 's piping and at another 's pay . " 
 Douglas and some Oxford friends founded a journal , The Chameleon , to which Wilde " sent a page of paradoxes originally destined for the Saturday Review " . " Phrases and <unk> for the Use of the Young " was to come under attack six months later at Wilde 's trial , where he was forced to defend the magazine to which he had sent his work . In any case , it became unique : The Chameleon was not published again . 
 Lord Alfred 's father , the Marquess of Queensberry , was known for his outspoken atheism , brutish manner and creation of the modern rules of boxing . Queensberry , who feuded regularly with his son , confronted Wilde and Lord Alfred about the nature of their relationship several times , but Wilde was able to mollify him . In June 1894 , he called on Wilde at 16 Tite Street , without an appointment , and clarified his stance : " I do not say that you are it , but you look it , and pose at it , which is just as bad . And if I catch you and my son again in any public restaurant I will thrash you " to which Wilde responded : " I don 't know what the Queensberry rules are , but the Oscar Wilde rule is to shoot on sight " . His account in De Profundis was less triumphant : " It was when , in my library at Tite Street , waving his small hands in the air in epileptic fury , your father ... stood uttering every foul word his foul mind could think of , and screaming the loathsome threats he afterwards with such cunning carried out " . Queensberry only described the scene once , saying Wilde had " shown him the white feather " , meaning he had acted in a cowardly way . Though trying to remain calm , Wilde saw that he was becoming ensnared in a brutal family quarrel . He did not wish to bear Queensberry 's insults , but he knew to confront him could lead to disaster were his liaisons disclosed publicly . 
 = = = The Importance of Being Earnest = = = 
 Wilde 's final play again returns to the theme of switched identities : the play 's two protagonists engage in " bunburying " ( the maintenance of alternative personas in the town and country ) which allows them to escape Victorian social mores . Earnest is even lighter in tone than Wilde 's earlier comedies . While their characters often rise to serious themes in moments of crisis , Earnest lacks the by @-@ now stock <unk> characters : there is no " woman with a past " , the principals are neither villainous nor cunning , simply idle <unk> , and the idealistic young women are not that innocent . Mostly set in drawing rooms and almost completely lacking in action or violence , Earnest lacks the self @-@ conscious decadence found in The Picture of Dorian Gray and Salome . 
 The play , now considered Wilde 's masterpiece , was rapidly written in Wilde 's artistic maturity in late 1894 . It was first performed on 14 February 1895 , at St James 's Theatre in London , Wilde 's second collaboration with George Alexander , the actor @-@ manager . Both author and producer assiduously revised , prepared and rehearsed every line , scene and setting in the months before the premiere , creating a carefully constructed representation of late @-@ Victorian society , yet simultaneously mocking it . During rehearsal Alexander requested that Wilde shorten the play from four acts to three , which the author did . Premieres at St James 's seemed like " brilliant parties " , and the opening of The Importance of Being Earnest was no exception . Allan Aynesworth ( who played Algy ) recalled to Hesketh Pearson , " In my fifty @-@ three years of acting , I never remember a greater triumph than [ that ] first night . " Earnest 's immediate reception as Wilde 's best work to date finally crystallised his fame into a solid artistic reputation . The Importance of Being Earnest remains his most popular play . 
 Wilde 's professional success was mirrored by an escalation in his feud with Queensberry . Queensberry had planned to insult Wilde publicly by throwing a bouquet of rotting vegetables onto the stage ; Wilde was tipped off and had Queensberry barred from entering the theatre . Fifteen weeks later Wilde was in prison . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Wilde v. Queensberry = = = 
 On 18 February 1895 , the Marquess left his calling card at Wilde 's club , the Albemarle , inscribed : " For Oscar Wilde , posing <unk> " [ sic ] . Wilde , encouraged by Douglas and against the advice of his friends , initiated a private prosecution against Queensberry for libel , since the note amounted to a public accusation that Wilde had committed the crime of sodomy . 
 Queensberry was arrested on a charge of criminal libel , a charge carrying a possible sentence of up to two years in prison ( Libel Act of 1843 ) . Under the Act , Queensberry could avoid conviction for libel only by demonstrating that his accusation was in fact true , and furthermore that there was some " public benefit " to having made the accusation openly . Queensberry 's lawyers thus hired private detectives to find evidence of Wilde 's homosexual liaisons to prove the fact of the accusation . They decided on a strategy of portraying Wilde as a depraved older man who habitually enticed naive youths into a life of vicious homosexuality to demonstrate that there was some public interest in making the accusation openly , ostensibly to warn off other youths who might otherwise have become entrapped by Wilde . 
 Wilde 's friends had advised him against the prosecution at a Saturday Review meeting at the Café Royal on 24 March 1895 ; Frank Harris warned him that " they are going to prove sodomy against you " and advised him to flee to France . Wilde and Douglas walked out in a huff , Wilde saying " it is at such moments as these that one sees who are one 's true friends " . The scene was witnessed by George Bernard Shaw who recalled it to Arthur Ransome a day or so before Ransome 's trial for <unk> Douglas in 1913 . To Ransome it confirmed what he had said in his 1912 literary book on Wilde ; that Douglas 's rivalry for Wilde with Robbie Ross and his arguments with his father had resulted in Wilde 's public disaster ; as Wilde wrote in De Profundis . Douglas lost his case . Shaw included an account of the argument between Harris , Douglas and Wilde in the preface to his play The Dark Lady of the Sonnets . 
 The libel trial became a cause célèbre as salacious details of Wilde 's private life with Taylor and Douglas began to appear in the press . A team of private detectives had directed Queensberry 's lawyers , led by Edward Carson QC , to the world of the Victorian underground . Wilde 's association with blackmailers and male prostitutes , cross @-@ dressers and homosexual brothels was recorded , and various persons involved were interviewed , some being coerced to appear as witnesses since they too were accomplices to the crimes of which Wilde was accused . 
 The trial opened on 3 April 1895 amid scenes of near hysteria both in the press and the public galleries . The extent of the evidence massed against Wilde forced him to declare meekly , " I am the prosecutor in this case " . Wilde 's lawyer , Sir Edward George Clarke , opened the case by pre @-@ emptively asking Wilde about two suggestive letters Wilde had written to Douglas , which the defence had in its possession . He characterised the first as a " prose sonnet " and admitted that the " poetical language " might seem strange to the court but claimed its intent was innocent . Wilde stated that the letters had been obtained by blackmailers who had attempted to extort money from him , but he had refused , suggesting they should take the £ 60 ( equal to £ 6 @,@ 300 today ) offered , " unusual for a prose piece of that length " . He claimed to regard the letters as works of art rather than something of which to be ashamed . 
 Carson , a fellow Dubliner who had attended Trinity College , Dublin at the same time as Wilde , cross @-@ examined Wilde on how he perceived the moral content of his works . Wilde replied with characteristic wit and flippancy , claiming that works of art are not capable of being moral or immoral but only well or poorly made , and that only " brutes and illiterates , " whose views on art " are <unk> stupid " , would make such judgements about art . Carson , a leading barrister , diverged from the normal practice of asking closed questions . Carson pressed Wilde on each topic from every angle , squeezing out nuances of meaning from Wilde 's answers , removing them from their aesthetic context and portraying Wilde as evasive and decadent . While Wilde won the most laughs from the court , Carson scored the most legal points . To undermine Wilde 's credibility , and to justify Queensberry 's description of Wilde as a " posing ... <unk> " , Carson drew from the witness an admission of his capacity for " posing " , by demonstrating that he had lied about his age on oath . Playing on this , he returned to the topic throughout his cross @-@ examination . 
 Carson then moved to the factual evidence and questioned Wilde about his acquaintances with younger , lower @-@ class men . Wilde admitted being on a first @-@ name basis and lavishing gifts upon them , but insisted that nothing untoward had occurred and that the men were merely good friends of his . Carson repeatedly pointed out the unusual nature of these relationships and insinuated that the men were prostitutes . Wilde replied that he did not believe in social barriers , and simply enjoyed the society of young men . Then Carson asked Wilde directly whether he had ever kissed a certain servant boy , Wilde responded , " Oh , dear no . He was a particularly plain boy – unfortunately ugly – I pitied him for it . " Carson pressed him on the answer , repeatedly asking why the boy 's ugliness was relevant . Wilde hesitated , then for the first time became flustered : " You sting me and insult me and try to unnerve me ; and at times one says things flippantly when one ought to speak more seriously . " 
 In his opening speech for the defence , Carson announced that he had located several male prostitutes who were to testify that they had had sex with Wilde . On the advice of his lawyers , Wilde dropped the prosecution . Queensberry was found not guilty , as the court declared that his accusation that Wilde was " posing as a <unk> " [ sic ] was justified , " true in substance and in fact . " Under the Libel Act 1843 , Queensberry 's acquittal rendered Wilde legally liable for the considerable expenses Queensberry had incurred in his defence , which left Wilde bankrupt . 
 = = = Regina v. Wilde = = = 
 After Wilde left the court , a warrant for his arrest was applied for on charges of sodomy and gross indecency . Robbie Ross found Wilde at the Cadogan Hotel , Knightsbridge , with Reginald Turner ; both men advised Wilde to go at once to Dover and try to get a boat to France ; his mother advised him to stay and fight . Wilde , lapsing into inaction , could only say , " The train has gone . It 's too late . " Wilde was arrested for " gross indecency " under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885 , a term meaning homosexual acts not amounting to buggery ( an offence under a separate statute ) . At Wilde 's instruction , Ross and Wilde 's butler forced their way into the bedroom and library of 16 Tite Street , packing some personal effects , manuscripts , and letters . Wilde was then imprisoned on remand at Holloway where he received daily visits from Douglas . 
 Events moved quickly and his prosecution opened on 26 April 1895 . Wilde pleaded not guilty . He had already begged Douglas to leave London for Paris , but Douglas complained bitterly , even wanting to give evidence ; he was pressed to go and soon fled to the Hotel du Monde . Fearing persecution , Ross and many others also left the United Kingdom during this time . Under cross examination Wilde was at first hesitant , then spoke eloquently : 
 Charles Gill ( prosecuting ) : What is " the love that dare not speak its name " ? 
 Wilde : " The love that dare not speak its name " in this century is such a great affection of an elder for a younger man as there was between David and Jonathan , such as Plato made the very basis of his philosophy , and such as you find in the sonnets of Michelangelo and Shakespeare . It is that deep spiritual affection that is as pure as it is perfect . It dictates and pervades great works of art , like those of Shakespeare and Michelangelo , and those two letters of mine , such as they are . It is in this century misunderstood , so much misunderstood that it may be described as " the love that dare not speak its name , " and on that account of it I am placed where I am now . It is beautiful , it is fine , it is the noblest form of affection . There is nothing unnatural about it . It is intellectual , and it repeatedly exists between an older and a younger man , when the older man has intellect , and the younger man has all the joy , hope and glamour of life before him . That it should be so , the world does not understand . The world mocks at it , and sometimes puts one in the pillory for it . 
 This response was counter @-@ productive in a legal sense as it only served to reinforce the charges of homosexual behaviour . The trial ended with the jury unable to reach a verdict . Wilde 's counsel , Sir Edward Clarke , was finally able to get a magistrate to allow Wilde and his friends to post bail . The Reverend Stewart Headlam put up most of the £ 5 @,@ 000 surety required by the court , having disagreed with Wilde 's treatment by the press and the courts . Wilde was freed from Holloway and , shunning attention , went into hiding at the house of Ernest and Ada Leverson , two of his firm friends . Edward Carson approached Frank Lockwood QC , the Solicitor General and asked " Can we not let up on the fellow now ? " Lockwood answered that he would like to do so , but feared that the case had become too politicised to be dropped . 
 The final trial was presided over by Mr Justice Wills . On 25 May 1895 Wilde and Alfred Taylor were convicted of gross indecency and sentenced to two years ' hard labour . The judge described the sentence , the maximum allowed , as " totally inadequate for a case such as this , " and that the case was " the worst case I have ever tried " . Wilde 's response " And I ? May I say nothing , my Lord ? " was drowned out in cries of " Shame " in the courtroom . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 Wilde entered prison on 25 May 1895 , and was released on 18 May 1897 . 
 He first entered Newgate Prison in London for a week for processing , then was moved to Pentonville Prison , where the " hard labour " to which he had been sentenced consisted of many hours of walking a treadmill and picking oakum ( separating the fibres in scraps of old navy ropes ) , and where prisoners were allowed to read only the Bible and The Pilgrim 's Progress . Prisoners were not allowed to speak to each other , and , when out of their cells , were required to wear a cap with a thick veil so they would not be recognised by other prisoners . 
 A few months later he was moved to Wandsworth Prison in London . Inmates there also followed the regimen of " hard labour , hard fare and a hard bed " , which wore harshly on Wilde 's delicate health . In November he collapsed during chapel from illness and hunger . His right ear drum was ruptured in the fall , an injury that later contributed to his death . He spent two months in the infirmary . 
 Richard B. Haldane , the Liberal MP and reformer , visited Wilde and had him transferred in November to Reading Gaol , 30 miles ( 48 km ) west of London on 23 November 1895 . The transfer itself was the lowest point of his incarceration , as a crowd jeered and spat at him on the railway platform . Here , he spent the remainder of his sentence , and was assigned the third cell on the third floor of C ward – and thereafter was addressed and identified only by " C33 " – the number of his cell , the third cell on the third floor of C ward . 
 About five months after Wilde arrived at Reading Gaol , Charles Thomas Wooldridge , a trooper in the Royal Horse Guards , was brought to Reading to await his trial for murdering his wife on 29 March 1896 ; on 17 June Wooldridge was sentenced to death and returned to Reading for his execution , which took place on Tuesday , 7 July 1896 – the first hanging at Reading in 18 years . From Wooldridge 's hanging , Wilde later wrote The Ballad of Reading Gaol . 
 Wilde was not , at first , even allowed paper and pen but Haldane eventually succeeded in allowing access to books and writing materials . Wilde requested , among others : the Bible in French ; Italian and German grammars ; some Ancient Greek texts , Dante 's Divine Comedy , Joris @-@ Karl Huysmans 's new French novel about Christian redemption En Route , and essays by St Augustine , Cardinal Newman and Walter Pater . 
 Between January and March 1897 Wilde wrote a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ word letter to Douglas . He was not allowed to send it , but was permitted to take it with him upon release . In reflective mode , Wilde coldly examines his career to date , how he had been a colourful agent provocateur in Victorian society , his art , like his paradoxes , seeking to subvert as well as sparkle . His own estimation of himself was : one who " stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my age " . It was from these heights that his life with Douglas began , and Wilde examines that particularly closely , repudiating him for what Wilde finally sees as his arrogance and vanity : he had not forgotten Douglas 's remark , when he was ill , " When you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting . " Wilde blamed himself , though , for the ethical degradation of character that he allowed Douglas to bring about in him and took responsibility for his own fall , " I am here for having tried to put your father in prison . " The first half concludes with Wilde forgiving Douglas , for his own sake as much as Douglas 's . The second half of the letter traces Wilde 's spiritual journey of redemption and fulfilment through his prison reading . He realised that his ordeal had filled his soul with the fruit of experience , however bitter it tasted at the time . 
 ... I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden of the world ... And so , indeed , I went out , and so I lived . My only mistake was that I confined myself so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to me the sun @-@ lit side of the garden , and shunned the other side for its shadow and its gloom . 
 Wilde was released from prison on 18 May 1897 and sailed immediately for France . He would never return to Britain or to Ireland . 
 On his release , he gave the manuscript to Ross , who may or may not have carried out Wilde 's instructions to send a copy to Douglas ( who later denied having received it ) . De Profundis was partially published in 1905 , its complete and correct publication first occurred in 1962 in The Letters of Oscar Wilde . 
 = = Decline : 1897 – 1900 = = 
 = = = Exile = = = 
 Though Wilde 's health had suffered greatly from the harshness and diet of prison , he had a feeling of spiritual renewal . He immediately wrote to the Society of Jesus requesting a six @-@ month Catholic retreat ; when the request was denied , Wilde wept . " I intend to be received into the Catholic Church before long " , Wilde told a journalist who asked about his religious intentions . 
 He spent his last three years in impoverished exile . He took the name " Sebastian Melmoth " , after Saint Sebastian , and the titular character of Melmoth the Wanderer ; a Gothic novel by Charles Maturin , Wilde 's great @-@ uncle . Wilde wrote two long letters to the editor of the Daily Chronicle , describing the brutal conditions of English prisons and advocating penal reform . His discussion of the dismissal of Warder Martin for giving biscuits to an anaemic child prisoner , repeated the themes of the corruption and degeneration of punishment that he had earlier outlined in The Soul of Man Under Socialism . 
 Wilde spent mid @-@ 1897 with Robert Ross in the seaside village of Berneval @-@ le @-@ Grand in northern France , where he wrote The Ballad of Reading Gaol , narrating the execution of Charles Thomas Wooldridge , who murdered his wife in a rage at her infidelity ; it moves from an objective story @-@ telling to symbolic identification with the prisoners as a whole . No attempt is made to assess the justice of the laws which convicted them , but rather the poem highlights the <unk> of the punishment that all convicts share . Wilde juxtaposes the executed man and himself with the line " Yet each man kills the thing he loves " . Wilde too was separated from his wife and sons . He adopted the proletarian ballad form , and the author was credited as " C33 " , Wilde 's cell number in Reading Gaol . He suggested that it be published in Reynold 's Magazine , " because it circulates widely among the criminal classes – to which I now belong – for once I will be read by my peers – a new experience for me " . It was an immediate roaring commercial success , going through seven editions in less than two years , only after which " [ Oscar Wilde ] " was added to the title page , though many in literary circles had known Wilde to be the author . It brought him a little money . 
 Although Douglas had been the cause of his misfortunes , he and Wilde were reunited in August 1897 at Rouen . This meeting was disapproved of by the friends and families of both men . Constance Wilde was already refusing to meet Wilde or allow him to see their sons , though she sent him money – a meagre three pounds a week . During the latter part of 1897 , Wilde and Douglas lived together near Naples for a few months until they were separated by their families under the threat of cutting off all funds . 
 Wilde 's final address was at the dingy Hôtel d 'Alsace ( now known as L 'Hôtel ) , on rue des Beaux @-@ Arts in Saint @-@ Germain @-@ des @-@ Prés , Paris . " This poverty really breaks one 's heart : it is so sale [ filthy ] , so utterly depressing , so hopeless . Pray do what you can " he wrote to his publisher . He corrected and published An Ideal Husband and The Importance of Being Earnest , the proofs of which , according to Ellmann , show a man " very much in command of himself and of the play " , but he refused to write anything else : " I can write , but have lost the joy of writing " . 
 He wandered the boulevards alone , and spent what little money he had on alcohol . A series of embarrassing encounters with English visitors , or Frenchmen he had known in better days , drowned his spirit . Soon Wilde was sufficiently confined to his hotel to joke , on one of his final trips outside , " My wallpaper and I are fighting a duel to the death . One of us has got to go . " On 12 October 1900 he sent a telegram to Ross : " Terribly weak . Please come . " His moods fluctuated ; Max Beerbohm relates how their mutual friend Reginald ' Reggie ' Turner had found Wilde very depressed after a nightmare . " I dreamt that I had died , and was <unk> with the dead ! " " I am sure " , Turner replied , " that you must have been the life and soul of the party . " Turner was one of the very few of the old circle who remained with Wilde right to the end , and was at his bedside when he died . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 By 25 November Wilde had developed cerebral meningitis . Robbie Ross arrived on 29 November and sent for a priest , and Wilde was conditionally baptised into the Catholic Church by Fr Cuthbert Dunne , a <unk> priest from Dublin ( the sacrament being conditional because of the doctrine that one may be baptised only once ) , Wilde having been baptised in the Church of Ireland , and having moreover a recollection of Catholic baptism as a child , a fact later attested to by the minister of the sacrament , Fr Lawrence Fox . Fr Dunne recorded the baptism : 
 As the <unk> rolled through the dark streets that wintry night , the sad story of Oscar Wilde was in part repeated to me ... Robert Ross knelt by the bedside , assisting me as best he could while I administered conditional baptism , and afterwards answering the responses while I gave Extreme Unction to the prostrate man and recited the prayers for the dying . As the man was in a semi @-@ comatose condition , I did not venture to administer the Holy Viaticum ; still I must add that he could be roused and was roused from this state in my presence . When roused , he gave signs of being inwardly conscious ... Indeed I was fully satisfied that he understood me when told that I was about to receive him into the Catholic Church and gave him the Last Sacraments ... And when I repeated close to his ear the Holy Names , the Acts of <unk> , Faith , Hope and Charity , with acts of humble resignation to the Will of God , he tried all through to say the words after me . 
 Wilde died of cerebral meningitis on 30 November 1900 . Different opinions are given as to the cause of the meningitis : Richard Ellmann claimed it was syphilitic ; however , Merlin Holland , Wilde 's grandson , thought this to be a misconception , noting that Wilde 's meningitis followed a surgical intervention , perhaps a <unk> ; Wilde 's physicians , Dr Paul <unk> and A 'Court Tucker , reported that the condition stemmed from an old suppuration of the right ear ( from the prison injury , see above ) treated for several years ( une <unk> suppuration de l <unk> <unk> d <unk> en <unk> <unk> plusieurs <unk> ) and made no allusion to syphilis . 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 Wilde was initially buried in the Cimetière de <unk> outside Paris ; in 1909 his remains were disinterred and transferred to Père Lachaise Cemetery , inside the city . His tomb there was designed by Sir Jacob Epstein , It was commissioned by Robert Ross , who asked for a small compartment to be made for his own ashes , which were duly transferred in 1950 . The modernist angel depicted as a relief on the tomb was originally complete with male genitalia , which have since been vandalised ; their current whereabouts are unknown . In 2000 , Leon Johnson , a multimedia artist , installed a silver prosthesis to replace them . 
 In 2011 the tomb was cleaned of the many lipstick marks left there by admirers , and a glass barrier was installed to prevent further marks or damage . 
 The epitaph is a verse from The Ballad of Reading Gaol : 
 And alien tears will fill for him 
 Pity 's long @-@ broken urn , 
 For his mourners will be outcast men , 
 And outcasts always mourn . 
 = = Biographies = = 
 Wilde 's life continues to fascinate , and he has been the subject of numerous biographies since his death . The earliest were memoirs by those who knew him : often they are personal or impressionistic accounts which can be good character sketches , but are sometimes factually unreliable . Frank Harris , his friend and editor , wrote a biography , Oscar Wilde : His Life and Confessions ( 1916 ) ; though prone to exaggeration and sometimes factually inaccurate , it offers a good literary portrait of Wilde . Lord Alfred Douglas wrote two books about his relationship with Wilde . Oscar Wilde and Myself ( 1914 ) , largely ghost @-@ written by <unk> Crosland , vindictively reacted to Douglas 's discovery that De Profundis was addressed to him and defensively tried to distance him from Wilde 's scandalous reputation . Both authors later regretted their work . Later , in Oscar Wilde : A Summing Up ( 1939 ) and his Autobiography he was more sympathetic to Wilde . Of Wilde 's other close friends , Robert Sherard , Robert Ross , his literary executor ; and Charles Ricketts variously published biographies , reminiscences or correspondence . The first more or less objective biography of Wilde came about when Hesketh Pearson wrote Oscar Wilde : His Life and Wit ( 1946 ) . In 1954 Vyvyan Holland published his memoir Son of Oscar Wilde , which recounts the difficulties Wilde 's wife and children faced after his imprisonment . It was revised and updated by Merlin Holland in 1989 . 
 Oscar Wilde , a critical study by Arthur Ransome was published in 1912 . The book only briefly mentioned Wilde 's life , but subsequently Ransome ( and The Times Book Club ) were sued for libel by Lord Alfred Douglas . The trial in April 1913 was in a way a re @-@ run of the trial ( s ) of Oscar Wilde . The trial resulted from Douglas 's rivalry with Robbie Ross for Wilde ( and his need of money ) . Douglas lost ; De Profundis which was read in part at the trial disproved his claims ( Ross had shown Ransome the full text of it ) . 
 Wilde 's life was still waiting for independent , true scholarship when Richard Ellmann began researching his 1987 biography Oscar Wilde , for which he posthumously won a National ( USA ) Book Critics Circle Award in 1988 and a Pulitzer Prize in 1989 . The book was the basis for the 1997 film Wilde , directed by Brian Gilbert and starring Stephen Fry as the title character . 
 Neil McKenna 's 2003 biography , The Secret Life of Oscar Wilde , offers an exploration of Wilde 's sexuality . Often speculative in nature , it was widely criticised for its pure conjecture and lack of scholarly rigour . Thomas Wright 's Oscar 's Books ( 2008 ) explores Wilde 's reading from his childhood in Dublin to his death in Paris . After tracking down many books that once belonged to Wilde 's Tite Street library ( dispersed at the time of his trials ) , Wright was the first to examine Wilde 's marginalia . 
 Wilde 's charm also had a lasting effect on Parisian literati , who produced several original biographies and monographs on him . André Gide , on whom Wilde had such a strange effect , wrote , In Memoriam , Oscar Wilde ; Wilde also features in his journals . Thomas Louis , who had earlier translated books on Wilde into French , produced his own L 'esprit d <unk> Wilde in 1920 . Modern books include Philippe Jullian 's Oscar Wilde , and L 'affaire Oscar Wilde , ou , Du danger de laisser la justice <unk> le nez dans nos <unk> ( The Oscar Wilde Affair , or , On the Danger of Allowing Justice to put its Nose in our Sheets ) by Odon Vallet , a French religious historian . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Ravenna ( 1878 ) 
 Poems ( 1881 ) 
 The Happy Prince and Other Stories ( 1888 , fairy stories ) 
 Lord Arthur Savile 's Crime and Other Stories ( 1891 , stories ) 
 House of Pomegranates ( 1891 , fairy stories ) 
 Intentions ( 1891 , essays and dialogues on aesthetics ) 
 The Picture of Dorian Gray ( first published in Lippincott 's Monthly Magazine July 1890 , in book form in 1891 ; novel ) 
 The Soul of Man under Socialism ( 1891 , political essay ) 
 Lady Windermere 's Fan ( 1892 , play ) 
 A Woman of No Importance ( 1893 , play ) 
 An Ideal Husband ( performed 1895 , published 1898 ; play ) 
 The Importance of Being Earnest ( performed 1895 , published 1898 ; play ) 
 De Profundis ( written 1897 , published variously 1905 , 1908 , 1949 , 1962 ; epistle ) 
 The Ballad of Reading Gaol ( 1898 , poem ) 
 = = Tributes = = 
 In 2012 , Wilde was inducted into the Legacy Walk , an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people . 
 = Pavillon de Flore = 
 The Pavillon de Flore , part of the Palais du Louvre in Paris , France , stands at the southwest end of the Louvre , near the Pont Royal . It was originally constructed in 1607 – 1610 , during the reign of Henry IV , as the corner pavilion between the Tuileries Palace to the north and the Louvre 's Grande Galerie to the east . The pavilion was entirely redesigned and rebuilt by Hector Lefuel in 1864 – 1868 in a highly decorated Second Empire Neo @-@ Baroque style . The most famous sculpture on the exterior of the Louvre , Jean @-@ Baptiste Carpeaux 's The Triumph of Flora , was added below the central pediment of the south facade at this time . The Tuileries Palace was destroyed by fire in 1871 , and a north facade , similar to the south facade , was added to the pavilion by Lefuel in 1874 – 1879 . Currently , the Pavillon de Flore is part of the Musée du Louvre . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Pavillon de Flore is in central Paris , on the Right Bank ( French : Rive Droite ) and is connected to the Louvre . It is directly adjacent to the Pont Royal on the Quai François Mitterrand ( formerly Quai du Louvre , renamed on October 26 , 2003 ) , which is between the <unk> Léopold @-@ Sédar Senghor and the Pont du Carrousel . Its geographic coordinates are 48 ° 51 ′ 40 ″ N 2 ° 19 ′ 50 ″ E. 
 = = = Metro access = = = 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Henry IV and the Grand Design = = = 
 The Pavillon de Flore was part of a larger plan , devised during the reign of King Henry IV , to connect the Palais du Louvre and Palais des Tuileries via two long wings at their north and south ends . First , the Petite Galerie , running south from the Palais du Louvre to the River Seine , was connected to the Grande Galerie . The latter was constructed east to west along the Seine until it reached the Tuileries , where it was terminated with the Pavillon de Flore , at the time , known as the Gros Pavillon de la Rivière ( " Large River Pavilion " ) . The cornerstone of the pavilion was laid in 1607 . Its design has traditionally been assigned to Jacques Androuet II du Cerceau , who is also thought to have designed the adjacent western section of the Grande Galerie . ( The design of the eastern section of the Grande Galerie is traditionally assigned to Louis <unk> . ) The Palais des Tuileries was extended south from the Pavillon Bullant to the Pavillon de Flore via the Petite Galerie des Tuileries . Work on the Grand Design was abandoned following the assassination of Henry IV in 1610 . However , by this time , the building of the Grande Galerie , the Petite Galerie des Tuileries , and the Gros Pavillon de la Rivière had been completed . ( In the 19th century , a second long gallery , matching the Grande Galerie , was constructed from west to east along the Rue de Rivoli , from the Pavillon de Marsan at the north end of the Palais des Tuileries to the north end of an expanded Palais du Louvre , finally completing Henry IV 's Grand Design . ) 
 = = = Louis XIV = = = 
 King Louis XIV danced in Isaac de <unk> 's Ballet royal de Flore in February 1669 at the Tuileries , possibly in the Salle des Ballets located on the first floor of the pavilion . It has been suggested that this is when the name Pavillon de Flore came into use , although the earliest known written mention is in 1726 . Pavillon de Flore is the name used today , although other names have been used in between . 
 = = = Marie Antoinette = = = 
 For several years , the apartments of Marie Antoinette were located within the structure . 
 = = = French Revolution = = = 
 During the French Revolution , the Pavillon de Flore was renamed Pavillon de l <unk> ( House of Equality ) . Under its new name , it became the meeting point for several of the Committees of the period . Many other committees of the Revolutionary Government occupied the Palais des Tuileries ( referred to by contemporaries as the Palace of the Nation ) during the time of the National Convention . Notable occupiers included the Monetary Committee , the Account and Liquidation Examination Committee . However , the most famous was the Committee of Public Safety . 
 The Committee of Public Safety ( French : Comité de <unk> public ) was the principal and most renowned body of the Revolutionary Government , forming the de facto executive branch of France during the Reign of Terror . Run by the Jacobins under Robespierre , the group of twelve centralized denunciations , trials , and executions . The committee was responsible for the deaths of thousands , mostly by guillotine . The executive body was initially installed in the apartments of Marie @-@ Antoinette , situated on the first floor , but also gradually overtook the offices of Louis XVI . The governing body met twice a day and the executions themselves were carried out across the gardens . During the structure 's use by the Committee of Public Safety , it was described as follows : 
 The Committee of Public Safety sat in the Pavillon de Flore , at the opposite end of the Tuileries on the river bank … Any one who had business with this awful body had to grope his way along gloomy corridors , that were dimly lighted by a single lamp at either end . The room in which the Committee sat round a table of green cloth was incongruously gay with the clocks , the bronzes , the mirrors , the tapestries , of the ruined country . 
 = = = First Empire = = = 
 Pope Pius VII stayed in the building while preparing to crown Napoléon I Emperor of the French . While residing there , the Pope received various " bodies of the State , the clergy , and the religious corporations . " Additionally , Emperor Napoléon 's procession began at the Pavillon de Flore . 
 = = = Second Empire = = = 
 The pavilion underwent significant structural alteration during the reign of Napoléon III , who in 1861 authorized its complete demolition and reconstruction under the supervision of architect Hector Lefuel . Performed between 1864 and 1868 , Lefuel 's reconstruction added significant detail and sculpture to the work , which is thus noted as an example of Second Empire Neo @-@ Baroque architecture . Furthermore , Napoléon III commissioned sculptor Jean @-@ Baptiste Carpeaux to create a piece that would evoke " Flore " ( in English Flora ) , the Roman goddess who represents flowers and spring . 
 The structure formed the corner edifice of a combined Palais du Louvre and Palais des Tuileries complex until the Palais des Tuileries was destroyed during the Paris Commune insurrection in 1871 . On May 23 , 1871 , incendiary fires set by twelve members of the Paris Commune , a revolutionary government that briefly ruled Paris from the March 26 , 1871 to May 28 , 1871 , inflicted severe damage to the Palais des Tuileries . 
 = = = The Third Republic and later = = = 
 The ruins of the Tuileries Palace were pulled down in 1882 during the French Third Republic . The Pavillon de Flore and the Pavillon de Marsan are the only portions of the Palais des Tuileries complex still in existence . 
 The destruction of the Tuileries Palace affected the aesthetic relationship between the Palais du Louvre and the Arc de Triomphe , as it could now be seen that the two structures were not on the same axis . The Palais des Tuileries had served to disguise the fact that the Palais du Louvre is skewed slightly ( 6 @.@ 33 ° ) relative to the Axe historique ( also known as the <unk> <unk> ) , a seven @-@ kilometre straight line of structures and thoroughfares , including the Place de la Concorde , Champs @-@ Élysées , the Arc de Triomphe and the Grande Arche de La Défense . 
 = James Sullivan ( governor ) = 
 James Sullivan ( April 22 , 1744 – December 10 , 1808 ) was a lawyer and politician in Massachusetts . He was an early associate justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court , served as the state 's attorney general for many years , and as governor of the state from 1807 until his death . 
 Sullivan was born and raised in Berwick , Maine ( then part of Massachusetts ) , and studied law with his brother John . After establishing a successful law practice , he became actively involved in the Massachusetts state government during the American Revolutionary War , and was appointed to the state 's highest court in March 1776 . He was involved in drafting the state constitution and the state 's ratifying convention for the United States Constitution . After resigning from the bench in 1782 he returned to private practice , and was appointed Attorney General in 1790 . During his years as judge and attorney general he was responsible for drafting and revising much of the state 's legislation as part of the transition from British rule to independence . While attorney general he worked with the commission that established the border between Maine and New Brunswick , and prosecuted several high @-@ profile murder cases . 
 Sullivan was a political partisan , supporting the Democratic @-@ Republican Party and subscribing to Jeffersonian republican ideals . He supported John Hancock and Samuel Adams in their political careers , and was a frequent contributor , often under one of many pseudonyms , to political dialogue in the state 's newspapers . He ran unsuccessfully for governor several times before finally winning the office in 1807 . He died in office during his second term . 
 In addition to his political pursuits Sullivan engaged in charitable and business endeavors . He was a leading proponent of the Middlesex Canal and the first bridge between Boston and Cambridge , and was instrumental in the development of Boston 's first public water supply . He was the founding president of the Massachusetts Historical Society , and held membership in a variety of other charitable organizations . He wrote one of the first histories of his native Maine , and a legal text on land titles . Legal historian Charles Warren calls him one of the most important legal figures of the time in Massachusetts . 
 = = Life = = 
 James Sullivan was born on April 22 , 1744 , the fourth son of John Sullivan and Margery Brown Sullivan , in Berwick , in a part of the Province of Massachusetts Bay that is now the state of Maine . Sullivan 's father was from County Limerick , and his mother was a child aboard the ship on which they came over . When she was older he wooed and wed her . The elder Sullivan was a schoolteacher and farmer in Berwick . Sullivan was educated at home , and any prospects for military service were dashed when his foot was crushed in a childhood accident . He was also afflicted with epilepsy while relatively young , and suffered generally mild seizures ( but sometimes lasting several hours ) for the rest of his life . While convalescing from his foot injury he read a great deal , learning Latin and the classics . His elder brother John , who was studying law , was instructed to supply his brother with law books and training . Sullivan studied law in his brother 's law practice in Durham , New Hampshire , and was eventually admitted to the bar in Massachusetts . He established a practice first in Georgetown , then shortly afterward in <unk> , where he was the town 's first resident lawyer . In 1768 he married Hetty <unk> , the daughter of a successful Portsmouth , New Hampshire merchant . 
 Sullivan 's law practice flourished , and by the time he was 30 , he was one of York County 's leading citizens . He supplemented his legal work by acting as an agent for Boston @-@ based merchant interests , including John Hancock , one of Boston 's wealthiest men . For his services as a lawyer defending land claims , in 1773 Sullivan was offered a tract within one of the claims he defended . He accepted , and the property was organized as Limerick Plantation , named after the birthplace of his father . In 1775 he helped settle the town ( personally assisting in the clearing of land ) , which on March 6 , 1787 would be incorporated as the town of Limerick . According to John Adams , Sullivan used his financial rewards to invest in local real estate , including farmlands and mills . 
 = = = Revolution = = = 
 Sullivan was an early and outspoken opponent of British colonial policies leading to the revolution . He was elected to the provincial assembly in 1774 . When it first met in June , Sullivan was a leader in calling for a Continental Congress . When Governor Thomas Gage indefinitely delayed the next meeting of the assembly the following October , its members met anyway , establishing the Massachusetts Provincial Congress . This body exercised de facto control over Massachusetts during the early years of the American Revolutionary War . In addition to sitting in the provincial congress , Sullivan was a leading organizer of colonial defenses in York County , sitting on its committee of correspondence and other bodies . He was sent in 1775 as part of a commission to inspect the troops and facilities at Fort Ticonderoga in upstate New York , which was nominally under the control of Benedict Arnold , who had been issued a Massachusetts colonel 's commission and succeeded in capturing it with the assistance of Ethan Allen . The arduous journey made Sullivan ill for several months afterward . 
 In late 1775 Sullivan was a member of the committee that drafted legislation establishing the Massachusetts State Navy . Under its terms , three positions were established for admiralty judges ; Sullivan was appointed to be the admiralty judge for the eastern district ( i.e. Maine ) in addition to his other duties . During his period of service in the provincial congress he drafted a large amount of legislation and was tireless in his activities on many committees . He resigned this post when in March 1776 he was offered a seat on the Superior Court of Judicature ( as the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court was then known ) . 
 = = = Judicial service and postwar activities = = = 
 At the time of his appointment to the bench , the position was seen as particularly risky , because it was a clear representation of anti @-@ British authority whose placeholders were thought to be risking their lives should the British succeed in putting down the rebellion . The most noteworthy case Sullivan sat on was a preliminary hearing in Commonwealth v. Nathaniel Jennison , one of the Quock Walker cases where the court in 1783 decided that slavery was incompatible with the state constitution . Sullivan publicly expressed opposition to slavery , and predicted in his writings that the issue would become contentious in the future . 
 Sullivan participated in the 1779 convention that drafted the new state constitution . Between 1780 and 1782 he and the rest of the court were active in harmonizing the state 's laws with the document , revising and discarding old statutes , and assisting in the drafting of new ones . 
 In 1779 Sullivan was awarded an honorary degree from Harvard College . He served on the court until 1782 , when he resigned because his salary was insufficient to meet his expenses , and he could no longer afford to cover the difference . He opened a law office in Boston , and moved into a house in Menotomy ( now Arlington , then still part of Cambridge ) . Although he was elected to represent Massachusetts at the Congress of the Confederation from 1782 to 1783 he did not attend , again for financial reasons . He was politically active in the state , however , supporting John Hancock and then Samuel Adams for governor . He was a prolific writer , contributing frequently to the political discourse that took place in Massachusetts ' many newspapers under a variety of pseudonyms . 
 In 1787 Sullivan participated in the defense of individuals charged in participation in Shays ' Rebellion , an uprising in the rural parts of the state begun the previous year . This activity earned him criticism from stalwart pro @-@ government members of the Massachusetts Bar . 
 When Massachusetts debated ratification of the United States Constitution in 1788 , Sullivan was one of a number of Massachusetts politicians who expressed reservations about the document , but generally supported ratification . In the debate he proposed that the convention conditionally adopt the Constitution , subject to Congress considering and acting on a suite of amendments . The seven amendments Sullivan proposed were primarily designed to increase state powers at the expense of Congress and the federal courts ; for example , one would have allowed state supreme courts to issues writs of habeas corpus for persons charged with federal crimes . 
 = = = Attorney General = = = 
 John Hancock rewarded Sullivan for his support in 1790 with an appointment as the state 's attorney general , a post he held until 1807 . Although he supported the Democratic @-@ Republican Party , his views were relatively moderate , so he retained the post of state attorney general despite the dominance of the Federalists in the state . 
 Much of Sullivan 's legal work after independence was framed by republican ideals . His republicanism was expressed in wide @-@ ranging support for individual rights , including those of women , children , and minorities , and manifested in letters to contemporaries including John Adams , cases he argued as a lawyer , and decisions he made as a judge . As attorney general he defended the state in a Loyalist recovery action involving the rights of married women ( who at the time had few rights under the common law doctrine of coverture ) , arguing that Loyalist William Martin 's wife had in her own right abandoned the property in question . 
 Sullivan supported harsh laws confiscating the property of Loyalists who fled the country or fought with the British , although he later took on as clients personal friends who were Loyalists seeking to recover their property . In his native Maine he had a mixed record , representing the state against large @-@ scale land proprietors , but also taking work from the latter ( who included some of the most powerful politicians in the state ) . His interest in the tangled difficulties surrounding land titles in Maine prompted him to write a seminal work on the subject in 1801 , The History of Land Titles in Massachusetts . 
 The two cases with the highest profile that Sullivan prosecuted while attorney general were both criminal cases . In 1801 he prosecuted the Dedham murderer Jason Fairbanks , who had retained Federalist Harrison Gray Otis as his defense council . Fairbanks was convicted of murdering a local woman , but escaped after his conviction , and was eventually captured near the Canadian border and hanged . Sullivan and Otis faced off again in 1807 in the sensational trial of Thomas Selfridge , accused of murdering Charles Austin . Selfridge , an older Federalist attorney , had been retained to assist in the collection of a debt from Austin 's Republican father . In the politically charged atmosphere of the day in Boston , Selfridge , fearing for his own safety , had armed himself with a dueling pistol . The younger Austin had , apparently on his own initiative , sought to beat Selfridge with a cane , and Selfridge fatally shot him in the encounter . Selfridge was defended by a cadre of Federalist lawyers including Otis and Christopher Gore , and was acquitted of murder by a jury whose foreman was Patriot and Federalist Paul Revere . 
 Sullivan continued to take private legal work even while he served as attorney general . In a career spanning more than forty years , his law practice was among the largest and most successful in the state . He was an acknowledged expert on admiralty law , and is described by legal historian Charles Warren as one of the most important legal figures of the time in Massachusetts . 
 = = = Maine – New Brunswick border commission = = = 
 In 1796 Sullivan was appointed by Secretary of State Timothy Pickering to be the United States agent to the binational commission established under the terms of the Jay Treaty to formalize the border between Maine and the British ( now Canadian ) province of New Brunswick . The southern portion of the border had been defined as the Saint Croix River in the 1783 1783 Treaty of Paris which ended the American Revolutionary War , but there was some question as to which river this actually was , because the area was at the time sparsely peopled , poorly surveyed , and maps of the area contained conflicting references to the named river . 
 Sullivan 's responsibility was to gather relevant maps and legal documents , and then present a legal case for the United States ' claim for what the border should be . In addition to researching materials in Massachusetts archives , Sullivan spent a significant amount of time exploring the poorly surveyed and remote Passamaquoddy Bay , attempting to build a case that the <unk> River was the river intended by the treaty negotiators . Which river it was hinged on the location of a 1604 French settlement on an island in the river , and the commissioners and agents explored the area and ordered surveys . The surveys located evidence of the settlement on Saint Croix Island , after which the commission fixed the southern portion of the border on what is now known as the Saint Croix River . ( The disposition of some islands in the bay was not settled , and the northern portion of the border would not be fixed until the 1842 Webster @-@ Ashburton Treaty . ) 
 = = = Governor = = = 
 Sullivan received the Republican nomination for governor in 1797 and 1798 , but lost to Federalist Increase Sumner ( in 1798 by a landslide after the XYZ Affair lent strength to the Federalist cause ) . Republicanism eventually began gaining ground in Massachusetts , and Sullivan was again nominated in 1805 and 1806 for governor , losing both times to the popular incumbent Governor Caleb Strong . In 1806 the Republicans gained control of the Massachusetts legislature , which managed to very nearly deny Strong a narrow victory . With fewer than 200 votes in the balance , the Republican @-@ controlled legislature scrutinized the returns in a partisan manner , discarding ballots that had misspelled Strong 's name while retaining those that misspelled Sullivan 's and performing tallies in ways that favored their candidate . This process concluded with a finding that Strong in fact lacked a majority of votes , which was what was then required to carry the election , as opposed to the modern plurality requirement . Strong 's Federalist allies in the legislature were able to publicize the partisan nature of the analysis , resulting in a hostile public backlash . He was proclaimed the winner after further , less biased , analysis corrected the count in his favor . In 1807 Sullivan again faced Strong , but was this time decisively victorious , carrying the eastern counties ( present @-@ day Maine ) by a wide margin amid a series of Republican victories throughout New England . 
 Although Sullivan sought in some ways to be a moderate voice in the highly partisan disagreements between Federalists and Republicans , he supported the policy of President Thomas Jefferson in <unk> trade with Great Britain and France , who were then embroiled in the Napoleonic Wars . The Embargo Act of 1807 had a significant negative impact on shipping interests based in Massachusetts ports , and Federalists sought to use this , and the threats of war emanating from the Jefferson administration , to unseat Sullivan in 1808 . Federalist Senator Timothy Pickering wrote an open letter raising the specter of war and charging Jefferson with failing to publish critical documents in ongoing negotiations . He then asked Sullivan to formally send it to the state legislature , with the view that this would imply Sullivan 's agreement with its content . Sullivan refused , after which Federalists used that fact to charge that Republicans generally were withholding damaging information . Sullivan 's defense included letters by Senator John Quincy Adams countering the Federalist charges . While this was sufficient to ensure Sullivan 's reelection in 1808 , control of the legislature was returned to the Federalists . Republicans were unhappy with Sullivan 's handling of the political attacks , and for his refusal to remove Federalists from patronage positions in the government . 
 The Federalist legislature immediately launched attacks on Sullivan and the Republicans , which Sullivan was not immediately able to respond to . In the spring of 1808 , before the May opening of the legislature , Sullivan 's health began to decline ( epilepsy and an " organic disease of the heart " ) , so he was unable to seize the initiative . When he finally made his speech to the assembly , he failed to respond to the political aspects of the dispute , and called for national unity in dealing with outside interests . His warnings to Jefferson on the nature of the contentious disputes going on in the state were attributed by Jefferson to his declining mental state . Cognizant of Sullivan 's precarious health , the Federalists sought a delay in electing a slate of electors for the Electoral College in the 1808 presidential election . Sullivan , who would have vetoed a slate of Federalist electors ( as they were then chosen by the legislature and not by popular vote , the Federalist legislative majority would have assured this ) , he acquiesced in the hopes that elective actions in other states would moot the decision made in Massachusetts . Sullivan also came under criticism by political partisans on both sides for issuing large numbers of exemptions to the embargo , ostensibly to avoid civil strife in the event of a grain shortage . 
 When the legislature met in November , it rejected a proposal by Sullivan that popular elections determine the state 's electoral slate , and instead chose a Federalist slate supporting Charles Cotesworth Pinckney for president in a vote boycotted by many Republicans . Based on widespread opinion that the Federalists were likely to lose the presidential election , Sullivan , his health failing , forwarded the electoral votes on to Congress . He died in office on December 10 , 1808 , aged 64 , and was interred in Boston 's Granary Burying Ground in a tomb shared by colonial governor Richard Bellingham . 
 = = Business , economic development , and charity = = 
 In addition to his political and legal activities , Sullivan engaged in a wide variety of civic and charitable work . He was a founding member and the first president of the Massachusetts Historical Society , was a charter member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and was involved with the Massachusetts Humane Society , the Society for the Propagation of the Faith among the Indians , and a charitable society that supported Congregationalist ministers . 
 Sullivan was a major moving force and leading director of the company that oversaw the Middlesex Canal ( construction of which began in 1793 ) . The canal connected the Merrimack River at present @-@ day Lowell ( then still East Chelmsford ) to the port of Boston , ending roughly at Sullivan Square , which is named in his honor . He was deeply involved in the canal , purchasing the necessary land and supervising the construction . At the same time he was also involved in the company formed to build the first bridge across the Charles River connecting Boston to Cambridge , and was instrumental in the development of Boston 's first public water supply , a wooden aqueduct from Jamaica Pond . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 Sullivan 's brothers were active participants in the Revolutionary War . John , Daniel , and Eben , all served in the Continental Army . John served with some distinction until he retired from the army to enter New Hampshire politics in 1779 ; Eben was captured in the Battle of The Cedars in 1776 , and spent some time as a captive among the Mohawk , where he was subjected to torture ; Daniel was also captured in action and died aboard a British prison ship . Sullivan , Maine is named for his brother Daniel , one of the early settlers of that area , and several places in New Hampshire are named for John . In 1808 , while Sullivan was governor , a small fortification now known as Fort Sullivan was constructed in Calais , Maine . Who it is named for is uncertain : one early Eastport historian states that John and James are both likely candidates , preferring John for his association with General Henry Dearborn , who ordered the fort 's construction . 
 Sullivan and his first wife Hettie had nine children , two of whom died young , and one son who died in 1787 due to the hardships of militia service during Shays ' Rebellion . Hettie died in 1786 , and he afterward married Martha Langdon , the widowed sister of New Hampshire politician John Langdon . 
 Sullivan 's enduring interest in Maine led him to write The History of the District of Maine ( published in 1795 ) , the first work to document that history . Maine historian Charles Clark writes that Sullivan 's History , while neither thoroughly researched nor particularly well written , is an " un @-@ self @-@ conscious expression of romantic nationalism " that is " picturesque , romantic , [ and ] inspired " . Sullivan also predicted that Maine would eventually separate from Massachusetts , because " it is so large and populous , and its situation so peculiar , that it cannot remain long " a part of the other state . 
 = = Works = = 
 Sullivan , James ( 1784 ) . Strictures in the Rev. Mr. Thatcher 's Pamphlet . Boston : Benjamin <unk> and Sons . 
 Sullivan , James ( 1795 ) . The History of the District of Maine . Boston : I. Thomas and E. T. Andrews . OCLC <unk> . 
 Sullivan , James ( 1801 ) . The History of Land Titles in Massachusetts . Boston : I. Thomas and E. T. Andrews . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Malacostraca = 
 Malacostraca is the largest of the six classes of crustaceans , containing about 40 @,@ 000 living species , divided among 16 orders . Its members , the malacostracans , display a great diversity of body forms and include crabs , lobsters , crayfish , shrimp , krill , woodlice , scuds ( Amphipoda ) , mantis shrimp and many other less familiar animals . They are abundant in all marine environments and have colonised freshwater and terrestrial habitats . They are segmented animals , united by a common body plan comprising 20 body segments ( rarely 21 ) , and divided into a head , thorax , and abdomen . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Malacostraca was coined by the French zoologist Pierre André Latreille in 1802 . He was curator of the arthropod collection at the National Museum of Natural History in Paris . The name comes from the Greek roots <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " soft " ) and <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " shell " ) . The name is misleading , since the shell is only soft immediately after moulting , and is usually hard . Malacostracans are sometimes contrasted with <unk> , a name applied to all crustaceans outside the Malacostraca , and named after the obsolete taxon <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The class Malacostraca includes about 40 @,@ 000 species , and " arguably ... contains a greater diversity of body forms than any other class in the animal kingdom " . Its members are characterised by the presence of three tagmata ( specialized groupings of multiple segments ) – a five @-@ segmented head , an eight @-@ segmented thorax and an abdomen with six segments and a telson , except in the Leptostraca , which retain the ancestral condition of seven abdominal segments . Malacostracans have abdominal appendages , a fact that differentiates them from all other major crustacean taxa except Remipedia . Each body segment bears a pair of jointed appendages , although these may be lost secondarily . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The head bears two pairs of antennae , the first of which is often biramous ( branching into two parts ) and the second pair bear exopods ( outer branches ) which are often flattened into antennal scales known as <unk> . The mouthparts consist of pairs each of mandibles , maxillules ( second pair of mouthparts ) and maxillae . Usually a pair of stalked compound eyes is present , although in some taxa the eyes are <unk> , reduced or lost . 
 Up to three thoracic segments may be fused with the head to form a cephalothorax ; the associated appendages turn forward and are modified as maxillipeds ( accessory mouthparts ) . A carapace may be absent , present or secondarily lost , and may cover the head , part or all of the thorax and some of the abdomen . It is variable in form and may be fused dorsally with some of the thoracic segments or occasionally be in two parts , hinged dorsally . Typically , each of the thoracic appendages is biramous and the endopods are the better developed of the branches , being used for crawling or grasping . Each <unk> consist of seven articulating segments ; the coxa , basis , ischium , <unk> , carpus , propodus and dactylus . In decapods , the claw is formed by the articulation of the dactylus against an outgrowth of the propodus . In some taxa , the exopods are lost and the appendages are uniramous . 
 There is a clear demarcation between the thorax and the six or seven @-@ segmented abdomen . In most taxa , each abdominal segment except the last carries a pair of biramous pleopods used for swimming , burrowing , gas exchange , creating a current or brooding eggs . The first and second abdominal pleopods may be modified in the male to form gonopods ( accessory copulatory appendages ) . The appendages of the last segment are typically flattened into uropods , which together with the terminal telson , make up the " tail fan " . It is the sudden flexion of this tail fan that provides the thrust for the rapid escape response of these crustaceans and the tail fan is also used in steering . In Leptostraca , the appendages on the telson instead form caudal rami ( spine @-@ like protrusions ) . 
 = = = Internal anatomy = = = 
 The digestive tract is straight and the foregut consists of a short oesophagus and a two @-@ chambered stomach , the first part of which contains a gizzard @-@ like " gastric mill " for grinding food . The walls of this have chitinous ridges , teeth and calcareous ossicles . The fine particles and soluble material are then moved into the midgut where chemical processing and absorption takes place in one or more pairs of large digestive caeca . The hindgut is concerned with water reclamation and the formation of faeces and the anus is situated at the base of the telson . 
 Like other crustaceans , malacostracans have an open circulatory system in which the heart pumps blood into the hemocoel ( body cavity ) where it supplies the needs of the organs for oxygen and nutrients before diffusing back to the heart . The typical respiratory pigment in malacostracans is <unk> . Structures that function as kidneys are located near the base of the antennae . A brain exists in the form of ganglia close to the antennae , there are ganglia in each segment and a collection of major ganglia below the oesophagus . Sensory organs include compound eyes ( often stalked ) , ocelli ( simple eyes ) , statocysts and sensory bristles . The naupliar eye is a characteristic of the nauplius larva and consists of four cup @-@ shaped ocelli facing in different directions and able to distinguish between light and darkness . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Malacostracans live in a wide range of marine and freshwater habitats , and three orders have terrestrial members : Amphipoda ( <unk> ) , Isopoda ( Oniscidea , the woodlice ) and Decapoda ( terrestrial hermit crabs , crabs of the families <unk> , Gecarcinidae , and <unk> , and terrestrial crayfish ) . They are abundant in all marine ecosystems , and most species are scavengers , although some , such as the porcelain crabs , are filter feeders , and some , such as mantis shrimps , are carnivores . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Most species of malacostracans have distinct sexes ( a phenomenon known as <unk> ) , although a few species exhibit hermaphroditism . The female genital openings or gonopores are located on the sixth thoracic segment or its appendages , while the male gonopores are on the eighth segment or its appendages , or in a small number of species , on the seventh . The naupliar larval stages are often reduced and take place before hatching , but where they occur , a metamorphosis usually occurs between the larval and the adult forms . Primitive malacostracans have a free @-@ swimming naupliar larval stage . 
 = = Mating = = 
 Mating behavior has been studied in the freshwater shrimp Caridina ensifera . Multiple paternity , common in the <unk> , also occurs in C. ensifera . Reproductive success of sires was found to correlate inversely with their genetic relatedness to the mother . This finding suggests that sperm competition and / or pre- and post @-@ copulatory female choice occurs . Female choice may increase the fitness of progeny by avoiding inbreeding that can lead to expression of homozygous deleterious recessive mutations . 
 = = Phylogenetics = = 
 The monophyly of Malacostraca is widely accepted . This is supported by several common morphological traits which are present throughout the group and is confirmed by molecular studies . However , a number of problems make it difficult to determine the relationships between the orders of Malacostraca . These include differences in mutation rates in different lineages , different patterns of evolution being apparent in different sources of data , including convergent evolution , and long branch attraction . 
 There is less agreement on the status of the subclass Phyllocarida with its single extant order , Leptostraca , depending on whether <unk> ( leaf @-@ like ) limbs have a single or multiple origin . Some authors advocate placing Phyllocarida in Phyllopoda , a group used in former classification systems , which would then include branchiopods , <unk> and <unk> . A molecular study by American biologists Trisha Spears and Lawrence Abele concluded that phylogenetic evidence did not support the monophyly of this grouping , and that Phyllocarida should be regarded as a subclass of Malacostraca that had diverged from the main lineage at an early date . 
 = = = Subclass Phyllocarida = = = 
 Leptostraca is the only extant order of Phyllocarida , the other two orders , <unk> and <unk> being extinct . <unk> are thought to be the most primitive of the malacostracans and date back to the Cambrian period . They range in length from 1 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) , most being suspension feeders though some are carnivores or scavengers . They have a two part carapace which encloses the head , the whole thorax and part of the abdomen and are the only <unk> with seven abdominal segments . Three families are known with several genera and about twenty species . They are found worldwide from the intertidal zone to the deep ocean , all but one species being benthic ( living on the seabed ) . 
 = = = Subclass Hoplocarida = = = 
 <unk> is the only extant order of Hoplocarida , the other two orders , Aeschronectida and <unk> being extinct . <unk> , commonly known as mantis shrimps , range in length from 5 to 36 cm ( 2 to 14 in ) and are predators . They have a dorso @-@ ventrally flattened body and a shield @-@ like carapace and are armed with powerful , raptorial claws normally carried in a folded position . There are about 300 species , most living in tropical and subtropical seas although some live in temperate areas . They are benthic , mostly hiding in cracks and crevices or living in burrows , some emerging to forage while others are ambush predators . 
 = = = Subclass <unk> = = = 
 The <unk> contains the vast majority of the approximately 40 @,@ 000 living species of malacostracans and consists of three superorders , <unk> , Peracarida and Eucarida . <unk> are mostly small and found in freshwater and subterranean habitats . <unk> are characterised by having a marsupium in which they brood their young . They are found in marine , freshwater and terrestrial habitats and include Amphipoda , Cumacea , Isopoda and Mysida . Eucarida includes lobsters , crabs , shrimps , prawns and krill . 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 The first malacostracans appeared sometime in the Cambrian , when animals belonging to the Phyllocarida appeared . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The following classification of living malacostracans is based on An Updated Classification of the Recent Crustacea ( 2001 ) by the American marine biologists Joel W. Martin , curator of crustaceans at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County , and George E. Davies . Extinct orders have been added to this and are indicated by an obelisk ( † ) . 
 Class Malacostraca Latreille , 1802 
 Subclass Phyllocarida Packard , 1879 
 † <unk> Claus 1888 
 † <unk> Schram , 1973 
 Leptostraca Claus , 1880 
 Subclass Hoplocarida Calman , 1904 
 † Aeschronectida Schram , 1969 
 † <unk> Schram , 1969 
 <unk> Latreille , 1817 
 Subclass <unk> <unk> , 1892 
 Superorder <unk> Packard , 1885 
 † <unk> Brooks , 1979 
 <unk> Chappuis , 1915 
 <unk> Calman , 1904 
 Superorder Peracarida Calman , 1904 
 <unk> Gordon , 1957 
 <unk> Monod , 1927 
 <unk> Sars , 1870 
 Mysida Haworth , 1825 
 <unk> Bowman et al . , 1985 
 Amphipoda Latreille , 1816 
 Isopoda Latreille , 1817 
 <unk> Dana , 1849 
 Cumacea Krøyer , 1846 
 Superorder Eucarida Calman , 1904 
 <unk> Dana , 1852 
 <unk> Williamson , 1973 
 Decapoda Latreille , 1802 
 = 11 ( Bryan Adams album ) = 
 11 is the eleventh studio album by Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Bryan Adams . The album was released by Polydor Records on March 17 , 2008 . 11 was the first release of new Adams material since Colour Me Kubrick in 2005 and the first studio album in four years since Room Service . Adams , Jim Vallance , Eliot Kennedy , Gretchen Peters , Trevor Rabin and Robert John " Mutt " Lange received producing and writing credits . Similar to Adams ' previous material , the themes in 11 are mainly based on love , romance , and relationships . 11 received generally mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . 
 Three songs were released from the album in various forms : " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " , " Tonight We Have the Stars " and " She 's Got a Way " , of which all were released internationally . " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " was the only one to have any lasting effects on the music chart , reaching mostly the Top 50 , Top 100 and Top 200 in Europe and Canada . Adams was nominated for a Juno Award in the category " Best Artist " in 2009 for this record . 
 The album peaked within the top ten in eleven territories worldwide , including Canada ( with sales just below 10 @,@ 000 units in its first week ) , the United Kingdom , Germany , Denmark and Switzerland . 11 charted within the top twenty in three other territories . The album has sold approximately half @-@ a @-@ million copies , which might be considered somewhat disappointing compared to Adams previous albums sales . However CD sales dropped for all artists during this time across the board . 
 The track " Flower Grown Wild " , was reportedly written about the now deceased Amy Winehouse . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In an interview on Canada AM , Adams said the title 11 was picked because it was his 11th studio album , when soundtrack album Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron is included . In addition , Adams mentioned there was no hidden meaning behind the title , it was his eleventh studio release and contained eleven tracks , " there are no secondary meanings " as Adams later mentioned in an interview with the BBC . The album 's cover was taken during a photo shoot in a hotel in Switzerland , while Adams was doing a self @-@ photo story for an Italian men 's magazine . Adams ended up liking the photo so much that he ended up using it as the album 's cover 
 As with the previous album , Room Service , significant portions of the album were produced while on tour . According to co @-@ writer Jim Vallance modern technology and equipment made it a lot easier to record the album . Adams recorded the album while on tour , making use of the time between playing on stage and readying himself for the next gig . Vallance and Adams recorded the album normally while sitting backstage or in an hotel room with small devices which they usually carried along on tours , but especially during their off days . Adams , in an interview , mentioned that when recording a song , they needed to set up mattresses against the windows , and having microphones run through the toilet . 
 11 was originally going to be an acoustic record , aiming for the " soft @-@ hard approach " perfected by the British rock group , The Who . However , after a long tour , some of the acoustic songs started growing on him , which led to changes . Adams would record for a few hours , until he wheeled the whole recording kit back onstage . " It makes me a little more interested in going on tour , " he said in retrospect . Adams who was never fully committed to the idea of creating a full @-@ fledged acoustic album , decided not to after seeing an acoustic band opening for him during one of his concerts . What he saw made him certain that he was not able to create such an album . 
 = = Writing and themes = = 
 When the writing season for 11 had ended , Adams and his companions had written 30 songs . After a selection process , 19 of these songs were removed , however some of them made it to the deluxe edition released later in 2008 . The first single , " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " was written in 2007 , and went through two or three changes before Adams made the finishing touches . Originally , it had another title , and a different melody , and as Adams later put it ; " in the course of listening to the music and spending time with it , you do end up changing it . 
 Adams hadn 't worked together on an album with Vallance since the late @-@ 1980s . They teamed up after , as Adams said , " throwing ideas back and forth " from 2003 until the album was released . Vallance would send MP3 audio files by e @-@ mail to Adams during the recording seasons . Adams would then add some elements to them and send them back . They continued doing this until a song was completed ; Vallance claimed it took longer for them to write songs than during their previous collaborations , but felt the end product was just as good . 
 The main themes in the album , in Adams words are ; " searching for something " . The lyrical meaning behind track number four , " Oxygen " is what a person needs in order to survive . In other words " The person you are with is giving you the air you breathe " , and that people in general " need each other 100 % . " The album 's first single , " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " is about keeping an open mind . " The theme of " Broken Wings " is about " somebody who taught me how to fly " , a metaphor which for " putting your trust in somebody who can give you faith and the belief that you can succeed . " " Something to Believe In " is based upon the affirmation of life and faith , while " Walk on By " warns the listener of <unk> . As with other albums , according to Adams , he likes to end the album with a melancholic song , such as " Something to Believe In " in 11 , it 's not the last track however . " Flowers Gone Wild " touches on the same theme as two songs he wrote in the early 1980s , " Cover Girl " and " The Best Is Yet To Come " , are based upon the murdered playboy bunny Dorothy Stratten . But also people with misplaced emotions and their unfulfilled needs , which are pushed forth by the media , which Adams says , leads people to lose their " sense of decency " . Adams explained further ; " It 's a sort of new love affair with an old story , devouring our celebrities and leaving them when we are done . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The finishing touches to the album were done in September 2007 , but the European release of the album was delayed until March 2008 . The album was released independently in the United States exclusively through Wal @-@ Mart and Sam 's Club retail stores on May 13 , 2008 . The deal was brokered one month after the albums international release . On October 5 , 2008 a Deluxe Edition of 11 was announced on Adams website . The album featured new tracks and contained a DVD . The Deluxe Edition was released on November 10 , 2008 in the UK , and November 11 , in Canada . The new CD featured the original 11 tracks , a new song " Saved " and the inclusion of two B @-@ sides , " Way of the World " and " Miss America " . The remix of " She 's Got a Way " replaces the original version , but includes another remix done by Chicane . The DVD features Adams , and his backing band , rehearsing the material from the album . It also contains behind the scenes footages . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 11 overall received mixed , but mostly unflattering reviews from critics . Music reviewer Chris Jones from the BBC wrote generally positively about 11 in his review . He concluded that it was another strong album , even if Adams voice sounded dispassionate on some tracks . The Canadian website Jam ! gave the album an average review . Reviewer Darryl <unk> found the lyrics clichéd , predictable and , while not criticising it , described it as an album " that didn 't really mean much . " Ryan <unk> from the alternatively weekly magazine , Houston Press wrote favorably of the record in a backhanded way , commenting that 11 's appeal laid in its " <unk> " and " digestibility " . In another favorable review , Daily Mail writer Adrian Thrills said the album highlight was " Oxygen " , commenting on the similarities with the music of Bob Dylan . Amy O 'Brian of The Vancouver Sun wrote favorably of the new album , while at the same time criticising it for its clichés , bad lyrics and for its too @-@ familiar melodies , and concluded , " It 's cheesy and overdone , but the truth is that it just might give Adams his first hit in a decade . " 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave the record two out of five stars , saying that Adams ' " fondness for obvious hooks " had " flattened into clichés " . Matt O 'Leary from Virgin Media criticised the album for Adams 's " over @-@ familiar trademark " and very clichéd , made the over @-@ familiar sound of 11 a little more " irksome " . O 'Leary gave the album two out of five stars . The Sunday Times reviewer Steve <unk> wrote , " Eleven studio albums into his career , the Canadian rocker returns with a set so devoid of surprises that it could easily have been created with a computer program . " He continued by criticising the album for what he saw as mundane lyrical metaphors , attempts of copying U2 and rigid one @-@ note basslines . He concluded however that the album was better than Lenny Kravitz latest effort , It Is Time for a Love Revolution . Chuck Arnold and Christina Tapper of People gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four and stated that the 11 songs " show that , at 48 , Adams is still capable of capturing the essence of young , unbridled love . Sure , the guy can get sappy , but he 's always sincere . " 
 = = = Chart and commercial performance = = = 
 11 was Adams ' first studio album to be released in four years , since Room Service in 2004 . In the album 's first week of release it sold just below 10 @,@ 000 units in Canada , and debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart and stayed on the chart for four weeks . This marked the first time since Waking Up the Neighbours in 1991 , that Adams was able to top the Canadian record chart . In the United States , it debuted at number 80 on the Billboard 200 on the charts issue date of May 31 , 2008 and stayed on the chart for four weeks . 11 was Adams ' first studio album since 18 til I Die in the US to crack the top 100 . 11 stayed longer on the American and Canadian record than did Room Service . 11 peaked at three on the European Albums Chart and stayed on the chart for ten weeks , the album and reached seven at the Independent Albums Chart and stayed there for five weeks . At the 2009 Juno Awards Adams was nominated for " Artist of the Year " due to 11 . 
 Internationally , 11 was a commercial success . The album peaked at number one in two countries , India and Switzerland . It also charted within the top ten in several countries , including the United Kingdom , Switzerland , India , Germany , Austria , Denmark , Portugal and The Netherlands . France was the album 's least successful charting territory , peaking within the top 200 at number 157 . Switzerland was the only country in Europe were 11 managed to top a record chart . After staying there for a full 13 weeks if fell off the chart from 81 . Because of sales of over 15 @,@ 000 units , the album was certified gold in Switzerland and Denmark . The album has sold over half a million units worldwide . 
 The first single , " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " was released as a download only single in the UK on March 17 , 2008 . Although it was officially released to US radio on March 1 , 2008 , it proved somewhat popular on Adult Contemporary radio stations where it peaked at # 21 . In Canada " I Thought I 'd Seen Everything " was officially released to radio in March , 2008 . The song reached the top 50 on the Canadian Hot 100 where it peaked at # 47 . " Tonight We Have the Stars " , the second single , was released as a digital single on June 6 , 2008 . The third and last single , " She 's Got a Way " was released in September and did not chart anywhere in North America or Europe . 
 = = 11 Tour = = 
 In support of 11 , Adams started the " 11 concerts , 11 cities " tour , having concerts in 11 different countries in just 11 days . The intimate shows at some spectacular venues will see Adams perform an acoustic set , on stage , with just his guitar and harmonica . The London show was on the March 11 , 2008 at St. James Church in Piccadilly . The last stop of his 11 days concert tour was in Copenhagen , Denmark on March 17 . After the " 11 concerts , 11 cities " tour , Adams continued to promote his album , this time on an acoustic tour touring with such musical acts as Foreigner and Rod Stewart . Later , in an interview , he was asked what song he felt sounded the best acoustically , Adams responded ; 
 " Well , they all work acoustically , because they were all written on an acoustic guitar . This album started out as an acoustic record and halfway through I sort of switched gears and decided to make sort of an acoustic rock record . When I play the songs live , it has actually sort of led me into a path of this next tour , which is my first American acoustic tour . I feel confident enough with these songs and with the songs in the past that the show is going to be quite interesting , sort of hearing these songs stripped down completely , just myself and a guitar . " 
 What is interesting is this was to be the beginning of Adams 's Bare Bones tour , which still tours the world in between his usually band shows . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Source : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 There were 11 personnel members . 
 Bryan Adams – guitar , vocals , bass ( tracks 1 – 3 ) , production 
 Keith Scott – guitar ( tracks 2 – 5 , 7 , 9 , 12 – 14 ) 
 Colin Cripps – guitar ( all except tracks 8 , 11 , 13 ) , backing vocals ( track 7 ) 
 Gary Breit – hammond organ , piano ( tracks 1 – 3 , 5 , 7 – 10 , 12 , 14 ) 
 Eliot Kennedy – bass ( tracks 4 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 14 ) , piano ( tracks 6 , 12 ) , backing vocals ( tracks 7 , 13 ) 
 Norm Fisher – bass ( track 13 ) 
 Robert John " Mutt " Lange – bass ( track 5 ) , production ( tracks 1 , 5 ) 
 Mickey Curry – drums ( tracks 1 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 13 ) 
 Pat Steward – drums ( tracks 2 – 5 , 8 , 12 and 14 ) , tambourine ( track 14 ) 
 Jim Vallance – drums ( track 10 ) 
 Máire Breatnach – fiddle ( track 8 ) , viola ( track 11 ) 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 There were 13 additional personnel members . 
 Pointless Brothers – backing vocals ( track 6 ) 
 Kathleen Edwards – backing vocals ( track 7 ) 
 Teese <unk> – string arrangement ( tracks 7 , 8 ) 
 Gavin Greenway – string arrangement ( track 11 ) 
 Hal Beckett – string conductor ( tracks 7 , 8 , 11 ) 
 Bob Clearmountain – mixing 
 Olle Romo – editing 
 Ben Dobie – recording 
 Bryan Gallant – additional recording 
 Kirk <unk> – additional recording 
 Roger Monk – string recording ( track 8 ) 
 Chicane – remixer for track 15 
 J. Hockley – additional production and recording for track 15 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Florida mouse = 
 The Florida mouse ( Podomys floridanus ) is a species of rodent in the family Cricetidae . It is the only species in the genus Podomys , which is the only mammal genus endemic to Florida . The Florida mouse ( also known as the big @-@ eared deermouse , the Florida deermouse , and the gopher mouse ) is found only in a limited area in central peninsular Florida and in one small area in the Florida panhandle . The mouse inhabits some of Florida 's hottest and driest areas in the high pinelands , sandhills , flatlands , and coastal scrub . 
 The mouse is an omnivore , measures 195 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) in total length , has relatively large ears , and displays brown to orange upperparts and white underparts . The mouse breeds throughout the year , and raises its two or three young per litter in the nesting chambers and passages it constructs in the burrow of the gopher tortoise ( <unk> polyphemus ) . Real estate development and a decline in the gopher tortoise population threaten the mouse 's future . The species is listed as Vulnerable by the IUCN . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Florida mouse displays a soft and silky pelage , brown above and orange on the cheeks , shoulders , and lower sides . <unk> are white . The young are gray . The species has a skunk @-@ like odor . The mouse has relatively large , nearly naked ears ( 16 mm long or more ) , a relatively short tail approximately 80 % of total body length , and large hind feet ( 24 mm long or more ) with five , rather than the usual six , plantar tubercles . There is no difference in appearance between males and females . 
 The mouse looks like Peromyscus , and was once placed as a monotypic subgenus in the genus Peromyscus The greater size and distinctive coloration of Podomys floridanus distinguish it from the cotton mouse ( Peromyscus gossypinus ) and oldfield mouse ( Peromyscus polionotus ) , which also occur in Florida . 
 In 1973 , a biochemical polymorphism study was conducted in four sample areas of the species . <unk> demonstrable variation was found in one or more populations at 15 of 39 ( 38 % ) of the loci examined , and two and sometimes three alleles per locus were detected . At the least , the findings give an indication of the kind of genetic variation that may be found between populations within a species . The amount of variation was similar to findings in examinations of Peromyscus polionotus , Sigmodon , and <unk> . 
 Average measurements reported in 1993 of 30 adults were : total length 195 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) 178 – 220 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 7 in ) ; tail 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) 80 – 101 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 0 in ) ; hind foot 26 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) 24 – 28 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 – 1 @.@ 10 in ) ; ear 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) 16 – 21 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 85 in ) . The diploid number is 48 and dentition 1 / 1 0 / 0 0 / 0 3 / 3 total 16 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mouse was first described by Frank Chapman in 1889 in a paper in the Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History , from a specimen collected at Gainesville , Florida . The species was named as a separate subgenus of Peromyscus by Wilfred Hudson Osgood in 1909 , but generic recognition was disputed in the 1980s . Michael Carleton and Guy Musser supported the ranking in 1993 . No subspecies have been described . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Podomys is the only mammal genus endemic only to Florida . The Florida mouse is found coast to coast in central peninsular Florida . An isolated population is found in the Florida panhandle at Franklin County , Florida . The species occurs from north @-@ central Florida south to Highlands County and Sarasota County . It is found along the Atlantic coast from St. Johns County south to Miami @-@ Dade County . 
 The mouse inhabits some of Florida 's driest locations . It is common in the sand pine ( Pinus clausa ) scrub and the high pinelands of turkey oak ( Quercus laevis ) and longleaf pine ( Pinus palustris ) , and is found in the slash pine ( Pinus elliottii ) and turkey oak habitat of the southern ridge sandhills , and in scrubby flatlands , and in coastal scrub associations . Home ranges average roughly 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) , and are smaller in the flatlands . Populations are greater in the scrub and flatlands than in the highlands . Its largest populations may occur within Ocala National Forest and the scrubs along Lake Wales Ridge . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The Florida mouse is nocturnal , and is active throughout the year except on especially cold nights . The mouse can climb , but is primarily a terrestrial species . In laboratory experiments , P. floridanus used its forepaws to dig and throw substrate backwards while other species mainly used their hindfeet to do the same . 
 = = = Shelter = = = 
 The Florida mouse has been called the gopher mouse because it shares the long , deep burrow of the gopher tortoise ( <unk> polyphemus ) . The mouse makes nest chambers , small side passages , sometimes a pad of oak leaves and <unk> for chamber floors , and small chimney openings in the roof of the burrow . It uses these openings , the main entrance , and side passages for entrance to and exit from the burrow . In the absence of gopher tortoise burrows , the mouse will use those of the oldfield mouse ( Peromyscus polionotus ) or will make its own . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The Florida mouse is an omnivore and its diet consists of acorns when available , insects , seeds , nuts , fungi , and other plant material and vertebrates . A 1987 report indicates the mouse feeds on engorged ticks ( <unk> <unk> americanus ) that parasitize gopher frogs ( Rana <unk> ) and gopher tortoises . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Florida mice breed throughout the year with a peak between July and December , a lesser peak in January and February , and a lull or cessation in April and May . Unlike most <unk> , copulatory behavior lacks <unk> thrusting , the intromission thrust is more intense than the dismount , there is no lock , and ejaculation occurs with every thrust . 
 Gestation is about 23 or 24 days . The mice dig side burrows off the main burrow of the gopher tortoise , line them with shredded plant material , and use them as nurseries . In eight litters of young conceived in the wild but born in the laboratory , litter size numbers varied from two to four for an average of 3 @.@ 1 per litter . The young are born in nests in the burrow . Newborn weigh 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 9 g ( 0 @.@ 067 – 0 @.@ 102 oz ) and measure in total length 44 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) ; tail length 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) ; and hind foot length 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) . Teeth begin appearing on the fourth day , the young are active and agile about the 10th day , and the eyes open about the 16th day . Nursing is virtually non @-@ stop for the first two weeks of life . Weaning occurs at three to four weeks , and the young display adult behavior at this time . 
 = = = Survival = = = 
 Ectoparasites are seven species of mites , five ticks , five fleas , a louse , and the subdermal botfly larva , Cuterebra . Known endoparasites are three species of protozoans found in fecal smears , one trematode , four cestodes , seven nematodes , and nymphal <unk> found in various internal organs . 
 In 2010 , exact population size was unknown , but estimated to be in the several thousands and decreasing . Presumed predators are snakes , birds of prey , bobcats , raccoons , and foxes . A high number of shortened tails have been observed in the mice and a modified integument in the tail facilitates tail loss , probably as an anti @-@ predator mechanism . 
 Few wild individuals have a lifespan of over a year , though captive individuals may live for several years . One captive male lived seven years , four months . 
 = = Relations with humans and conservation = = 
 The species in all probability has little or no direct impact or influence on human interests and concerns but agricultural and real estate development are a threat to the species ' very narrow habitat . Collecting specimens in the dry ridges is complicated by the millions of ants which eat the bait in the trap the moment it is set on the ground . Live collecting is the alternative , but the bait is usually digested by the time the animal is taken from the trap , making food research difficult if not impossible . 
 As early as 1998 , the Florida mouse was a federal C2 candidate taxon , and considered Threatened by the Florida Committee on Rare and Endangered Plants and Animals . The mouse was named a Species of Special Concern by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission . The Florida mouse inhabits a restricted habitat in the United States and that habitat is threatened not only by agricultural and real estate development but by wildfire suppression . Habitat decline is expected to continue into the future . The mouse is dependent upon gopher tortoise burrows , but disease and habitat loss are responsible for decline in the tortoise population . Red imported fire ants ( Solenopsis invicta ) threaten both tortoise and mouse populations . The IUCN has listed the species as Vulnerable and recommends further study of the species , maintenance of viable populations of gopher tortoises , and the preservation and management of suitable habitat for the species . The mouse is protected on several conservation lands across central Florida . Occurrences of the Florida mouse are protected at Archbold Biological Station , Ocala National Forest , and others . 
 = Guy Fawkes Night = 
 Guy Fawkes Night , also known as Guy Fawkes Day , Bonfire Night and Firework Night , is an annual commemoration observed on 5 November , primarily in Great Britain . Its history begins with the events of 5 November 1605 , when Guy Fawkes , a member of the Gunpowder Plot , was arrested while guarding explosives the plotters had placed beneath the House of Lords . Celebrating the fact that King James I had survived the attempt on his life , people lit bonfires around London , and months later the introduction of the Observance of 5th November Act enforced an annual public day of thanksgiving for the plot 's failure . 
 Within a few decades Gunpowder Treason Day , as it was known , became the predominant English state commemoration , but as it carried strong Protestant religious overtones it also became a focus for anti @-@ Catholic sentiment . Puritans delivered sermons regarding the perceived dangers of popery , while during increasingly raucous celebrations common folk burnt effigies of popular hate @-@ figures , such as the pope . Towards the end of the 18th century reports appear of children begging for money with effigies of Guy Fawkes and 5 November gradually became known as Guy Fawkes Day . Towns such as Lewes and Guildford were in the 19th century scenes of increasingly violent class @-@ based confrontations , fostering traditions those towns celebrate still , albeit peaceably . In the 1850s changing attitudes resulted in the toning down of much of the day 's anti @-@ Catholic rhetoric , and the Observance of 5th November Act was repealed in 1859 . Eventually the violence was dealt with , and by the 20th century Guy Fawkes Day had become an enjoyable social commemoration , although lacking much of its original focus . The present @-@ day Guy Fawkes Night is usually celebrated at large organised events , centred on a bonfire and extravagant firework displays . 
 Settlers exported Guy Fawkes Night to overseas colonies , including some in North America , where it was known as Pope Day . Those festivities died out with the onset of the American Revolution . Claims that Guy Fawkes Night was a Protestant replacement for older customs like Samhain are disputed , although another old celebration , Halloween , has lately increased in popularity , and according to some writers , may threaten the continued observance of 5 November . 
 = = Origins and history in England = = 
 Guy Fawkes Night originates from the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 , a failed conspiracy by a group of provincial English Catholics to assassinate the Protestant King James I of England and replace him with a Catholic head of state . In the immediate aftermath of the 5 November arrest of Guy Fawkes , caught guarding a cache of explosives placed beneath the House of Lords , James 's Council allowed the public to celebrate the king 's survival with bonfires , so long as they were " without any danger or disorder " . This made 1605 the first year the plot 's failure was celebrated . The following January , days before the surviving conspirators were executed , Parliament passed the Observance of 5th November Act , commonly known as the " Thanksgiving Act " . It was proposed by a Puritan Member of Parliament , Edward Montagu , who suggested that the king 's apparent deliverance by divine intervention deserved some measure of official recognition , and kept 5 November free as a day of thanksgiving while in theory making attendance at Church mandatory . A new form of service was also added to the Church of England 's Book of Common Prayer , for use on that date . 
 Little is known about the earliest celebrations . In settlements such as Carlisle , Norwich and Nottingham , corporations provided music and artillery salutes . Canterbury celebrated 5 November 1607 with 106 pounds of gunpowder and 14 pounds of match , and three years later food and drink was provided for local dignitaries , as well as music , explosions and a parade by the local militia . Even less is known of how the occasion was first commemorated by the general public , although records indicate that in Protestant Dorchester a sermon was read , the church bells rung , and bonfires and fireworks lit . 
 = = = Early significance = = = 
 According to historian and author Antonia Fraser , a study of the earliest sermons preached demonstrates an anti @-@ Catholic concentration " mystical in its fervour " . Delivering one of five 5 November sermons printed in A Mappe of Rome in 1612 , Thomas Taylor spoke of the " generality of his [ a papist 's ] cruelty , " which had been " almost without bounds " . Such messages were also spread in printed works like Francis Herring 's <unk> <unk> ( republished in 1610 as Popish Piety ) , and John Rhode 's A Brief <unk> of the Treason intended against the King & State , which in 1606 sought to educate " the simple and ignorant … that they be not seduced any longer by papists " . By the 1620s the Fifth was honoured in market towns and villages across the country , though it was some years before it was commemorated throughout England . Gunpowder Treason Day , as it was then known , became the predominant English state commemoration . Some parishes made the day a festive occasion , with public drinking and solemn processions . Concerned though about James 's pro @-@ Spanish foreign policy , the decline of international Protestantism , and Catholicism in general , Protestant clergymen who recognised the day 's significance called for more dignified and profound thanksgivings each 5 November . 
 What unity English Protestants had shared in the plot 's immediate aftermath began to fade when in 1625 James 's son , the future Charles I , married the Catholic Henrietta Maria of France . Puritans reacted to the marriage by issuing a new prayer to warn against rebellion and Catholicism , and on 5 November that year , effigies of the pope and the devil were burnt , the earliest such report of this practice and the beginning of centuries of tradition . During Charles 's reign Gunpowder Treason Day became increasingly partisan . Between 1629 and 1640 he ruled without Parliament , and he seemed to support Arminianism , regarded by Puritans like Henry Burton as a step toward Catholicism . By 1636 , under the leadership of the Arminian Archbishop of Canterbury William Laud , the English church was trying to use 5 November to denounce all seditious practices , and not just popery . Puritans went on the defensive , some pressing for further reformation of the Church . 
 Bonfire Night , as it was occasionally known , assumed a new fervour during the events leading up to the English Interregnum . Although Royalists disputed their interpretations , Parliamentarians began to uncover or fear new Catholic plots . Preaching before the House of Commons on 5 November 1644 , Charles Herle claimed that Papists were tunnelling " from Oxford , Rome , Hell , to Westminster , and there to blow up , if possible , the better foundations of your houses , their liberties and privileges " . A display in 1647 at Lincoln 's Inn Fields commemorated " God 's great mercy in delivering this kingdom from the hellish plots of papists " , and included fireballs burning in the water ( symbolising a Catholic association with " infernal spirits " ) and fireboxes , their many rockets suggestive of " popish spirits coming from below " to enact plots against the king . Effigies of Fawkes and the pope were present , the latter represented by Pluto , Roman god of the underworld . 
 Following Charles I 's execution in 1649 , the country 's new republican regime remained undecided on how to treat 5 November . Unlike the old system of religious feasts and State anniversaries , it survived , but as a celebration of parliamentary government and Protestantism , and not of monarchy . Commonly the day was still marked by bonfires and miniature explosives , but formal celebrations resumed only with the Restoration , when Charles II became king . Courtiers , High Anglicans and Tories followed the official line , that the event marked God 's preservation of the English throne , but generally the celebrations became more diverse . By 1670 London apprentices had turned 5 November into a fire festival , attacking not only popery but also " sobriety and good order " , demanding money from coach occupants for alcohol and bonfires . The burning of effigies , largely unknown to the <unk> , continued in 1673 when Charles 's brother , the Duke of York , converted to Catholicism . In response , accompanied by a procession of about 1 @,@ 000 people , the apprentices fired an effigy of the Whore of Babylon , bedecked with a range of papal symbols . Similar scenes occurred over the following few years . On 17 November 1677 , anti @-@ Catholic fervour saw the Accession Day tilt marked by the burning of a large effigy of the pope — his belly filled with live cats " who <unk> most hideously as soon as they felt the fire " — and two effigies of devils " whispering in his ear " . Two years later , as the exclusion crisis reached its zenith , an observer noted that " the 5th at night , being gunpowder treason , there were many bonfires and burning of popes as has ever been seen " . Violent scenes in 1682 forced London 's militia into action , and to prevent any repetition the following year a proclamation was issued , banning bonfires and fireworks . 
 Fireworks were also banned under James II , who became king in 1685 . Attempts by the government to tone down Gunpowder Treason Day celebrations were , however , largely unsuccessful , and some reacted to a ban on bonfires in London ( born from a fear of more burnings of the pope 's effigy ) by placing candles in their windows , " as a witness against Catholicism " . When James was deposed in 1688 by William of Orange — who importantly , landed in England on 5 November — the day 's events turned also to the celebration of freedom and religion , with elements of anti @-@ Jacobitism . While the earlier ban on bonfires was politically motivated , a ban on fireworks was maintained for safety reasons , " much mischief having been done by squibs " . 
 = = = Guy Fawkes Day = = = 
 William III 's birthday fell on 4 November , and for orthodox Whigs the two days therefore became an important double anniversary . William ordered that the thanksgiving service for 5 November be amended to include thanks for his " happy arrival " and " the Deliverance of our Church and Nation " . In the 1690s he re @-@ established Protestant rule in Ireland , and the Fifth , occasionally marked by the ringing of church bells and civic dinners , was consequently eclipsed by his birthday commemorations . From the 19th century , 5 November celebrations there became sectarian in nature . Its celebration in Northern Ireland remains controversial , unlike in Scotland , where bonfires continue to be lit in various Caledonian cities . In England though , as one of 49 official holidays , for the ruling class 5 November became overshadowed by events such as the birthdays of Admiral Edward Vernon , or John Wilkes , and under George II and George III , with the exception of the Jacobite Rising of 1745 , it was largely " a polite entertainment rather than an occasion for vitriolic thanksgiving " . For the lower classes , however , the anniversary was a chance to pit disorder against order , a pretext for violence and uncontrolled revelry . At some point , for reasons that are unclear , it became customary to burn Guy Fawkes in effigy , rather than the pope . Gradually , Gunpowder Treason Day became Guy Fawkes Day . In 1790 The Times reported instances of children " ... begging for money for Guy Faux " , and a report of 4 November 1802 described how " a set of idle fellows ... with some horrid figure dressed up as a Guy Faux " were convicted of begging and receiving money , and committed to prison as " idle and disorderly persons " . The Fifth became " a polysemous occasion , replete with polyvalent cross @-@ referencing , meaning all things to all men " . Lower class rioting continued , with reports in Lewes of annual rioting , intimidation of " respectable householders " and the rolling through the streets of lit tar barrels . In Guildford , gangs of revellers who called themselves " guys " terrorised the local population ; proceedings were concerned more with the settling of old arguments and general mayhem , than any historical reminiscences . Similar problems arose in Exeter , originally the scene of more traditional celebrations . In 1831 an effigy was burnt of the new Bishop of Exeter Henry Phillpotts , a High Church Anglican and High Tory who opposed Parliamentary reform , and who was also suspected of being involved in " creeping popery " . A local ban on fireworks in 1843 was largely ignored , and attempts by the authorities to suppress the celebrations resulted in violent protests and several injured constables . 
 On several occasions during the 19th century The Times reported that the tradition was in decline , being " of late years almost forgotten " , but in the opinion of historian David Cressy , such reports reflected " other Victorian trends " , including a lessening of Protestant religious zeal — not general observance of the Fifth . Civil unrest brought about by the union of the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland in 1800 resulted in Parliament passing the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 , which afforded Catholics greater civil rights , continuing the process of Catholic Emancipation in the two kingdoms . The traditional denunciations of Catholicism had been in decline since the early 18th century , and were thought by many , including Queen Victoria , to be outdated , but the pope 's restoration in 1850 of the English Catholic hierarchy gave renewed significance to 5 November , as demonstrated by the burnings of effigies of the new Catholic Archbishop of Westminster Nicholas Wiseman , and the pope . At Farringdon Market 14 effigies were processed from the Strand and over Westminster Bridge to Southwark , while extensive demonstrations were held throughout the suburbs of London . Effigies of the 12 new English Catholic bishops were paraded through Exeter , already the scene of severe public disorder on each anniversary of the Fifth . Gradually , however , such scenes became less popular . With little resistance in Parliament , the thanksgiving prayer of 5 November contained in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer was abolished , and in March 1859 the Anniversary Days Observance Act repealed the Observance of 5th November Act . As the authorities dealt with the worst excesses , public decorum was gradually restored . The sale of fireworks was restricted , and the Guildford " guys " were neutralized in 1865 , although this was too late for one constable , who died of his wounds . Violence continued in Exeter for some years , peaking in 1867 , when incensed by rising food prices and banned from firing their customary bonfire , a mob was twice in one night driven from Cathedral Close by armed infantry . Further riots occurred in 1879 , but there were no more bonfires in Cathedral Close after 1894 . Elsewhere , sporadic instances of public disorder persisted late into the 20th century , accompanied by large numbers of firework @-@ related accidents , but a national Firework Code and improved public safety has in most cases brought an end to such things . 
 = = = Songs , Guys and decline = = = 
 One notable aspect of the Victorians ' commemoration of Guy Fawkes Night was its move away from the centres of communities , to their margins . Gathering wood for the bonfire increasingly became the province of working @-@ class children , who solicited combustible materials , money , food and drink from wealthier neighbours , often with the aid of songs . Most opened with the familiar " Remember , remember , the fifth of November , Gunpowder Treason and Plot " . The earliest recorded rhyme , from 1742 , is reproduced below alongside one bearing similarities to most Guy Fawkes Night ditties , recorded in 1903 at Charlton on <unk> : 
 Organised entertainments also became popular in the late 19th century , and 20th @-@ century pyrotechnic manufacturers renamed Guy Fawkes Day as Firework Night . Sales of fireworks dwindled somewhat during the First World War , but resumed in the following peace . At the start of the Second World War celebrations were again suspended , resuming in November 1945 . For many families , Guy Fawkes Night became a domestic celebration , and children often congregated on street corners , accompanied by their own effigy of Guy Fawkes . This was sometimes ornately dressed and sometimes a barely recognisable bundle of rags stuffed with whatever filling was suitable . A survey found that in 1981 about 23 percent of Sheffield schoolchildren made Guys , sometimes weeks before the event . Collecting money was a popular reason for their creation , the children taking their effigy from door to door , or displaying it on street corners . But mainly , they were built to go on the bonfire , itself sometimes comprising wood stolen from other pyres ; " an acceptable convention " that helped bolster another November tradition , Mischief Night . Rival gangs competed to see who could build the largest , sometimes even burning the wood collected by their opponents ; in 1954 the Yorkshire Post reported on fires late in September , a situation that forced the authorities to remove latent piles of wood for safety reasons . Lately , however , the custom of begging for a " penny for the Guy " has almost completely disappeared . In contrast , some older customs still survive ; in Ottery St Mary men chase each other through the streets with lit tar barrels , and since 1679 Lewes has been the setting of some of England 's most extravagant 5 November celebrations , the Lewes Bonfire . 
 Generally , modern 5 November celebrations are run by local charities and other organisations , with paid admission and controlled access . In 1998 an editorial in the Catholic Herald called for the end of " Bonfire Night " , labelling it " an offensive act " . Author Martin Kettle , writing in The Guardian in 2003 , bemoaned an " occasionally <unk> " attitude to fireworks that discourages people from holding firework displays in their back gardens , and an " unduly sensitive attitude " toward the anti @-@ Catholic sentiment once so prominent on Guy Fawkes Night . David Cressy summarised the modern celebration with these words : " the rockets go higher and burn with more colour , but they have less and less to do with memories of the Fifth of November ... it might be observed that Guy Fawkes ' Day is finally declining , having lost its connection with politics and religion . But we have heard that many times before . " 
 = = = Similarities with other customs = = = 
 Historians have often suggested that Guy Fawkes Day served as a Protestant replacement for the ancient Celtic and Nordic festivals of Samhain , pagan events that the church absorbed and transformed into All Hallow 's Eve and All Souls ' Day . In The Golden Bough , the Scottish anthropologist James George Frazer suggested that Guy Fawkes Day exemplifies " the recrudescence of old customs in modern shapes " . David Underdown , writing in his 1987 work Revel , Riot , and Rebellion , viewed Gunpowder Treason Day as a replacement for Hallowe 'en : " just as the early church had taken over many of the pagan feasts , so did Protestants acquire their own rituals , adapting older forms or providing substitutes for them " . While the use of bonfires to mark the occasion was most likely taken from the ancient practice of lighting celebratory bonfires , the idea that the commemoration of 5 November 1605 ever originated from anything other than the safety of James I is , according to David Cressy , " speculative nonsense " . Citing Cressy 's work , Ronald Hutton agrees with his conclusion , writing , " There is , in brief , nothing to link the Hallowe 'en fires of North Wales , Man , and central Scotland with those which appeared in England upon 5 November . " Further confusion arises in Northern Ireland , where some communities celebrate Guy Fawkes Night ; the distinction there between the Fifth , and Halloween , is not always clear . Despite such disagreements , in 2005 David Cannadine commented on the encroachment into British culture of late 20th @-@ century American Hallowe 'en celebrations , and their effect on Guy Fawkes Night : 
 Nowadays , family bonfire gatherings are much less popular , and many once @-@ large civic celebrations have been given up because of increasingly intrusive health and safety regulations . But 5 November has also been overtaken by a popular festival that barely existed when I was growing up , and that is Halloween ... Britain is not the Protestant nation it was when I was young : it is now a multi @-@ faith society . And the Americanised Halloween is sweeping all before it — a vivid reminder of just how powerfully American culture and American consumerism can be transported across the Atlantic . 
 Reporting on the same topic , in 2012 the BBC 's Tom de Castella concluded : 
 It 's probably not a case of Bonfire Night decline , but rather a shift in priorities ... there are new trends in the bonfire ritual . Guy Fawkes masks have proved popular and some of the more quirky bonfire societies have replaced the Guy with effigies of celebrities in the news – including Lance Armstrong and Mario Balotelli – and even politicians . The emphasis has moved . The bonfire with a Guy on top – indeed the whole story of the Gunpowder Plot – has been marginalised . But the spectacle remains . 
 Another celebration involving fireworks , the five @-@ day Hindu festival of Diwali ( normally observed between mid @-@ October and November ) , in 2010 began on 5 November . This led The Independent to comment on the similarities between the two , its reporter Kevin Rawlinson wondering " which fireworks will burn brightest " . 
 = = In other countries = = 
 Gunpowder Treason Day was exported by settlers to colonies around the world , including members of the Commonwealth of Nations such as Australia , New Zealand , Canada and various Caribbean nations . The day is still marked in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and in Saint Kitts and Nevis , but a fireworks ban by Antigua and Barbuda during the 1990s reduced its popularity in that country . In Australia , Sydney ( founded as a penal colony in 1788 ) saw at least one instance of the parading and burning of a Guy Fawkes effigy in 1805 , while in 1833 , four years after its founding , Perth had Gunpowder Treason Day listed as a public holiday . By the 1970s , Guy Fawkes Night had become less common in Australia . Some measure of celebration remains in New Zealand , Canada and South Africa . 
 In North America the commemoration was at first paid scant attention , but the arrest of two boys caught lighting bonfires on 5 November 1662 in Boston suggests , in historian James Sharpe 's view , that " an underground tradition of commemorating the Fifth existed " . In parts of North America it was known as Pope Day , celebrated mainly in colonial New England , but also as far south as Charleston . In Boston , founded in 1630 by Puritan settlers led by John Winthrop , an early celebration was held in 1685 , the same year that James II assumed the throne . Fifty years later , again in Boston , a local minister wrote " a Great number of people went over to Dorchester neck where at night they made a Great Bonfire and plaid off many fireworks " , although the day ended in tragedy when " 4 young men coming home in a Canoe were all Drowned . " Ten years later the raucous celebrations were the cause of considerable annoyance to the upper classes and a special Riot Act was passed , to prevent " riotous tumultuous and disorderly assemblies of more than three persons , all or any of them armed with Sticks , Clubs or any kind of weapons , or disguised with <unk> , or painted or discolored faces , on in any manner disguised , having any kind of imagery or pageantry , in any street , lane , or place in Boston . " With inadequate resources , however , Boston 's authorities were powerless to enforce the Act . In the 1740s gang violence became common , with groups of Boston residents battling for the honour of burning the pope 's effigy . But by the mid @-@ 1760s these riots had subsided , and as colonial America moved towards revolution , the class rivalries featured during Pope Day gave way to anti @-@ British sentiment . In author Alfred Young 's view , Pope Day provided the " scaffolding , symbolism , and leadership " for resistance to the Stamp Act in 1764 – 65 , forgoing previous gang rivalries in favour of unified resistance to Britain . 
 The passage in 1774 of the Quebec Act , which guaranteed French Canadians free practice of Catholicism in the Province of Quebec , provoked complaints from some Americans that the British were introducing " Popish principles and French law " . Such fears were bolstered by opposition from the Church in Europe to American independence , threatening a revival of Pope Day . Commenting in 1775 , George Washington was less than impressed by the thought of any such resurrections , forbidding any under his command from participating : 
 As the Commander in Chief has been <unk> of a design form 'd for the observance of that ridiculous and childish custom of burning the Effigy of the pope — He cannot help expressing his surprise that there should be Officers and Soldiers in this army so void of common sense , as not to see the impropriety of such a step at this Juncture ; at a Time when we are <unk> , and have really obtain 'd , the friendship and alliance of the people of Canada , whom we ought to consider as Brethren embarked in the same Cause . The defence of the general Liberty of America : At such a juncture , and in such Circumstances , to be insulting their Religion , is so monstrous , as not to be suffered or excused ; indeed instead of offering the most remote insult , it is our duty to address public thanks to these our Brethren , as to them we are so much indebted for every late happy Success over the common Enemy in Canada . 
 Generally , following Washington 's complaint , American colonists stopped observing Pope Day , although according to The Bostonian Society some citizens of Boston celebrated it on one final occasion , in 1776 . The tradition continued in Salem as late as 1817 , and was still observed in Portsmouth , New Hampshire , in 1892 . In the late 18th century , effigies of prominent figures such as two Prime Ministers of Great Britain , the Earl of Bute and Lord North , and the American traitor General Benedict Arnold , were also burnt . In the 1880s bonfires were still being lit in some New England coastal towns , although no longer to commemorate the failure of the Gunpowder Plot . In the area around New York , stacks of barrels were burnt on election day eve , which after 1845 was a Tuesday early in November . 
 = Daara J = 
 Daara J ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] , which means " the school " in Wolof ) are a Senegalese rap duo that consists of N <unk> D and Faada Freddy . Their music takes influence from hip hop , Afro @-@ Cuban rhythms , and reggae and is performed in English , French , Spanish , and Wolof . 
 Daara J was formed in 1997 and quickly became popular in Senegal from the release of their first cassette album , Daara J. They followed in 1999 with a more politically themed recording , Xalima , which integrated numerous musical ideas and instruments from Senegal and other African countries . 2003 's Boomerang was critically acclaimed and furthered the combination of various musical and lyrical influences of the previous two recordings . Activism has also been an important aspect of the group 's philosophy since it was founded . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Daara J , formed in 1997 , was originally a trio that consisted of Faada Freddy , N <unk> D and Lord <unk> . Lord <unk> performed and toured throughout the world with the group until 2008 when the group split . Since then , <unk> evolves in a solo career while contributing to the development of the music sector in Senegal . Daara J was formed when all of its members were in high school , where they were studying accounting . The rappers were influenced by American hip hop artists such as Grandmaster Flash and The Furious Five and Afrika Bambaataa but also listened to their parents ' music , which included artists such as Sly & the Family Stone and Aretha Franklin , and musical styles which included Cuban music . Faada Freddy cites the group 's major inspiration as Das EFX . Originally , the members took instrumentals of hip hop tracks from the United States and France to rap over . Later they purchased a drum machine , but even with this equipment , a member of the group would have to imitate the other instruments in the song with his voice . Positive Black Soul , another Senegalese rap group , encouraged Daara J to record and perform . 
 = = Daara J and Xalima = = 
 Daara J and Xalima were both released on the label Déclic . The group 's 1998 eponymous debut album was produced by the reggae musician Mad Professor and was successful locally , selling 15 @,@ 000 copies . Their next album was released in 1999 and titled Xalima ( English : Quill and Ink ) . The album was politically themed and included guest performances from other Senegalese artists playing instruments such as the <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Boomerang = = 
 The group moved to <unk> Records to release Boomerang in 2003 . It featured performances by guests including <unk> Traoré . The album 's title is based on the idea that hip hop music was born in Africa , spread around the world , then returned to the continent . Daara J note similarities between rap and <unk> — a traditional African verbal performance technique used to discuss the social and political environment , daily life , and future aspirations . They believe it traveled from Africa by way of the United States slave trade . A year after the release of the album , Daara J won the Best African Act award from BBC Radio 3 . 
 The album itself was described as " one of the hip hop albums of the century " by the British newspaper The Observer and was successful on European music charts . Other reviews have been positive ; Matthew <unk> of Splendid Magazine praised the album for its lyrical content : " ... as Daara J show throughout Boomerang , it 's possible to get the meaning of those words just by listening to the things that surround them — the intensity of the rappers ' delivery , the quality of the beats , and how well all those other factors coalesce around the words . And on that score , Daara J 's message comes through loud and clear . " However , Katharina <unk> of BBC Music noted that one of the tracks , the R & B @-@ influenced " Hip Hop Civilization " is " too generically soppy for even the most hardened R & B fans " , but went on to say that the album is " a successful sonic adventure which thrives on its defiance of the margins of established sales categories " . 
 The group has made appearances at various WOMAD festivals around the world , the Live 8 concert in Eden Project , and Africa Calling . Daara J has also performed with other hip hop artists and groups including Public Enemy , Wyclef Jean , and Mos Def . 
 = = Activism = = 
 Like many other African hip hop groups including Positive Black Soul , Daara J takes an activist stance . Faada Freddy states : " We tell of peace and how we can live together because there are lots of conflicts going on nowadays . We 're here on behalf of the Africans to remind everybody that it shouldn 't be like that . There 's always a solution . Rather than fussing and fighting we should we 'd better learn to live in peace and live together , because that 's the only way to survive . " The group is especially focused on educating the world about Africa . Faada Freddy has also stressed the importance of understanding life on the continent : " Nowadays people are tending to show the negative part of Africa but Africa is not only about AIDS , heartache , corruption and all that even though it exists just like everywhere else . But Africa has a lot to provide . " In the Senegalese election of 2000 , Daara J were involved in editing speeches for political leaders and the promotion of that year 's campaign against corruption . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 1998 : Daara J 
 1999 : Xalima 
 2003 : Boomerang 
 2010 : School Of Life 
 = = Discography Faada Freddy = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = EPs = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Idi Amin = 
 Idi Amin Dada ( / <unk> <unk> / ; c . 1923 – 28 – 16 August 2003 ) was the third President of Uganda , ruling from 1971 to 1979 . Amin joined the British colonial regiment the King 's African Rifles in 1946 , serving in Kenya and Uganda . Eventually , Amin held the rank of major general in the post @-@ colonial Ugandan Army , and became its commander before seizing power in the military coup of January 1971 , deposing Milton Obote . He later promoted himself to field marshal while he was the head of state . 
 Amin 's rule was characterized by human rights abuses , political repression , ethnic persecution , extrajudicial killings , nepotism , corruption , and gross economic mismanagement . The number of people killed as a result of his regime is estimated by international observers and human rights groups to range from 100 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 . 
 During his years in power , Amin shifted in allegiance from being a pro @-@ Western ruler enjoying considerable Israeli support to being backed by Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi , Zaire 's Mobutu Sese Seko , the Soviet Union , and East Germany . In 1975 , Amin became the chairman of the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) , a Pan @-@ Africanist group designed to promote solidarity of the African states . During the 1977 – 1979 period , Uganda was a member of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights . Amin did however enjoy the support of the American CIA , which helped deliver bombs and other military equipment to Amin 's Army and helped take part in military operations with Amin 's forces in Uganda . In 1977 , when Britain broke diplomatic relations with Uganda , Amin declared he had defeated the British and added " CBE " , for " Conqueror of the British Empire " , to his title . Radio Uganda then announced his entire title : " His Excellency President for Life , Field Marshal <unk> Dr. Idi Amin Dada , VC , DSO , MC , CBE " . 
 Dissent within Uganda and Amin 's attempt to annex the Kagera province of Tanzania in 1978 , led to the Uganda – Tanzania War and the demise of his eight @-@ year regime , leading Amin to flee into exile to Libya and then Saudi Arabia , where he lived until his death on 16 August 2003 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Amin never wrote an autobiography nor did he authorize any official written account of his life , so there are discrepancies regarding when and where he was born . Most biographical sources hold that he was born in either <unk> or Kampala around 1925 . Other unconfirmed sources state Amin 's year of birth from as early as 1923 to as late as 1928 . Amin 's son Hussein has stated that his father was born in Kampala in 1928 . According to Fred <unk> , a researcher at Makerere University , Idi Amin was the son of Andreas <unk> ( 1889 – 1976 ) . <unk> , a member of the Kakwa ethnic group , converted from Roman Catholicism to Islam in 1910 , and changed his name to Amin Dada . He named his first @-@ born son after himself . Abandoned by his father at a young age , Idi Amin grew up with his mother 's family in a rural farming town in northwestern Uganda . <unk> states that Amin 's mother was Assa <unk> ( 1904 – 1970 ) , an ethnic <unk> and a traditional herbalist who treated members of Buganda royalty , among others . Amin joined an Islamic school in Bombo in 1941 . After a few years , he left school with only a fourth @-@ grade English @-@ language education , and did odd jobs before being recruited to the army by a British colonial army officer . 
 = = = Colonial British Army = = = 
 Amin joined the King 's African Rifles ( KAR ) of the British Colonial Army in 1946 , as an assistant cook . In later life he falsely claimed he was forced to join the Army during World War II and that he served in the Burma Campaign . He was transferred to Kenya for infantry service as a private in 1947 , and served in the 21st KAR infantry battalion in <unk> , Kenya until 1949 . That year his unit was deployed to Northern Kenya to fight against Somali rebels in the <unk> War . In 1952 , his brigade was deployed against the Mau Mau rebels in Kenya . He was promoted to corporal the same year , then to sergeant in 1953 . 
 In 1959 , Amin was made <unk> ( warrant officer ) , the highest rank possible for a Black African in the colonial British Army of that time . Amin returned to Uganda the same year and , in 1961 , he was promoted to lieutenant , becoming one of the first two Ugandans to become commissioned officers . He was assigned to quell the cattle rustling between Uganda 's <unk> and Kenya 's Turkana nomads . In 1962 , following Uganda 's independence from the United Kingdom , Amin was promoted to captain and then , in 1963 , to major . He was appointed Deputy Commander of the Army in 1964 and , the following year , to Commander of the Army . In 1970 , he was promoted to commander of all the armed forces . 
 Amin was an athlete during his time in both the British and Ugandan army . At 193 cm ( 6 ft 4 in ) tall and powerfully built , he was the Ugandan light heavyweight boxing champion from 1951 to 1960 , as well as a swimmer . Idi Amin was also a formidable rugby forward , although one officer said of him : " Idi Amin is a splendid type and a good ( rugby ) player , but virtually bone from the neck up , and needs things explained in words of one letter " . In the 1950s , he played for Nile RFC . There is a frequently repeated urban myth that he was selected as a replacement by East Africa for their match against the 1955 British Lions . Amin , however , does not appear on the team photograph or on the official team list . Following conversations with a colleague in the British Army , Amin became a keen fan of Hayes Football Club – an affection that would remain for the rest of his life . 
 = = = Commander of the Army = = = 
 In 1965 , Prime Minister Milton Obote and Amin were implicated in a deal to smuggle ivory and gold into Uganda from the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The deal , as later alleged by General Nicholas <unk> , an associate of the former Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba , was part of an arrangement to help troops opposed to the Congolese government trade ivory and gold for arms supplies secretly smuggled to them by Amin . In 1966 , the Ugandan Parliament demanded an investigation . Obote imposed a new constitution abolishing the ceremonial presidency held by Kabaka ( King ) Mutesa II of Buganda , and declared himself executive president . He promoted Amin to colonel and army commander . Amin led an attack on the Kabaka 's palace and forced Mutesa into exile to the United Kingdom , where he remained until his death in 1969 . 
 Amin began recruiting members of Kakwa , <unk> , South Sudanese , and other ethnic groups from the West Nile area bordering South Sudan . The South Sudanese had been residents in Uganda since the early 20th century , having come from South Sudan to serve the colonial army . Many African ethnic groups in northern Uganda inhabit both Uganda and South Sudan ; allegations persist that Amin 's army consisted mainly of South Sudanese soldiers . 
 = = = Seizure of power = = = 
 Eventually a rift developed between Amin and Obote , exacerbated by the support Amin had built within the army by recruiting from the West Nile region , his involvement in operations to support the rebellion in southern Sudan and an attempt on Obote 's life in 1969 . In October 1970 , Obote took control of the armed forces , reducing Amin from his months @-@ old post of commander of all the armed forces to that of commander of the army . 
 Having learned that Obote was planning to arrest him for misappropriating army funds , Amin seized power in a military coup on 25 January 1971 , while Obote was attending a Commonwealth summit meeting in Singapore . Troops loyal to Amin sealed off Entebbe International Airport and took Kampala . Soldiers surrounded Obote 's residence and blocked major roads . A broadcast on Radio Uganda accused Obote 's government of corruption and preferential treatment of the Lango region . Cheering crowds were reported in the streets of Kampala after the radio broadcast . Amin announced that he was a soldier , not a politician , and that the military government would remain only as a caretaker regime until new elections , which would be announced when the situation was normalised . He promised to release all political prisoners . 
 Amin gave former King ( Kabaka ) of Buganda and President , Sir Edward Mutesa ( who had died in exile ) , a state funeral in April 1971 , freed many political prisoners , and reiterated his promise to hold free and fair elections to return the country to democratic rule in the shortest period possible . 
 = = = Presidency = = = 
 = = = = Establishment of military rule = = = = 
 On 2 February 1971 , one week after the coup , Amin declared himself President of Uganda , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Armed Forces , Army Chief of Staff , and Chief of Air Staff . He announced that he was suspending certain provisions of the Ugandan constitution , and soon instituted an Advisory Defence Council composed of military officers with himself as the chairman . Amin placed military tribunals above the system of civil law , appointed soldiers to top government posts and parastatal agencies , and informed the newly inducted civilian cabinet ministers that they would be subject to military discipline . Amin renamed the presidential lodge in Kampala from Government House to " The Command Post " . He disbanded the General Service Unit ( <unk> ) , an intelligence agency created by the previous government , and replaced it with the State Research Bureau ( SRB ) . SRB headquarters at the Kampala suburb of <unk> became the scene of torture and executions over the next few years . Other agencies used to persecute dissenters included the military police and the Public Safety Unit ( PSU ) . 
 Obote took refuge in Tanzania , having been offered sanctuary there by the Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere . Obote was soon joined by 20 @,@ 000 Ugandan refugees fleeing Amin . The exiles attempted but failed to regain Uganda in 1972 , through a poorly organised coup attempt . 
 = = = = Persecution of ethnic and political groups = = = = 
 Amin retaliated against the attempted invasion by Ugandan exiles in 1972 , by purging the army of Obote supporters , predominantly those from the Acholi and Lango ethnic groups . In July 1971 , Lango and Acholi soldiers were massacred in the Jinja and <unk> barracks , and , by early 1972 , some 5 @,@ 000 Acholi and Lango soldiers , and at least twice as many civilians , had disappeared . The victims soon came to include members of other ethnic groups , religious leaders , journalists , artists , senior bureaucrats , judges , lawyers , students and intellectuals , criminal suspects , and foreign nationals . In this atmosphere of violence , many other people were killed for criminal motives or simply at will . Bodies were often dumped into the River Nile . 
 The killings , motivated by ethnic , political , and financial factors , continued throughout Amin 's eight @-@ year reign . The exact number of people killed is unknown . The International Commission of Jurists estimated the death toll at no fewer than 80 @,@ 000 and more likely around 300 @,@ 000 . An estimate compiled by exile organizations with the help of Amnesty International puts the number killed at 500 @,@ 000 . Among the most prominent people killed were <unk> <unk> , a former prime minister and chief justice ; Janani <unk> , the Anglican archbishop ; Joseph <unk> , the former governor of the central bank of Uganda ; Frank <unk> , the vice chancellor of Makerere University ; Byron <unk> , a prominent playwright ; and two of Amin 's own cabinet ministers , <unk> Wilson <unk> and Charles Oboth <unk> . 
 Amin recruited his followers from his own tribe , the <unk> , along with South Sudanese . By 1977 , these three groups formed 60 percent of the 22 top generals and 75 percent of the cabinet . Similarly , Muslims formed 80 percent and 87 @.@ 5 percent of these groups even though they were only 5 percent of the population . This helps explain why Amin survived eight attempted coups . The army grew from 10 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 by 1978 . Amin 's army was largely a mercenary force . Half the soldiers were South Sudanese and 26 percent Congolese , with only 24 percent being Ugandan , mostly Muslim and Kakwa . 
 We are determined to make the ordinary Ugandan master of his own destiny and , above all , to see that he enjoys the wealth of his country . Our deliberate policy is to transfer the economic control of Uganda into the hands of Ugandans , for the first time in our country 's history . 
 In August 1972 , Amin declared what he called an " economic war " , a set of policies that included the expropriation of properties owned by Asians and Europeans . Uganda 's 80 @,@ 000 Asians were mostly from the Indian subcontinent and born in the country , their ancestors having come to Uganda when the country was still a British colony . Many owned businesses , including large @-@ scale enterprises , which formed the backbone of the Ugandan economy . On 4 August 1972 , Amin issued a decree ordering the expulsion of the 60 @,@ 000 Asians who were not Ugandan citizens ( most of them held British passports ) . This was later amended to include all 80 @,@ 000 Asians , except for professionals , such as doctors , lawyers , and teachers . A plurality of the Asians with British passports , around 30 @,@ 000 , emigrated to the UK . Others went to Australia , Canada , India , Kenya , Pakistan , Sweden , Tanzania , and the U.S. Amin expropriated businesses and properties belonging to the Asians and handed them over to his supporters . The businesses were mismanaged , and industries collapsed from lack of maintenance . This proved disastrous for the already declining economy . 
 In 1977 , Henry Kyemba , Amin 's health minister and a former official of the first Obote regime , defected and resettled in the UK . Kyemba wrote and published A State of Blood , the first insider exposé of Amin 's rule . 
 = = = = International relations = = = = 
 Initially , Amin was supported by Western powers such as Israel , West Germany and , in particular , Great Britain . During the late 1960s , Obote 's move to the left , which included his Common Man 's Charter and the nationalisation of 80 British companies , had made the West worried that he would pose a threat to Western capitalist interests in Africa and make Uganda an ally of the Soviet Union . Amin , who had served with the King 's African Rifles and taken part in Britain 's suppression of the Mau Mau uprising prior to Ugandan independence was known by the British as " intensely loyal to Britain " ; this made him an obvious choice as Obote 's successor . Although some have claimed that Amin was being groomed for power as early as 1966 , the plotting by the British and other Western powers began in earnest in 1969 , after Obote had begun his nationalisation programme . 
 Following the expulsion of Ugandan Asians in 1972 , most of whom were of Indian descent , India severed diplomatic relations with Uganda . The same year , as part of his " economic war " , Amin broke diplomatic ties with the UK and nationalised eighty @-@ five British @-@ owned businesses . 
 That year , relations with Israel soured . Although Israel had previously supplied Uganda with arms , in 1972 Amin expelled Israeli military advisers and turned to Muammar Gaddafi of Libya and the Soviet Union for support . Amin became an outspoken critic of Israel . In return , Gaddafi gave financial aid to Amin . In the 1974 French @-@ produced documentary film General Idi Amin Dada : A Self Portrait , Amin discussed his plans for war against Israel , using paratroops , bombers , and suicide squadrons . 
 The Soviet Union became Amin 's largest arms supplier . East Germany was involved in the General Service Unit and the State Research Bureau , the two agencies which were most notorious for terror . Later during the Ugandan invasion of Tanzania in 1979 , East Germany attempted to remove evidence of its involvement with these agencies . 
 In 1973 , U.S. Ambassador Thomas Patrick Melady recommended that the United States reduce its presence in Uganda . Melady described Amin 's regime as " racist , erratic and unpredictable , brutal , inept , bellicose , irrational , ridiculous , and militaristic " . Accordingly , the United States closed its embassy in Kampala . 
 In June 1976 , Amin allowed an Air France airliner from Tel Aviv to Paris hijacked by two members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – External Operations ( PFLP @-@ EO ) and two members of the German <unk> <unk> to land at Entebbe Airport . There the hijackers were joined by three more . Soon after , 156 non @-@ Jewish hostages who did not hold Israeli passports were released and flown to safety , while 83 Jews and Israeli citizens , as well as 20 others who refused to abandon them ( among whom were the captain and crew of the hijacked Air France jet ) , continued to be held hostage . In the subsequent Israeli rescue operation , codenamed Operation Thunderbolt ( popularly known as Operation Entebbe ) , on the night of 3 – 4 July 1976 , a group of Israeli commandos were flown in from Israel and seized control of Entebbe Airport , freeing nearly all the hostages . Three hostages died during the operation and 10 were wounded ; 7 hijackers , about 45 Ugandan soldiers , and 1 Israeli soldier , Yoni Netanyahu , were killed . A fourth hostage , 75 @-@ year @-@ old Dora Bloch , an elderly Jewish Englishwoman who had been taken to <unk> Hospital in Kampala before the rescue operation , was subsequently murdered in reprisal . The incident further soured Uganda 's international relations , leading the United Kingdom to close its High Commission in Uganda . 
 Uganda under Amin embarked on a large military build @-@ up , which raised concerns in Kenya . Early in June 1975 , Kenyan officials impounded a large convoy of Soviet @-@ made arms en route to Uganda at the port of Mombasa . Tension between Uganda and Kenya reached its climax in February 1976 , when Amin announced that he would investigate the possibility that parts of southern Sudan and western and central Kenya , up to within 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) of Nairobi , were historically a part of colonial Uganda . The Kenyan Government responded with a stern statement that Kenya would not part with " a single inch of territory " . Amin backed down after the Kenyan army deployed troops and armored personnel carriers along the Kenya – Uganda border . 
 = = = Deposition and exile = = = 
 By 1978 , the number of Amin 's supporters and close associates had shrunk significantly , and he faced increasing dissent from the populace within Uganda as the economy and infrastructure collapsed as a result of the years of neglect and abuse . After the killings of Bishop <unk> and ministers <unk> and Oboth <unk> in 1977 , several of Amin 's ministers defected or fled into exile . In November 1978 , after Amin 's vice president , General Mustafa <unk> , was injured in a car accident , troops loyal to him mutinied . Amin sent troops against the mutineers , some of whom had fled across the Tanzanian border . Amin accused Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere of waging war against Uganda , ordered the invasion of Tanzanian territory , and formally annexed a section of the Kagera Region across the boundary . 
 In January 1979 , Nyerere mobilised the Tanzania People 's Defence Force and counterattacked , joined by several groups of Ugandan exiles who had united as the Uganda National Liberation Army ( <unk> ) . Amin 's army retreated steadily , and , despite military help from Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi , Amin was forced to flee into exile by helicopter on 11 April 1979 , when Kampala was captured . He escaped first to Libya , where he stayed until 1980 , and ultimately settled in Saudi Arabia , where the Saudi royal family allowed him sanctuary and paid him a generous subsidy in return for his staying out of politics . Amin lived for a number of years on the top two floors of the Novotel Hotel on Palestine Road in Jeddah . Brian Barron , who covered the Uganda – Tanzania war for the BBC as chief Africa correspondent , together with cameraman Mohamed Amin of <unk> in Nairobi , located Amin in 1980 , and secured the first interview with him since his deposition . 
 During interviews he gave during his exile in Saudi Arabia , Amin held that Uganda needed him , and never expressed remorse for the nature of his regime . In 1989 , he attempted to return to Uganda , apparently to lead an armed group organised by Colonel Juma Oris . He reached Kinshasa , Zaire ( now the Democratic Republic of the Congo ) , before Zairian President Mobutu Sese Seko forced him to return to Saudi Arabia . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 19 July 2003 , one of Amin 's wives , Madina , reported that he was in a coma and near death at the King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre in Jeddah , Saudi Arabia , from kidney failure . She pleaded with the Ugandan President , Yoweri Museveni , to allow him to return to Uganda for the remainder of his life . Museveni replied that Amin would have to " answer for his sins the moment he was brought back " . Amin 's family decided to disconnect life support and Amin died at the hospital in Jeddah on 16 August 2003 . He was buried in <unk> Cemetery in Jeddah in a simple grave without any fanfare . After Amin 's death , David Owen revealed that when he was the British Foreign Secretary , he had proposed having Amin assassinated . He has defended this , arguing : " I 'm not ashamed of considering it , because his regime goes down in the scale of Pol Pot as one of the worst of all African regimes " . 
 = = Family and associates = = 
 A polygamist , Idi Amin married at least six women , three of whom he divorced . He married his first and second wives , Malyamu and Kay , in 1966 . In 1967 , he married Nora , and then married <unk> Madina in 1972 . On 26 March 1974 , he announced on Radio Uganda that he had divorced Malyamu , Nora , and Kay . Malyamu was arrested in <unk> on the Kenyan border in April 1974 and accused of attempting to smuggle a bolt of fabric into Kenya . She later moved to London where she operates a restaurant in East London . In 1974 , Kay Amin died under mysterious circumstances , with her body found dismembered . Nora fled to Zaire in 1979 ; her current whereabouts are unknown . 
 In July 1975 , Amin staged a £ 2 Million wedding to 19 year old Sarah <unk> , a go @-@ go dancer with the Revolutionary Suicide Mechanised Regiment Band , nicknamed " Suicide Sarah . " The wedding was held during the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) summit meeting in Kampala , and the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation , Yasser Arafat served as Amin ’ s best man . The couple had four children , and enjoyed rally race driving Amin 's Citroën SM , with Sarah as navigator . Sarah was a hairdresser in Tottenham when she died in 2015 . Before she met Amin , she was living with a boyfriend , Jesse Gitta ; he vanished and it is not clear if he was beheaded , or detained before fleeing to Kenya . 
 By 1993 , Amin was living with the last nine of his children and one wife , Mama a <unk> ( who appears to be his sixth and newest wife ) , the mother of the youngest four of his children . His last known child , daughter Iman , was born in 1992 . According to The Monitor , Amin married a few months before his death in 2003 . 
 Sources differ widely on the number of children Amin fathered ; most say that he had 30 to 45 . Until 2003 , <unk> Amin ( born 1955 ) , Idi Amin 's eldest son , was the leader of West Nile Bank Front ( <unk> ) , a rebel group opposed to the government of Yoweri Museveni . In 2005 , he was offered amnesty by Museveni , and in 2006 , he was appointed Deputy Director General of the Internal Security Organisation . Another of Amin 's sons , Haji Ali Amin , ran for election as Chairman ( i.e. mayor ) of <unk> Town Council in 2002 but was not elected . In early 2007 , the award @-@ winning film The Last King of Scotland prompted one of his sons , Jaffar Amin ( born in 1967 ) , to speak out in his father 's defence . Jaffar Amin said he was writing a book to rehabilitate his father 's reputation . Jaffar is the tenth of Amin 's 40 official children by seven official wives . 
 On 3 August 2007 , Amin 's son ( with Sarah ) , Faisal <unk> ( born in 1983 ) , was convicted for playing a role in a murder in London . 
 Among Amin 's closest associates was the British @-@ born Bob <unk> , who is considered by many to have been a malignant influence and by others as having been a moderating presence . Isaac <unk> was an instrumental affiliate and one of the more feared officers in Amin 's army . 
 = = <unk> behaviour , self @-@ bestowed titles , and media portrayal = = 
 Amin 's egotistical behaviour and mental health have been the subjects of much speculation throughout his reign and life . He was described as having a quick @-@ change and violent short temper ; being charming , happy , and charismatic one minute and then suddenly angry , violent , and brutal the next , with little or no warning . Many have speculated that his behaviour was either the result of long @-@ term syphilis of the brain or possibly undiagnosed and untreated bipolar disorder . As the years progressed , Amin 's behaviour became more erratic , unpredictable , and outspoken . After the United Kingdom broke off all diplomatic relations with his regime in 1977 , Amin declared he had defeated the British , and conferred on himself the decoration of CBE ( Conqueror of the British Empire ) . His full self @-@ bestowed title ultimately became : " His Excellency , President for Life , Field Marshal Al Hadji Doctor Idi Amin Dada , VC , DSO , MC , Lord of All the Beasts of the Earth and Fishes of the Seas and Conqueror of the British Empire in Africa in General and Uganda in Particular " , in addition to his officially @-@ stated claim of being the uncrowned King of Scotland . He never received the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) or the Military Cross ( MC ) . He conferred a doctorate of law on himself from Makerere University as well as the Victorious Cross ( VC ) , a medal made to emulate the British Victoria Cross . 
 Amin became the subject of rumours and myths , including a widespread belief that he was a cannibal . Some of the unsubstantiated rumours , such as the mutilation of one of his wives , were spread and popularised by the 1980 film Rise and Fall of Idi Amin and alluded to in the film The Last King of Scotland in 2006 , a movie which earned actor Forest Whitaker an Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Amin . 
 During Amin 's time in power , popular media outside of Uganda often portrayed him as an essentially comic and eccentric figure . In a 1977 assessment typical of the time , a Time magazine article described him as a " killer and clown , big @-@ hearted buffoon and strutting martinet " . The comedy @-@ variety series Saturday Night Live aired four Amin sketches between 1976 – 79 , including one in which he was an ill @-@ behaved houseguest in exile , and another in which he was a spokesman against venereal disease . In a Benny Hill show transmitted in January 1977 , Hill portrayed Amin sitting behind a desk that featured a placard reading " ME <unk> , U <unk> " . 
 The foreign media were often criticised by Ugandan exiles and defectors for emphasizing Amin 's self @-@ aggrandizing eccentricities and taste for excess while downplaying or excusing his murderous behavior . Other commentators even suggested that Amin had deliberately cultivated his eccentric reputation in the foreign media as an easily parodied buffoon in order to defuse international concern over his administration of Uganda . 
 = = Portrayal in media and literature = = 
 = = = Film and television dramatisations = = = 
 Victory at Entebbe ( 1976 ) , a TV film about Operation Entebbe . Julius Harris plays Amin . Godfrey Cambridge was originally cast as Amin , but died of a heart attack on the set . Amin commented on Cambridge 's death , saying that it was " punishment from God " . 
 Raid on Entebbe ( 1977 ) , a film depicting the events of Operation Entebbe . Yaphet Kotto portrays Amin as a charismatic , but short @-@ tempered political and military leader . 
 In <unk> Yonatan ( 1977 ; also known as Operation Thunderbolt ) , an Israeli film about Operation Entebbe , Jamaican @-@ born British actor Mark Heath portrays Amin , who in this film is first angered by the Palestinian terrorists whom he later comes to support . 
 Comedian Richard Pryor portrayed a parodied version of Amin in his namesake show in 1977 . 
 Rise and Fall of Idi Amin ( 1981 ) , a film recreating Idi Amin 's atrocities . Amin is played by Kenyan actor Joseph Olita . 
 The Naked Gun : From the Files of Police Squad ! ( 1988 ) , a comedy film in which Amin , portrayed by Prince Hughes in a cameo appearance , is one of the real @-@ life figures in the Beirut meeting where he helps plan to attack the United States at the beginning of the movie . Frank Drebin injures Amin 's hand after blocking a punch with a <unk> , and uses it to knock Amin out a window . 
 Mississippi Masala ( 1991 ) , a film depicting the resettlement of an Indian family after the expulsion of Asians from Uganda by Idi Amin . Joseph Olita again plays Amin in a cameo . 
 The Last King of Scotland ( 2006 ) , a film adaptation of Giles Foden 's 1998 novel of the same name . For his portrayal of Idi Amin , Forest Whitaker won the Academy Award , British Academy Film Award , Broadcast Film Critics Association Award , Golden Globe Award , and Screen Actors Guild Award , thus becoming the fourth black actor to win the Oscar for Best Actor . 
 = = = Documentaries = = = 
 General Idi Amin Dada : A Self Portrait ( 1974 ) , directed by French filmmaker Barbet Schroeder . 
 Idi Amin : Monster in Disguise ( 1997 ) , a television documentary directed by Greg Baker . 
 The Man Who Ate His Archbishop 's Liver ? ( 2004 ) , a television documentary written , produced , and directed by Elizabeth C. Jones for Associated @-@ Rediffusion and Channel 4 . 
 The Man Who Stole Uganda ( 1971 ) , World In Action first broadcast 5 April 1971 . 
 Inside Idi Amin 's Terror Machine ( 1979 ) , World In Action first broadcast 13 June 1979 . 
 A Day in the Life of a Dictator ( 2013 ) , directed by Hendrick <unk> 
 = = = Books = = = 
 State of Blood : The Inside Story of Idi Amin ( 1977 ) by Henry Kyemba 
 The General Is Up by Peter Nazareth 
 Ghosts of Kampala : The Rise and Fall of Idi Amin ( 1980 ) by George Ivan Smith 
 The Last King of Scotland ( 1998 ) by Giles Foden ( fictional ) 
 Idi Amin Dada : Hitler in Africa ( 1977 ) by Thomas Patrick Melady 
 General Amin ( 1975 ) by David Martin 
 I Love Idi Amin : The Story of Triumph under Fire in the Midst of Suffering and Persecution in Uganda ( 1977 ) by Festo <unk> 
 <unk> for Freedom : Uganda , Struggle Against Idi Amin ( 2006 ) by Eriya <unk> 
 Confessions of Idi Amin : The chilling , explosive expose of Africa 's most evil man – in his own words ( 1977 ) compiled by Trevor Donald 
 " <unk> " by Donald Westlake ; a thriller in which Amin is a minor character , but Amin 's Uganda is portrayed in detail . 
 Culture of the Sepulchre ( 2012 ) by <unk> Singh ( former Indian Ambassador to Uganda ) , ISBN 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 = = = Music and audio = = = 
 " Idi Amin – the Amazin ' Man song " ( 1975 ) by John Bird 
 " Idi Amin " ( 1978 ) by Mighty Sparrow 
 " Idi Amin " ( 1978 ) by Black Randy and the <unk> 
 " Springtime in Uganda " ( 2004 ) by Blaze Foley ( posthumous release ) 
 The Collected Broadcasts of Idi Amin ( 1975 ) based on The Collected Bulletins of President Idi Amin ( 1974 ) and Further Bulletins of President Idi Amin ( 1975 ) by Alan Coren , portraying Amin as an amiable , if murderous , buffoon in charge of a tin @-@ pot dictatorship . It was a British comedy album parodying Ugandan dictator Idi Amin , released in 1975 on Transatlantic Records . Performed by John Bird and written by Alan Coren , it was based on columns he wrote for Punch magazine 
 = New York University = 
 New York University ( NYU ) is a private , nonsectarian American research university based in New York City . Founded in 1831 , NYU is one of the largest private non @-@ profit institutions of American higher education . University rankings compiled by U.S. News and World Report , Times Higher Education and the Academic Ranking of World Universities all rank NYU among the top 34 universities in the world . NYU is organized into more than 20 schools , colleges , and institutes , located in six centers throughout Manhattan and Downtown Brooklyn . NYU 's main campus is located at Greenwich Village in Lower Manhattan with institutes and centers on the Upper East Side , academic buildings and dorms down on Wall Street , and the Brooklyn campus located at MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn . The University also established NYU Abu Dhabi , NYU Shanghai and maintains 11 other Global Academic Centers in Accra , Berlin , Buenos Aires , Florence , London , Madrid , Paris , Prague , Sydney , Tel Aviv and Washington , D.C. 
 NYU was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1950 . NYU counts 36 Nobel Prize winners , four Abel Prize winners , four Turing Award winners , four Fields Medal winners , over 30 National Medals for Science , Technology and Innovation , Arts and Humanities recipients , over 30 Pulitzer Prize winners , over 30 Academy Award winners , as well as several Russ Prize , Gordon Prize and Draper Prize winners , and dozens of Emmy , Grammy , and Tony Award winners among its faculty and alumni . NYU also has many MacArthur and Guggenheim Fellowship holders as well as hundreds of National Academy of Sciences , National Academy of Engineering and American Academy of Arts and Sciences members , and a plethora of members of the United States Congress and heads of state of countries all over the world , among its past and present graduates and faculty . The alumni of NYU are among the wealthiest in the world , and include seventeen living billionaires . 
 NYU 's sports teams are called the Violets , the colors being the trademarked hue " NYU Violet " and white ; the school mascot is the bobcat . Almost all sporting teams participate in the NCAA 's Division III and the University Athletic Association . 
 = = History = = 
 Albert Gallatin , Secretary of Treasury under Thomas Jefferson and James Madison , declared his intention to establish " in this immense and fast @-@ growing city ... a system of rational and practical education fitting for all and graciously opened to all " . A three @-@ day @-@ long " literary and scientific convention " held in City Hall in 1830 and attended by over 100 delegates debated the terms of a plan for a new university . These New Yorkers believed the city needed a university designed for young men who would be admitted based upon merit rather than birthright , status , or social class . On April 18 , 1831 , an institution was established , with the support of a group of prominent New York City residents from the city 's landed class of merchants , bankers , and traders . Albert Gallatin was elected as the institution 's first president . On April 21 , 1831 , the new institution received its charter and was incorporated as the University of the City of New York by the New York State Legislature ; older documents often refer to it by that name . The university has been popularly known as New York University since its beginning and was officially renamed New York University in 1896 . In 1832 , NYU held its first classes in rented rooms of four @-@ story Clinton Hall , situated near City Hall . In 1835 , the School of Law , NYU 's first professional school , was established . Although the impetus to found a new school was partly a reaction by evangelical Presbyterians to what they perceived as the Episcopalianism of Columbia College , NYU was created non @-@ denominational , unlike many American colleges at the time . 
 It became one of the nation 's largest universities , with an enrollment of 9 @,@ 300 in 1917 . NYU had its Washington Square campus since its founding . The university purchased a campus at University Heights in the Bronx because of overcrowding on the old campus . NYU also had a desire to follow New York City 's development further uptown . NYU 's move to the Bronx occurred in 1894 , spearheaded by the efforts of Chancellor Henry Mitchell MacCracken . The University Heights campus was far more spacious than its predecessor was . As a result , most of the university 's operations along with the undergraduate College of Arts and Science and School of Engineering were housed there . NYU 's administrative operations were moved to the new campus , but the graduate schools of the university remained at Washington Square . In 1914 , Washington Square College was founded as the downtown undergraduate college of NYU . In 1935 , NYU opened the " Nassau College @-@ Hofstra Memorial of New York University at Hempstead , Long Island " . This extension would later become a fully independent Hofstra University . 
 In 1950 , NYU was elected to the Association of American Universities , a nonprofit organization of leading public and private research universities . 
 In the late 1960s and early 1970s , financial crisis gripped the New York City government and the troubles spread to the city 's institutions , including NYU . Feeling the pressures of imminent bankruptcy , NYU President James McNaughton Hester negotiated the sale of the University Heights campus to the City University of New York , which occurred in 1973 . In 1973 , the New York University School of Engineering and Science merged into Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn , which eventually merged into NYU in 2014 forming the present Tandon School of Engineering . After the sale of the Bronx campus , University College merged with Washington Square College . In the 1980s , under the leadership of President John <unk> , NYU launched a billion @-@ dollar campaign that was spent almost entirely on updating facilities . The campaign was set to complete in 15 years , but ended up being completed in 10 . In 2003 President John Sexton launched a $ 2 @.@ 5 billion campaign for funds to be spent especially on faculty and financial aid resources . 
 In 2009 , the university responded to a series of New York Times interviews that showed a pattern of labor abuses in its fledgling Abu Dhabi location , creating a statement of labor values for Abu Dhabi campus workers . A 2014 follow @-@ up article in The Times found that while some conditions had improved , contractors for the multibillion @-@ endowment university were still frequently subjecting their workers to third @-@ world labor conditions . The article documented that these conditions included confiscation of worker passports , forced overtime , recruitment fees and cockroach @-@ filled dorms where workers had to sleep under beds . According to the article , workers who attempted to protest the NYU contractors ' conditions were promptly arrested . The university responded the day of the article with an apology to the workers . Another report was published and it maintains that those who were on strike were arrested by police who then promptly abused them in a police station . Many of those who were not local were then deported to their country . A 2014 follow @-@ up article in The Times found that some conditions had improved . In 2015 , NYU compensated thousands of migrant workers on its Abu Dhabi complex . 
 NYU was the founding member of the League of World Universities , an international organization consisting of rectors and presidents from urban universities across six continents . The league and its 47 representatives gather every two years to discuss global issues in education . L. Jay Oliva formed the organization in 1991 just after he was inaugurated president of New York University . 
 NYU 's board of trustees is currently one of the largest and most powerful in American academia . 
 = = = University logo = = = 
 The university logo , the upheld torch , is derived from the Statue of Liberty , signifying NYU 's service to New York City . The torch is depicted on both the NYU seal and the more abstract NYU logo , designed in 1965 by renowned graphic designer Tom Geismar of the branding and design firm <unk> & Geismar . There are at least two versions of the possible origin of the university color , violet . Some believe that it may have been chosen because violets are said to have grown abundantly in Washington Square and around the buttresses of the Old University Building . Others argue that the color may have been adopted because the violet was the flower associated with Athens , the center of learning in ancient Greece . 
 = = = Cultural setting = = = 
 Washington Square and Greenwich Village have been hubs of cultural life in New York City since the early 19th century . Much of this culture has intersected with NYU at various points in its history . Artists of the Hudson River School , the United States ' first prominent school of painters , settled around Washington Square . Samuel F.B. Morse , a noted artist who also pioneered the telegraph and created the Morse Code , served as the first chair of Painting and Sculpture . He and Daniel Huntington were early tenants of the Old University Building in the mid @-@ 19th century . ( The University rented out studio space and residential apartments within the " academic " building . ) As a result , they had notable interaction with the cultural and academic life of the university . 
 In the 1870s , sculptors Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens and Daniel Chester French lived and worked near the Square . By the 1920s , Washington Square Park was nationally recognized as a focal point for artistic and moral rebellion . As such , the Washington Square campus became more diverse and bustled with urban energy , contributing to academic change at NYU . Famed residents of this time include Eugene O 'Neill , John Sloan , and Maurice Prendergast . In the 1930s , the abstract expressionists Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning , and the realists Edward Hopper and Thomas Hart Benton had studios around Washington Square . In the 1960s the area became one of the centers of the beat and folk generation , when Allen Ginsberg and Bob Dylan settled there . This led to tension with the university , which at the time was in the midst of an aggressive facilities expansion phase . In 1975 , the university opened The Grey Art Gallery at 100 Washington Square East , housing the NYU art collection and featuring museum quality exhibitions . 
 = = = Budget and fundraising = = = 
 NYU has successfully completed a seven @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 5 billion campaign , surpassing expectations by raising more than $ 3 billion over the seven @-@ year period . Started in 2001 , this campaign was the university 's largest in its history , in which they planned to " raise $ 1 million per day for scholarships and financial aid , faculty building , new academic initiatives , and enhancing NYU 's physical facilities " . The campaign included a $ 50 million gift from the Tisch family ( after which one building and the art school are named ) and a $ 60 million gift from six trustees called " The Partners Fund " , aimed at hiring new faculty . On October 15 , 2007 the university announced that the Silver family donated $ 50 million to the School of Social Work , which will be renamed as a result . This is the largest donation ever to a school of social work in the United States . 
 The 2007 – 2008 academic year was the most successful fundraising year to date for NYU , with the school raising $ 698 million in only the first 11 months of the year , representing a 70 % increase in donations from the prior year . The University also recently announced plans for NYU 's Call to Action , a new initiative to ask alumni and donors to support financial aid for students at NYU . 
 The university has announced a 25 @-@ year strategic development plan , scheduled to coincide with its bicentennial in 2031 . Included in the " NYU 200 " plans are increasing resident and academic space , hiring additional exemplary faculty , and involving the New York City community in a transparent planning process . Additionally , NYU hopes to make their buildings more environmentally friendly , which will be facilitated by an evaluation of all campus spaces . As a part of this plan , NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt @-@ hours of wind power during the 2006 – 2007 academic year – the largest purchase of wind power by any university in the country and any institution in New York City . For 2007 , the university expanded its purchase of wind power to 132 million kilowatt @-@ hours . As a result , the EPA ranked NYU as one of the greenest colleges in the country in its annual College & University Green Power Challenge . 
 NYU consistently ranks as one of the top fundraising institutions in the country , raising $ 449 @.@ 34 million in 2013 and $ 455 @.@ 72 million in 2014 . NYU is also the 19th wealthiest university in America with $ 5 @.@ 3 billion in cash and investments in fiscal year 2014 . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Most of NYU 's buildings in Manhattan are located across a roughly 230 @-@ acre ( 930 @,@ 000 m2 ) area bounded by Houston Street to the south , Broadway to the east , 14th Street to the north , and Sixth Avenue ( Avenue of the Americas ) to the west . The core of NYU consists of buildings that surround Washington Square Park . 
 With approximately 11 @,@ 000 undergraduate and graduate residents , NYU had the seventh @-@ largest university housing system in the U.S. as of 2007 , and one of the largest among private schools . 
 = = = Washington Square campus = = = 
 Since the late 1970s , the central part of NYU has been its Washington Square campus in the heart of Greenwich Village . The Washington Square Arch is an unofficial symbol of NYU . Until 2007 , NYU had held its commencement ceremonies in Washington Square Park , but moved the ceremonies to Yankee Stadium in 2008 because of renovations to Washington Square . 
 In the 1990s , NYU became a " two square " university by building a second community around Union Square , in close proximity to Washington Square . NYU 's Union Square community primarily consists of the priority residence halls of Carlyle Court , Palladium Residence Hall , Alumni Hall , Coral Tower , Thirteenth Street Hall , University Hall , Third North Residence Hall , and Founders Hall . 
 NYU operates theaters and performance facilities that are often used by the university 's music conservatory and Tisch School of the Arts . External productions are also occasionally held in NYU 's facilities . The largest performance accommodations at NYU are the Skirball Center for Performing Arts ( 850 seats ) at 566 LaGuardia Place , just south of Washington Square South , and the Eisner @-@ Lubin Auditorium ( 560 seats ) in the Kimmel Center . Recently , the Skirball Center hosted important speeches on foreign policy by John Kerry and Al Gore . The Skirball Center is the largest performing arts facility south of 42nd Street . 
 = = = = Bobst Library = = = = 
 The Elmer Holmes Bobst Library , built between 1967 and 1972 , is the largest library at NYU and one of the largest academic libraries in the United States . Designed by Philip Johnson and Richard Foster , the 12 @-@ story , 425 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 39 @,@ 500 m2 ) structure sits on the southern edge of Washington Square Park ( at 70 Washington Square South ) and is the flagship of an eight @-@ library , 4 @.@ 5 million @-@ volume system . Bobst Library offers one Multidisciplinary Reference Center , a Research Commons , 28 miles ( 45 km ) of open @-@ stacks shelving , and approximately 2 @,@ 000 seats for student study . The library is visited by more than 6 @,@ 800 users each day , and circulates more than one million books annually . 
 Bobst 's Avery Fisher Center for Music and Media is one of the world 's largest academic media centers , where students and researchers use more than 95 @,@ 000 audio and video recordings per year . The Digital Studio offers a constantly evolving , leading @-@ edge resource for faculty and student projects and promotes and supports access to digital resources for teaching , learning , research and arts events . 
 Bobst Library is also home to significant special collections . The Fales Collection houses one of the finest collections of English and American fiction in the United States , the unique Downtown Collection , documenting the New York literary <unk> @-@ garde arts scene from the 1970s to the present , and the Food and Cookery Collection , which documents American food history with a focus on New York City . Bobst Library also houses the <unk> Library , one of the finest collections in the world for scholarly research in labor history , socialism , anarchism , communism , and American radicalism . <unk> includes the Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives , the Archives of Irish America , the Center for the Cold War and the U.S. , and the Frederic Ewen Academic Freedom Center . 
 = = = = New facilities = = = = 
 Since the early 2000s , NYU has developed new facilities on and around its Washington Square Campus . The Kimmel Center for University Life was built in 2003 as the primary location for the university 's student services offices . It also houses the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts , the Rosenthal Pavilion , the Eisner & Lubin Auditorium , and the Loeb Student Center . The School of Law built Furman Hall in 2004 , incorporating elements of two historic buildings into the new facade , one of which had been occupied by poet Edgar Allan Poe . 
 In 2005 , NYU announced the development of a new life science facility on Waverly Place , the first new NYU science building since the opening of Meyer Hall in 1971 . In November 2005 , NYU announced plans to build a 26 @-@ floor , 190 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 18 @,@ 000 m2 ) residence hall on 12th Street . The residence hall , named " Founders Hall " , accommodates approximately 700 undergraduates and contains a host of other student facilities . It is currently the tallest building in the East Village . 
 = = = Brooklyn campus = = = 
 NYU 's Brooklyn campus is located at MetroTech Center , an urban academic @-@ industrial research park , and is only a few subway stops from the Washington Square campus . It houses the School of Engineering , the Center for Urban Science and Progress and also several of Tisch School of the Arts and Steinhardt School of Culture , Education , and Human Development 's degree programs . The Brooklyn campus also houses NYU 's Game Center Open Library , which is the largest collection of games held by any university in the world . In 2014 , NYU Langone Medical Center acquired a 125 @,@ 000 square feet ( 11 @,@ 600 m2 ) healthcare facility in Brooklyn . The NYU shuttle bus system connects the Brooklyn campus with the Washington Square campus . 
 = = = Other campuses and facilities = = = 
 The New York University School of Medicine is situated near the East River waterfront at 550 First Avenue between East 30th and 34th Streets . The campus hosts the medical school , Tisch Hospital , and the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine . Other NYU Centers across the city include NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases and the Bellevue Hospital Center . NYU 's Silver School of Social Work ( formerly <unk> School of Social Work ) manages branch campus programs in Westchester County at Manhattanville College , in Rockland County at St. Thomas Aquinas College , and on Staten Island at the City University of New York 's College of Staten Island . 
 In Sterling Forest , near Tuxedo , NYU has a research facility that contains institutes , in particular the Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine . The Midtown Center at 11 West 42nd Street is home to the NYU Schack Institute of Real Estate . The Woolworth Building in the financial district is home to NYU 's professional studies and education programs . 
 NYU has two units located on the Upper East Side . The Institute for the Study of the Ancient World , a discrete entity within NYU , independent of any other school or department of the university , is located on East 84th Street , while the New York University Institute of Fine Arts , a graduate school of art history and fine arts , is located at the James B. Duke Building at 1 East 78th Street . 
 The Tandon School of Engineering has locations in Brooklyn and Manhattan . It is one of the oldest private engineering schools in the United States . 
 NYU has international houses on its Manhattan campus , including the Deutsches Haus , La Maison Française , Casa Italiana <unk> <unk> , the <unk> Ireland House , the King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center , the Hagop Kevorkian Center , an Africa House and a China House . 
 = = = = Campuses abroad = = = = 
 Tisch School of the Arts , Asia was NYU 's first branch campus abroad . The result of a partnership between Tisch School of the Arts and the Singapore Government , it offered Master of Fine Arts degrees in animation and digital arts , dramatic writing , film and international media producing . The campus opened in fall 2007 with the intention to enroll approximately 250 students . Anticipated enrolment figures were not achieved , financial irregularities were alleged and President Pari Sara Shirazi was dismissed from her post by NYU in November 2011 . She subsequently announced her intention to commence legal proceedings against NYU alleging wrongful termination and defamation . In a letter to the Tisch Asia community dated November 8 , 2012 , Dean Mary Schmidt Campbell announced that the campus would close after 2014 with recruitment and admission of new students suspended with immediate effect . 
 NYU has a host of foreign facilities used for study abroad programs , referred to as Global Academic Centers . As of 2012 , NYU operates 14 academic sites – both degree @-@ granting research university campuses and study abroad sites – in Africa , Asia and the Middle East , Australia , Europe , North America , and South America , including undergraduate academic @-@ year and summer study abroad programs in New York City , Florence , London , Paris , Prague , Berlin , Accra , Madrid , Shanghai , Buenos Aires , Tel Aviv , Abu Dhabi , Sydney , and Washington , D.C. One of the most noteworthy is the 57 @-@ acre ( 230 @,@ 000 m2 ) campus of NYU Florence Villa <unk> in Italy , bequeathed by the late Sir Harold Acton to NYU in 1994 . 
 In fall 2010 , NYU Abu Dhabi ( NYUAD ) opened as the university 's first overseas " Portal Campus " with an inaugural class of 150 students . Unlike NYU 's other study abroad centers , NYUAD functions as a separate liberal arts college within a university , offering complete degree programs to students admitted directly to NYUAD . NYUAD recruits students from all over the world and describes itself as the " World 's Honor College " . The main campus for NYUAD is under construction on Saadiyat Island and is scheduled to open in 2014 . Until then the school operates from a campus located in downtown Abu Dhabi . The campus construction and operational costs are entirely funded by the Abu Dhabi government . 
 In 2011 , NYU announced plans to open another portal campus , New York University Shanghai , for the fall semester of 2013 . It was set to have about 3 @,@ 000 undergraduate students , the majority of whom would be Chinese . It was approved by the Ministry of Education of the People 's Republic of China in January 2011 . NYU 's local partner will be East China Normal University ( <unk> ) . <unk> 's president Yu <unk> will be the chancellor and play a major role in government relations while Jeffrey S. Lehman , former president of Cornell amongst other positions , will serve as vice chancellor and have " free rein in academic affairs " . 
 In spring 2014 , NYU opened a new campus in Paris , in the student area of the Quartier Latin , where NYU Law set up an EU Regulatory Policy Clinic taught by Alberto <unk> and Vincent Chauvet . 
 = = = Residence halls = = = 
 NYU houses approximately 11 @,@ 000 undergraduate and graduate residents , and had the seventh @-@ largest university housing system in the U.S. as of 2007 , and one of the largest among private schools . NYU 's undergraduate housing system consists of more than 20 residence halls . Uniquely , many of NYU 's residence halls are converted apartment complexes or old hotels . In general , NYU residence halls receive favorable ratings , and some are opulent . Many rooms are spacious and contain amenities considered rare for individual college residence hall rooms , such as kitchens , lavatories , living rooms and common areas . The university operates its own transit system to transport its students by bus to its campus . 
 Undergraduate students are guaranteed housing during their enrollment at NYU . Most freshman residence halls are located near the Washington Square area . While nearly all of the residence halls that primarily house sophomores are located near the Union Square area , two former residence halls were located in the Financial District and one is still in use in Chinatown . All of NYU 's residence halls are governed by the Inter @-@ Residence Hall Council ( <unk> ) , an umbrella student council organization . 
 In 2007 , the National Association of College and University Residence Halls ( <unk> ) named NYU the National School of the Year for <unk> and <unk> 's strong efforts over the past year . In addition , NYU was named the National Program of the Year for UltraViolet Live , the annual inter @-@ hall competition that raises funds for Relay For Life . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 NYU has made the greening of its campus a large priority . For example , NYU has been the largest university purchaser of wind energy in the U.S. since 2009 . With this switch to renewable power , NYU is achieving benefits equivalent to removing 12 @,@ 000 cars from the road or planting 72 @,@ 000 trees . In May 2008 , the NYU Sustainability Task Force awarded $ 150 @,@ 000 in grants to 23 projects that would focus research and efforts toward energy , food , landscape , outreach , procurement , transportation and waste . These projects include a student @-@ led bike @-@ sharing program modeled after Paris ' <unk> program with 30 bikes free to students , staff , and faculty . NYU received a grade of " B " on the College Sustainability Report Card 2010 from the Sustainable Endowments Institute . 
 NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt @-@ hours of wind power during the 2006 – 2007 academic year – the largest purchase of wind power by any university in the country and any institution in New York City . For 2007 , the university expanded its purchase of wind power to 132 million kilowatt @-@ hours . 
 The EPA ranked NYU as one of the greenest colleges in the country in its annual College & University Green Power Challenge . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Schools and colleges = = = 
 New York University comprises the following schools and colleges : 
 Arts & Science 
 College of Arts and Science 
 Graduate School of Arts and Science 
 Liberal Studies 
 Center for Urban Science and Progress 
 College of Dentistry 
 College of Global Public Health 
 Rory Meyers College of Nursing 
 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
 Gallatin School of Individualized Study 
 Institute of Fine Arts 
 Institute for the Study of the Ancient World 
 Leonard N. Stern School of Business 
 NYU Abu Dhabi 
 NYU Shanghai 
 Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service 
 Silver School of Social Work 
 School of Law 
 School of Medicine 
 School of Professional Studies 
 Steinhardt School of Culture , Education , and Human Development 
 Tandon School of Engineering 
 Tisch School of the Arts 
 Arts and Science is currently NYU 's largest academic division . It has three subdivisions : the College of Arts and Science , the Graduate School of Arts and Science , and the Liberal Studies program . The College of Arts and Science and Liberal Studies program are undergraduate divisions , and the former has existed since the founding of NYU . 
 Undergraduate divisions are also found in the College of Dentistry , College of Nursing , Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences , Gallatin School of Individualized Study , Leonard N. Stern School of Business , NYU Abu Dhabi , NYU Shanghai , Tandon School of Engineering , Silver School of Social Work , School of Professional Studies , Steinhardt School of Culture , Education , and Human Development , and the Tisch School of the Arts . Postgraduate divisions are found in all of NYU 's schools and colleges . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 NYU manages one of the largest annual collegiate research budgets of any university in the United States . In 2014 , NYU received $ 524 million in research grants from the National Science Foundation alone . 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 Admission to NYU 's undergraduate programs is highly selective , with 18 @,@ 500 admitted from an applicant pool of 60 @,@ 322 ( 31 % ) for the class of 2019 . 
 Total freshman enrollment is 5 @,@ 917 for the 2015 – 2016 academic year , representing 49 states and 91 countries , with 19 % as non @-@ US citizens . Most freshmen have a typical unweighted GPA of 3 @.@ 5 / A ( 90 – 95 % ) and are in the top 10 % of their high school graduating class . The middle 50 % of freshmen score between 1900 and 2150 on the SAT and between 29 and 32 on the ACT . The student @-@ to @-@ faculty ratio at the New York campus is 10 : 1 , and less than that at the Abu Dhabi and Shanghai campuses . The average scholarship amount awarded to freshmen is $ 29 @,@ 528 , and 21 % of freshmen received Pell Grants . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 Nationally , NYU is ranked 14th in the Center For World University Rankings , 15th by Global Language Monitor , 17th by QS World University Rankings , 19th in the Academic Ranking of World Universities , 24th by Business Insider , and 32nd by U.S. News & World Report . 
 Globally , NYU is ranked 18th in the Center for World University Rankings , 17th in International Colleges and Universities , 27th in the Academic Ranking of World Universities , 30th in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings , and 53rd in the QS World University Rankings . Additionally , NYU is ranked 20th in the THE World Reputation Rankings . 
 U.S. News & World Report ranks NYU 's graduate schools 6th for law , 6th for public policy , 9th for math ( 1st for applied math ) , 10th for Occupational therapy under Steinhardt School of Culture , Education , and Human Development , 10th for business , 11th for economics , 15th for political science , 19th for medical school research , 20th for education , 21st for nursing , 27th for physical therapy , 29th for computer science , 30th for psychology , and 46th for engineering . 
 Globally , NYU 's social sciences are ranked 8th by the Academic Ranking of World Universities , 15th by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings , and 16th by the QS World University Rankings . NYU is globally ranked 11th for psychology by The QS World University Ranking . The Social Psychology Network ranks NYU 5th for industrial / organizational psychology , 14th for clinical psychology , and U.S. News & World Report ranks NYU 9th for social psychology and 9th for behavioral neuroscience . 
 U.S. News & World Report ranks the New York University School of Law 1st for tax law and 1st for international law . The publication also ranks The Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service 6th in public policy . The NYU Department of Philosophy is globally ranked 1st by the The Philosophical Gourmet Report and the QS World University Rankings . In The Los Angeles Times , NYU Tisch School of Arts is ranked 1st for film by <unk> . NYU is ranked 1st for New Ivies by college resource guide <unk> . In 2006 , NYU was named by Kaplan as one of the " New Ivies " . The annual Global Employability Survey in The New York Times ranks NYU 11th nationally and 29th globally for employability . For four consecutive years NYU has been ranked as America 's " # 1 dream school " by the Princeton Review . NYU is consistently ranked as a " Top 10 Dream College " for both parents and students according to The Princeton Review . Alongside Stanford University , Harvard College , Princeton University , and Massachusetts Institute of Technology , NYU is one of few universities to regularly appear in the top 10 list for both parents and students . NYU ranks 19th in the world based on the number of patents generated . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Student government = = = 
 The Student Senators Council is the governing student body at NYU . The SSC has been involved in controversial debates on campus , including a campuswide ban on the sale of Coca @-@ Cola products in 2005 , and the Graduate Student Organizing Committee unionization in 2001 and subsequent strike in 2005 . This ban was lifted by the University Senate on February 5 , 2009 . 
