 = = = Student organizations = = = 
 NYU has over 450 student clubs and organizations on campus . In addition to the sports teams , fraternities , sororities , and study clubs , there are many organizations on campus that focus on entertainment , arts , and culture . These organizations include various student media clubs : for instance , the daily student newspaper the Washington Square News , the NYU Local daily blog , The Plague comedy magazine , " Washington Square Local web @-@ based satire news source , and the literary journals Washington Square Review and The <unk> Review , as well as student @-@ run event producers such as the NYU Program Board and the Inter @-@ Residence Hall Council . It also operates radio station <unk> @-@ FM 89 @.@ 1 with a diverse college radio format , transmitting to the entire New York metropolitan area from the original campus , and via booster station <unk> @-@ <unk> which fills in the signal in lower Manhattan from atop one of the Silver Towers , next to the football field at the Washington Square campus . 
 The New York University Mock Trial team is consistently ranked as one of the best collegiate mock trial teams in the country . NYU has qualified for the National Championship Tournament for 10 consecutive seasons and placed in the top 10 during each of those years . In the 2009 – 2010 season , NYU won the 26th National Championship Tournament in Memphis over rival Harvard . The following season , they qualified for the final round once more only to be the runners @-@ up to UCLA . In the American Mock Trial Association 's 2015 – 2016 power rankings , NYU ranks third , behind Harvard and Yale . 
 During the University Heights era , an apparent rift evolved with some organizations distancing themselves from students from the downtown schools . The exclusive Philomathean Society operated from 1832 to 1888 ( formally giving way in 1907 and reconstituted into the <unk> Club ) . Included among the <unk> 's regulations was " Rule No.11 : Have no relations save the most casual and informal kind with the downtown schools " . The Eucleian Society , rival to the Philomathean Society , was founded in 1832 . The Knights of the Lamp was a social organization founded in 1914 at the School of Commerce . This organization met every full moon and had a <unk> as its mascot . The Red Dragon Society , founded in 1898 , is thought to be the most selective society at NYU . In addition , NYU 's first yearbook was formed by fraternities and " secret societies " at the university . 
 NYU has traditions which have persisted across campuses . Since the beginning of the 20th century initiation ceremonies have welcomed incoming NYU freshmen . At the Bronx University Heights Campus , seniors used to grab unsuspecting freshmen , take them to a horse @-@ watering trough , and then dunk them head @-@ first into what was known colloquially as " the Fountain of Knowledge " . This underground initiation took place until the 1970s . Today freshmen take part in university @-@ sponsored activities during what is called " Welcome Week " . In addition , throughout the year the university traditionally holds Apple Fest ( an apple @-@ themed country fest that began at the University Heights campus ) , the Violet Ball ( a dance in the atrium of Bobst Library ) , Strawberry Fest ( featuring New York City 's longest Strawberry Shortcake ) , and the semi @-@ annual midnight breakfast where Student Affairs administrators serve free breakfast to students before finals . 
 Students publish a campus comedy magazine , The Plague . Like many college humor magazines , this often pokes fun at popular culture as well as campus life and the idiosyncrasies of New York University . The Plague was founded in 1978 by Howard <unk> along with Amy Burns , John Rawlins , Joe Pinto and Dan Fiorella , and is currently published once per semester . It is not NYU 's first humor magazine , as The Medley was a humor magazine published by the Eucleian Society from 1913 to 1950 . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 Some of the first fraternities in the country were formed at NYU . Greek life first formed on the NYU campus in 1837 when Psi Upsilon chartered its Delta Chapter . The first fraternities at NYU were social ones . With their athletic , professional , intellectual , and service activities , later groups sought to attract students who also formed other groups . Since then , Greek letter organizations have proliferated to include 25 social fraternities and sororities . As of 2014 , approximately 13 % of NYU students are members of fraternities or sororities . 
 Four governing boards oversee Greek life at the university . The Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) has jurisdiction over all twelve recognized fraternities on campus . Eight sororities are under the jurisdiction of the Panhellenic Council ( <unk> ) , which features seven national sororities ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) and two local sororities ( <unk> and <unk> ) . Five multicultural organizations maintain membership in the Multicultural Greek Council ( MGC ) , including two fraternities and three sororities . All three of the aforementioned boards are managed under the auspices of the Inter @-@ Greek Council . 
 Greek organizations have historical significance at NYU . Delta Phi Epsilon , Zeta Psi , Alpha Epsilon Pi , Tau Delta Phi , Alpha Kappa Psi and Delta Sigma Pi were founded at NYU . Zeta Psi Fraternity of North America was chartered in 1847 , Delta Sigma Pi in 1907 , and Alpha Epsilon Pi in 1913 . Delta Phi Epsilon was founded in 1917 . The NYU Gamma chapter of Delta Phi , founded in 1841 , is the longest continuously active fraternity chapter in the world , having never gone inactive since its establishment . Delta Phi is also the oldest continuously active fraternity in the United States , being the only organization in the original Union Triad to remain active since its institute . The NYU Gamma chapter of Zeta Beta Tau is the oldest active <unk> chapter in the country . 
 = = = ROTC = = = 
 NYU does not have an ROTC program on campus . However , NYU students may participate in the U.S. Army ROTC program through NYC Army ROTC , headquartered at Fordham University . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 NYU 's sports teams are referred to as the NYU Violets , the colors being the trademarked hue " NYU Violet " and white . Since 1981 , the school mascot has been a bobcat , whose origin can be traced back to the abbreviation then being used by the Bobst Library computerized catalog — short : Bobcat . NYU 's sports teams include baseball , men 's and women 's varsity basketball , cross country , fencing , golf , soccer , softball , swimming and diving , tennis , track and field , volleyball , and wrestling . All of NYU 's sports teams participate in the NCAA 's Division III and the University Athletic Association , with the exception of fencing , which participates in Division I. While NYU has had All @-@ American football players , the school has not had a varsity football team since 1952 . 
 NYU students also compete in club and intramural sports , including badminton , baseball , basketball , crew , cycling , equestrianism , ice hockey , lacrosse , martial arts , rugby , softball , squash , tennis , triathlon , and ultimate . The Coles Sports and Recreation Center serves as the home base of several of NYU 's intercollegiate athletic teams . Many of NYU 's varsity teams play their games at various facilities and fields throughout Manhattan because of the scarcity of space for playing fields near campus . In 2002 , NYU opened the Palladium Athletic Facility as the second on @-@ campus recreational facility . 
 = = Faculty and alumni = = 
 NYU has 470 @,@ 000 living alumni as of 2015 . At least thirty @-@ six Nobel Prize winners winners are affiliated with NYU . Notable graduating classes include among others , 1941 , which graduated three later Nobel Prize laureates ( Julius Axelrod , Gertrude B. Elion and Clifford Shull ) , Olympic Gold Medalist John Woodruff , sportscaster Howard Cosell and sociologist Morris Janowitz ; 1951 included professor emeritus at MIT and former DARPA director Jack <unk> and Cathleen Synge <unk> , first woman recipient of National Medal of Science ; 1957 included Pulitzer Prize winning author Frank McCourt and president of Technion @-@ Israel Institute of Technology Josef Singer ; 1964 included former Chief Engineer of NASA Johnson Space Center , Jay Greene and film director Martin Scorsese ; and 1977 included : former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan ; IRS Commissioner Mark Everson ; INSEAD Dean Gabriel <unk> ; Pulitzer , Oscar and Tony Award winner John Patrick Shanley ; NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman ; NASDAQ CEO Robert <unk> ; Ma Ying @-@ jeou president of Republic of China ( Taiwan ) ; Guillermo Endara president of Republic of Panama , Clive Davis music industry executive , and Cathy <unk> , Federal Reserve Chairman Boston . 
 = = = <unk> statistics = = = 
 NYU ranked 7th among the World ’ s top 100 universities for producing millionaires , as compiled by Times Higher Education World University Rankings . NYU ranked 5th globally among universities with the highest number of alumni worth $ 30 million or more , as compiled by ABC News . CNBC ranked NYU 4th globally among universities with the most billionaire graduates . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 NYU has been portrayed in books , movies and television shows , and the campus of NYU has been the backdrop for a number of different books and movies . 
 = Dusky shark = 
 The dusky shark ( Carcharhinus obscurus ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae , occurring in tropical and warm @-@ temperate continental seas worldwide . A generalist apex predator , the dusky shark can be found from the coast to the outer continental shelf and adjacent pelagic waters , and has been recorded from a depth of 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . Populations migrate seasonally towards the poles in the summer and towards the equator in the winter , traveling hundreds to thousands of kilometers . One of the largest members of its genus , the dusky shark reaches 4 @.@ 2 m ( 14 ft ) in length and 347 kg ( 765 lb ) in weight . It has a slender , streamlined body and can be identified by its short round snout , long sickle @-@ shaped pectoral fins , ridge between the first and second dorsal fins , and faintly marked fins . 
 Adult dusky sharks have a broad and varied diet , consisting mostly of bony fishes , sharks and rays , and cephalopods , but also occasionally crustaceans , sea stars , bryozoans , sea turtles , marine mammals , carrion , and garbage . This species is viviparous with a three @-@ year reproductive cycle ; females bear litters of 3 – 14 young after a gestation period of 22 – 24 months , after which there is a year of rest before they become pregnant again . Females are capable of storing sperm for long periods , as their encounters with suitable mates may be few and far between due to their nomadic lifestyle and low overall abundance . Dusky sharks are one of the slowest @-@ growing and latest @-@ maturing sharks , not reaching adulthood until around 20 years of age . 
 Because of its slow reproductive rate , the dusky shark is very vulnerable to human @-@ caused population depletion . This species is highly valued by commercial fisheries for its fins , used in shark fin soup , and for its meat , skin , and liver oil . It is also esteemed by recreational fishers . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened worldwide and Vulnerable off the eastern United States , where populations have dropped to 15 – 20 % of 1970s levels . The dusky shark is regarded as potentially dangerous to humans due to its large size , but there are few attacks attributable to it . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 French naturalist Charles Alexandre Lesueur published the first scientific description of the dusky shark in an 1818 issue of Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia . He placed it in the genus Squalus and gave it the specific epithet obscurus ( Latin for " dark " or " dim " ) , referring to its coloration . Subsequent authors have recognized this species as belonging to the genus Carcharhinus . Lesueur did not designate a type specimen , though he was presumably working from a shark caught in North American waters . 
 Many early sources gave the scientific name of the dusky shark as Carcharias ( later Carcharhinus ) <unk> , which originated from an 1882 account by David Starr Jordan and Charles Henry Gilbert . Although Jordan and Gilbert referred to a set of jaws that came from a dusky shark , the type specimen they designated was later discovered to be a copper shark ( C. brachyurus ) . Therefore , C. <unk> is not considered a synonym of C. obscurus but rather of C. brachyurus . Other common names for this species include bay shark , black whaler , brown common gray shark , brown dusky shark , brown shark , common whaler , dusky ground shark , dusky whaler , river whaler , shovelnose , and slender whaler shark . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 Teeth belonging to the dusky shark are fairly well represented in the fossil record , though assigning Carcharhinus teeth to species can be problematic . Dusky shark teeth dating to the Miocene ( 23 @-@ 5 @.@ 3 Ma ) have been recovered from the <unk> and Grand Bay formations in Carriacou , the Grenadines , the <unk> Formation in Egypt , Polk County , Florida , and possibly Cerro La Cruz in northern Venezuela . Teeth dating to the Late Miocene or Early Pliocene ( 11 @.@ 6 @-@ 3 @.@ 6 Ma ) are abundant in the Yorktown Formation and the Pungo River , North Carolina , and from the Chesapeake Bay region ; these teeth differ slightly from the modern dusky shark , and have often been misidentified as belonging to the oceanic whitetip shark ( C. longimanus ) . Dusky shark teeth have also been recovered from the vicinity of two baleen whales in North Carolina , one preserved in Goose Creek Limestone dating to the Late Pliocene ( c . 3 @.@ 5 Ma ) , and the other in mud dating to the Pleistocene @-@ Holocene ( c . 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) . 
 In 1982 , Jack Garrick published a phylogenetic analysis of Carcharhinus based on morphology , in which he placed the dusky shark and the Galapagos shark ( C. galapagensis ) at the center of the " obscurus group " . The group consisted of large , triangular @-@ toothed sharks with a ridge between the dorsal fins , and also included the bignose shark ( C. altimus ) , the Caribbean reef shark ( C. perezi ) , the sandbar shark ( C. plumbeus ) , and the oceanic whitetip shark . This interpretation was largely upheld by Leonard Compagno in his 1988 phenetic study , and by Gavin Naylor in his 1992 allozyme sequence study . Naylor was able to further resolve the interrelationships of the " ridge @-@ backed " branch of Carcharhinus , finding that the dusky shark , Galapagos shark , oceanic whitetip shark , and blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) comprise its most derived clade . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the dusky shark extends worldwide , albeit discontinuously , in tropical and warm @-@ temperate waters . In the western Atlantic Ocean , it is found from Massachusetts and the Georges Bank to southern Brazil , including the Bahamas and Cuba . In the eastern Atlantic Ocean , it has been reported from the western and central Mediterranean Sea , the Canary Islands , Cape Verde , Senegal , Sierra Leone , and possibly elsewhere including Portugal , Spain , Morocco , and Madeira . In the Indian Ocean , it is found off South Africa , Mozambique , and Madagascar , with sporadic records in the Arabian Sea , the Bay of Bengal , and perhaps the Red Sea . In the Pacific Ocean , it occurs off Japan , mainland China and Taiwan , Vietnam , Australia , and New Caledonia in the west , and from southern California to the Gulf of California , around Revillagigedo , and possibly off northern Chile in the east . Records of dusky sharks from the northeastern and eastern central Atlantic , and around tropical islands , may in fact be of Galapagos sharks . Mitochondrial DNA and microsatellite evidence suggest that Indonesian and Australian sharks represent distinct populations . 
 Residing off continental coastlines from the surf zone to the outer continental shelf and adjacent oceanic waters , the dusky shark occupies an intermediate habitat that overlaps with its more specialized relatives , such as the inshore sandbar shark , the pelagic silky shark ( C. falciformis ) and oceanic whitetip shark , the deepwater bignose shark , and the <unk> Galapagos shark and silvertip shark ( C. albimarginatus ) . One tracking study in the northern Gulf of Mexico found that it spends most of its time at depths of 10 – 80 m ( 33 – 262 ft ) , while making occasional forays below 200 m ( 660 ft ) ; this species has been known to dive as deep as 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . It prefers water temperatures of 19 – 28 ° C ( 66 – 82 ° F ) , and avoids areas of low salinity such as estuaries . 
 The dusky shark is nomadic and strongly migratory , undertaking recorded movements of up to 3 @,@ 800 km ( 2 @,@ 400 mi ) ; adults generally move longer distances than juveniles . Sharks along both coasts of North America shift northward with warmer summer temperatures , and retreat back towards the equator in winter . Off South Africa , young males and females over 0 @.@ 9 m ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) long disperse southward and northward respectively ( with some overlap ) from the nursery area off KwaZulu @-@ Natal ; they join the adults several years later by a yet @-@ unidentified route . In addition , juveniles spend spring and summer in the surf zone and fall and winter in offshore waters , and as they approach 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) in length begin to conduct a north @-@ south migration between KwaZulu @-@ Natal in the winter and the Western Cape in summer . Still @-@ larger sharks , over 2 @.@ 8 m ( 9 @.@ 2 ft ) long , migrate as far as southern Mozambique . Off Western Australia , adult and juvenile dusky sharks migrate towards the coast in summer and fall , though not to the inshore nurseries occupied by newborns . 
 = = Description = = 
 One of the largest members of its genus , the dusky shark commonly reaches a length of 3 @.@ 2 m ( 10 ft ) and a weight of 160 – 180 kg ( 350 – 400 lb ) ; the maximum recorded length and weight are 4 @.@ 2 m ( 14 ft ) and 347 kg ( 765 lb ) respectively . Females grow larger than males . This shark has a slender , streamlined body with a broadly rounded snout no longer than the width of the mouth . The nostrils are preceded by barely developed flaps of skin . The medium @-@ sized , circular eyes are equipped with nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . The mouth has very short , subtle furrows at the corners and contains 13 @-@ 15 ( typically 14 ) tooth rows on either side of both jaws . The upper teeth are distinctively broad , triangular , and slightly oblique with strong , coarse serrations , while the lower teeth are narrower and upright , with finer serrations . The five pairs of gill slits are fairly long . 
 The large pectoral fins measure around one @-@ fifth as long as the body , and have a falcate ( sickle @-@ like ) shape tapering to a point . The first dorsal fin is of moderate size and somewhat falcate , with a pointed apex and a strongly concave rear margin ; its origin lies over the pectoral fin free rear tips . The second dorsal fin is much smaller and is positioned about opposite the anal fin . A low dorsal ridge is present between the dorsal fins . The caudal fin is large and high , with a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The dermal denticles are diamond @-@ shaped and closely set , each bearing five horizontal ridges leading to teeth on the posterior margin . This species is bronzy to bluish gray above and white below , which extends onto the flanks as a faint lighter stripe . The fins , particularly the underside of the pectoral fins and the lower caudal fin lobe ) darken towards the tips ; this is more obvious in juveniles . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 As an apex predator positioned at the highest level of the trophic web , the dusky shark is generally less abundant than other sharks that share its range . However , high concentrations of individuals , especially juveniles , can be found at particular locations . Adults are often found following ships far from land , such as in the Agulhas Current . A tracking study off the mouth of the Cape Fear River in North Carolina reported an average swimming speed of 0 @.@ 8 km / h ( 0 @.@ 50 mph ) . The dusky shark is one of the hosts of the sharksucker ( Echeneis naucrates ) . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms Anthobothrium <unk> , Dasyrhynchus pacificus , Platybothrium <unk> , Floriceps <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , the monogeneans Dermophthirius carcharhini and <unk> <unk> , the leech Stibarobdella macrothela , the copepods Alebion sp . , Pandarus cranchii , P. sinuatus , and P. smithii , the praniza larvae of <unk> isopods , and the sea lamprey ( <unk> marinus ) . 
 Full @-@ grown dusky sharks have no significant natural predators . Major predators of young sharks include the ragged tooth shark ( Carcharias taurus ) , the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) , the bull shark ( C. leucas ) , and the tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) . Off KwaZulu @-@ Natal , the use of shark nets to protect beaches has reduced the populations of these large predators , leading to a dramatic increase in the number of juvenile dusky sharks ( a phenomenon called " predator release " ) . In turn , the juvenile sharks have decimated populations of small bony fishes , with negative consequences for the biodiversity of the local ecosystem . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The dusky shark is a generalist that takes a wide variety of prey from all levels of the water column , though it favors hunting near the bottom . A large individual can consume over a tenth of its body weight at a single sitting . The bite force exerted by a 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long dusky shark has been measured at 60 kg ( 130 lb ) over the 2 mm2 ( 0 @.@ 0031 in2 ) area at the tip of a tooth . This is the highest figure thus far measured from any shark , though it also reflects the concentration of force at the tooth tip . Dense aggregations of young sharks , forming in response to feeding opportunities , have been documented in the Indian Ocean . 
 The known diet of the dusky shark encompasses pelagic fishes , including herring and anchovies , tuna and mackerel , billfish , jacks , needlefish and flyingfish , threadfins , <unk> , lancetfish , and lanternfish ; demersal fishes , including mullets , porgies , grunts , and flatheads , eels , lizardfish , cusk eels , gurnards , and flatfish ; reef fishes , including barracudas , goatfish , <unk> , groupers , scorpionfish , and porcupinefish ; cartilaginous fishes , including dogfish , sawsharks , angel sharks , catsharks , thresher sharks , smoothhounds , smaller requiem sharks , sawfish , guitarfish , skates , stingrays , and butterfly rays ; and invertebrates , including cephalopods , decapod crustaceans , barnacles , and sea stars . Very rarely , the largest dusky sharks may also consume sea turtles , marine mammals ( mainly as carrion ) , and human refuse . 
 In the northwestern Atlantic , around 60 % of the dusky shark 's diet consists of bony fishes , from over ten families with bluefish ( <unk> <unk> ) and summer flounder ( Paralichthys dentatus ) being especially important . Cartilaginous fishes , mainly skates and their egg cases , are the second @-@ most important dietary component , while the lady crab ( <unk> ocellatus ) is also a relatively significant food source . In South African and Australian waters , bony fishes are again the most important prey type . Newborn and juvenile sharks subsist mainly on small pelagic prey such as sardines and squid ; older sharks over 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long broaden their diets to include larger bony and cartilaginous fishes . The run of the southern African pilchard ( Sardinops sagax ) , occurring off the eastern coast of South Africa every winter , is attended by medium and large @-@ sized dusky sharks . Pregnant and post @-@ partum females do not join , possibly because the energy cost of gestation leaves them unable to pursue such swift prey . One South African study reported that 0 @.@ 2 % of the sharks examined had preyed upon bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops truncatus ) . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other requiem sharks , the dusky shark is viviparous : the developing embryos are initially nourished by a yolk sac , which is converted into a placental connection to the mother once the yolk supply is exhausted . Mating occurs during spring in the northwestern Atlantic , while there appears to be no reproductive seasonality in other regions such as off South Africa . Females are capable of storing masses of sperm , possibly from multiple males , for months to years within their nidamental glands ( an organ that secretes egg cases ) . This would be advantageous given the sharks ' itinerant natures and low natural abundance , which would make encounters with suitable mates infrequent and unpredictable . 
 With a gestation period estimated at up to 22 – 24 months and a one @-@ year resting period between pregnancies , female dusky sharks bear at most one litter of young every three years . The litter size ranges from 3 to 16 , with 6 to 12 being typical , and does not correlate with female size . Sharks in the western Atlantic tend to produce slightly smaller litters than those from the southeastern Atlantic ( averaging 8 versus 10 pups per litter ) . Depending on region , birthing may occur throughout the year or over a span of several months : newborn sharks have been reported from late winter to summer in the northwestern Atlantic , in summer and fall off Western Australia , and throughout the year with a peak in fall off southern Africa . Females move into shallow inshore habitats such as lagoons to give birth , as such areas offer their pups rich food supplies and shelter from predation ( including from their own species ) , and leave immediately afterward . These nursery areas are known along the coasts of KwaZulu @-@ Natal , southwestern Australia , western Baja California , and the eastern United States from New Jersey to North Carolina . 
 Newborn dusky sharks measure 0 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 0 m ( 2 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long ; pup size increases with female size , and decreases with litter size . There is evidence that females can determine the size at which their pups are born , so as to improve their chances of survival across better or worse environmental conditions . Females also provision their young with energy reserves , stored in a liver that comprises one @-@ fifth of the pup 's weight , which sustains the newborn until it learns to hunt for itself . The dusky shark is one of the slowest @-@ growing shark species , reaching sexual maturity only at a substantial size and age ( see table ) . Various studies have found growth rates to be largely similar across geographical regions and between sexes . The annual growth rate is 8 – 11 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) over the first five years of life . The maximum lifespan is believed to be 40 – 50 years or more . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The dusky shark is considered to be potentially dangerous to humans because of its large size , though little is known of how it behaves towards people underwater . As of 2009 , the International Shark Attack File lists it as responsible for six attacks on people and boats , three of them unprovoked and one fatal . However , attacks attributed to this species off Bermuda and other islands were probably in reality caused by Galapagos sharks . Shark nets used to protect beaches in South Africa and Australia entangle adult and larger juvenile dusky sharks in some numbers . From 1978 to 1999 , an average of 256 individuals were caught annually in nets off KwaZulu @-@ Natal ; species @-@ specific data is not available for nets off Australia . Young dusky sharks adapt well to display in public aquariums . 
 The dusky shark is one of the most sought @-@ after species for shark fin trade , as its fins are large and contain a high number of internal rays ( <unk> ) . In addition , the meat is sold fresh , frozen , dried and salted , or smoked , the skin is made into leather , and the liver oil is processed for vitamins . Dusky sharks are taken by targeted commercial fisheries operating off eastern North America , southwestern Australia , and eastern South Africa using multi @-@ species longlines and gillnets . The southwestern Australian fishery began in the 1940s and expanded in the 1970s to yield 500 – 600 tons per year . The fishery utilizes selective demersal gillnets that take almost exclusively young sharks under three years old , with 18 – 28 % of all newborns captured in their first year . Demographic models suggest that the fishery is sustainable , provided that the mortality rate of sharks over 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long is under 4 % . 
 In addition to commercial shark fisheries , dusky sharks are also caught as bycatch on longlines meant for tuna and swordfish ( and usually kept for its valuable fins ) , and by recreational fishers . Large numbers of dusky sharks , mostly juveniles , are caught by sport fishers off South Africa and eastern Australia . This shark was once one of the most important species in the Florida trophy shark tournaments , before the population collapsed . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened worldwide and Vulnerable in the northwestern Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico . The American Fisheries Society has also assessed North American dusky shark populations as Vulnerable . Its very low reproductive rate renders the dusky shark extremely susceptible to overfishing . 
 Stocks off the eastern United States are severely overfished ; a 2006 stock assessment survey by the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) showed that its population had dropped to 15 – 20 % of 1970s levels . In 1997 , the dusky shark was identified as a Species of Concern by the NMFS , meaning that it warranted conservation concern but there was insufficient information for listing on the U.S. Endangered Species Act ( ESA ) . Commercial and recreational retention of dusky sharks was prohibited in 1998 , but this has been of limited effectiveness due to high bycatch mortality on multi @-@ species gear . In addition , some 2 @,@ 000 dusky sharks were caught by recreational fishers in 2003 despite the ban . In 2005 , North Carolina implemented a time / area closure to reduce the impact of recreational fishing . To aid conservation efforts , molecular techniques using polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) have been developed that can identify whether marketed shark parts ( e.g. fins ) are from prohibited species like the dusky shark , versus similar allowed species such as the sandbar shark . 
 = Second Battle of Kharkov = 
 The Second Battle of Kharkov , was an Axis counter @-@ offensive in the region around Kharkov ( now Kharkiv ) against the Red Army Izium bridgehead offensive conducted 12 – 28 May 1942 , on the Eastern Front during World War II . Its objective was to eliminate the Izium bridgehead over Seversky Donets or the " Barvenkovo bulge " ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) which was one of the Soviet offensive 's staging areas . After a winter counter @-@ offensive that drove German troops away from Moscow and also depleted the Red Army 's reserves , the Kharkov offensive was a new Soviet attempt to expand upon their strategic initiative , although it failed to secure a significant element of surprise . 
 On 12 May 1942 , Soviet forces under the command of Marshal Semyon Timoshenko launched an offensive against the German 6th Army from a salient established during the winter counter @-@ offensive . After initial promising signs , the offensive was stopped by German counterattacks . Critical errors by several staff officers and by Joseph Stalin , who failed to accurately estimate the 6th Army 's potential and overestimated their own newly trained forces , led to a German pincer attack which cut off advancing Soviet troops from the rest of the front . The operation caused almost 300 @,@ 000 Soviet casualties compared to just 20 @,@ 000 for the Germans and their allies . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = General situation on the Eastern Front = = = 
 By late February 1942 , the Soviet winter counter @-@ offensive , had pushed German forces from Moscow on a broad front and then ended in mutual exhaustion . Stalin was convinced that the Germans were finished and would collapse by the spring or summer 1942 , as he said in his speech of 7 November 1941 . Stalin decided to exploit this perceived weakness on the Eastern Front by launching a new offensive in the spring . Stalin 's decision faced objections from his advisors , including the Chief of the Red Army General Staff , General Boris Shaposhnikov , and generals Aleksandr Vasilevsky and Georgy Zhukov , who argued for a more defensive strategy . Vasilevsky wrote " Yes , we were hoping for [ German reserves to run out ] , but the reality was more harsh than that " . According to Zhukov , Stalin did believe that the Germans were able to carry out operations simultaneously along two strategic axes , he was sure that the opening of spring offensives along the entire front would destabilize the German Army , before it had a chance to initiate what could be a mortal offensive blow on Moscow . Despite the caution urged by his generals , Stalin decided to try to keep the German forces off @-@ balance through " local offensives " . 
 = = = Choosing the strategy = = = 
 After the conclusion of the winter offensive , Stalin and the Soviet Armed Forces General Staff ( Stavka ) believed that the eventual German offensives would aim for Moscow , with a big offensive to the south as well , mirroring Operation Barbarossa and Operation Typhoon in 1941 . Although Stavka believed that the Germans had been defeated before Moscow , the seventy divisions which faced Moscow remained a threat . Stalin , most generals and front commanders believed that the principal effort would be a German offensive towards Moscow . Emboldened by the success of the winter offensive , Stalin was convinced that local offensives in the area would wear down German forces , weakening German efforts to mount another operation to take Moscow . Stalin had agreed to prepare the Red Army for an " active strategic defence " but later gave orders for the planning of seven local offensives , stretching from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea . One area was Kharkov , where action was originally ordered for March . 
 Early that month , the Stavka issued orders to Southwestern Strategic Direction headquarters for an offensive in the region , after the victories following the Rostov Strategic Offensive Operation and the Barvenkovo – <unk> Offensive Operation in the Donbas region . The forces of Marshal Semyon Timoshenko and Lieutenant General Kirill Moskalenko penetrated German positions along the northern Donets River , east of Kharkov . Fighting continued into April , with Moskalenko crossing the river and establishing a tenuous bridgehead at Izium . In the south , the Soviet 6th Army had limited success defending against German forces , which managed to keep a bridgehead of their own on the east bank of the river . Catching the attention of Stalin , it set the pace for the prelude to the eventual offensive intended to reach <unk> and <unk> and eventually Kharkov and Poltava . 
 By 15 March , Soviet commanders introduced preliminary plans for an offensive towards Kharkov , assisted by a large number of reserves . On 20 March , Timoshenko held a conference in <unk> to discuss the offensive and a report to Moscow , prepared by Timoshenko 's chief of staff , General Lieutenant Ivan <unk> , summed up the conference , although arguably leaving several key intelligence features out . The build @-@ up of Soviet forces in the region of Barvenkovo and <unk> continued well into the beginning of May . Final details were settled following discussions between Stalin , Stavka and the leadership of the Southwestern Strategic Direction led by Timoshenko throughout March and April , with one of the final Stavka directives issued on 17 April . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Soviet order of battle = = = 
 By 11 May 1942 , the Red Army was able to allocate six armies under two fronts , amongst other units . The Soviet Southwestern Front had the 21st Army , 28th Army , 38th Army and the 6th Army . By 11 May , the 21st Tank Corps had been moved into the region with the 23rd Tank Corps , with another 269 tanks . There were also three independent rifle divisions and a rifle regiment from the 270th Rifle Division , concentrated in the area , supported by the 2nd Cavalry Corps in <unk> . The Soviet Southern Front had the 57th and 9th armies , along with thirty rifle divisions , a rifle brigade and the 24th Tank Corps , the 5th Cavalry Corps and three Guards rifle divisions . At its height , the Southern Front could operate eleven guns or mortars per kilometer of front . 
 Forces regrouping in the sector ran into the rasputitsa , which turned much of the soil into mud . This caused severe delays in the preparations and made reinforcing the Southern and Southwestern Front take longer than expected . Senior Soviet representatives criticized the front commanders for poor management of forces , an inability to stage offensives and for their armchair generalship . Because the regrouping was done so haphazardly , the Germans received some warning of Soviet preparations . Moskalenko , the commander of the 38th Army , placed the blame on the fact that the fronts did not plan in advance to regroup and showed a poor display of front management . ( He commented afterwards that it was no surprise that the " German @-@ Fascist command divined our plans " . ) 
 = = = Soviet leadership and manpower = = = 
 The primary Soviet leader was Marshal Semyon Timoshenko , a veteran of World War I and the Russian Civil War . Timoshenko had achieved some success at the Battle of Smolensk in 1941 but was eventually defeated . Timoshenko orchestrated the victory at Rostov during the winter counter @-@ attacks and more success in the spring offensive at Kharkov , before to the battle . Overseeing the actions of the army was Military Commissar Nikita Khrushchev . 
 The average Soviet soldier suffered from inexperience . With the Soviet debacle of the previous year ameliorated only by the barest victory at Moscow , most of the original manpower of the Red Army had been killed , wounded or captured by the Germans , with casualties of almost 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 just from the Battle of Moscow . The typical soldier in the Red Army was a conscript and had little to no combat experience and tactical training was practically nonexistent . Coupled with the lack of trained soldiers , the Red Army also began to suffer from the loss of Soviet industrial areas and a temporary strategic defence was considered necessary . 
 The General Chief of Staff , Marshal Vasilevsky , recognised that the Soviet Army of 1942 was not ready to conduct big offensive operations against the well @-@ trained German army , because it did not have quantitative and qualitative superiority over the Wehrmacht and because leadership was being rebuilt after the defeats of 1941 . ( This analysis is retrospective and is an analysis on Soviet conduct during their strategic offensives in 1942 , and even beyond , such as Operation Mars in October 1942 and the Battle of <unk> Frumos in May 1944 . ) 
 = = = German preparations = = = 
 Unknown to the Soviet forces , the German 6th Army , under the newly appointed General Paulus , was issued orders for Operation <unk> on 30 April 1942 . This operation was to crush the Soviet armies within the Izium salient south of Kharkov , created during the Soviet spring offensives in March and April . This task was given to the 6th Army and the final directive issued on 30 April gave a start date of 18 May . 
 The Germans had made a big effort to reinforce Army Group South and transferred Field Marshal Fedor von Bock , former commander of Army Group Center during Operation Barbarossa and Operation Typhoon . On 5 April 1942 , Hitler issued Directive 41 , which made the south the main area of operations under Case Blue the summer campaign , at the expense of the other fronts . The divisions of Army Group South were brought up to full strength in late April and early May . The strategic objective was illustrated after the victories of Erich von Manstein and the 11th Army in the Crimea . The main objective remained Caucasus , its oil fields and as a secondary objective , the city of Stalingrad . 
 The plan to begin Operation <unk> in April led to more forces being allocated to the area of the German 6th Army . Unknown to the Soviet forces , the German army was regrouping in the center of operations for the offensive around Kharkov . On 10 May , Paulus submitted his final draft of Operation <unk> and feared a Soviet attack . By then , the German army opposite Timoshenko was ready for the operation towards Caucasus . 
 = = Soviet offensive = = 
 = = = Initial success = = = 
 The Red Army offensive began at 6 : 30 a.m. on 12 May 1942 , led by a concentrated hour @-@ long artillery bombardment and a final twenty @-@ minute air attack upon German positions . The ground offensive began with a dual pincer movement from the <unk> and Barvenkovo salients at 7 : 30 a.m. The German defences were knocked out by air raids , artillery @-@ fire and coordinated ground attacks against German fortifications . The fighting was so fierce that the Soviets inched forward their second echelon formations , preparing to throw them into combat as well . Fighting was particularly ferocious near the Soviet village of <unk> , where the Germans launched three local counter @-@ attacks . By dark the deepest Soviet advance was 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . Moskalenko , discovered the movement of several German reserve units and realised that the attack had been opposed by two German divisions , not the one expected , indicating poor Soviet reconnaissance and intelligence @-@ gathering before the battle . A captured diary of a dead German general alluded to the Germans knowing about Soviet plans in the region . 
 Next day Paulus obtained three infantry divisions and a panzer division for the defence of Kharkov and the Soviet advance was slow , achieving little success except on the left flank . Bock had warned Paulus not to counter @-@ attack without air support , although this was later reconsidered , when several Soviet tank brigades broke through VIII Corps ( General Walter Heitz ) in the <unk> sector , only 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from Kharkov . In the first 72 hours the 6th Army lost 16 battalions conducting holding actions and local counter @-@ attacks in the heavy rain and mud . By 14 May the Red Army had made impressive gains , several Soviet divisions were so depleted that they were withdrawn and Soviet tank reserves were needed to defeat the German counter @-@ attacks , German losses were estimated to be minimal , with only 35 – 70 tanks believed to have been knocked out in the 3rd and 23rd Panzer divisions . 
 = = = Luftwaffe = = = 
 Hitler immediately turned to the Luftwaffe to help blunt the offensive . At this point , its close support corps was deployed in the Crimea , taking part in the siege of Sevastopol . 8th Air Corps under the command of Wolfram von Richthofen was initially ordered to deploy to Kharkov from the Crimea , but the command was rescinded . In an unusual move , Hitler kept it in the Crimea , but did not put the corps under the command of Luftflotte 4 ( Air Fleet 4 ) , which already contained 6th Air Corps , under the command of General Kurt Pflugbeil , and Fliegerführer Süd ( Flying Command South ) , a small anti @-@ shipping command based in the Crimea . Instead , he allowed Richthofen to take charge of all operations over Sevastopol . The siege in the Crimea was not over , and the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula had not yet been won . Still , Hitler was pleased with the progress there and content to keep Richthofen where he was and withdraw air support from Fliegerkorps VIII in order to prevent a Soviet breakthrough at Kharkov . The use of the Luftwaffe to compensate for the German Army 's lack of firepower suggested that the OKW saw the Luftwaffe primarily as a ground support arm . This angered Richthofen who complained that the Luftwaffe was treated as " the army 's whore " . Now that he was not being redeployed to Kharkov , Richthofen also complained about the withdrawal of his units to the region , arguing that the Kerch and Sevastopol battles were ongoing and owing to the transfer of aerial assets to Kharkov , victory in the Crimea was no longer guaranteed . In reality , the Soviet units at Kerch were already routed and the Axis position at Sevastopol was comfortable . 
 The news that powerful air support was on its way to bolster the 6th Army boosted German morale . Army commanders , such as Paulus and Bock , placed so much confidence in the Luftwaffe that they ordered their forces not to risk an attack without air support . In the meantime , Fliegerkorps VI , was forced to use every available aircraft . Although meeting more numerous Soviet air forces , he achieved air superiority and limited the German ground forces ' losses to Soviet aviation , but with some crews flying more than 10 missions per day . By 15 May , Pflugbeil was reinforced and received Kampfgeschwader 27 ( Bomber Wing 27 , or KG 27 ) , Kampfgeschwader 51 ( KG 51 ) , Kampfgeschwader 55 ( KG 55 ) and Kampfgeschwader 76 ( KG 76 ) equipped with Junkers Ju 88 and Heinkel He 111 bombers . Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 ( Dive Bomber Wing 77 , or StG 77 ) also arrived to add direct ground support . Pflugbeil now had 10 bomber , six fighter and four Junkers Ju 87 Stuka Gruppen ( Groups ) . Logistical difficulties meant that only 54 @.@ 5 per cent were operational . 
 = = = German defence = = = 
 German close air support also began to take its toll , forcing units such as the Soviet 38th Army onto the defensive . It ranged over the front , operating dangerously close to the changing frontline . Air interdiction and direct ground support damaged Soviet supply lines and rear areas , also inflicting large losses on their armoured formations . General Franz Halder remarked the air attacks went a long way to breaking the Soviet offensive . The Soviet air force could do very little to stop these air attacks . Not only did the Luftwaffe attack the enemy , it also carried out vital supply missions . Bombers dropped supplies to encircled German units , which could continue to hold out until a counter @-@ offensive relieved them . 
 On 14 May , the Germans continued to attack Soviet positions in the north in localised offensives and by then , the Luftwaffe had gained air superiority over the Kharkov sector , forcing Timoshenko to move his own air assets forward in order to effectively counter the bolstered Luftflotte 4 . The Luftwaffe won air superiority over their numerically superior , but technically inferior opponents . The air battles depleted the Soviet fighter strength , allowing the German strike aircraft the chance to influence the land battle even more . Nonetheless , the Soviet forces pushed on , disengaging from several minor battles and changing the direction of their thrusts . However , in the face of continued resistance and local counterattacks , the Soviet attack ebbed , especially when combined with the invariably heavy air raids . By the end of the day , the 28th Army could no longer conduct offensive operations against German positions . 
 Ironically , the Soviet southern pincer did not suffer as terribly as had the shock groups in the north . They achieved spectacular success the first three days of combat , with a deep penetration of German positions . Although intensive fighting also marked the battles in the south , the Red Army routed several key German battalions , including many made up of personnel of foreign descent , including some Hungarian units . The success of the Southern Shock group , however , has been attributed to the fact that the early penetrations in the north had directed German reserves there , thus limiting the reinforcements to the south . But , by 14 May , Hitler had briefed General Ewald von Kleist and ordered his 1st Panzer Army to grab the initiative in a bold counteroffensive , setting the pace for the final launching of Operation <unk> . 
 = = = Second phase of the offensive = = = 
 On 15 and 16 May , another attempted Soviet offensive in the north met the same resistance encountered on the three first days of the battle . German bastions continued to hold out against Soviet assaults . The major contribution to Soviet frustration in the battle was the lack of heavy artillery , which ultimately prevented the taking of heavily defended positions . One of the best examples of this was the defense of <unk> , where defending German units absolutely refused to surrender . The fighting was so harsh that , after advancing an average of five kilometers , the offensive stopped for the day in the north . The next day saw a renewal of the Soviet attack , which was largely blocked by counterattacks by German tanks ; the tired Soviet divisions could simply not hold their own against the concerted attacks from the opposition . The south , however , achieved success , much like the earlier days of the battle , although Soviet forces began to face heavier air strikes from German aircraft . The Germans , on the other hand , had spent the day fighting holding actions in both sectors , launching small counterattacks to whittle away at Soviet offensive potential , while continuously moving up reinforcements from the south , including several aircraft squadrons transferred from the Crimea . Poor decisions by the 150th Rifle Division , which had successfully crossed the Barvenkovo River , played a major part in the poor exploitation of the tactical successes of the southern shock group . 
 = = = 1st Panzer Army counterattacks = = = 
 On 17 May , supported by Fliegerkorps VI , the German army took the initiative , as Kleist 's 3rd Panzer Corps and 44th Army Corps began a counterattack on the Barvenkovo bridgehead from the area of <unk> in the south . Aided greatly by air support , Kleist was able to crush Soviet positions and advanced up to ten kilometres in the first day of the attack . Many of the Soviet units were sent to the rear that night to be refitted , while others were moved forward to reinforce tenuous positions across the front . That same day , Timoshenko reported the move to Moscow and asked for reinforcements and described the day 's failures . Vasilevsky 's attempts to gain approval for a general withdrawal were rejected by Stalin . 
 On 18 May , the situation worsened and Stavka suggested once more stopping the offensive and ordering the 9th Army to break out of the salient . Timoshenko and Khruschev claimed that the danger coming from Wehrmacht 's <unk> group was exaggerated , and Stalin refused the withdrawal again . The consequences of losing the air battle were also apparent . On 18 May the Fliegerkorps VI destroyed 130 tanks and 500 motor vehicles , while adding another 29 tanks destroyed on 19 May . 
 On 19 May , Paulus , on orders from Bock , began a general offensive from the area of <unk> in the north of the bulge in an attempt to encircle the remaining Soviet forces in the Izium salient . Only then did Stalin authorize Zhukov to stop the offensive and fend off German flanking forces . However , it was already too late . Quickly , the Germans achieved considerable success against Soviet defensive positions . The 20 May saw more of the same , with the German forces closing in from the rear . More German divisions were committed to the battle that day , shattering several Soviet counterparts , allowing the Germans to press forward . The Luftwaffe also intensified operations over the Donets River to prevent Soviet forces escaping . Ju 87s from StG 77 destroyed five of the main bridges and damaged four more while Ju 88 bombers from Kampfgeschwader 3 ( KG 3 ) inflicted heavy losses on retreating motorised and armoured columns . 
 Although Timoshenko 's forces successfully regrouped on 21 May , he ordered a withdrawal of Army Group <unk> by the end of 22 May , while he prepared an attack for 23 May , to be orchestrated by the 9th and 57th Armies . Although the Red Army desperately attempted to fend off advancing Wehrmacht and launched local counterattacks to relieve several surrounded units , they generally failed . By the end of May 24 , Soviet forces opposite Kharkov had been surrounded by German formations , which had been able to transfer several more divisions to the front , increasing the pressure on the Soviet flanks and finally forcing them to collapse . 
 = = = Soviet encirclement = = = 
 The 25 May saw the first major Soviet attempt to break the encirclement . German Major General Hubert Lanz described the attacks as gruesome , made en masse . By 26 May , the surviving Red Army soldiers were forced into crowded positions in an area of roughly fifteen square kilometers . Soviet attempts to break into the German encirclement from the east were continuously blocked using tenacious defensive manoeuvres and German air power . Groups of Soviet tanks and infantry that attempted to escape and succeeded in breaking through German lines were caught and destroyed by Ju 87s from StG 77 . In the face of determined German operations , Timoshenko ordered the official halt of all Soviet offensive manoeuvres on 28 May , while attacks to break out of the encirclement continued until 30 May . Nonetheless , less than one man in ten managed to break out of the " Barvenkovo mousetrap " . Beevor puts Soviet losses in terms of prisoners as 240 @,@ 000 ( with the bulk of their armour ) , while Glantz — citing <unk> — gives a total of 277 @,@ 190 overall Soviet casualties . Both tend to agree on a low German casualty count , with the most formative rounding being at 20 @,@ 000 dead , wounded and missing . Regardless of the casualties , Kharkov was a major Soviet setback ; it put an end to the successes of the Red Army during the winter counteroffensive . 
 = = Analysis and conclusions = = 
 Many authors have attempted to pinpoint the reasons for the Soviet defeat . Several Soviet generals have placed the blame on the inability of Stavka and Stalin to appreciate the Wehrmacht 's military power on the Eastern Front after their defeats in the winter of 1941 – 1942 and in the spring of 1942 . On the subject , Zhukov sums up in his memoirs that the failure of this operation was quite predictable , since the offensive was organized very ineptly , the risk of exposing the left flank of the Izium salient to German counterattacks being obvious on a map . Still according to Zhukov , the main reason for the stinging Soviet defeat lay in the mistakes made by Stalin , who underestimated the danger coming from German armies in the southwestern sector ( as opposed to the Moscow sector ) and failed to take steps to concentrate any substantial strategic reserves there to meet any potential German threat . Furthermore , Stalin ignored sensible advice provided by his own General Chief of Staff , who recommended organising a strong defence in the southwestern sector in order to be able to repulse any Wehrmacht attack . 
 Additionally , the subordinate Soviet generals ( especially South @-@ Western Front generals ) were just as willing to continue their own winter successes , and much like the German generals , under @-@ appreciated the strength of their enemies , as pointed out a posteriori by the commander of the 38th Army , Kirill Moskalenko . The Soviet winter counteroffensive weakened the Wehrmacht , but did not destroy it . As Moskalenko recalls , quoting an anonymous soldier , " these fascists woke up after they hibernated " . 
 Stalin 's willingness to expend recently conscripted armies , which were poorly trained and poorly supplied , illustrated a misconception of realities , both in the capabilities of the Red Army and the subordinate arms of the armed forces , and in the abilities of the Germans to defend themselves and successfully launch a counteroffensive . The latter proved especially true in the subsequent Case Blue , which led to the Battle of Stalingrad , though this was the battle in which Paulus faced an entirely different outcome . 
 The battle had shown the potential of the Soviet armies to successfully conduct an offensive . This battle can be seen as one of the first major instances in which the Soviets attempted to preempt a German summer offensive . This later unfolded and grew as Stavka planned and conducted Operation Mars , Operation Uranus and Operation Saturn . Although only two of the three were victories , it still offers concise and telling evidence of the ability of the Soviets to turn the war in their favor . This finalised itself after the Battle of Kursk in July 1943 . The Second Battle of Kharkov also had a positive effect on Stalin , who started to trust his commanders and his Chief of Staff more ( allowing the latter to have the last word in naming front commanders for instance ) . After the great purge in 1937 , failing to anticipate the war in 1941 , and underestimating German military power in 1942 , Stalin finally fully trusted his military . 
 Within the context of the battle itself , the failure of the Red Army to properly regroup during the prelude to the battle and the ability of the Germans to effectively collect intelligence on Soviet movements played an important role in the outcome . Poor Soviet performance in the north and equally poor intelligence @-@ gathering at the hands of Stavka and front headquarters , also eventually spelled doom for the offensive . Nonetheless , despite this poor performance , it underscored a dedicated evolution of operations and tactics within the Red Army which borrowed and refined the pre @-@ war theory , Soviet deep battle . 
 = Aquaman ( TV pilot ) = 
 Aquaman is a television pilot developed by Smallville creators Al Gough and Miles Millar for The WB Television Network , based on the DC Comics character of the same name . Gough and Millar wrote the pilot , which was directed by Greg Beeman . Justin Hartley starred as Arthur " A.C. " Curry , a young man living in a beachside community in the Florida Keys who learns about his powers and destiny as the Prince of Atlantis . 
 The Aquaman pilot was expected to debut in the fall schedule of 2006 , but following the merger of the WB and UPN , the resulting CW Network opted not to buy the series . After they passed on the pilot , it was made available online through iTunes in the United States and became the number @-@ one most downloaded television show on iTunes . It received generally favorable reviews , was later released on other online markets , and aired on Canadian television network YTV . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The concept of Aquaman stemmed from a fifth season episode of Smallville , " Aqua " . The episode featured Arthur Curry ( Alan Ritchson ) coming to Smallville to stop an underwater weapons project being developed by LuthorCorp . " Aqua " became the highest rated episode for Smallville that season , but it was never meant to be a backdoor pilot for an Aquaman series . However , as work progressed on " Aqua " , the character was recognized to have potential for his own series . Miles Millar and Alfred Gough , the creators of Smallville , also considered a series featuring Lois Lane , but felt more confident about Aquaman . Millar said , " [ Aquaman ] was the first idea where we really thought we had a franchise where we could see 100 episodes . " 
 Alan Ritchson was not considered for the role in the new series , because Gough and Millar did not consider it a spin @-@ off from Smallville . Gough said in November 2005 , " [ The series ] is going to be a different version of the ' Aquaman ' legend . " Gough did express the idea of a crossover with Smallville at some point . There was initial speculation that the show 's title would not be Aquaman . Tempest Keys and Mercy Reef were rumored to be the working titles for the series . The show would eventually be listed as Aquaman , when it was later released on iTunes . Greg Beeman , who has produced and directed episodes of Smallville , was hired to direct the pilot . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The role of Arthur Curry was originally given to Will Toale , after Gough and Millar saw over 400 candidates from England , Australia , Canada and the United States . Before filming began , Toale was replaced with Justin Hartley . A CW spokesman said , " We have made the decision to go in a different direction with the Aquaman role and wish [ Toale ] the best of luck in all of his endeavors . " Graham Bentz was cast as a young Arthur Curry , while Adrianne Palicki was cast as a Siren named Nadia . Ving Rhames , Amber McDonald , Denise Quiñones , Rick Peters , and Lou Diamond Phillips filled in the rest of the regular cast members . 
 Four of the cast members guest starred on Smallville before the Aquaman pilot . Denise Quiñones played Andrea Rojas in the season five episode " Vengeance " , while Adrianne Palicki appeared in the season three episode " Covenant " . Rick Peters was cast as Bob Rickman in the season one episode " Hug " . Kenny Johnson , who briefly appears as the Sheriff in the pilot 's opening , guest starred in the season five episode " Mortal " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production was based in North Miami , Florida ; filming began in March 2006 with an estimated budget of $ 7 million . Practical and exterior footage was shot around Coconut Grove , Miami . Some scenes were filmed on location at the Homestead Joint Air Reserve Base adjacent to Homestead , Florida . The <unk> Fighter Wing Airmen were used as extras while filming at the base , along with several of their fighter aircraft . The production was expected to continue in June of that year , had it been given the greenlight . 
 Some of the actors received training from Staff Sergeant Leo Castellano on the proper way to present arms . Much of the filming took place underwater ; Hartley filmed his underwater scenes without a tank , breathing from the safety divers ' tanks around him for the scenes out on the ocean . Hartley had never been scuba diving and was not a diver , but did say that he was a good swimmer . Entity FX , the firm which did the special effects for Smallville since its second season , was contracted to work on the Aquaman pilot . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Justin Hartley as Arthur " A.C. " Curry / Aquaman : The central character of the show . He runs a dive shop in his day @-@ to @-@ day life . However , Arthur is aware of his special abilities , but uses them for fun before learning in the pilot episode of his destiny as the lost Prince of Atlantis . 
 Lou Diamond Phillips as Tom Curry : A Coast Guard officer . While in his rookie year , he rescues the infant Arthur ( then named Orin ) , Atlanna , and McCaffery from shark @-@ infested waters . He later falls in love with Atlanna , marrying her and adopting her son . 
 Denise Quiñones as Lt. Rachel Torres : A fighter pilot . She meets Arthur when he rescues her after her jet crashes in the ocean . She is then asked by Brigman to aid in his investigation . 
 Rick Peters as Admiral Brigman : A U.S. Navy officer who has been investigating the apparent resurfacing of people around Mercy Reef who were lost in the Bermuda Triangle , some , as much as 40 years ago . 
 Ving Rhames as McCaffery : A lighthouse keeper and A.C. ' s mentor . He is also an Atlantean . 
 Amber McDonald as Eva : A.C. ' s business partner ; together they run a dive shop in Tempest Keys . The two are close friends . 
 Adrianne Palicki as Nadia : A siren and the villain of the story . She is the one responsible for the murder of Atlanna . 
 Daniella Wolters as Atlanna : A.C. ' s mother ; she was taken from him when he was young , and her disappearance has mystified A.C. ever since . She was the first to call him " Orin " . 
 = = Pilot summary = = 
 A.C. and his mother Atlanna are flying over the Bermuda Triangle . As they get closer , Atlanna 's necklace begins to glow and a surge of light and energy erupts from the ocean , causing cyclones which bring their plane down . Atlanna is kidnapped by a siren , but not before giving A.C. her necklace and calling him Orin . Ten years later , A.C. is charged for releasing dolphins from a marine park . His father bails him out of trouble , but gives him a stern lecture on responsibility . Later , A.C. tells his friend Eva that he felt like the dolphins were calling to him . While he 's working , he is approached by a lighthouse keeper who identifies himself as McCaffery . The Coast Guard picks up an unidentified man , floating in the Bermuda Triangle and pleading to warn Orin . Lt. Torres is sent to investigate the area . A.C. is also at the Triangle , and his necklace triggers another surge of light , which causes Torres to crash her jet . Brigman transports the John Doe to another facility , and persuades Torres to join his team . Brigman is looking for a connection between the disappearances of thousands of individuals , and their reappearance years later without ever aging a day . 
 That evening , A.C. meets Nadia and she convinces him to go swimming . In the water , Nadia reveals herself to not only be a Siren , but the one that took his mother . A.C. barely escapes with a little help from McCaffery . McCaffery explains that he , Arthur and Arthur 's mother were all exiled from Atlantis , and that A.C. is the prince of Atlantis . Arthur convinces Eva to leave Tempest Key for a few days , but it comes too late as Nadia injures Eva and captures Arthur . When he wakes up , A.C. finds that Nadia has also captured McCaffery and she is bringing them both back to Atlantis to be executed . Breaking free using a flask of water to enhance his strength , A.C. destroys Nadia by putting a spear through her head . The next morning , McCaffery explains that there will be more creatures that will come looking for A.C. and that he should have started his training years prior . A.C. agrees to start his training , and McCaffery leaves him with Henry IV Part 1 and Part 2 to read . McCaffery informs Arthur who would rather just skip to the ending that " It isn 't about the ending , it 's about the journey . " 
 Ideas for future episodes focused on environmental threats , such as " ocean polluters " and " evil oil companies . " The first 13 episodes already planned out , with a possible story arc involving McCaffery being captured and taken back to Atlantis . Stories regarding mythology were set to play a small role in later episodes . Gough and Millar chose to go with a more classic version , from the comics , of Aquaman 's mythology . Gough stated , " Unlike Superman , there really isn 't a set core mythology for Arthur Curry . There are a couple different versions of it . We went with the most classic one . " 
 = = Abilities and weakness = = 
 Hartley explained that Arthur would be aware of his powers at the beginning of the series and would have no problem using them for personal gain . Hartley felt this played against the typical superheroes , because his character was not afraid to flaunt his abilities . Gough explained A.C. would be able to swim faster than humans , breathe underwater , as well as have super strength while underwater . He also stated that exposure to water on land would give him powers . The extent of his speed is shown in the pilot , when Arthur is able to keep up with a fighter jet flying above him . The extent of A.C. ' s ability to breathe underwater was not elaborated upon , but he is seen swimming near the bottom of the ocean near the start of the pilot . When A.C. is talking to Eva about releasing captive dolphins , he tells her that he felt as though the dolphins were somehow calling to him . In the comics , one of Aquaman 's powers is the ability to communicate with sea life . Gough likened A.C. ' s not having access to water to Clark 's growing weak around kryptonite in Smallville – if A.C. does not get water , he will dehydrate and weaken . Water gives him a power boost and enables producers to explore stories on land . 
 = = Release = = 
 The pilot was considered to have a good chance of being picked up , but ultimately the CW passed on the show . Discussing the excitement surrounding the project , Lou Diamond Phillips said , " The funny thing about the Aquaman project is that there 's so much buzz about it already . Which is amazing , I mean you don 't usually get that with a pilot , because they 're sort of sight unseen . " There were reports of two WB pilots in contention for the new CW network , one being Aquaman , which was a frontrunner . On May 18 , 2006 , when The CW announced its fall lineup Aquaman was not on the list . Dawn Ostroff , The CW 's president of entertainment , stated that it was still a midseason contender . 
 Gough and Miller were so passionate about the pilot that they wanted it released in some form so the fans could see it . Gough said in an interview , " The implication when a network doesn 't pick up a show is that the pilot sucks and that 's not the case . It 's not a perfect pilot by any stretch of the imagination . There are other reasons — which are a mystery to us — as to why The CW didn 't pick it up . " He mentioned a potential release as an extended episode during the sixth season of Smallville . 
 On July 24 , 2006 , the pilot became one of the first shows offered by Warner Brothers on the iTunes Store ( available only to US customers ) for $ 1 @.@ 99 , under the title Aquaman . Within a week , it reached the number @-@ one spot on the list of most downloaded TV shows on the digital store 's list , and it held that spot for over a week . Gough stated , " At least the pilot is now getting its day in court with the fans , and the reviews have all been very positive . " It became the first show available on iTunes which had not previously aired on a network . The pilot was released the week of March 12 , 2007 on the Xbox Live Video Marketplace . By March 24 , 2007 , the pilot reached # 6 on the Video Marketplace 's top downloads . On June 9 , 2007 , Canadian television network YTV , aired the pilot as part of their " Superhero Saturday . " Warner Home Video in association with Best Buy released the pilot as a promotional DVD on November 11 , 2007 , bundling it together with selected Smallville season sets . On February 23 , 2009 , Warner Bros. attached it as a bonus feature to the Blu @-@ ray release of Justice League : Crisis on Two Earths . 
 Critical response was generally positive . The pilot was found comparable in quality to Smallville , with suggestions that Aquaman was indeed worthy of a place on The CW 's schedule . The cast was well received ; in addition , Hartley was praised for his portrayal of Arthur Curry . Cinematography and underwater special effects were well received . Reviews that were not as positive did concede the show had potential . The project was commended for keeping the comic book myth fresh and exciting for a modern audience . IGN had a different opinion of the show , calling it " dead in the water " , and comparing it to " cheesy cult classics , such as Shazam ! " . 
 = New York State Route 59 = 
 New York State Route 59 ( NY 59 ) is an east – west state highway in southern Rockland County , New York , in the United States . The route extends for 14 @.@ 08 miles ( 22 @.@ 66 km ) from NY 17 in Hillburn to U.S. Route 9W ( US 9W ) in Nyack . In Suffern , it has a concurrency with US 202 for 0 @.@ 05 miles ( 0 @.@ 08 km ) . NY 59 runs parallel to the New York State Thruway its entire route . The routing of NY 59 became a state highway in 1911 and was signed as NY 59 in the late 1920s . 
 When NY 59 was first assigned , it began at NY 17 in Suffern . A western bypass of Suffern was designated as New York State Route 339 c . 1932 ; however , it became part of a realigned NY 17 in the mid @-@ 1930s . NY 339 was reassigned to NY 17 's former routing between Hillburn and Suffern , but it was replaced again c . 1937 by an extended NY 59 . In the 1960s , proposals surfaced for the Spring Valley Bypass , a highway that would utilize the NY 59 corridor between NY 306 in Monsey and NY 45 in Spring Valley . The proposed highway was never built . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 59 begins at an intersection with NY 17 in Hillburn , just south of the village of Sloatsburg in southern Rockland County . It heads to the southeast as the Korean War Veterans Memorial Highway , crossing over the Ramapo River and the Norfolk Southern Railway before following both into Suffern . The river leaves NY 59 just inside the village line ; however , the railroad continues to run alongside NY 59 into the center of Suffern , where both pass under the New York State Thruway near where Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) connects to I @-@ 287 . 
 Just south of the I @-@ 87 overpass , NY 59 meets US 202 at Wayne Avenue . US 202 joins NY 59 for a one block wrong way concurrency along Orange Avenue — as NY 59 eastbound is paired with US 202 westbound and vice versa — during which time both routes cross the Norfolk Southern Railway at @-@ grade . At the end of the overlap , US 202 continues south along Orange Avenue to the New Jersey state line while NY 59 forks eastward toward central Rockland County . As NY 59 leaves Suffern and enters Airmont , it passes Good Samaritan Hospital , a major hospital in Rockland County . While in Airmont , NY 59 intersects County Route 89 ( CR 89 ) and CR 85 . After leaving Airmont , NY 59 proceeds east through Monsey , where it intersects the southern terminus of NY 306 . 
 As NY 59 passes Spring Valley High School , it enters the village limits of Spring Valley . While in Spring Valley , NY 59 has an overlap with CR 35A for about a tenth of a mile and meets the Thruway at exit 14 . The route continues eastward into Nanuet , where NY 59 passes through a heavy commercialized area . Before its busy intersection with CR 33 , NY 59 passes The Shops at Nanuet to its south and the Rockland Plaza to its north . 
 Upon entering West Nyack , NY 59 intersects the Palisades Interstate Parkway ( exit 8 ) and NY 304 . The route proceeds onward , passing Palisades Center , one of the largest shopping malls in the country . Immediately after passing the Palisades Center , NY 59 briefly enters Central Nyack . Here it connects to NY 303 by way of an interchange . Before hitting the Nyack village line , NY 59 has its final interchange with the Thruway . The southbound entrance to the Tappan Zee Bridge is via Mountainview Avenue , and the northbound entrance is via <unk> Street . 
 At the Nyack line , NY 59 becomes known as Main Street . As Main Street , NY 59 runs under the Thruway one final time before the Thruway heads over the bridge . The route continues toward downtown Nyack ; however , it ends at an intersection with US 9W before it reaches the central district . Main Street continues for several blocks into downtown Nyack . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 NY 59 originated as the Nyack Turnpike , which was the first major thoroughfare in Rockland County . A petition was filed in 1813 to construct the turnpike . Legislation stemming from the petition was passed on April 17 , 1816 , allowing construction to begin . The Nyack Turnpike was completed from Suffern to Nyack in the 1830s , despite many years of local opposition to the highway . Its charter was renewed multiple times throughout the 19th century , and it was designated as a toll road to help pay for its upkeep . In 1894 , the turnpike was absorbed into the Rockland County road system . 
 The turnpike was turned over from the county to the state of New York on July 14 , 1911 , and added to the state highway system as part of Route 39 @-@ b , an unsigned legislative route extending from Nyack ( at Broadway ) to Harriman via modern NY 59 and NY 17 . The Route 39 @-@ b designation was eliminated on March 1 , 1921 , as part of a partial renumbering of New York 's legislative route system . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the portion of former Route 39 @-@ b between Suffern and Harriman became part of NY 17 . The remainder of the route from Nyack to Suffern was not given a number . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 The Suffern – Nyack highway remained unnumbered until the late 1920s when was designated as NY 59 . At the time , NY 59 was routed on West Nyack Road between Nanuet and Central Nyack . The route was rendered unchanged in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . A western bypass of Suffern was designated as NY 339 c . 1932 . The north – south highway left NY 17 at the hamlet of Ramapo and followed the modern New York State Thruway and I @-@ 287 corridors south through Hillburn to the New Jersey state line . In the mid @-@ 1930s , the alignments of NY 17 and NY 339 south of Ramapo were swapped , placing NY 17 on the bypass and NY 339 on the Ramapo – Suffern route . In Suffern , NY 339 ended at a junction with US 202 just one block north of NY 59 's western terminus . NY 339 was replaced by an extended NY 59 c . 1937 . 
 In the early 1950s , construction began on a bypass of West Nyack Road between Nanuet and West Nyack . The highway was completed c . 1955 and became part of a realigned NY 59 . The portion of NY 59 's former routing that did not overlap NY 304 was redesignated as NY <unk> . This designation was short @-@ lived as it was removed from West Nyack Road in the late 1950s . In 1960 , control of the highway was turned over to the town of <unk> , and parts of NY <unk> 's former routing were abandoned . A local company carried out work to convert the highway into a shopping center access road ; however , Rockland County asserted that the town — and by extension the company — had no rights to perform this action . The county sued the company that helped improve the highway in 2002 . 
 = = = Traffic problems = = = 
 In 1958 , Ramapo town engineer Edwin Wallace noticed an increase in the amount of traffic passing through the village of Spring Valley , which had become the largest village in Rockland County by this time . This led Wallace to propose a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) bypass of NY 59 in Monsey and NY 45 in Hillcrest . Rockland County approved the proposed bypass two years later . In 1966 , the Tri @-@ State Transportation Commission released its long @-@ term highway report for the area . The new study replaced the Spring Valley Bypass with the NY 45 expressway , a north – south bypass of Spring Valley connecting the Garden State Parkway to the Palisades Interstate Parkway . The road would serve a steadily growing area of commercial businesses along the NY 45 corridor . No action was taken on this proposal . 
 With the Spring Valley Bypass plan shelved , traffic continued to pour through the Spring Valley – Nanuet area . In 1987 , a task force was introduced to come up with a plan to solve this issue . Traffic became even worse when the Nanuet Mall expanded in 1994 . NYSDOT tried to fix the worsening situation in 1995 when they reconstructed almost 3 miles ( 5 km ) of NY 59 from the eastern border of Spring Valley to exit 8 of the Palisades Interstate Parkway . The project widened the road to six lanes , helping to move traffic through the area from Grandview to Middletown Roads in Nanuet . In 1997 , the New York State Thruway Authority dropped the Spring Valley toll on the Thruway for all motorists except truckers . This helped reduce traffic on NY 59 between exits 14A and 14B . 
 Shortly after the traffic problems in Nanuet were reduced , the focus was shifted to West Nyack where Palisades Center was being constructed . First proposed in the late 1980s , construction finally started in 1995 . This caused major delays for motorists when a bridge was constructed from NY 59 to Palisades Center south parking lot . To keep this portion of NY 59 from being overloaded with mall goers , exit 12 of the Thruway with NY 303 was re @-@ routed through Palisades Center via Palisades Center Drive . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Rockland County . 
 = Wilkins Peak = 
 Wilkins Peak is a small mountain located in Sweetwater County , Wyoming , between the cities of Green River and Rock Springs . It is primarily used for radio and television station transmitters , but it also serves radio needs of the FAA , EMS , and local businesses such as <unk> Gas . In 2003 , a tower on the peak was knocked down by a vehicle delivering propane to customers . The tower was owned by Wyoming Public Radio and was serving the local area with programming from National Public Radio . There are numerous access roads to the peak and it is not gated and open year round , weather permitting . Along with the radio uses , the mountain is also a popular location for mountain biking and hiking . The mountain contains geology typical of its location in southwestern Wyoming . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Along with other mountains in southwestern Wyoming , Wilkins Peak is part of the Green River Formation , a formation of the <unk> Lake <unk> environment during the Eocene epoch . Similar to its neighboring Aspen Mountain , Wilkins Peak is part of the Rock Springs Uplift , and some of the largest oil shale and trona beds in the region are located near the mountain . Wilkins Peak also has its own distinct segment of the Green River Formation , which is known as the Wilkins Peak Formation . The peak itself is 7 @,@ 650 feet ( 2 @,@ 332 m ) in elevation and is located 8 @.@ 18 miles ( 13 km ) from Rock Springs , Wyoming and 6 @.@ 3 miles ( 10 km ) from Green River , Wyoming . 
 = = Radio and television uses = = 
 Wilkins Peak holds radio towers for several FM radio and television stations . Stations include <unk> ( 95 @.@ 1 FM ) and its sister stations <unk> ( 92 @.@ 1 FM ) and <unk> ( 97 @.@ 9 FM ) . Also on the mountain is the tower for the station <unk> 89 @.@ 5 , which signed on the air in September 2010 . <unk> is an affiliate of Pilgrim Radio . Several television translators transmit their signals from two small towers located in the center of Wilkins Peak . Additionally , the religious television network TBN has a translator known locally as <unk> , broadcasting from the mountain . Prior to 2009 , K22BK , the local PBS television translator , carried its signal from Wilkins Peak . K22BK was moved across the interstate to White Mountain to the same tower as its digital counterpart . In late 2009 , a new television station signed on the air from the peak . It is known as <unk> @-@ D on channel 33 ( UHF ) and carries programming from <unk> TV , a Christian religious broadcast and production company , based in Cedar Hill , Texas . <unk> and K22BK have been off the air since the digital television transition in the year 2009 . 
 = = = FM translators = = = 
 Among high powered FM radio stations , Wilkins Peak is also currently host to three lower powered FM translators . <unk> carries a Gospel format on 88 @.@ 9 FM . <unk> <unk> programming from AM station <unk> on 104 @.@ 9 FM . Finally , <unk> carries programming from <unk> 97 @.@ 9 FM . 
 = = = Other radio related uses = = = 
 Wilkins Peak also has repeater towers for local police , fire , and EMS services . The emergency radio repeaters on the mountain are used in conjunction with other repeaters located on nearby Aspen Mountain and <unk> Hill . 
 In September 2003 , a commercial truck delivering propane to customers on the peak knocked down the then @-@ existent <unk> tower after the vehicle 's brakes failed . The collapse of the tower knocked out power to the mountain for several hours , and while <unk> borrowed space from neighboring towers for several months thereafter , the station ultimately relocated its transmitter to nearby Aspen Mountain . 
 = = Accessing the peak = = 
 Wilkins Peak is not gated , and it can be reached via an unpaved road known as Wilkins Peak Road that starts on U.S. Route 191 southwest of Rock Springs , Wyoming . The mountain can also be accessed via another unpaved road that begins in the Scott 's Bottom Nature Area in Green River , Wyoming . The peak is accessible year @-@ round , weather permitting . The Green River access road is in worse shape than the Rock Springs side , and it has several road hazards such as steep grades , poor grading , and off @-@ road vehicle traffic . Along with serving radio needs , the peak also is a popular hiking and mountain biking location in the area . There are many smaller roads and trails that spring from the peak that offer varied degrees of challenge . 
 = A Golden Crown = 
 " A Golden Crown " is the sixth episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series Game of Thrones , first aired on May 22 , 2011 . The teleplay was written by Jane Espenson , David Benioff and D.B. Weiss from a story by Benioff and Weiss , and directed by Daniel Minahan . 
 The episode 's plot depicts the deterioration of the political balance of the seven kingdoms , with Eddard Stark having to deal with the Lannister aggressions while King Robert is away on a hunt . At the Eyrie , Tyrion is put on trial , and across the Narrow Sea , Viserys Targaryen is determined to force Khal Drogo to make him king . 
 The episode was well received by critics , who praised aspects of the King 's Landing storyline and the culmination of Viserys ' storyline . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Like previous episodes , " A Golden Crown " interweaves action happening in multiple separate locations within and around the Kingdom of Westeros . 
 = = = In the North = = = 
 Bran Stark ( Isaac Hempstead @-@ Wright ) is awakened from one of his recurring dreams of a three @-@ eyed crow with the pleasant surprise that the specially designed saddle that will allow him to ride has been finished . He goes to test it in the forest under the supervision of his brother Robb ( Richard Madden ) and Theon Greyjoy ( Alfie Allen ) . 
 While Theon is trying to convince Robb to avenge his father for the Lannisters ' attack , a small group of wildlings ( humans who live north of the wall , outside of " civilized " lands ) , who have ventured south , capture Bran . Robb and Theon manage to kill all the men and capture the woman Osha ( Natalia Tena ) . Despite Theon 's help , Robb chastises him for endangering Bran 's life when Theon shot an arrow at the wildling who was holding Bran . 
 = = = In the Eyrie = = = 
 Tyrion ( Peter Dinklage ) is able to trick Lysa Arryn ( Kate Dickie ) into summoning a court to listen to his confession , at which he confesses various misdemeanours committed during his life , but nothing about the attempt on Bran 's life or Lysa 's husband 's death . After , Tyrion publicly demands a trial by combat , and the mercenary Bronn ( Jerome Flynn ) volunteers to fight for him . Lysa Arryn has no choice but to allow it . Bronn defeats Lysa 's champion Ser Vardis <unk> ( Brendan McCormack ) by tiring the heavily armored knight and kicking him out the Moon Door , and Tyrion is allowed to walk free with Bronn as his escort , much to the dismay of the Tully sisters . 
 = = = In King 's Landing = = = 
 Eddard Stark ( Sean Bean ) awakens in his chambers with Robert ( Mark Addy ) and Cersei ( Lena Headey ) watching him . Cersei accuses Eddard of kidnapping her brother , Tyrion , and claims Eddard was drunk and attacked Jaime first , but she is silenced by a slap from Robert . After she leaves , Robert tells Eddard that he cannot rule the kingdoms if the Lannisters and Starks are at war and insists that Eddard remain the Hand of the King , or else Robert will give the position to Jaime . Robert also informs Eddard that he will be regent while Robert is away on a hunting trip . 
 Meanwhile , Arya ( Maisie Williams ) deals with her father 's injury and her loss of Jory during her sword @-@ dance lessons ; Syrio ( Miltos Yerolemou ) tells her it 's a perfect opportunity for her to learn to avoid distraction while fighting . In the Starks ' common room , Sansa ( Sophie Turner ) and Septa <unk> are interrupted by Prince Joffrey ( Jack Gleeson ) , who apologizes to Sansa for his earlier behavior and gives her a necklace , vowing that she will become his queen in an elaborate wedding ceremony . Sansa happily accepts the apology , unaware Joffrey has been forced into it by his mother . 
 While acting as regent , Eddard learns that Ser Gregor " The Mountain " Clegane was spotted leading brigands and attacking villages in the Riverlands . Realizing this is revenge for Tyrion 's arrest , Eddard orders Ser Beric <unk> ( David Michael Scott ) to secure Gregor 's arrest , strips him of his lands and titles , and summons his Lord Tywin Lannister to answer for Gregor 's actions . Fearing war with the Lannisters and for his daughters ' lives , he orders Arya and Sansa to return to Winterfell for their safety . Sansa protests and mentions Joffrey 's blond hair ; Eddard realizes something and re @-@ reads the book of lineages of the Baratheon family . Doing so , he puts the pieces together : Joffrey does not have black hair like his father , his father 's ancestors , and Robert 's bastards whom he and Jon Arryn had been researching . Eddard concludes Joffrey is not Robert 's real son . 
 = = = In Vaes Dothrak = = = 
 Daenerys ( Emilia Clarke ) takes one of the dragon eggs and places it on a glowing @-@ hot brazier . She reaches in and picks up the blisteringly hot egg . Her handmaiden rushes in to take the hot egg from her hands , burning herself in the process , but Daenerys ' hands are completely unscathed . 
 Daenerys begins the ritual with the <unk> <unk> by eating the raw heart of a stallion . After some struggle , she completes the task and stands up to proclaim her unborn son as the Khal who will unite the entire world as one khalasar , and she names him <unk> . Viserys ( Harry Lloyd ) grows angry at his sister 's increasing popularity among the Dothraki , but Jorah Mormont ( Iain Glen ) urges patience . Viserys ignores him and sneaks away to Daenerys ' tent to steal the dragon eggs to fund a new army . However , Jorah confronts him , forcing Viserys to leave the eggs behind . Viserys storms off after a tense exchange of words between the two men . 
 Later , at a feast for Daenerys and Khal Drogo , a drunken Viserys draws his sword on his sister , threatening that if the Khal does not give him an army to take back the Seven Kingdoms , he will take back Daenerys and cut out her child . Khal Drogo agrees to give him the " golden crown " that he wants , and Viserys lets his guard down , allowing Drogo 's <unk> to restrain him . Drogo melts his belt in a stewpot , and Viserys realises to his horror that the " golden crown " is actually molten gold , which Drogo pours on his head . Daenerys watches her brother 's painful death calmly , and coldly observes : " He was no dragon . Fire cannot kill a dragon . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The teleplay for " A Golden Crown " was written by Jane Espenson , David Benioff and D. B. Weiss from a story by Benioff and Weiss , based on A Game of Thrones by George R. R. Martin . The episode includes the book 's chapters 38 @-@ 41 , 44 @-@ 45 and 47 ( Bran V , Tyrion V , Eddard X , Catelyn VII , Eddard XI , Sansa III , and Daenerys V ) . Chapter 42 ( Jon V ) , dealing with Jon convincing Maester Aemon to allow Samwell to join the Watch as a steward , was removed from the series , and chapter 43 ( Tyrion VI ) was moved to episode 8 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The episode introduces the recurring character of the wildling Osha . The writer of the original books , George R. R. Martin , admitted that this casting was different from his vision of the character . As he explains , he was surprised to see that actress Natalia Tena was being considered for the role since Osha had been conceived as a hard @-@ bitten older woman and the actress was " too young and too hot . " However , when he saw the audition tapes he was convinced with the new approach : " she was sensational , and I said , ' It 's gotta be her . ' " 
 = = = Staging and props = = = 
 The scene in which Daenerys has to eat a horse 's heart was filmed in The Paint Hall studio in Belfast . There , the production built the Dothraki temple in which the scene is set – a large semicircular structure of wood and woven reeds , inspired by Marsh Arab constructions . The heart actress Emilia Clarke ate was , according to Weiss , " basically a giant , three @-@ pound gummi bear covered in fake sugar blood – which has the added attraction of drawing real flies . " Through repeated takes , Clarke did have to eat much of the sugary heart . She said that it tasted of bleach and was made tough and gristly by the addition of valves made from " something like dried pasta . " Clarke did not have to act in the shots at the end of the scene in which Daenerys almost throws up the last bit of heart , as she was indeed close to vomiting at that point . 
 The book of lineages that helps Ned realize the truth about Joffrey 's father was prepared by Bryan Cogman , who in addition to writing episode four ( " Cripples , Bastards , and Broken Things " ) also served as the show 's " lore master " and authored the background content concerning the history of Westeros that is to be included in the first season 's DVD and Blu @-@ ray release . Cogman wrote two pages ' worth of text detailing the lineage of four noble houses . The text concerning house Umber was shown in episode four , and the Baratheon text appears in episode six . Cogman also wrote text for the houses of Targaryen and Royce , but the corresponding scenes were removed from the final script for " Cripples , Bastards , and Broken Things " but the Targaryen page was shown in " A Golden Crown " . Cogman said that he drew on the novels and the fan @-@ created website Wiki of Ice and Fire for reference , and invented what could not be sourced , including even some Internet fan message board names as in @-@ jokes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 For the first time since the premiere of the show the ratings decreased in relation to the previous weeks . The first airing brought 2 @.@ 4 million viewers , compared to the 2 @.@ 6 million gathered by the previous episode . With the second airing the differences shrank , bringing the total of the night to 3 @.@ 2 million , one hundred thousand viewers below the previous week 's 3 @.@ 3 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " A Golden Crown " received positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff from the A.V. Club gave it an A- , and Maureen Ryan from AOL TV rated it with a 70 out of 100 . HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall titled his review " The rules get upended in a terrific episode . " Both Elio Garcia from <unk> and Jace Lacob from <unk> considered it the best episode of the series so far . In the words of reviewer Jace Lacob , the episode " revolves around changes both great and small , about the way the scales can fall from our eyes and we can see the truth that has been standing in front of us for so long . For Eddard , it 's a realization of just why Jon Arryn died , of the terrible secret he had gleaned from the book of royal lineages , and just what this could mean for the throne ... and for the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros . For Dany , it 's the brutal truth of her brother 's real nature , of his insatiable thirst for power and the twisted quality of his rampant heart . " 
 The Dothraki scenes that culminate with the " crowning " of Viserys Targaryen were acclaimed by the critics . Writing for Time , James Poniewozik highlighted an acting of " touching self @-@ recognition by Harry Lloyd , who did an outstanding job humanizing a villain , " and Maureen Ryan congratulated the actor for his " excellent job of showing the human side of this impetuous , cruel aristocrat " and " keeping Viserys just this side of sane in all his scenes . " The acting of Emilia Clarke , closing her arc initiated in the first episode from a frightened girl to an empowered woman was also praised . VanDerWerff commented on the difficulty to adapt such an evolution from page to screen , but concluded that " Clarke and Lloyd more than seal the deal here . " IGN 's Matt Fowler also praised Clarke and noted that Daenerys ' choice to watch Viserys die was " powerful " and an important shift in her character . 
 Another aspect of the show that was widely discussed among commentators was the moral dilemma presented in the episode between a pragmatic approach to ruling or remaining true to the ideals of justice and honor , exemplified in the scene where Eddard summons Tywin Lannister to the court to answer for the crimes of his bannerman Gregor Clegane . Poniewozik states that Eddard " doesn 't seem to consider that he has options : he is left to rule in the king 's place , an injustice has been committed , the law requires one path to justice and he chooses it . This makes his decision easy , but it may make his life , and others ' , difficult . " According to The Atlantic 's Scott Meslow , " Ned 's principles are , as always , admirable , and he 's clearly interested in justice . But the sad truth is that the lack of guile that makes him honorable also makes him a pretty poor king . It 's a terrible idea to order the arrest of the man who is single @-@ handedly financing your kingdom . " Myles McNutt , writing for Cultural Learnings , agreed with Meslow and concluded that " the only thing more dangerous than a reckless man asserting their [ sic ] power in Westeros is an honorable man doing the same , as it threatens the delicate framework which has propped up King Robert for so long . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The episode received three Emmy nominations in 2011 , for Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie or a Special ; Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single @-@ Camera Series ; and Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . 
 = Ruddy shelduck = 
 The ruddy shelduck ( Tadorna ferruginea ) , known in India as the <unk> duck , is a member of the family Anatidae . It is a distinctive waterfowl , 58 to 70 cm ( 23 to 28 in ) in length with a wingspan of 110 to 135 cm ( 43 to 53 in ) . It has orange @-@ brown body plumage with a paler head , while the tail and the flight feathers in the wings are black , contrasting with the white wing @-@ coverts . It is a migratory bird , wintering in the Indian subcontinent and breeding in southeastern Europe and central Asia , though there are small resident populations in North Africa . It has a loud honking call . 
 The ruddy shelduck mostly inhabits inland water @-@ bodies such as lakes , reservoirs and rivers . The male and female form a lasting pair bond and the nest may be well away from water , in a crevice or hole in a cliff , tree or similar site . A clutch of about eight eggs is laid and is incubated solely by the female for about four weeks . The young are cared for by both parents and fledge about eight weeks after hatching . 
 In central and eastern Asia , populations are steady or rising , but in Europe they are generally in decline . Altogether , the birds have a wide range and large total population , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed their conservation status as being of " least concern " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The ruddy shelduck ( Tadorna ferruginea ) is a member of the shelduck genus Tadorna ; in the wildfowl family Anatidae . The bird was first described in 1764 by the German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas who named it Anas ferruginea , but later it was transferred to the genus Tadorna with the other shelducks . Some authorities place it in the genus <unk> along with the South African shelduck ( T. <unk> ) , the Australian shelduck ( T. <unk> ) and the Paradise shelduck ( T. variegata ) . Phylogenetic analysis shows that it is most closely related to the South African shelduck . In captivity , the ruddy shelduck has been known to hybridise with several other members of Tadorna , with several members of the dabbling duck genus Anas , and with the Egyptian goose ( <unk> aegyptiaca ) . No subspecies are recognised . 
 The genus name Tadorna comes from the French " <unk> " , the common shelduck , and may originally derive from a Celtic word meaning " pied waterfowl " . The English name " <unk> duck " dates from around 1700 and means the same . The species name ferruginea is Latin for " rusty " and refers to the colour of the plumage . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ruddy shelduck grows to a length of 58 to 70 cm ( 23 to 28 in ) and has a 110 – 135 cm ( 43 – 53 in ) wingspan . The male has orange @-@ brown body plumage and a paler , orange @-@ brown head and neck , separated from the body by a narrow black collar . The rump , flight feathers , tail @-@ coverts and tail feathers are black and there are iridescent green speculum feathers on the inner surfaces of the wings . Both upper and lower wing @-@ coverts are white , this feature being particularly noticeable in flight but hardly visible when the bird is at rest . The bill is black and the legs are dark grey . The female is similar but has a rather pale , whitish head and neck and lacks the black collar , and in both sexes , the colouring is variable and fades as the feathers age . The birds moult at the end of the breeding season and the male loses the black collar , but a further partial moult between December and April restores it . Juveniles are similar to the female but are a darker shade of brown . 
 The call is a series of loud , nasal honking notes , it being possible to discern the difference between those produced by the male and the female . The calls are made both on the ground and in the air , and the sounds are variable according to the circumstances in which they are uttered . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 There are very small resident populations of this species in north west Africa and Ethiopia , but the main breeding area of the bird is from southeast Europe across central Asia to Lake Baikal , Mongolia , and western China . Eastern populations are mostly migratory , wintering in the Indian subcontinent . This species has colonised the island of Fuerteventura in the Canary Islands , first breeding there in 1994 , and reaching a population of almost fifty pairs by 2008 . The ruddy shelduck is a common winter visitor in India where it arrives by October and departs by April . Its typical breeding habitat is large wetlands and rivers with mud flats and shingle banks , and it is found in large numbers on lakes and reservoirs . It breeds in high altitude lakes and swamps in Jammu and Kashmir . Outside the breeding season it prefers lowland streams , sluggish rivers , ponds , flooded grassland , marshes and brackish lagoons . 
 Although becoming quite rare in southeast Europe and southern Spain , the ruddy shelduck is still common across much of its Asian range . It may be this population which gives rise to vagrants as far west as Iceland , Great Britain and Ireland . However , since the European population is declining , it is likely that most occurrences in western Europe in recent decades are escapes or feral birds . Although this bird is observed in the wild from time to time in eastern North America , no evidence has been found that this is a genuine case of vagrancy . 
 This shelduck mostly frequents open locations on inland bodies of water such as lakes , reservoirs and rivers . It is seldom seen in forested areas but does occur in brackish water and saline lagoons . Though more common in the lowlands , it also inhabits higher altitudes and in central Asia is one of the few waterbirds , along with the bar @-@ headed goose ( Anser indicus ) , to be found on lakes at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The ruddy shelduck is a mainly nocturnal bird . It is omnivorous and feeds on grasses , the young shoots of plants , grain and water plants as well as both aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates . On land it grazes on the foliage , in the water it dabbles in the shallows , and at greater depths , it up @-@ ends , but it does not dive . 
 The ruddy shelduck is usually found in pairs or small groups and rarely forms large flocks . However , moulting and wintering gatherings on chosen lakes or slow rivers can be very large . Gatherings of over four thousand birds have been recorded on the Koshi Barrage and in the Koshi <unk> Wildlife Reserve in Nepal , and over ten thousand at Lake <unk> in Turkey . 
 The birds arrive at their main breeding locations in central Asia in March and April . There is a strong pair bond between the male and female and it is thought they pair for life . In their breeding quarters , the birds are very aggressive towards their own kind and towards other species . The female in particular approaches intruders with head lowered and neck outstretched , uttering anger calls . If the intruder stands its ground , the female returns to the male and runs round him , inciting him to attack . He may or may not do so . Mating takes place on the water after a brief courtship ritual involving neck stretching , head dipping and tail raising . The nesting site is often far away from water in a hole in a tree or ruined building , a crevice in a cliff , among sand @-@ dunes or in an animal burrow . The nest is constructed by the female using feathers and down and some grasses . 
 A clutch of about eight eggs ( range six to twelve ) is laid between late April and early June . These have a dull gloss and are creamy @-@ white , averaging 68 by 47 mm ( 2 @.@ 68 by 1 @.@ 85 in ) . Incubation is done by the female while the male stands in attendance nearby . The eggs hatch after about twenty @-@ eight days and both parents care for the young , which fledge in a further fifty @-@ five days . After breeding the adults moult , losing the power of flight for about a month while they do so . Before moulting they move to large water bodies where they can more easily avoid predation while they are flightless . The family may stay together as a group for some time ; the autumn migration starts around September and the young may mature in their second year . North African birds breed about five weeks earlier , and their breeding success is greater in wet summers . 
 = = Status = = 
 Buddhists regard the ruddy shelduck as sacred and this gives the birds some protection in central and eastern Asia , where the population is thought to be steady or even rising . The <unk> Black @-@ necked Crane Reserve in Tibet is an important wintering area for ruddy ducks , and here they receive protection . In Europe on the other hand , populations are generally declining as wetlands are drained and the birds are hunted . However , they are less vulnerable than some other waterfowl because of their adaptability to new habitats such as reservoirs . 
 The ruddy shelduck has a very wide range and an estimated total population size of 170 @,@ 000 to 225 @,@ 000 individuals . The overall population trend is unclear as some local populations are increasing while others are decreasing . The bird does not appear to meet the higher criteria necessary to be considered threatened , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature assesses that its conservation status is of " least concern " . It is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies . 
 = First Crusade = 
 The First Crusade ( 1095 – 1099 ) was the first of a number of crusades that attempted to recapture the Holy Lands , called by Pope Urban II in 1095 . It started as a widespread pilgrimage in western Christendom and ended as a military expedition by Roman Catholic Europe to regain the Holy Lands taken in the Muslim conquests of the Levant ( 632 – 661 ) , ultimately resulting in the recapture of Jerusalem in 1099 . 
 It was launched on 27 November 1095 by Pope Urban II with the primary goal of responding to an appeal from Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos , who requested that western volunteers come to his aid and help to repel the invading Seljuk Turks from Anatolia . An additional goal soon became the principal objective — the Christian reconquest of the sacred city of Jerusalem and the Holy Land and the freeing of the Eastern Christians from Muslim rule . 
 During the crusade , knights , peasants and serfs from many regions of Western Europe travelled over land and by sea , first to Constantinople and then on towards Jerusalem . The Crusaders arrived at Jerusalem , launched an assault on the city , and captured it in July 1099 , massacring many of the city 's Muslim and Jewish inhabitants . They also established the crusader states of the Kingdom of Jerusalem , the County of Tripoli , the Principality of Antioch , and the County of Edessa . 
 The First Crusade was followed by the Second to the Ninth Crusades . It was also the first major step towards reopening international trade in the West since the fall of the Western Roman Empire . Due to the First Crusade being largely concerned with Jerusalem , a city which had not been under Christian dominion for 461 years , and that the crusader army , on seizure of lands , had refused to honour a brokered promise before the seizure to return gained lands to the control of the Byzantine Empire , the status of the First Crusade as defensive or aggressive in nature remains unanswered and controversial . The majority view is that it had elements of both in its nature . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The origin of the Crusades in general , and particularly that of the First Crusade , is widely debated among historians . The confusion is partially due to the numerous armies in the first crusade , and their lack of direct unity . The similar ideologies held the armies to similar goals , but the connections were rarely strong , and the unity broke down often . The Crusades are most commonly linked to the political and social situation in 11th @-@ century Europe , the rise of a reform movement within the papacy , and the political and religious confrontation of Christianity and Islam in Europe and the Middle East . Christianity had spread throughout Europe , Africa , and the Middle East in Late Antiquity , but by the early 8th century Christian rule had become limited to Europe and Anatolia after the Muslim conquests . 
 The Umayyad Caliphate had conquered Syria , Egypt , and North Africa from the predominantly Christian Byzantine Empire , and Hispania from the Visigothic Kingdom . In North Africa , the Umayyad empire eventually collapsed and a number of smaller Muslim kingdoms emerged , such as the Aghlabids , who attacked Italy in the 9th century . Pisa , Genoa , and the Principality of Catalonia began to battle various Muslim kingdoms for control of the Mediterranean Basin , exemplified by the Mahdia campaign and battles at Majorca and Sardinia . 
 Essentially , between the years 1096 and 1101 the Byzantine Greeks experienced the crusade as it arrived at Constantinople in three separate waves . 
 In the early summer of 1096 , the first large unruly group arrived on the outskirts of Constantinople . This wave was reported to be undisciplined and ill @-@ equipped as an army as noted in the People ’ s Crusade . This first group is often called the Peasants ’ or People ’ s Crusade . It was led by Peter the Hermit and Walter Sans Avoir and had no knowledge of or respect for the wishes of Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Comnenus . 
 The second wave was also not under the command of the Emperor and was made up of a number of armies with their own commanders . Together , this group and the first wave numbered an estimated 60 @,@ 000 . 
 The second wave was led by Hugh I , Count of Vermandois , the brother of King Philip I of France . Also among the second wave were Raymond IV , Count of Toulouse and the army of Provençals . " It was this second wave of crusaders which later passed through Asia Minor , captured Antioch in 1098 and finally took Jerusalem 15 July 1099 . ” 
 The third wave , composed of contingents from Lombardy , France , and Bavaria , arrived in Jerusalem in the early summer of 1101 . 
 = = Situation in Europe = = 
 At the western edge of Europe and of Islamic expansion , the Reconquista in the Iberian Peninsula was well underway by the 11th century . It was intermittently ideological , as evidenced by the Codex <unk> compiled in 881 . Increasingly in the 11th century foreign knights , mostly from France , visited Iberia to assist the Christians in their efforts . Shortly before the First Crusade , Pope Urban II had encouraged the Iberian Christians to reconquer Tarragona , using much of the same symbolism and rhetoric that was later used to preach the crusade to the people of Europe . 
 The heart of Western Europe had been stabilized after the Christianization of the Saxon , Viking , and Hungarian peoples by the end of the 10th century . However , the breakdown of the Carolingian Empire gave rise to an entire class of warriors who now had little to do but fight among themselves . The random violence of the knightly class was regularly condemned by the church , and in response it established the Peace and Truce of God to prohibit fighting on certain days of the year . At the same time , the reform @-@ minded papacy came into conflict with the Holy Roman Emperors , resulting in the Investiture Controversy . Popes such as Gregory VII justified the subsequent warfare against the Emperor 's partisans in theological terms . It became acceptable for the Pope to utilize knights in the name of Christendom , not only against political enemies of the Papacy , but also against Al @-@ Andalus , or , theoretically , against the Seljuq dynasty in the east . 
 To the east of Europe lay the Byzantine Empire , composed of Christians who had long followed a separate Orthodox rite ; the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches had been in schism since 1054 . Historians have argued that the desire to impose Roman church authority in the east may have been one of the goals of the crusade , although Urban II , who launched the First Crusade , never refers to such a goal in his letters on crusading . The Seljuq Turks had taken over almost all of Anatolia after the Byzantine defeat at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 ; however , their conquests were piecemeal and led by semi @-@ independent warlords , rather than by the sultan . A dramatic collapse of the empire 's position on the eve of the Council of Clermont brought Byzantium to the brink of disaster . By the mid @-@ 1090s , the Byzantine Empire was largely confined to Balkan Europe and the northwestern fringe of Anatolia , and faced Norman enemies in the west as well as Turks in the east . In response to the defeat at Manzikert and subsequent Byzantine losses in Anatolia in 1074 , Pope Gregory VII had called for the <unk> Christi ( " soldiers of Christ " ) to go to Byzantium 's aid . This call was largely ignored and even opposed . The reason for this was that while the defeat at Manzikert was shocking , it had limited significance and did not lead to major difficulties for the Byzantine empire , at least in the short term . 
 = = Situation in the Middle East = = 
 Until the crusaders ' arrival the Byzantines had continually fought the Seljuqs and other Turkish dynasties for control of Anatolia and Syria . The Seljuqs , who were orthodox Sunni Muslims , had formerly ruled the Great Seljuq Empire , but by the time of the First Crusade it had divided into several smaller states after the death of Malik @-@ Shah I in 1092 . 
 Malik @-@ Shah was succeeded in the Anatolian Sultanate of Rum by Kilij Arslan I , and in Syria by his brother Tutush I , who died in 1095 . Tutush 's sons Fakhr al @-@ Mulk Radwan and Duqaq inherited Aleppo and Damascus respectively , further dividing Syria amongst emirs antagonistic towards each other , as well as Kerbogha , the atabeg of Mosul . 
 Egypt and much of Palestine were controlled by the Arab Shi 'ite Fatimid Caliphate , which was significantly smaller since the arrival of the Seljuqs . Warfare between the Fatimids and Seljuqs caused great disruption for the local Christians and for western pilgrims . The Fatimids , under the nominal rule of caliph al @-@ Musta <unk> but actually controlled by vizier al @-@ Afdal Shahanshah , had lost Jerusalem to the Seljuqs in 1073 ( although some older accounts say 1076 ) ; they recaptured it in 1098 from the Artuqids , a smaller Turkish tribe associated with the Seljuqs , just before the arrival of the crusaders . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 It is now impossible to assess exactly why the First Crusade occurred , although many possible causes have been suggested by historians , most recently Jay Rubenstein . The historiography of the Crusades reflects attempts made by different historians to understand the Crusades ' complex causes and justifications . An early theory , the so @-@ called " Erdmann thesis " , developed by German historian Carl Erdmann , directly linked the Crusades to the 11th @-@ century reform movements . This first theory claimed that the exportation of violence to the east , and the assistance to the struggling Byzantine Empire were the Crusaders ' primary goals , and that the conquest of Jerusalem was more a secondary , popular goal . 
 Generally , subsequent historians have either followed Erdmann , with further expansions upon his thesis , or rejected it . Some historians , such as Speros <unk> , have emphasized the influence of the rise of Islam generally , and the impact of the recent Seljuq onslaught specifically . Steven Runciman argued that the crusade was motivated by a combination of theological justification for holy war and a " general restlessness and taste for adventure " , especially among the Normans and the " younger sons " of the French nobility who had no other opportunities . 
 Runciman even implies that there was no immediate threat from the Islamic world , arguing that " in the middle of the 11th century the lot of the Christians in Palestine had seldom been so pleasant " . However , Runciman makes his argument only in reference to Palestine under the Fatimids c . 1029 – 1073 , not under the Seljuqs . Moreover , the source of his generally positive view of Palestinian Christians ' lot in the later 11th century is unclear , as there were very few contemporary Christian sources from Palestine writing in this period , and surviving Christian sources deriving directly from Seljuq Palestine are virtually non @-@ existent . 
 In opposition to Runciman 's argument , and on the basis of contemporary Jewish Cairo <unk> documents , as well as later Muslim accounts , Moshe Gil argues that the Seljuq conquest and occupation of Palestine ( c . 1073 – 1098 ) was a period of " slaughter and vandalism , of economic hardship , and the uprooting of populations " . Indeed , drawing upon earlier writers such as Ignatius of Melitene , Michael the Syrian had recorded that the Seljuqs subjected Coele @-@ Syria and the Palestinian coast to " cruel destruction and pillage " . 
 Thomas Asbridge argues that the First Crusade was Pope Urban II 's attempt to expand the power of the church , and reunite the churches of Rome and Constantinople , which had been in schism since 1054 . Asbridge , however , provides little evidence from Urban 's own writings to bolster this claim , and Urban 's four extant letters on crusading do not seem to express such a motive . According to Asbridge , the spread of Islam was unimportant because " Islam and Christendom had coexisted for centuries in relative equanimity " . Asbridge , however , fails to note that the recent Turkish conquests of Anatolia and southern Syria had shattered the tense but relatively stable balance of power that a somewhat revived Byzantine Empire had gradually developed with earlier Islamic powers over the course of the 10th and early 11th century . 
 Following the defeat at Manzikert in 1071 , Muslims had taken half of the Byzantine Empire 's territory , and such strategically and religiously important cities as Antioch and Nicaea had only fallen to Muslims in the decade before the Council of Piacenza . Moreover , the harrowing accounts of the Turkish invasion and conquest of Anatolia recorded by such Eastern Christian chroniclers as John Skylitzes , Michael <unk> , Matthew of Edessa , Michael the Syrian and others , which are summarized by <unk> , seem to contradict Asbridge 's broad picture of <unk> " coexistence " between the Christian and Muslim worlds in the second half of the 11th century . 
 Thomas Madden represents a view almost diametrically opposed to that of Asbridge ; while the crusade was certainly linked to church reform and attempts to assert papal authority , he argues that it was most importantly a pious struggle to liberate fellow Christians , who , Madden claims , " had suffered mightily at the hands of the Turks " . This argument distinguishes the relatively recent violence and warfare that followed the conquests of the Turks from the general advance of Islam , the significance of which is dismissed by Runciman and Asbridge . Christopher Tyerman incorporates both arguments in his thesis ; namely , that the Crusade developed out of church reform and theories of holy war as much as it was a response to conflicts with the Islamic world throughout Europe and the Middle East . In Jonathan Riley @-@ Smith 's view , poor harvests , overpopulation , and a pre @-@ existing movement towards colonizing the frontier areas of Europe also contributed to the crusade ; however , he also takes care to say that " most commentators then and a minority of historians now have maintained that the chief motivation was a genuine idealism " . 
 Peter Frankopan has argued that the First Crusade has been fundamentally distorted by the attention paid by historians to western ( Latin ) sources , rather than Greek , Syriac , Armenian , Arabic and Hebrew material from the late 11th and 12th centuries . The expedition to Jerusalem , he argues , was conceived of not by the Pope but by the Emperor Alexios I Komnenos , in response to a dramatic deterioration of Byzantium 's position in Asia Minor and also as a result of the a state of near anarchy at the imperial court where plans to depose Alexios or even murder him were an open secret by 1094 . The appeal to Pope Urban II was a desperate move to shore up Emperor and Empire . Frankopan goes further , showing that the Crusade 's primary military targets in Asia Minor - Nicaea and Antioch - required large numbers of men with experience of siege warfare ; precisely the sort recruited by Urban during his preaching in France in 1095 @-@ 6 . 
 The idea that the crusades were a response to Islam dates back as far as 12th @-@ century historian William of Tyre , who began his chronicle with the fall of Jerusalem to Umar . Although the original Islamic conquests had taken place centuries before the First Crusade , more recent events would have been fresh in the minds of the European Christians of the time . For example , in 1009 the Church of the Holy Sepulchre had been destroyed by the Fatimid Caliph al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah ; Pope Sergius IV supposedly called for a military expedition in response , and in France , many Jewish communities were even attacked in a misdirected retaliation . Despite the Church 's rebuilding after al @-@ Hakim 's death , and pilgrimages resuming , including the Great German Pilgrimage of 1064 – 1065 , pilgrims continued to suffer attacks from local Muslims . In addition , the even more recent Turkish incursions into Anatolia and northern Syria were certainly viewed as devastating by Eastern Christian chroniclers , and it is plausible they were presented as such by the Byzantines to the Pope in order to solicit the aid of European Christians . 
 = = Council of Clermont = = 
 While the Crusades had causes deeply rooted in the social and political situations of 11th @-@ century Europe , the event actually triggering the First Crusade was a request for assistance from Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos . Alexios was worried about the advances of the Seljuqs , who had reached as far west as Nicaea , not far from Constantinople . In March 1095 , Alexios sent envoys to the Council of Piacenza to ask Pope Urban II for aid against the Turks . 
 Urban responded favourably , perhaps hoping to heal the Great Schism of forty years earlier , and to reunite the Church under papal primacy by helping the Eastern churches in their time of need . Alexios and Urban had previously been in close contact in 1089 and after , and had discussed openly the prospect of the ( re ) union of the Christian church . There were signs of considerable co @-@ operation between Rome and Constantinople in the years immediately before the Crusade . 
 In July 1095 , Urban turned to his homeland of France to recruit men for the expedition . His travels there culminated in the Council of Clermont in November , where , according to the various speeches attributed to him , he gave an impassioned sermon to a large audience of French nobles and clergy , graphically detailing the fantastical atrocities being committed against pilgrims and eastern Christians . There are five versions of the speech recorded by people who may have been at the council ( <unk> of Dol , Guibert of Nogent , Robert the Monk , and Fulcher of Chartres ) or who went on crusade ( Fulcher and the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum ) , as well as other versions found in later historians ( such as William of Malmesbury and William of Tyre ) . All of these versions were written after Jerusalem had been captured . Thus it is difficult to know what was actually said and what was recreated in the aftermath of the successful crusade . The only contemporary records are a few letters written by Urban in 1095 . 
 All five versions of the speech differ widely from one another in regard to particulars . All versions , except that in the Gesta Francorum , generally agree that Urban talked about the violence of European society and the necessity of maintaining the Peace of God ; about helping the Greeks , who had asked for assistance ; about the crimes being committed against Christians in the east ; and about a new kind of war , an armed pilgrimage , and of rewards in heaven , where remission of sins was offered to any who might die in the undertaking . They do not all specifically mention Jerusalem as the ultimate goal . However , it has been argued that Urban 's subsequent preaching reveals that he expected the expedition to reach Jerusalem all along . According to one version of the speech , the enthusiastic crowd responded with cries of Deus <unk> ! ( " God wills it ! " ) . However , other versions of the speech do not include this detail . 
 = = = Recruitment = = = 
 Urban 's speech had been well @-@ planned : he had discussed the crusade with Adhemar of Le Puy and Raymond IV , Count of Toulouse , and instantly the expedition had the support of two of southern France 's most important leaders . Adhemar himself was present at the Council and was the first to " take the cross " . During the rest of 1095 and into 1096 , Urban spread the message throughout France , and urged his bishops and legates to preach in their own dioceses elsewhere in France , Germany , and Italy as well . However , it is clear that the response to the speech was much greater than even the Pope , let alone Alexios , expected . On his tour of France , Urban tried to forbid certain people ( including women , monks , and the sick ) from joining the crusade , but found this nearly impossible . In the end , most who took up the call were not knights , but peasants who were not wealthy and had little in the way of fighting skills , in an outpouring of a new emotional and personal piety that was not easily harnessed by the ecclesiastical and lay aristocracy . Typically , preaching would conclude with every volunteer taking a vow to complete a pilgrimage to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre ; they were also given a cross , usually sewn onto their clothes . 
 As Thomas Asbridge wrote , " Just as we can do nothing more than estimate the number of thousands who responded to the crusading ideal , so too , with the surviving evidence , we can gain only a limited insight into their motivation and intent . " Previous generations of scholars argued that the crusaders were motivated by greed , hoping to find a better life away from the famines and warfare occurring in France , but as Asbridge notes , " This image is ... profoundly misleading . " He argues that greed was unlikely to have been a major factor because of the extremely high cost of travelling so far from home , and because almost all of the crusaders eventually returned home after completing their pilgrimage rather than trying to carve out possessions for themselves in the Holy Land . It is difficult or impossible to assess the motives of the thousands of poor for whom there is no historical record , or even those of important knights , whose stories were usually retold by monks or clerics . As the secular medieval world was so deeply ingrained with the spiritual world of the church , it is quite likely that personal piety was a major factor for many crusaders . 
 Despite this popular enthusiasm , however , Urban ensured that there would be an army of knights , drawn from the French aristocracy . Aside from Adhemar and Raymond , other leaders he recruited throughout 1096 included Bohemond of Taranto , a southern Italian ally of the reform popes ; Bohemond 's nephew Tancred ; Godfrey of Bouillon , who had previously been an anti @-@ reform ally of the Holy Roman Emperor ; his brother Baldwin of Boulogne ; Hugh I , Count of Vermandois , brother of the excommunicated Philip I of France ; Robert Curthose , brother of William II of England ; and his relatives Stephen II , Count of Blois and Robert II , Count of Flanders . The crusaders represented northern and southern France , Flanders , Germany , and southern Italy , and so were divided into four separate armies that were not always cooperative , though they were held together by their common ultimate goal . 
 The motives of the nobility are somewhat clearer than those of the peasants ; greed was apparently not a major factor . It is commonly assumed , for example by Runciman as mentioned above , that only younger members of a family went on crusade , looking for wealth and adventure elsewhere , as they had no prospects for advancement at home . Riley @-@ Smith has shown that this was not always the case . The crusade was led by some of the most powerful nobles of France , who left everything behind , and it was often the case that entire families went on crusade at their own great expense . For example , Robert of Normandy loaned the Duchy of Normandy to his brother William II of England , and Godfrey sold or mortgaged his property to the church . According to Tancred 's biographer , he was worried about the sinful nature of knightly warfare , and was excited to find a holy outlet for violence . Tancred and Bohemond , as well as Godfrey , Baldwin , and their older brother Eustace III , Count of Boulogne , are examples of families who crusaded together . Riley @-@ Smith argues that the enthusiasm for the crusade was perhaps based on family relations , as most of the French crusaders were distant relatives . Nevertheless , in at least some cases , personal advancement played a role in Crusaders ' motives . For instance , Bohemond was motivated by the desire to carve himself out a territory in the east , and had previously campaigned against the Byzantines to try to achieve this . The Crusade gave him a further opportunity , which he took after the Siege of Antioch , taking possession of the city and establishing the Principality of Antioch . 
 = = People 's Crusade = = 
 The great French nobles and their trained armies of knights , however , were not the first to undertake the journey towards Jerusalem . Urban had planned the departure of the first crusade for 15 August 1096 , the Feast of the Assumption , but months before this , a number of unexpected armies of peasants and petty nobles set off for Jerusalem on their own , led by a charismatic priest called Peter the Hermit . Peter was the most successful of the preachers of Urban 's message , and developed an almost hysterical enthusiasm among his followers , although he was probably not an " official " preacher sanctioned by Urban at Clermont . 
 A century later he was already a legendary figure ; William of Tyre believed that it was Peter who had planted the idea for the crusade in Urban 's mind ( which was taken as fact by historians until the 19th century ) . It is commonly believed that Peter led a massive group of untrained and illiterate peasants who did not even have any idea where Jerusalem was , but indeed there were many knights among the peasants , including Walter Sans Avoir , who was lieutenant to Peter and led a separate army . 
 Lacking military discipline , in what likely seemed to the participants a strange land ( Eastern Europe ) , Peter 's fledgling army quickly found itself in trouble despite the fact they were still in Christian territory . The army led by Walter fought with the Hungarians over food at Belgrade , but otherwise arrived in Constantinople unharmed . Meanwhile , the army led by Peter , which marched separately from Walter 's army , also fought with the Hungarians , and may have captured Belgrade . At Nish the Byzantine governor tried to supply them , but Peter had little control over his followers and Byzantine troops were needed to quell their attacks . Peter arrived at Constantinople in August , where his army joined with the one led by Walter , which had already arrived , as well as separate bands of crusaders from France , Germany , and Italy . Another army of Bohemians and Saxons did not make it past Hungary before splitting up . 
 This unruly mob began to attack and pillage outside the city in search of supplies and food , prompting Alexios to hurriedly ferry the gathering across the Bosporus one week later . After crossing into Asia Minor , the crusaders split up and began to pillage the countryside , wandering into Seljuq territory around Nicaea . The greater experience of the Turks was overwhelming ; most of this group of the crusaders were massacred . Some Italian and German crusaders were defeated and killed at <unk> at the end of August . Meanwhile , Walter and Peter 's followers , who , although for the most part untrained in battle but led by about 50 knights , fought a battle against the Turks at <unk> in October . The Turkish archers destroyed the crusader army , and Walter was among the dead . Peter , who was absent in Constantinople at the time , later joined the main crusader army , along with the few survivors of <unk> . 
 = = = Attacks on Jews in the Rhineland = = = 
 At a local level , the preaching of the First Crusade ignited violence against Jews , which some historians have deemed " the first Holocaust " . At the end of 1095 and beginning of 1096 , months before the departure of the official crusade in August , there were attacks on Jewish communities in France and Germany . In May 1096 , Emicho of <unk> ( sometimes incorrectly known as Emicho of Leiningen ) attacked the Jews at Speyer and Worms . Other unofficial crusaders from Swabia , led by Hartmann of Dillingen , along with French , English , <unk> and Flemish volunteers , led by Drogo of Nesle and William the Carpenter , as well as many locals , joined Emicho in the destruction of the Jewish community of Mainz at the end of May . In Mainz , one Jewish woman killed her children rather than see them killed ; the chief rabbi , <unk> Ben <unk> , committed suicide in anticipation of being killed . 
 Emicho 's company then went on to Cologne , and others continued on to Trier , Metz , and other cities . Peter the Hermit may have been involved in violence against the Jews , and an army led by a priest named <unk> also attacked Jews further east in Bohemia . Emicho 's army eventually continued into Hungary but was defeated by the army of Coloman of Hungary . His followers dispersed ; some eventually joined the main armies , although Emicho himself went home . 
 Many of the attackers seem to have wanted to force the Jews to convert , although they were also interested in acquiring money from them . Physical violence against Jews was never part of the church hierarchy 's official policy for crusading , and the Christian bishops , especially the Archbishop of Cologne , did their best to protect the Jews . A decade before , the Bishop of Speyer had taken the step of providing the Jews of that city with a walled ghetto to protect them from Christian violence and given their chief Rabbis the control of judicial matters in the quarter . Nevertheless , some also took money in return for their protection . The attacks may have originated in the belief that Jews and Muslims were equally enemies of Christ , and enemies were to be fought or converted to Christianity . Godfrey of Bouillon was rumoured to have extorted money from the Jews of Cologne and Mainz , and many of the Crusaders wondered why they should travel thousands of miles to fight non @-@ believers when there were already non @-@ believers closer to home . The attacks on the Jews were witnessed by Ekkehard of Aura and Albert of Aix ; among the Jewish communities , the main contemporary witnesses were the Mainz Anonymous , Eliezer ben Nathan , and Solomon bar Simson . 
 = = Princes ' Crusade = = 
 The four main crusader armies left Europe around the appointed time in August 1096 . They took different paths to Constantinople and gathered outside its city walls between November 1096 and April 1097 ; Hugh of Vermandois arrived first , followed by Godfrey , Raymond , and Bohemond . This time , Emperor Alexios was more prepared for the crusaders ; there were fewer incidents of violence along the way . 
 The size of the entire crusader army is difficult to estimate ; various numbers were given by the eyewitnesses , and equally various estimates have been offered by modern historians . Crusader military historian David Nicolle considers the armies to have consisted of about 30 @,@ 000 – 35 @,@ 000 crusaders , including 5 @,@ 000 cavalry . Raymond had the largest contingent of about 8 @,@ 500 infantry and 1 @,@ 200 cavalry . 
 The princes arrived in Constantinople with little food and expected provisions and help from Alexios . Alexios was understandably suspicious after his experiences with the People 's Crusade , and also because the knights included his old Norman enemy , Bohemond , who had invaded Byzantine territory on numerous occasions with his father , Robert Guiscard , and may have even attempted to organize an attack on Constantinople while encamped outside the city . 
 The crusaders may have expected Alexios to become their leader , but he had no interest in joining them , and was mainly concerned with transporting them into Asia Minor as quickly as possible . In return for food and supplies , Alexios requested the leaders to swear fealty to him and promise to return to the Byzantine Empire any land recovered from the Turks . Godfrey was the first to take the oath , and almost all the other leaders followed him , although they did so only after warfare had almost broken out in the city between the citizens and the crusaders , who were eager to pillage for supplies . Raymond alone avoided swearing the oath , instead pledging that he would simply cause no harm to the Empire . Before ensuring that the various armies were shuttled across the Bosporus , Alexios advised the leaders on how best to deal with the Seljuq armies that they would soon encounter . 
 = = = Siege of Nicaea = = = 
 The Crusader armies crossed over into Asia Minor during the first half of 1097 , where they were joined by Peter the Hermit and the remainder of his little army . In addition , Alexios also sent two of his own generals , Manuel <unk> and Tatikios , to assist the crusaders . The first objective of their campaign was Nicaea , previously a city under Byzantine rule , but which had become the capital of the Seljuq Sultanate of Rum under Kilij Arslan I. Arslan was away campaigning against the Danishmends in central Anatolia at the time , and had left behind his treasury and his family , underestimating the strength of these new crusaders . 
 Subsequently , upon the Crusaders ' arrival , the city was subjected to a lengthy siege , and when Arslan had word of it he rushed back to Nicaea and attacked the crusader army on 16 May . He was driven back by the unexpectedly large crusader force , with heavy losses being suffered on both sides in the ensuing battle . The siege continued , but the crusaders had little success as they found they could not blockade the lake , which the city was situated on , and from which it could be provisioned . To break the city , Alexios sent the Crusaders ' ships rolled over land on logs , and at the sight of them the Turkish garrison finally surrendered on 18 June . The city was handed over to the Byzantine troops , which has often been depicted as a source of conflict between the Empire and the crusaders ; Byzantine standards flew from the walls while the crusaders were forbidden from looting the city or even entering it except in small escorted bands . 
 However , this policy was in accordance with the previous oaths made to Alexios , and the emperor ensured that the crusaders were well @-@ paid for their efforts . As Thomas Asbridge writes , " the fall of Nicaea was a product of the successful policy of close co @-@ operation between the crusaders and Byzantium . " After handing custody of Nicaea to the Byzantines , the crusaders resumed their march to Jerusalem . Stephen of Blois , in a letter to his wife Adela of Blois wrote that he believed the journey would take five weeks ; in reality , it took two years . 
 = = = Battle of Dorylaeum = = = 
 At the end of June , the crusaders marched on through Anatolia . They were accompanied by some Byzantine troops under Tatikios , and still harboured the hope that Alexios would send a full Byzantine army after them . They also divided the army into two more @-@ easily managed groups — one contingent led by the Normans , the other by the French . The two groups intended to meet again at Dorylaeum , but on 1 July the Normans , who had marched ahead of the French , were attacked by Kilij Arslan . Arslan had gathered a much larger army than he previously had after his defeat at Nicaea , and now surrounded the Normans with his fast @-@ moving mounted archers . The Normans " deployed in a tight @-@ knit defensive formation " , surrounding all their equipment and the non @-@ combatants who had followed them along the journey , and sent for help from the other group . When the French arrived , Godfrey broke through the Turkish lines and the legate Adhemar outflanked the Turks from the rear ; thus the Turks , who had expected to destroy the Normans and did not anticipate the quick arrival of the French , fled rather than face the combined crusader army . 
 The crusaders ' march through Anatolia was thereafter unopposed , but the journey was unpleasant , as Arslan had burned and destroyed everything he left behind in his army 's flight . It was the middle of summer , and the crusaders had very little food and water ; many men and horses died . Fellow Christians sometimes gave them gifts of food and money , but more often than not , the crusaders simply looted and pillaged whenever the opportunity presented itself . Individual leaders continued to dispute the overall leadership , although none of them were powerful enough to take command on their own , as Adhemar was always recognized as the spiritual leader . After passing through the Cilician Gates , Baldwin of Boulogne set off on his own towards the Armenian lands around the Euphrates ; his wife , his only claim to European lands and wealth , had died after the battle , giving Baldwin no incentive to return to Europe . Thus , he resolved to seize a fiefdom for himself in the Holy Land . Early in 1098 , he was adopted as heir by Thoros of Edessa , a ruler who was disliked by his Armenian subjects for his Greek Orthodox religion . Thoros was later killed , during an uprising that Baldwin may have instigated . Then , in March 1098 , Baldwin became the new ruler , thus creating the County of Edessa , the first of the crusader states . 
 = = = Siege of Antioch = = = 
 The crusader army , meanwhile , marched on to Antioch , which lay about halfway between Constantinople and Jerusalem . Described by Stephen of Blois as " a city great beyond belief , very strong and unassailable " , the idea of taking the city by assault was a discouraging one to the crusaders . Hoping rather to force a capitulation , or find a traitor inside the city — a tactic that had previously seen Antioch change to the control of the Byzantines and then the Seljuq Turks — the crusader army set Antioch to siege on 20 October 1097 . During the almost eight months of the siege , they were forced to defeat two large relief armies under the leadership of Duqaq and Fakhr al @-@ Mulk Radwan . Antioch was so large that the crusaders did not have enough troops to fully surround it , and as a result it was able to stay partially supplied . On 4 March 1098 , relief arrived in the form of a Crusader fleet , the " Saxon Crusade " , bringing much needed supplies from the west . 
 In May 1098 , Kerbogha of Mosul approached Antioch to relieve the siege . Bohemond bribed an Armenian guard named Firuz to surrender his tower , and in June the crusaders entered the city and killed most of the inhabitants . However , only a few days later the Muslims arrived , laying siege to the former besiegers . According to Raymond D <unk> , it was at this point that a monk named Peter Bartholomew claimed to have discovered the Holy Lance in the city , and although some were skeptical , this was seen as a sign that they would be victorious . 
 On 28 June 1098 , the crusaders defeated Kerbogha in a pitched battle outside the city , a victory caused by Kerbogha 's inability to organize the different factions in his army . While the crusaders were marching towards the Muslims , the Fatimid section of the army deserted the Turkish contingent , as they feared Kerbogha would become too powerful were he able to defeat the Crusaders . According to Christian eyewitnesses , an army of Christian saints came to the aid of the crusaders during the battle and crippled Kerbogha 's army . 
 Stephen of Blois , a Crusade leader , was in Alexandretta when he learned of the situation in Antioch . It seemed like their situation was hopeless so he left the Middle East , warning Alexios and his army on his way back to France . Because of what looked like a massive betrayal , the leaders at Antioch , most notably Bohemond , argued that Alexios had deserted the Crusade and thus invalidated all of their oaths to him . While Bohemond asserted his claim to Antioch , not everyone agreed ( most notably Raymond of Toulouse ) , so the crusade was delayed for the rest of the year while the nobles argued amongst themselves . When discussing this period , a common historiographical viewpoint advanced by some scholars is that the Franks of northern France , the Provençals of southern France , and the Normans of southern Italy considered themselves separate " nations " , creating turmoil as each tried to increase its individual status . Others argue that while this may have had something to do with the disputes , personal ambition among the Crusader leaders might just be as easily blamed . 
 Meanwhile , a plague broke out , killing many among the army , including the legate Adhemar , who died on 1 August . There were now even fewer horses than before , and worse , the Muslim peasants in the area refused to supply the crusaders with food . Thus , in December , after the Arab town of Ma 'arrat al @-@ Numan was captured following a siege , history describes the first occurrence of cannibalism among the crusaders . <unk> of Caen wrote , " In Ma 'arrat our troops boiled pagan adults in cooking pots ; they impaled children on spits and devoured them grilled . " At the same time , the minor knights and soldiers had become increasingly restless and threatened to continue to Jerusalem without their squabbling leaders . Finally , at the beginning of 1099 , the march restarted , leaving Bohemond behind as the first Prince of Antioch . 
 = = = Continued march to Jerusalem = = = 
 Proceeding down the Mediterranean coast , the crusaders encountered little resistance , as local rulers preferred to make peace with them and furnish them with supplies rather than fight , with a notable exception of the abandoned siege of Arqa . On 7 June , the crusaders reached Jerusalem , which had been recaptured from the Seljuqs by the Fatimids only the year before . Many Crusaders wept upon seeing the city they had journeyed so long to reach . 
 = = = Siege of Jerusalem = = = 
 Crusaders ' arrival at Jerusalem revealed an arid countryside , lacking in water or food supplies . Here there was no prospect of relief , even as they feared an imminent attack by the local Fatimid rulers . There was no hope of trying to blockade the city as they had at Antioch ; the crusaders had insufficient troops , supplies , and time . Rather , they resolved to take the city by assault . They might have been left with little choice , as by the time the Crusader army reached Jerusalem , it has been estimated that only about 12 @,@ 000 men including 1 @,@ 500 cavalry remained . These contingents , composed of men with differing origins and varying allegiances , were also approaching another low ebb in their camaraderie ; e.g. , while Godfrey and Tancred made camp to the north of the city , Raymond made his to the south . In addition , the Provençal contingent did not take part in the initial assault on 13 June . This first assault was perhaps more speculative than determined , and after scaling the outer wall the Crusaders were repulsed from the inner one . 
 After the failure of the initial assault , a meeting between the various leaders was organized in which it was agreed upon that a more concerted attack would be required in the future . On 17 June , a party of Genoese mariners under Guglielmo <unk> arrived at Jaffa , and provided the Crusaders with skilled engineers , and perhaps more critically , supplies of timber ( cannibalized from the ships ) to build siege engines . The Crusaders ' morale was raised when a priest , Peter Desiderius , claimed to have had a divine vision , of Bishop Adhemar , instructing them to fast and then march in a barefoot procession around the city walls , after which the city would fall , following the Biblical story of Joshua at the siege of Jericho . After a three days fast , on 8 July the crusaders performed the procession as they had been instructed by Desiderius , ending on the Mount of Olives where Peter the Hermit preached to them , and shortly afterward the various bickering factions arrived at a public rapprochement . News arrived shortly after that a Fatimid relief army had set off from Egypt , giving the Crusaders a very strong incentive to make another assault on the city . 
 The final assault on Jerusalem began on 13 July ; Raymond 's troops attacked the south gate while the other contingents attacked the northern wall . Initially the Provençals at the southern gate made little headway , but the contingents at the northern wall fared better , with a slow but steady attrition of the defence . On 15 July , a final push was launched at both ends of the city , and eventually the inner rampart of the northern wall was captured . In the ensuing panic , the defenders abandoned the walls of the city at both ends , allowing the Crusaders to finally enter . 
 = = = = Massacre = = = = 
 The massacre that followed the capture of Jerusalem has attained particular notoriety , as a " juxtaposition of extreme violence and anguished faith " . The eyewitness accounts from the crusaders themselves leave little doubt that there was great slaughter in the aftermath of the siege . Nevertheless , some historians propose that the scale of the massacre has been exaggerated in later medieval sources . 
 After the successful assault on the northern wall , the defenders fled to the Temple Mount , pursued by Tancred and his men . Arriving before the defenders could secure the area , Tancred 's men assaulted the precinct , butchering many of the defenders , with the remainder taking refuge in the Al @-@ Aqsa Mosque . Tancred then called a halt to the slaughter , offering those in the mosque his protection . When the defenders on the southern wall heard of the fall of the northern wall , they fled to the citadel , allowing Raymond and the Provençals to enter the city . Iftikhar al @-@ Dawla , the commander of the garrison , struck a deal with Raymond , surrendering the citadel in return for being granted safe passage to Ascalon . 
 The slaughter continued for the rest of the day ; Muslims were indiscriminately killed , and Jews who had taken refuge in their synagogue died when it was burnt down by the Crusaders . The following day , Tancred 's prisoners in the mosque were slaughtered . Nevertheless , it is clear that some Muslims and Jews of the city survived the massacre , either escaping or being taken prisoner to be ransomed . The Eastern Christian population of the city had been expelled before the siege by the governor , and thus escaped the massacre . 
 = = = Establishment of the Kingdom of Jerusalem = = = 
 On 22 July , a council was held in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to establish a king for the newly created Kingdom of Jerusalem . Raymond of Toulouse at first refused to become king , perhaps attempting to show his piety , but probably hoping that the other nobles would insist upon his election anyway . Godfrey , who had become the more popular of the two after Raymond 's actions at the siege of Antioch , did no damage to his own piety by accepting a position as secular leader . Raymond was incensed at this development and took his army out into the countryside . 
 The exact nature and meaning of Godfrey 's title is somewhat controversial . Although it is widely claimed that he took the title <unk> Sancti <unk> ( " advocate " or " defender " of the Holy Sepulchre ) , this title is only used in a letter that was not written by Godfrey . Instead , Godfrey himself seems to have used the more ambiguous term princeps , or simply retained his title of dux from Lower Lorraine . According to William of Tyre , writing in the later 12th century when Godfrey was already a legendary hero in crusader Jerusalem , he refused to wear " a crown of gold " where Christ had worn " a crown of thorns " . Robert the Monk is the only contemporary chronicler of the crusade to report that Godfrey took the title " king " . 
 = = = Battle of Ascalon = = = 
 The crusaders had attempted to negotiate with the Fatimids during their march to Jerusalem , but to no avail . After the crusaders captured Jerusalem from the Fatimids , they learned of a Fatimid army about to attack them . On 10 August Godfrey of Bouillon led the remaining troops from Jerusalem to Ascalon , a day 's march away . 
 The Fatimids were estimated to have as many as 50 @,@ 000 troops ( other sources estimate about 20 @,@ 000 – 30 @,@ 000 ) entering the battle . Their troops consisted of Seljuq Turks , Arabs , Persians , Kurds , and Ethiopians , led by vizier al @-@ Afdal Shahanshah . Opposing them were the crusaders , whose numbers , estimated by Raymond of <unk> , were around 1 @,@ 200 knights and 9 @,@ 000 infantry . 
 On 12 August , crusader scouts discovered the location of the Fatimid camp , which the crusaders immediately marched towards . According to most crusader and Muslim accounts , the Fatimids were caught unaware . Because of a somewhat ill @-@ prepared Fatimid army , the battle was fairly short , although it still took some time to resolve , according to Albert of <unk> al @-@ Afdal Shahanshah and his army retreated into the heavily guarded and fortified city of Ascalon . The next day the crusaders learned that al @-@ Afdal Shahanshah had retreated back to Egypt via boat , so they plundered what remained of the Fatimid camp . After returning to Jerusalem most of the crusaders returned to their homes in Europe . 
 = = Crusade of 1101 = = 
 Having captured Jerusalem and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre , the crusading vow had hence been fulfilled . However , there were many who had gone home before reaching Jerusalem , and many who had never left Europe at all . When the success of the crusade became known , these people were mocked and scorned by their families and threatened with excommunication by the Pope . Many crusaders who had remained with the crusade all the way to Jerusalem also went home ; according to Fulcher of Chartres , there were only a few hundred knights left in the newfound kingdom in 1100 . Godfrey himself only ruled for one year , dying in July 1100 . He was succeeded by his brother , Baldwin of Edessa , the first person to take the title King of Jerusalem . 
 Among the crusaders in the Crusade of 1101 were Stephen II , Count of Blois and Hugh of Vermandois , both of whom had returned home before reaching Jerusalem . This crusade was almost annihilated in Asia Minor by the Seljuqs , but the survivors helped to reinforce the kingdom upon their arrival in Jerusalem . In the following years , assistance was also provided by Italian merchants who established themselves in Syrian ports , and from the religious and military orders of the Knights Templar and the Knights Hospitaller , which were created during Baldwin I 's reign . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The First Crusade succeeded in establishing the " crusader states " of Edessa , Antioch , Jerusalem , and Tripoli in Palestine and Syria ( as well as allies along the Crusaders ' route , such as the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia ) . 
 Back at home in Western Europe , those who had survived to reach Jerusalem were treated as heroes . Robert of Flanders was nicknamed " <unk> " thanks to his exploits . The life of Godfrey of Bouillon became legendary even within a few years of his death . In some cases , the political situation at home was greatly affected by crusader absences . For instance , while Robert Curthose was away on crusade the throne of England had passed to his brother Henry I of England instead , and their resultant conflict led to the Battle of Tinchebray in 1106 . 
 Meanwhile , the establishment of the crusader states in the east helped ease Seljuq pressure on the Byzantine Empire , which had regained some of its Anatolian territory with crusader help , and experienced a period of relative peace and prosperity in the 12th century . The effect on the Muslim dynasties of the east was gradual but important . In the wake of the death of Malik Shah I in 1092 , political instability and the division of the Great Seljuq Empire prevented a coherent defence against the Latin states . Cooperation between them remained difficult for many decades , but from Egypt to Syria to Baghdad there were calls for the expulsion of the crusaders , culminating in the recapture of Jerusalem under Saladin later in the century when the Ayyubids had united the surrounding areas . 
 = = Inspiration to the future = = 
 The success of the crusade inspired the literary imagination of poets in France , who , in the 12th century , began to compose various chansons de geste celebrating the exploits of Godfrey of Bouillon and other crusaders . Some of these , such as the Chanson d <unk> , are semi @-@ historical , while others are completely fanciful , describing battles with a dragon or connecting Godfrey 's ancestors to the legend of the Knight of the Swan . Together , the chansons are known as the crusade cycle . 
 The First Crusade was also an inspiration to artists in later centuries . In 1580 , Torquato Tasso wrote Jerusalem Delivered , a largely fictionalized epic poem about the capture of Jerusalem . George Frideric Handel composed music based on Tasso 's poem in his opera Rinaldo . The 19th @-@ century poet Tommaso <unk> also wrote an epic poem , which was the basis of Giuseppe Verdi 's opera I Lombardi alla prima <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet in Australian service = 
 The Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) has operated McDonnell Douglas F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighter aircraft since 1984 . The Australian Government purchased 75 " A " and " B " variants of the F / A @-@ 18 in 1981 to replace the RAAF 's Dassault Mirage III fighters . The Hornets entered service with the RAAF between 1984 and 1990 , and 71 remain in operation as of 2012 . The other four Hornets were destroyed in flying accidents during the late 1980s and early 1990s . 
 RAAF Hornets were first sent on a combat deployment as part of the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . During the invasion , 14 Hornets flew patrols over Iraq , as well as close air support sorties to assist coalition ground forces . RAAF F / A @-@ 18s also provided security for the American air base at Diego Garcia between late 2001 and early 2002 , and have protected a number of high @-@ profile events in Australia . From 2015 they have been striking ISIL targets as part of Operation Okra . 
 Since 1999 the RAAF has put its Hornets through a series of upgrades to improve their effectiveness . However , the aircraft are becoming increasingly difficult to operate and are at risk of being outclassed by the fighters and air @-@ defence systems operated by other countries . As a result , the RAAF will begin to retire its F / A @-@ 18s in the late 2010s , and the last aircraft will leave service in the early 2020s . Under current Australian Government planning they will be replaced by up to 72 Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II fighters . 
 = = Selection = = 
 The RAAF began the initial stages of scoping a replacement for its Dassault Mirage III fighters in 1968 . The service issued an Air Staff Requirement for new fighter aircraft in December 1971 , which received a larger than expected number of proposals from manufacturers . At this time the RAAF expected to start phasing out the Mirage IIIs in 1980 . In 1973 , a team of RAAF personnel inspected the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 15 Eagle , Northrop YF @-@ 17 , Saab 37 Viggen and Dassault Mirage F1 programs , but recommended that any decisions about a suitable replacement be delayed so that several new fighters that were expected to soon become available could also be considered . In August 1974 the Australian Government decided to defer the fighter replacement project and extend the Mirage IIIs ' operational life into the 1980s . One of the four Mirage III @-@ equipped squadrons was also disbanded at this time . 
 Work on the Mirage replacement program resumed in 1975 , and the Tactical Fighter Project Office was established in 1976 to manage the process of selecting the RAAF 's next fighter . A request for proposals was issued in November that year and attracted eleven responses . By March 1977 the office had chosen to focus on the F @-@ 15 Eagle , General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon , Dassault Mirage 2000 and Panavia Tornado , as well as the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 18A and F @-@ 18L ; the F @-@ 18A was a carrier @-@ based fighter developed from the YF @-@ 17 for the United States Navy , and the F @-@ 18L was a land @-@ based variant of this design . The Grumman F @-@ 14 Tomcat was also considered by the project office , but was regarded as unsuitable and never placed on the official shortlist . In November 1978 the F @-@ 15 and Tornado were removed from the list of aircraft being considered . The Tornado was excluded as it was principally a strike aircraft and had limited air @-@ to @-@ air capability . While the F @-@ 15 was an impressive aircraft that met or exceeded almost all of the RAAF 's requirements , it was believed that the air force did not need a fighter with such advanced capabilities and that introducing it into service could destabilise Australia 's region . 
 Further evaluation of the remaining aircraft took place during 1979 . Wing Commander ( and later Air Vice @-@ Marshal ) Bob Richardson test @-@ flew a Mirage 2000 in April 1979 , and reported that while the aircraft had excellent aerodynamic characteristics , its avionics , radar , fuel system , cockpit and weapons capability were inferior to those of US designs . Richardson also test @-@ flew a YF @-@ 17 that was being used as a demonstrator for the F @-@ 18L in mid @-@ 1979 , and was impressed by its capabilities . No F @-@ <unk> had been ordered at this time , however , and the RAAF did not want to take on the risk of being the lead customer for the design . At about the same time , the RAAF rejected an offer of F @-@ 14 Tomcats that had been originally ordered by the Iranian Government but not delivered as a result of the revolution in that country . While the Tomcats were made available at a greatly reduced price , the air force judged that these aircraft were too large and complex for its requirements . 
 With the Mirage 2000 and F @-@ 18L rejected , the RAAF was faced with a choice between the F @-@ 16 and F @-@ 18A . Richardson and several other RAAF pilots tested United States Air Force ( USAF ) F @-@ 16Bs in 1979 and 1980 , and reported that the aircraft had excellent performance but could be difficult to control at times . The evaluation team was also concerned about the reliability of the F @-@ 16 's engine and regarded the aircraft as technologically immature . It was also noted that the aircraft 's radar was inferior to that of the F @-@ 18A , and that F @-@ 16s could not fire the beyond @-@ visual @-@ range ( BVR ) air @-@ to @-@ air missiles and long @-@ range anti @-@ shipping missiles that the F @-@ 18A was capable of operating . In contrast , the evaluation team was impressed by the F @-@ 18A , and regarded it as being a more robust and survivable aircraft as it had been designed to operate from aircraft carriers ; these features were important for operations from bare bases in northern Australia . Richardson and three other RAAF pilots test @-@ flew F @-@ 18As , and reported that the aircraft handled well , but had some deficiencies with its flight control system and engines ; these were not seen as major flaws by the evaluation team , however . The F @-@ 18A 's twin engines were considered to be its main advantage over the single @-@ engined F @-@ 16 , as research conducted by the evaluation team found that the attrition rate for single @-@ engined fighters was twice that for aircraft with two engines . Overall , however , the RAAF judged that both the F @-@ 16 and F @-@ 18A were too immature for a decision to be made in 1980 as had been originally planned , and recommended to the Government that this be deferred by a year . 
 The Government accepted the RAAF 's recommendation , and delayed its decision on a Mirage III replacement until late 1981 . This gave General Dynamics an opportunity to offer the improved F @-@ 16C to the RAAF . The capability of these aircraft was closer to that of the F @-@ 18 as they were equipped with BVR missiles . Richardson and another RAAF pilot test @-@ flew F @-@ <unk> in May 1981 . The F @-@ 18 design was also improved during 1981 , and was redesignated the F / A @-@ 18 . When RAAF test pilots flew these aircraft during 1981 , they found that the deficiencies they had detected in 1980 were now addressed . Overall , the RAAF concluded that while both aircraft met its requirements and the F @-@ 16 was less expensive , the F / A @-@ 18 was the superior design as it was more technologically mature , easier to maintain during operational deployments , and likely to have a much lower attrition rate . The Government accepted this advice , and announced on 20 October 1981 that 75 F / A @-@ 18s would be ordered . As part of this announcement , Minister for Defence Jim Killen acknowledged that the F @-@ 16 would have been seven percent cheaper to purchase , but stated that the F / A @-@ 18 's lower running costs and expected attrition rate greatly reduced the difference between the lifetime cost of the two designs . 
 Instead of directly ordering the aircraft from McDonnell Douglas , the Australian Government purchased its F / A @-@ 18s through the US Government 's Foreign Military Sales ( FMS ) program . Ordering the aircraft via the US Government allowed the RAAF to take advantage of the superior purchasing power of the US military , and reduced the service 's project management requirements . This led to a complicated arrangement whereby the aircraft were ordered by the US Government , delivered to the US Navy , and then transferred to the RAAF once initial flight testing had taken place . The process functioned smoothly , however , and was cost effective . 
 = = Production = = 
 The RAAF 's order of 75 Hornets comprised 57 single @-@ seat " A " variant fighters and 18 two @-@ seat " B " variant operational training aircraft . It was planned that each of the three fighter squadrons and the single operational conversion unit that were to operate the F / A @-@ 18 would be allocated 16 aircraft , of which 12 were expected to be operational at any time while the other four were undergoing maintenance . The remaining eleven Hornets were labelled the " half @-@ life attrition buy " and would replace the aircraft that were expected to have been lost by 2000 ; as it happened , this greatly exceeded the RAAF 's actual losses . Deliveries were planned to start in late 1984 and be completed in 1990 . The total cost of the F / A @-@ 18 program , including the aircraft , spare parts , other equipment and modifications to the RAAF 's fighter bases , was calculated as A $ 2 @.@ 427 billion in August 1981 , but was rapidly revised upwards due to the depreciation of the Australian dollar at this time . 
 The Australian Hornets were very similar to the standard US Navy variants , but incorporated a number of minor modifications . These included the addition of an Instrument Landing System / Very High Frequency <unk> Range ( ILS / VOR ) system , a high @-@ frequency radio , a different ejection seat harness and the deletion of all equipment used only to launch the aircraft from catapults . In addition , two of the Australian aircraft were fitted with flight @-@ test instrumentation so that they could be used as part of trials . 
 The Government sought to use the Mirage III replacement program as a means to increase the capabilities of Australia 's manufacturing industry . Accordingly , it was decided to build the aircraft in Australia , though it was recognised that this would lead to higher costs than if the fighters were purchased directly from the United States . While the first two RAAF Hornets were built in the United States , the remainder were assembled at the Government Aircraft Factories plant at Avalon Airport in Victoria , and their engines were produced by the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation at Fishermans Bend in Melbourne . Another twelve Australian companies were involved in other stages of the project . These firms were sub @-@ contracted to McDonnell Douglas and the other major US companies that produced components for the F / A @-@ 18 , and had to comply with the requirements of the FMS program . The Australian Government hoped that Singapore and New Zealand would purchase Australian @-@ built Hornets , but this did not eventuate . The Canadian Government expressed interest in purchasing 25 Australian @-@ built F / A @-@ 18As in 1988 in order to increase its force of these aircraft after they had ceased to be manufactured in the United States , but this did not lead to any sales . 
 The Australian Hornets began to roll off the production lines in 1984 . The first two aircraft ( serial numbers A21 @-@ 101 and A21 @-@ 102 ) were entirely built at McDonnell Douglas ' factory in St. Louis , and were handed over to the RAAF on 29 October 1984 . These aircraft remained in the United States until May 1985 for training and trials purposes . The next two Australian Hornets ( A21 @-@ 103 and A21 @-@ 104 ) were also built at St. Louis , but were then disassembled and flown to Avalon in June 1984 on board a USAF Lockheed C @-@ 5 Galaxy . The aircraft were then reassembled , and A21 @-@ 103 was rolled out at a ceremony attended by Prime Minister Bob Hawke and the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal David Evans , on 16 November . However , the aircraft 's initial test flight was delayed until 26 February 1985 by a demarcation dispute over which category of pilot was permitted to fly the aircraft . 
 In order to meet production targets , GAF was required to complete 1 @.@ 5 Hornets per month . Production fell behind schedule during the first half of 1987 , however , as a result of inefficiencies at the company 's factory and industrial relations problems . GAF was able to accelerate production later in the year , though some components that were planned to be manufactured in Australia were purchased from companies in the United States instead . The final cost of the Hornet project was A $ 4 @.@ 668 billion ; after adjusting for the depreciation of the Australian dollar this was $ 186 million less than the initial estimate . 
 The RAAF began to accept Hornets into service in 1985 . A21 @-@ 103 was formally delivered on 4 May of that year . Two weeks later , A21 @-@ 101 and 102 were flown from Naval Air Station Lemoore in California to RAAF Base Williamtown in New South Wales between 16 and 17 May 1985 . This ferry flight was conducted as a non @-@ stop journey , and USAF McDonnell Douglas KC @-@ 10 Extender tankers refuelled each of the Hornets 15 times as they crossed the Pacific . As of 2005 this remained the longest single flight to have been undertaken by F / A @-@ 18s . Despite the delays to production in 1987 , the final Australian Hornet ( A21 @-@ 57 ) was delivered on schedule at a ceremony held in Canberra on 16 May 1990 . The F / A @-@ 18As were allocated serial numbers A21 @-@ 1 through to A21 @-@ 57 and the F / A @-@ 18Bs were allocated A21 @-@ 101 to A21 @-@ 118 . 
 A major capital works program was also undertaken to prepare RAAF bases for the Hornets . Over $ 150 million was spent upgrading the runways , hangars and maintenance facilities at RAAF Base Williamtown , which has been the main F / A @-@ 18 base throughout the aircraft 's service . The pre @-@ existing airfield at RAAF Base Tindal in the Northern Territory was also developed into a major air base between 1985 and 1988 at a cost of $ 215 million so that it could accommodate No. 75 Squadron . Until this time the squadron had been stationed at RAAF Base Darwin which , due to its location on Australia 's north coast , was vulnerable to damage from cyclones and difficult to defend during wartime . 
 Owing to concerns over the airworthiness of the RAAF 's General Dynamics F @-@ 111 bombers and delays to the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II program , the Australian Government ordered 24 F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets in 2006 . This design is significantly different from the original ( or " classic " ) Hornet , however . The RAAF 's first Super Hornets entered service in 2010 and deliveries were completed the next year . 
 = = Maintenance and upgrades = = 
 Maintenance of the RAAF 's Hornets is carried out by both air force personnel and civilian contractors . Until the early 1990s , all routine servicing and a significant proportion of intensive " deeper maintenance " was undertaken by the air force . However , the share of intensive maintenance tasks outsourced to the private sector was increased during the 1990s under the RAAF @-@ wide Commercial Support Program . Under current arrangements , the four Hornet @-@ equipped units undertake all routine servicing and some of the more complex deeper maintenance tasks . The remainder of the deeper maintenance work , as well as all major refurbishments and upgrade projects , are carried out by commercial firms . BAE Systems has been the lead contractor for Hornet deeper maintenance since 2003 , and Boeing Australia has also provided maintenance services for the aircraft since it won a contract to do so in 2010 . 
 The RAAF 's Hornet fleet received few modifications until the late 1990s . During this period , the AN / AAS @-@ 38 " Nite Hawk " targeting pod was the only new system fitted to the aircraft . However , several Asian countries introduced Mikoyan MiG @-@ 29 fighters into service during the 1990s , raising concerns that the RAAF 's aircraft would be outclassed . The air force considered replacing the Hornet with the Eurofighter Typhoon or Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , but concluded that both aircraft were technologically immature . As a result , it was decided to upgrade the Hornets . 
 The Hornet Upgrade Program ( HUG ) began in 1999 , and has had three main phases . In Phase 1 , which ran from mid @-@ 2000 through 2002 , the Hornets ' computer systems , navigation system and radio were replaced . The aircraft were also fitted to operate the ASRAAM air @-@ to @-@ air missile ; these weapons replaced the AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder . HUG Phase 2 comprised four sub @-@ elements and sought to improve the Hornets ' combat performance . During Phase 2 @.@ 1 the APG @-@ 65 radar was replaced with the improved AN / APG @-@ 73 , and the aircraft were fitted with a secure voice encryption communications system as well as various updates to their computer systems . In HUG Phase 2 @.@ 2 , the most important element of the program , the Hornets were fitted with a Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System , equipment needed to share data through the Link 16 network , a new countermeasures dispensing system and several upgrades to their cockpit displays . All of the Hornets were upgraded to this standard between January 2005 and December 2006 . In Phase 2 @.@ 3 , an improved Electronic Counter Measures system was fitted to the Hornets ; the AN / ALR @-@ 2002 was originally selected , but proved unsuccessful . It was replaced by the ALR @-@ 67 Radar Warning Receiver in late 2006 . As of early 2012 , 14 Hornets had been fitted with the system and the remainder were scheduled to receive it by the end of the year . During HUG Phase 2 @.@ 4 the Hornets were modified to be able to use the AN / AAQ @-@ 28 ( v ) " LITENING " targeting pod and 37 of these systems were purchased ; this phase was completed in 2007 . 
 The third stage of the Hornet Upgrade Program sought to rectify airframe damage . HUG Phase 3 @.@ 1 involved minor structural work to all aircraft as they passed through other phases of the program . The centre fuselages of the ten Hornets assessed as suffering the greatest amount of structural damage were replaced in HUG Phase 3 @.@ 2 . It was originally intended that all the RAAF 's Hornets would receive new centre fuselages , but the scope of this phase of the program was reduced after it was found that the number of man @-@ hours needed to upgrade each aircraft was much greater than originally estimated . The ten aircraft were upgraded at an L @-@ 3 Communications facility in Canada , and all were returned to service by June 2010 . 
 The long @-@ running HUG process has complicated the RAAF 's management of its fleet of F / A @-@ 18s . At any one time , the capabilities of individual aircraft have differed considerably depending on their upgrades . Accordingly , the long @-@ standing arrangement where aircraft were almost permanently assigned to each squadron was replaced by a system where they are pooled . Attempts to allocate Hornets with similar levels of modifications from the common pool to each squadron have not been successful . 
 = = Armament = = 
 The RAAF 's Hornets have been fitted with several different types of air @-@ to @-@ air weapons . The aircraft are equipped with an internal M61A1 cannon for use against air and ground targets ; 578 rounds can be carried for this weapon . During the initial years of the Hornet 's service , the aircraft were equipped with AIM @-@ 9M Sidewinder short range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles and AIM @-@ 7M Sparrow medium @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . The Sparrows were replaced by the AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM in 2002 , and in 2004 the Sidewinders were replaced by <unk> . The older missiles are occasionally used in training exercises , however . 
 The AGM @-@ 65 Maverick air @-@ to @-@ ground tactical missile ( AGM ) can be used for close air support . A variety of unguided and guided weapons can also be used against ground targets . The Hornets carry Mark 82 , Mark 83 and Mark 84 bombs , as well as GBU @-@ 10 , GBU @-@ 12 and GBU @-@ 16 Paveway II laser @-@ guided bombs . In addition , the aircraft have operated bombs fitted with JDAM guidance kits since 2008 . The long @-@ ranged JDAM @-@ ER variant of these bombs were ordered in 2011 and will begin to enter service in 2015 . During exercises the Hornets carry BDU @-@ 33 and BDU @-@ 57 <unk> training bombs . Since November 2011 , the RAAF 's Hornets have also been equipped with AGM @-@ 158 JASSM cruise missiles . The F / A @-@ 18s main weapon in the maritime strike role is the Harpoon anti @-@ ship missile ; the RAAF initially operated the Block IC variant of this missile , but purchased Block II variants in 2003 . In addition to these weapons , the Hornets can also be fitted with 330 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 1 @,@ 200 L ) drop tanks to extend their range . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Introduction into service = = = 
 Four RAAF units converted to the Hornet between 1985 and 1988 . The first 14 Hornets were allocated to No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( 2OCU ) at RAAF Base Williamtown , and were used to train the pilots and instructors needed to convert the RAAF 's three fighter squadrons to the aircraft . 2OCU 's first Hornet operational conversion course began on 19 August 1985 . In addition to the unit 's training activities , 2OCU aircraft travelled widely around Australia and South East Asia during 1985 and 1986 to showcase the new aircraft . No. 3 Squadron was the first fighter unit to convert from the Mirage III , and became operational with the Hornet in August 1986 . It was followed by No. 77 Squadron in June 1987 and No. 75 Squadron in May 1988 . No. 81 Wing , whose headquarters is located at Williamtown , has commanded these four units since they converted to the F / A @-@ 18 . As of 2012 , 2OCU , No. 3 and No. 77 Squadrons are stationed at Williamtown and No. 75 Squadron is located at Tindal . In addition , two Hornets are allocated to the Aircraft Research and Development Unit at RAAF Base Edinburgh in South Australia . 
 The RAAF 's Mirage III pilots generally found the process of converting to the Hornet to be straightforward . While the F / A @-@ 18 was considered to be easier to fly , its more sophisticated avionics and weapons systems required improved cockpit workload management skills . The Hornets have also proven to be mechanically reliable and easy to maintain , though shortages of spare parts reduced availability rates during the early years of their service with the RAAF . The updates installed as part of the HUG process have further simplified maintenance procedures . In recent years , however , the aging aircraft have required much more servicing than was the case in the past . 
 To extend the Hornet 's range , four of the RAAF 's six Boeing 707 transport aircraft were converted to tankers in the early 1990s ; the first Boeing 707 tanker entered service in 1990 . The tankers were operated by No. 33 Squadron and supported the Hornet units until the 707s were retired in 2008 . These aircraft were replaced with KC @-@ 30A tanker @-@ transports in 2011 . 
 The RAAF has at times suffered from shortfalls of Hornet @-@ qualified pilots . The service began to experience shortages of F / A @-@ 18 and F @-@ 111 fast @-@ jet pilots in the mid @-@ 1980s due to competition from commercial airlines and relatively low recruitment rates . By June 1999 the three operational Hornet @-@ equipped squadrons had only 40 pilots , which was less than the number of aircraft allocated to these units . The RAAF claimed that the squadrons were able to meet their readiness targets , however . To overcome this shortfall , the RAAF gave its fast jet units a higher priority for aircrew , implemented measures to reduce separation rates , and recruited pilots from other countries . These reforms coincided with reduced demand for civil pilots following the 11 September attacks , and by late 2003 the RAAF 's fast @-@ jet units were at near full strength . A 2010 article in the magazine Australian Aviation stated that No. 3 Squadron typically had " about 18 pilots on strength " at any point in time . At this time the total strength of the squadron , including air and ground crew , was around 300 personnel . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 As the Hornets are multi @-@ role fighters , their pilots practice a wide range of tasks during peacetime training . Each year the three Hornet squadrons rotate between four @-@ month training " blocks " focused on air @-@ to @-@ air combat , air @-@ to @-@ ground tactics and Australian Defence Force support tasks . The units undertake the air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ ground " blocks " before assuming responsibility for Australian Defence Force support ( which involves operating with the Australian Army and Royal Australian Navy ) . No. 81 Wing 's headquarters oversees this training program and monitors adherence to common standards and procedures . Training sorties may include such tasks as defending air bases , infrastructure and shipping from enemy aircraft , attacking naval and ground targets , and practicing in @-@ flight refueling . More unusual tasks such as dropping naval mines have also been practiced at times . Major exercises often involve other RAAF units and aircraft , as well as units from the Army and Navy and contingents from other countries . 
 As part of their regular training activities , F / A @-@ 18 Hornets operate in different parts of Australia and the Asia @-@ Pacific region . Regular deployments are made to Singapore and RMAF Butterworth in Malaysia as part of Integrated Air Defence System exercises . In addition , RAAF F / A @-@ 18s have participated in exercises in the Philippines , Thailand and the United States . These deployments have seen Australian fighter squadrons range as far afield as Eielson Air Force Base in Alaska , where they took part in Red Flag – Alaska exercises in 2008 and 2011 . 
 Four of the RAAF 's Hornets were destroyed in flying accidents during the late 1980s and early 1990s . A21 @-@ 104 was the first aircraft to be lost when it crashed at Great Palm Island in Queensland on 18 November 1987 ; its pilot was killed . The next loss occurred on 2 August 1990 when two No. 75 Squadron Hornets ( A21 @-@ 29 and A21 @-@ 42 ) collided . A21 @-@ 42 crashed , killing the unit 's commanding officer ; the other aircraft was damaged but managed to return to base . On 5 June 1990 A21 @-@ 41 crashed 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north @-@ east of Weipa , Queensland , killing its pilot . A21 @-@ 106 was the fourth aircraft to be lost when it crashed inland from Shoalwater Bay in Queensland on 19 May 1992 – its pilot and a passenger from the Defence Science and Technology Organisation died . As of February 2016 , all of the remaining 71 F / A @-@ 18s were still in service . 
 = = = Deployments = = = 
 In late 1990 consideration was given to deploying a squadron of F / A @-@ 18s to the Middle East as part of an expanded Australian contribution to the Gulf War . The Department of Defence opposed dispatching the aircraft on the grounds that doing so would greatly strain the fighter force in Australia , and this option was not adopted by the government . As a result , the Hornets ' only role in the war was to support the training of the Royal Australian Navy warships which were sent to the Gulf by conducting mock attacks on the vessels as they sailed from Sydney to Perth . 
 During late 1999 , No. 75 Squadron was placed on alert to provide close air support and air defence for the international forces deployed to East Timor as part of INTERFET . While Indonesian forces posed a potential threat to this force , no fighting eventuated and the Hornets were not required . 
 The first operational deployment of RAAF Hornets took place in 2001 . Following the 11 September terrorist attacks , the Australian Government agreed to deploy F / A @-@ 18s to protect the major USAF air base on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia , which was being used to mount operations in Afghanistan . Four No. 77 Squadron Hornets and 70 personnel departed for the island on 9 November . No. 3 Squadron pilots and ground crew relieved the No. 77 Squadron personnel in early February 2002 . While the Hornets were occasionally scrambled in response to reports of aircraft near the base , no threat developed . The detachment returned to Australia on 21 May 2002 . 
 No. 75 Squadron formed part of the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . The squadron began initial planning for this deployment in December 2002 , and intensive training was undertaken from January 2003 . To improve the unit 's readiness , air and ground crew as well as aircraft were also posted to No. 75 Squadron from other units . The Australian Government announced on 1 February that it would begin deploying RAAF aircraft , including a squadron of F / A @-@ 18s , to the Middle East . No. 75 Squadron departed from Tindal on 13 February , and arrived at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar on the 16th of the month . The 14 F / A @-@ 18A Hornets selected for this deployment had received the HUG 2 @.@ 1 package of upgrades and recently completed major servicing . In addition to No. 75 Squadron , several experienced Hornet pilots were also posted to the USAF Combined Air and Space Operations Center in the Middle East to provide advice on how to make the best use of the squadron . 
 The Australian Hornets saw combat in several roles during the Iraq War . Following the outbreak of war on 20 March , No. 75 Squadron was initially used to escort high @-@ value Coalition aircraft , such as tankers and airborne early warning and control aircraft . As it rapidly became clear that the Iraqi Air Force posed no threat , from 21 March No. 75 Squadron also began to also conduct air interdiction sorties against Iraqi forces . These sorties were initially flown in support of the United States Army 's V Corps , but the squadron was rarely assigned any targets to attack . As a result , the Australian commanders in the Middle East had No. 75 Squadron reassigned to support the United States Marine Corps ' I Marine Expeditionary Force . At this time the squadron also began flying close air support sorties . During the first two weeks of the war the squadron typically flew 12 sorties per day . To avoid pilot fatigue , additional aircrew were posted to the Middle East from Australia . The number of sorties dropped to between six and ten per day from 5 April onwards as the American forces closed on Baghdad and few targets remained in southern Iraq . On 12 April , No. 75 Squadron supported elements of the Special Air Service Regiment and 4th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment , which occupied Al Asad Airbase . During the last weeks of the war the squadron continued to fly sorties across western , central and southern Iraq to support British and American forces . In several of the squadron 's operations in the final week of the war , the Hornets made low altitude and high speed passes over Iraqi positions to encourage their defenders to surrender . No. 75 Squadron conducted its final combat sorties on 27 April . During the war the squadron flew 350 combat missions ( including 670 individual sorties ) and dropped 122 laser @-@ guided bombs . No. 75 Squadron did not suffer any casualties , and all 14 Hornets returned to Tindal on 14 May 2003 . 
 RAAF Hornets have also provided air defence for several high @-@ profile events in Australia since the 11 September attacks . In 2002 , Hornets patrolled over the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting ( CHOGM ) at <unk> Beach , Queensland ; this was the first time RAAF aircraft had flown air defence sorties over Australia since World War II . On 22 and 23 October that year a detachment of Hornets patrolled over Canberra during US President George W. Bush 's visit to the city . A detachment of aircraft from No. 77 Squadron was deployed to RAAF Base East Sale in March 2006 to protect the Commonwealth Games , which were being held in Melbourne . In September 2007 , Hornets patrolled over Sydney during the APEC leaders meeting there . Eight Hornets were also deployed from Williamstown to RAAF Base Pearce in October 2011 to protect the CHOGM meeting in nearby Perth . On 16 and 17 November that year , Hornets operated over Canberra and Darwin while President Barack Obama was present . 
 In March 2015 six F / A @-@ 18As from No. 75 Squadron were deployed to the Middle East as part of Operation Okra , replacing a detachment of Super Hornets . By the end of November 2015 the Hornets had conducted 580 sorties over Iraq , during which they dropped 363 munitions . The aircraft also flew 18 sorties over Syria in September 2015 , dropping two munitions . 
 = = Planned replacement = = 
 While the Hornet Upgrade Program has been successful , the RAAF 's Hornets are approaching retirement . It is expected that the aircraft will be increasingly expensive to operate as they age , and improvements to the fighter aircraft and air defences operated by other countries will reduce the Hornets ' combat effectiveness . Under current planning , the F / A @-@ 18s will begin to be withdrawn from service in the late 2010s , with the final aircraft being retired in the early 2020s . In the meantime , the RAAF has implemented several measures to keep the Hornets in service . These include a structural refurbishment program , increased monitoring of fatigue @-@ related issues as well as repainting the aircraft and frequently washing them to reduce the risks posed by corrosion . In 2015 the Defence Science and Technology Group conducted new statistical analysis of the Hornets ' structural condition which found that the airframes were less fatigued than previously believed , and so able to remain in service for a longer period than planned if necessary . This finding was accepted by the Directorate General Technical Airworthiness – Australian Defence Force . 
 The Australian Government is currently planning to replace the RAAF 's F / A @-@ 18 Hornets with Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35A Lightning II fighters from 2017 onwards . The Defence Materiel Organisation 's Project AIR 6000 Phase 2A / B specifies that up to 72 F @-@ 35A fighters will be acquired to equip three squadrons and an operational training unit . However , only 14 aircraft had been funded as at June 2012 , and the first two will be delivered in 2014 . The next twelve are scheduled to be delivered between 2017 and 2019 . The government will make a decision on funding the remainder of the aircraft at an unspecified future date . Up to 28 additional F @-@ 35As may also be ordered to replace the Super Hornets . 
 As a result of delays to the F @-@ 35 program , the Australian Government is considering buying additional F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets or further extending the life of the " classic " F / A @-@ 18s . Writing in 2011 , Australian Strategic Policy Institute analyst Andrew Davies recommended that , owing to the increasing difficulty and expense of keeping the aircraft operational , a program to retain the F / A @-@ 18A and B Hornets in service should only be attempted if it is expected that the F @-@ 35 will be delayed for an additional one or two years . 
 = Electric vehicle warning sounds = 
 Electric vehicle warning sounds are a series of sounds designed to alert pedestrians to the presence of electric drive vehicles such as hybrid electric vehicles ( HEVs ) , plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles ( PHEVs ) , and all @-@ electric vehicles ( EVs ) travelling at low speeds . Warning sound devices were deemed necessary because vehicles operating in all @-@ electric mode produce less noise than traditional combustion engine vehicles and can make it more difficult for pedestrians , the blind , cyclists , and others , to be aware of their presence . Warning sounds may be driver triggered ( as in a horn but less urgent ) or automatic at low speeds ; in type , they vary from clearly artificial ( beeps , chimes ) to those that mimic engine sounds and those of tires moving over gravel . 
 Japan issued guidelines for such warning devices in January 2010 and the U.S. approved legislation on December 2010 . The European Parliament approved legislation that requires the mandatory use of " Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems " for all new electric and hybrid electric vehicles within 5 years . 
 Several automakers have developed electric warning sound devices , and since December 2011 advanced technology cars available in the market with manually activated electric warning sounds include the Nissan Leaf , Chevrolet Volt , Honda <unk> Clarity , Nissan Fuga Hybrid / Infiniti M35 , Hyundai Sonata Hybrid , and the Toyota Prius ( Japan only ) . Models equipped with automatically activated systems include the 2014 BMW i3 ( option not available in the US ) , 2012 model year Toyota Camry Hybrid , 2012 Lexus <unk> , all EV versions of the Honda Fit , and all Prius family cars recently introduced in the United States , including the standard 2012 model year Prius , the Toyota Prius v , Prius c and the Toyota Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid . The 2013 Smart electric drive comes with automatically activated sounds in the U.S. and Japan and manually activated in Europe . Tesla Motors and Volkswagen do not currently include warning sounds in their electric drive vehicles , as all of them decided to add artificial sounds only when required by regulation . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a result of increased sales of hybrid electric vehicles in several countries , some members of the blind community have raised concerns about the noise reduction when those vehicles operate in all @-@ electric mode , as blind people or the visually impaired consider the noise of combustion engines a helpful aid while crossing streets and feel quiet hybrids could pose an unexpected hazard . Although a 2009 study found no statistically significant difference in pedestrian crashes involving quiet hybrid vehicles when compared to noisier vehicles when both types of vehicles were travelling in a straight line , it found a doubling of hybrid vehicle pedestrian crashes when reversing or parking etc. at slow speeds . 
 This problem is not exclusive to electric vehicles . In 2007 research at the Technical University Munich showed that ordinary vehicles in background noise are often detected too late for safe accident avoidance . The researchers measured the distances of 35 approaching vehicles to a pedestrian in the moment when they just got audible in a stationary background noise . These distances were then compared to the stopping distances of the respective cars and an algorithm was proposed to estimate them based on auditory masking . 
 Research conducted at the University of California , Riverside in 2008 found that hybrid cars are so quiet when operating in electric mode ( EV mode ) that they may pose a risk to the blind , small children , the elderly , runners , cyclists , and other pedestrians , as they may have only one or two seconds , depending on the context , to audibly detect the location of approaching hybrid cars when the vehicles operate at very slow speeds . This research project was funded by the National Federation of the Blind . 
 The experiment consisted of making audio recordings of a Toyota Prius and combustion engine Honda Accord approaching from two directions at 5 miles per hour ( 8 @.@ 0 km / h ) to assure that the hybrid car operated only with its electric motor . Then test subjects in a laboratory listened to the recordings and indicated when they could hear from which direction the cars approached . Subjects could locate the hum of the internal combustion engine car at 36 feet ( 11 m ) away , but could not identify the hybrid running in electric mode until it came within 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) , leaving just less than two seconds to react before the vehicle reached their position . In a second trial , the background sounds of two quietly idling combustion engine cars were added to the recordings to simulate the noise of a parking lot . Under this condition , the hybrid needed to be 74 percent closer than the conventional car before the subjects could hear from which direction the cars approached . Subjects could correctly judge the approach of the combustion car when it was about 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) feet away . This result means that under closer to normal environmental noise , a pedestrian would not be able to correctly determine the hybrid 's approach until it was one second away . 
 A separate 2008 study from Western Michigan University found that hybrids and conventional vehicles are equally safe when travelling more than about 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) , because tire and wind noise generate most of the audible cues at those speeds . Hybrid cars were also tested safe when leaving a stoplight and it was found that under this condition they do not pose a risk to pedestrians . All Prius models used in the study engaged their internal combustion engines when accelerating from a standstill and produced enough noise to be detected . 
 A 2009 study conducted by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration found that crashes involving pedestrians and bicyclists have higher incidence rates for hybrid electric vehicles than internal combustion engine ( ICE ) vehicles in low @-@ speed vehicle maneuvers such as reversing or leaving a parking zone . These accidents commonly occurred in zones with low speed limits , during daytime and in clear weather . The study found that a HEV was two times more likely to be involved in a pedestrian crash than was a conventional ICE vehicle when a vehicle is slowing or stopping , backing up , or entering or leaving a parking space . Vehicle maneuvers were grouped in one category considering those maneuvers that might have occurred at very low speeds where the difference between the sound levels produced by the hybrid versus ICE vehicle is the greatest . Also the study found that the incidence rate of pedestrian crashes in scenarios when vehicles make a turn was significantly higher for HEVs when compared to ICE vehicles . Similarly , The NHTSA study also concluded that the incidence rate of bicyclist crashes involving HEVs for the same kind of maneuvers was significantly higher when compared to conventional vehicles . 
 In September 2010 , Volvo Cars and Vattenfall , a Swedish energy company , issued a report regarding the results of the first phase of the Volvo V70 Plug @-@ in Hybrid demonstration program . Among other findings , before the trial drivers participating in the field testing were concerned about being a danger to pedestrians and cyclists due to the quietness of the electric @-@ drive vehicle . After the test several of them change their opinion and said that this issue was less of a problem than expected . Nevertheless , some test drivers said they experienced incidents of not being noticed while others said they had taken extra care in their driving with regard to this issue . 
 = = Regulations = = 
 Since 2009 the Japanese government , the U.S. Congress and the European Commission are exploring legislation to establish a minimum level of sound for plug @-@ in electric and hybrid electric vehicles when operating in electric mode , so that blind people and other pedestrians and cyclists can hear them coming and detect from which direction they are approaching . Tests have shown that vehicles operating in electric mode can be particularly hard to hear below 32 km / h ( 20 mph ) . 
 = = = European Union = = = 
 In 2011 the European Commission drafted a guideline for Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems ( AVAS ) . The goal is to present recommendations to manufacturers for a system to be installed in vehicles to provide an audible signal to pedestrians and vulnerable road users . This interim guideline is intended to provide guidance until the completion of on @-@ going research activities and the development of globally harmonized device performance specifications . The guidelines are intended for hybrid electric and pure electric highway @-@ capable vehicles . The guideline recommends that the AVAS shall automatically generate a continuous sound in the minimum range of vehicle speed from start up to approximately 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) and during reversing , if applicable for that vehicle category , and list the types of sounds that are not acceptable . It also states that the AVAS may have a pause switch to stop its operation temporarily . 
 On 6 February 2013 , the European Parliament approved a draft law to tighten noise limits for cars to protect public health , and also to add alerting sounds to ensure the audibility of hybrid and electric vehicles to improve the safety of vulnerable road users in urban areas , such as blind , visually and auditorily challenged pedestrians , cyclists and children . The draft legislation states a number of tests , standards and measures that must first be developed for an Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems ( AVAS ) to be compulsory in the future . Now an agreement has to be negotiated with European Union countries . The approved amendment establishes that " the sound to be generated by the AVAS should be a continuous sound that provides information to the pedestrians and vulnerable road users of a vehicle in operation . The sound should be easily indicative of vehicle behaviour and should sound similar to the sound of a vehicle of the same category equipped with an internal combustion engine . " In April 2014 the European Parliament approved the legislation that requires the Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems , which is mandatory for all new electric and hybrid electric vehicles . The new rule established a transitional period of 5 years to comply with the regulation . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 Beginning in July 2009 the Japanese government began assessing possible countermeasures through the Committee for the Consideration of Countermeasures Regarding Quiet Hybrid and Other Vehicles , and in January 2010 the Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transport and Tourism issued guidelines for hybrid and other near @-@ silent vehicles . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 The Department for Transport ( DfT ) commissioned research to gather statistics on accidents involving electric vehicles with pedestrians who are blind or vision impaired to determine whether the perceived accident risk is real and whether electric and hybrid cars are more difficult to detect audibly than conventional internal combustion engine vehicles . The DfT goal was to use the findings to establish what sort of sound should be fitted to electric vehicles . 
 The research was conducted by the Transport Research Laboratory , and the findings were published in 2011 . The study found little correlation between pedestrian vehicle involvement density and noise level for the majority of vehicles . In addition , the analysis found no evidence of a pattern in pedestrian vehicle involvement densities when only considering those accidents occurring on 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) or slower roads , or where the pedestrian was disabled . A previous study did not find an increased pedestrian vehicle involvement density for electric and hybrid vehicles with respect to their conventional counterparts , which raised the question as to whether added sound is necessarily required . The study also noted that some modern conventional cars are as quiet as their electric counterparts , even at low speeds . 
 UK organisation The Guide Dogs for the Blind Association lobbied members of the European Parliament to vote in favour of legislation to make the installation of artificial sound generators mandatory on quiet electric and hybrid vehicles . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The Pedestrian Safety Enhancement Act of 2010 was approved by the U.S. Senate by unanimous consent on December 9 , 2010 and passed by the House of Representatives by 379 to 30 on December 16 , 2010 . The act does not stipulate a specific speed for the simulated noise but requires the U.S. Department of Transportation to study and establish a motor vehicle safety standard that would set requirements for an alert sound that allows blind and other pedestrians to reasonably detect a nearby electric or hybrid vehicle , and the ruling must be finalized within eighteen months . The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on January 4 , 2011 . 
 A proposed rule was published for comment by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) in January , 2013 . It would require hybrids and electric vehicles traveling at less than 18 @.@ 6 miles per hour ( 30 km / h ) to emit warning sounds that pedestrians must be able to hear over background noises . The agency selected 30 km / h as the limit because according to NHTSA measurements , this is the speed at which the sound levels of the hybrid and electric vehicles approximated the sound levels produced by similar internal combustion vehicles . According to the NHTSA proposal , carmakers would be able to pick the sounds the vehicles make from a range of choices , and similar vehicles would have to make the same sounds . The rules were scheduled to go into effect in September 2014 . The NHTSA estimates that the new warning noises would prevent 2 @,@ 800 pedestrian and cyclist injuries during the life of each model year electric and hybrid vehicle . 
 In February 2013 , the Association of Global <unk> and the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers , which submitted a joint comment to the NHTSA , announced their support to the rule , but asked the NHTSA to find a noise level that effectively alerts pedestrians without being excessively loud to others inside and outside of the vehicle . They also commented that the rule is too complicated , unnecessarily prescriptive , and it will cost more than necessary . Some automakers also said there is no need for electric @-@ drive vehicles to play sounds while not in motion , " since it is not clear that it helps pedestrians to hear cars that are stopped in traffic or parked . " In addition , the carmakers requested the NHTSA to make the new sound system required by 2018 instead of 2014 . 
 In January 2015 , the NHTSA rescheduled the date for a final ruling to the end of 2015 . Since the regulation comes into force three years after being rendered as a final rule , compliance was delayed to 2018 . In November 2015 , the NHTSA rescheduled one more time because additional coordination is necessary . A final ruling was delayed at least until mid @-@ March 2016 . 
 = = Specific systems = = 
 = = = Enhanced Vehicle Acoustics = = = 
 Enhanced Vehicle Acoustics ( EVA ) , a company based in Silicon Valley , California and founded by two Stanford students with the help of seed money from the National Federation of the Blind , developed an after market technology called " Vehicular Operations Sound <unk> Systems " ( <unk> ) . The device makes hybrid electric vehicles sound more like conventional internal combustion engine cars when the vehicle goes into the silent electric mode ( EV mode ) , but at a fraction of the sound level of most vehicles . At speeds higher than between 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) the sound system shuts off . The system also shuts off when the hybrid combustion engine kicks in . 
 <unk> uses miniature , all @-@ weather audio speakers that are placed on the hybrid 's wheel wells and emit specific sounds based on the direction the car is moving in order to minimize noise pollution and to maximize acoustic information for pedestrians . If the car is moving forward , the sounds are only projected in the forward direction ; and if the car is turning left or right , the sound changes on the left or right appropriately . The company argues that chirps , beeps and alarms are more distracting than useful , and that the best sounds for alerting pedestrians are <unk> , such as " the soft purr of an engine or the slow roll of tires across pavement . " One of the EVA 's external sound systems was designed specifically for the Toyota Prius . 
 = = = ECTunes = = = 
 ECTunes is developing a system that utilizes directional sound equipment to emit noise when and where it is needed . According to the company , its technology sends audible signals only in the direction of travel , thus allowing the vehicle to be heard by those who may be in the car 's path , without disturbing others with unwelcome noise . <unk> , a Danish venture company , has provided a significant investment to help ECTunes fully develop its technology . 
 The ECTunes system , and most others so far disclosed , use a control box , with software , digital amplifiers and weather @-@ friendly external speakers . ECTunes ' system connects to the car , and reads speed and acceleration , shutting down when the car reaches Cross @-@ over speed as set by existing regulation as well as regulation under development such as Quiet Road Transport Vehicles ( <unk> ) , at which point the tires and wind are making noise of their own . The company is currently selling products to OEM 's , mainly small series production , and to the after market , and has also a new mass production unit in prototype stage 
 = = = SoundRacer EVS = = = 
 SoundRacer AB is a Swedish manufacturer of electronic engine sound devices established 2008 to develop sound technology for improved driving experience in internal combustion engine ( ICE ) cars . In 2012 the company released their first version of an Electric Vehicle Electronic Engine Sound System , based on the same technology . 
 SoundRacer EVS use only real engine sound recordings as the base for the sounds , following the legislation guidelines that the sound " should sound similar to the sound of a vehicle of the same category equipped with an internal combustion engine " . As a result , the sounds will also be less likely to be disturbing compared to adding new types of synthetic sounds into the traffic environment . 
 The sound modules are developed to give a realistic ICE sound impression indicating if the vehicle is idling , accelerating , decelerating or cruising . The different sound characters and sound volume is determined from information about the actual speed of the vehicle and rate of speed change . 
 The company targets two different applications with the products : 1 . EV warning sounds , to make electric vehicles meet the upcoming legislations , and 2 . Increased driving experience to make electric vehicles more popular among customer groups that appreciate real engine sounds . 
 Many manufacturers of electric vehicles like cars , motorcycles and scooters are now in the process of evaluating sound systems for their products . To assist them in the prototyping process the SoundRacer EVS modules have functions that will give EV manufacturers the tools to test different sounds and settings . Several files with sounds and parameter settings , such as the speed for muting the sound , sound levels and simulated gear changing , can be created with a computer program and stored on a MicroSD card . Changing sounds and settings during test drives is then performed with a touch of a button . 
 SoundRacer AB delivers complete systems with CAN bus , analog and digital speed / rpm input and a selection of weather protected speakers . 
 = = = Fisker Automotive = = = 
 Fisker Automotive developed a sound @-@ generator that was incorporated in its Fisker Karma luxury plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicle , released in 2011 . According to the carmaker , the sound is designed to both alert pedestrians and enhance the driver experience , and the warning noise will be emitted automatically . The Fisker Karma emits a sound through a pair of external speakers embedded in the bumper . According to a company spokesman the sound is a mix between a " Formula One car and a starship " . 
 The developing process took between nine months to a year , and three sound companies sent in synthesized WAV file samples that were evaluated by Fisker employees and executives . The prospective sounds were studied in an audio chamber to allow engineers to evaluate the sounds without other noise interfering . After testing the candidate sounds in different locations relative to the vehicle , Fisker fined @-@ tune the final sound with its own equipment . The warning sound is activated when the car is traveling at less than 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) . 
 = = = Ford = = = 
 The 2012 Ford Focus Electric was planned to include warning sounds for pedestrians . Ford Motor Company developed four alternative sounds , and in June 2011 involved the electric car fans by asking them to pick their favorite from the four potential warning sounds through the Focus Electric Facebook page . However , ultimately Ford decided to hold off including warning sounds unless federal legislation required it , and no such system was implemented on the production vehicle . 
 = = = General Motors = = = 
 General Motors ' first commercially available plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicle , the Chevrolet Volt , introduced in December 2010 , includes warning sounds for pedestrians . GM 's system is called Pedestrian @-@ Friendly Alert System and it is manually activated by the driver , but future generations probably will include an active system . The automaker conducted a test with a group of the visually challenged at Milford Proving Grounds in order to evaluate the audible warning systems on the Volt when a pedestrian is in the car 's proximity . The system uses the car 's horn to emit a series of warning chirps , like a low tone of a horn , enough to provide an alert but not to startle . According to GM engineers , the biggest challenge is " developing an active system that can distinguish a pedestrian from another vehicle " ; otherwise , the sound will go off frequently , producing noise pollution instead . 
 = = = Hyundai = = = 
 Hyundai developed a warning noise for called the Virtual Engine Sound System ( <unk> ) . The system , which was introduced in September 2010 on its test fleet of <unk> electric <unk> , provides synthetic audio feedback mimicking the sound of an idling internal combustion engine . 
 The 2011 Hyundai Sonata Hybrid is the first mass production car manufactured by Hyundai to include the warning sound system . In 2010 the carmaker decided to have a button on the Sonata Hybrid 's instrument panel to turn the <unk> on and off , but after the enactment of the Pedestrian Safety Enhancement Act of 2010 , signed into law by President Obama in early 2011 , and learning that the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration would not allow such switches to avoid the noise device to be turned off , Hyundai decided not to install the button , and the first Sonata Hybrids destined for the U.S. market had to be altered to remove the switch . 
 = = = Lotus Engineering = = = 
 Lotus Engineering , a consultancy group of British sports carmaker Lotus Cars , partnered in 2009 with Harman Becker , a producer of audio systems , to develop and commercialize a synthetic automotive audio systems . Lotus has worked on a number of hybrid and electric vehicles and its engineers thought they would be safer if these vehicles made a noise while moving around the factory . Originally developed to cancel out intrusive noises inside a car , the noise canceling system was adapted so that it could also simulate engine sounds that change with speed and use of the throttle , providing audible " feedback " to drivers of vehicles with a silent engine . At the same time , and through the addition of external speakers , the sound system allows pedestrians to hear the noise too , but optionally there can be a different sound within the car from the one that is emitted for the outside . Lotus used a Toyota Prius to demonstrate the device but did not reveal if it intended to bring this technology to market . 
 Lotus ' synthetic sound system was incorporated in the Lotus <unk> <unk> Hybrid , a concept plug @-@ in hybrid unveiled at the 2010 Geneva Motor Show . The system , called <unk> Internal and External Electronic Sound Synthesis , is a suite of noise solutions that uses patented technologies from Lotus and Harman International . The audio system generates engine sounds inside the vehicle through the audio system . The system also generates the external sound through speakers mounted at the front and rear to provide a warning to increase pedestrian safety . The system comes with four driver @-@ selectable engine sounds , two of which have been designed to have characteristics of a multi @-@ cylinder conventional V6 and V12 engine . 
 = = = Nissan = = = 
 Vehicle Sound for Pedestrians or VSP is a Nissan @-@ developed warning sound system in electric vehicles . The Nissan Leaf was the first car manufactured by Nissan to include VSP , and the electric car includes one sound for forward motion and another for reverse . The VSP was also used in the Nissan Fuga hybrid launched in 2011 . The system developed makes a noise easy to hear for those outside to be aware of the vehicle approaching , but the warning sounds do not distract the car occupants inside . Nissan explained that during the development of the sound they studied behavioral research of the visually impaired and worked with cognitive and acoustic psychologists , including the National Federation of the Blind , the Detroit Institute of Ophthalmology , experts from the Vanderbilt University Medical Center and a Hollywood sound design studio . 
 Nissan 's Vehicle Sound for Pedestrians is a sine @-@ wave sound system that sweeps from 2 @.@ 5 kHz at the high end to a low of 600 Hz , a range that is easily audible across age groups . Depending on the speed and whether the Leaf is accelerating or decelerating , the sound system will make sweeping , high @-@ low sounds . For example , when the Leaf is started the sound will be louder , and when the car is in reverse , the system will generate an intermittent sound . The sound system ceases operation when the Nissan Leaf reaches 30 km / h ( 18 @.@ 6 mph ) and engages again as the car slows to under 25 kilometres per hour ( 16 mph ) . For the 2011 Leaf , the driver could turn off sounds temporarily through a switch inside the vehicle , but the system automatically reset to " On " at the next ignition cycle . The system is controlled through a computer and synthesizer in the dash panel , and the sound is delivered through a speaker in the front driver 's side wheel well . Nissan said that there were six or seven finalist sounds , and that sound testing included driving cars emitting various sounds past testers standing on street corners , who indicated when they first heard the approaching car . Nissan removed the ability to disable the pedestrian alert between model year 2011 and 2012 in anticipation of the U.S. ruling to be issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration . 
 The Leaf 's electric warning sound had to be removed for cars delivered in the U.K. , as the country 's law mandates that any hazard warning sound must be capable of being disabled between 11 : 00 pm and 6 : 00 am , and the Leaf 's audible warning system does not allow for such temporary deactivation . For the 2014 UK model of the car , the VSP system is enabled by default , though a button on the dash permits drivers to disable the system until the next time the car is switched on . 
 = = = Toyota = = = 
 Toyota Motor Company teamed up with Fujitsu Ten to develop an automatic warning system for hybrids and electric vehicles to alert pedestrians when the car is propelled by its electric motor . The companies also studied the development of a system that would change the alarm 's tune and volume with the assistance of an obstacle @-@ detection radar . 
 On August 2010 Toyota began sales of an onboard device designed to automatically emit a synthesized sound of an electric motor when the Prius is operating as an electric vehicle at speeds up to approximately 25 kilometres per hour ( 16 mph ) . The device will be available in Japan through authorized Toyota dealers and Toyota genuine parts & accessories distributors for retrofitting on the third @-@ generation Prius at a price of ¥ 12 @,@ 600 ( ~ US $ 150 ) including the consumption tax . The alert sound rises and falls in pitch according to the vehicle 's speed , thus helping indicate the vehicle 's proximity and movement to nearby pedestrians . Toyota is planning to use other versions of the device for use in gasoline @-@ electric hybrids , plug @-@ in hybrids , electric vehicles as well as fuel @-@ cell hybrid vehicles planned for mass production . The device meets the 2010 government regulations issued for hybrid and other near @-@ silent vehicles . 
 Toyota 's Vehicle Proximity Notification System ( <unk> ) was introduced in the United States in all 2012 model year Prius family vehicles , including the Prius v , Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid and the standard Prius . The system is being introduced to comply with the Pedestrian Safety Enhancement Act of 2010 . 
 = = = Other carmakers = = = 
 Tesla Motors and Think Global , both manufactures of electric cars already in the market , are assessing this safety issue . Ford Motor Company is developing a system for emitting external sounds to future hybrids and electrics , including its Focus BEV , scheduled for 2011 , and a next @-@ generation hybrid and plug @-@ in hybrid vehicle planned for 2012 . Nancy Gioia , Ford 's Director for Global Electrification commented that " car companies should consider standardizing tones from future hybrids and electrics to avoid a cacophony of confusion on the streets . " 
 = = Criticism and controversy = = 
 After Nissan 's new sounds were publicized , the U.S. National Federation of the Blind issued a statement saying that " while it was pleased that the alert existed , it was unhappy that the driver was able to turn it off . " The NFB approves the Nissan Leaf 's forward motion sound , but it said the forward noise should also be used for reversing because the " intermittent sound is not as effective as a continuous sound " and that the car should emit warning sounds when it is idling , not only when it 's moving slowly . Nevertheless , their main complaint is that they don ’ t think the driver should be able to switch the sound off . 
 Several anti @-@ noise and electric car advocates have opposed the introduction of artificial sounds as warning for pedestrians , as they argue that the proposed system will only increase noise pollution . They also opposed U.S. pending legislation that would require generated warning sounds with no off switch for the driver . 
 Robert S. Wall Emerson of Western Michigan University has argued that several high @-@ end gasoline @-@ powered luxury cars are already quieter than hybrids , and according to his most recent studies , hybrid SUVs were noisier than many internal @-@ combustion vehicles . He concludes that pedestrian safety is not a hybrid issue but rather " a quiet car issue . " 
 = = Market availability = = 
 As of 1 January 2014 , most of the hybrids and plug @-@ in electric and hybrids sold make warning noises using a speaker system . Tesla Motors , Volkswagen and BMW do not currently include warning sounds in their electric @-@ drive vehicles , as all of them decided to add artificial sounds only when required by regulation . 
 = Suillus quiescens = 
 Suillus quiescens is a pored mushroom of the genus Suillus in the family Suillaceae . First collected in 2002 on Santa Cruz Island off the coast of California , in association with Bishop Pine ( Pinus muricata ) , the species was scientifically described and named in 2010 . In addition to its distribution in coastal California , it was also found forming ectomycorrhizae with the roots of pine seedlings in the eastern Sierra Nevada , coastal Oregon , and the southern Cascade Mountains . It resembles Suillus brevipes , but can be distinguished from that species by its paler @-@ colored immature cap and by the tiny colored glands on the stipe that darken with age . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Fruit bodies of the fungus were first collected in 2002 on Santa Cruz Island , in Santa Barbara County . They were named provisionally as a new species , Suillus quiescens , in conference proceedings published in 2005 . The species was officially described and named in a 2010 Mycologia publication . The specific epithet quiescens refers to the organism 's ability to wait dormant ( quiescent ) in the soil until it encounters pine roots . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 Based on phylogenetic analysis of the internal transcribed spacer region in the non @-@ functional RNA of a number of Suillus species , S. quiescens is distinct from other morphologically similar species such as S. brevipes , S. <unk> , and S. occidentalis . The S. quiescens sequences , which were obtained from fruit bodies and from mycorrhizal root tips , formed a clade . The analysis showed that the S. quiescens sequences were matches to some unidentified Suillus sequences found from mycorrhizae of pine seedlings collected from Oregon and California . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap ranges in shape from hemispheric to broadly convex , and has a diameter of 6 to 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The cap color is deep brown in mature specimens and lighter shades of brown in younger mushrooms . Young specimens have a sticky layer of gluten on the cap that dries out in maturity . The edge of the cap is rolled inwards in young specimens . The flesh of the cap is whitish and does not change color when bruised or cut . The tubes on the underside of the cap are light yellow to bright orange @-@ yellow ; the tube mouths are usually less than 1 mm wide . The stipe is usually between 2 and 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 and 1 @.@ 6 in ) long , less frequently reaching up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) . It is either the same width throughout or slightly larger ( bulbous ) at the base . The color of the upper portion of the stipe is pale to light yellow , while the lower portion may be light brown or covered with streaks of glutinous material like that on the cap . The stipe surface is covered with fine glands that are initially slightly darker than the color of the stipe surface , but deepen to brown or nearly black after drying . The color of the spore print was not determined from the initial collections , but is thought to be yellow @-@ brown to brown based on the accumulated spore deposit seen on the surface of the caps of neighboring fruit bodies . 
 The elongate spores are oblong in face view , with dimensions of 6 @.@ 1 – 14 @.@ 7 by 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 7 µm . Most spores have a single large drop of oil in them . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped , two- or four @-@ spored , and measure 20 @.@ 2 – 26 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 7 µm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 With its short stipe and sticky cap , S. quiescens is similar to S. brevipes . It may be distinguished from the latter species by the color of the young ( light @-@ brown ) cap , the glandular dots at the top of stipes in mature specimens , and the yellowish color at the top of the stipe . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies grow together in small groups on the ground in association with Bishop Pine ( Pinus muricata ) . It is the most common Suillus species on Santa Cruz Island , its type locality and it has also been collected at Santa Rosa Island , and Point Reyes National Seashore in California . Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa , two of the four islands that make up the northern Channel Islands , have a Mediterranean climate with cool and wet winters , and warm and dry summers . Most species of Suillus do not have spores that survive in the soil for extended periods of time , but the spores of S. quiescens can tolerate the dry conditions and heat typical of California . Another study showed that viable S. quiescens spores were present in steam @-@ pasteurized soil planted in Oregon fields . The authors suggest that S. quiescens is an early successional species that fruits in young forests , and whose spores remain dormant in the soil for extended periods of time until the roots of a suitable pine host are encountered . 
 = Rebecca Soni = 
 Rebecca Soni ( born March 18 , 1987 ) is an American former competition swimmer and breaststroke specialist who is a six @-@ time Olympic medalist . She is a former world record @-@ holder in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke ( short and long course ) and the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke ( short and long course ) , and is the first woman to swim the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke in under 2 minutes 20 seconds . As a member of the U.S. national team , she currently holds the world record in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay ( short and long course ) . 
 Soni has won a total of twenty @-@ two medals in major international competition , fourteen gold , seven silver , and one bronze spanning the Olympics , the World , the Universiade , and the Pan Pacific Championships . She burst onto the international scene at the 2008 Summer Olympics where she won two silver medals and one gold . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke at the Olympics , she set the world record en route to winning gold , shocking Australian favorite Leisel Jones . Four years later at the 2012 Summer Olympics , Soni successfully defended her Olympic title in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke in world record time , becoming the first woman to do so in the event . 
 She was named Swimming World 's World Swimmer of the Year award in 2010 and 2011 , and the American Swimmer of the Year award in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Soni was born in Freehold , New Jersey , in 1987 , the daughter of Peter and <unk> <unk> . Soni 's parents are of Hungarian descent ; they emigrated from Cluj @-@ Napoca , Romania . Besides English , Soni also speaks Hungarian . Soni has one older sister , Rita , who was also a swimmer . Originally a gymnast , Soni began swimming at the age of ten . 
 Soni is a 2005 graduate of West Windsor @-@ Plainsboro High School North in Plainsboro Township , New Jersey . In July 2006 she had a cardiac ablation . Soni attended the University of Southern California and graduated in 2009 . She majored in communication at the Annenberg School for Communication . 
 At USC , Soni was a six @-@ time NCAA Champion , having won the 200 @-@ yard breaststroke in 2006 through 2009 and the 100 @-@ yard breaststroke in 2008 and 2009 . Soni currently swims for the Trojan Swim Club in Los Angeles with coach Dave Salo , who also coaches breaststroke world @-@ record holder Jessica Hardy . 
 In August 2010 , Soni became a spokeswoman for the United Nations Foundation 's Girl Up campaign . The organization focuses on improving the lives of the world 's adolescent girls . 
 She dated fellow U.S. Olympic swimmer Ricky Berens from 2010 to 2012 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 As a 17 @-@ year @-@ old at the 2004 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Soni finished 15th overall in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke and 11th overall in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . The following year , at the 2005 World Championship Trials , Soni just missed a spot on the 2005 World Aquatic team after finishing third in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke behind Tara Kirk and Kristen <unk> . Soni also placed fourth in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke . At the 2005 Summer Universiade , Soni earned her first international medals by winning silver in the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter breaststroke and gold in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . At the 2006 World Short Course Championships , Soni finished in 4th place in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . Just a few weeks before the 2006 National Championships , Soni underwent a procedure called <unk> ablation to help regulate her heartbeat . Although it was not health @-@ threatening , Soni would sometimes experience a high heart rate which sometimes interfered with her training . At the 2006 National Championships , the selection meet for the 2006 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships and the 2007 World Aquatics Championships , Soni finished tenth overall in both the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 = = = = 2008 Olympic Trials = = = = 
 At the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Soni competed in two events , the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . In the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni finished fourth in a time of 1 : 07 @.@ 80 . Usually , the top two finishers would qualify for the Olympics . However , after second @-@ place finisher Jessica Hardy withdrew from the team and third @-@ place finisher Tara Kirk missed the entry deadline , Soni was chosen to swim the event . Soni earned her berth by being the swimmer already on the team with the fastest time in the event since January 1 , 2006 . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni won with a time of 2 : 22 @.@ 60 , the third @-@ fastest finish as of that date . 
 = = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = = 
 At the 2008 Summer Olympics , Soni won a silver medal in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , finishing behind world record holder Leisel Jones of Australia 1 : 06 @.@ 73 to 1 : 05 @.@ 17 . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni upset the heavily favored Jones , winning the gold medal and breaking Jones 's world record with a time of 2 : 20 @.@ 22 . Jones finished second with a time of 2 : 22 @.@ 05 . After the race , Soni said , " It 's been a long road to get here , I can 't believe what just happened . " Soni then combined with Natalie Coughlin , Christine Magnuson , and Dara Torres in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay to finish second behind Australia . Soni had the second best split time in the field ( 1 : 05 @.@ 95 ) behind Jones ( 1 : 04 @.@ 58 ) . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 = = = = 2009 National Championships = = = = 
 At the 2009 National Championships Soni competed in two events , the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . In the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni easily won with a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 34 . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni again exhibited dominance by finishing first with a time of 2 : 20 @.@ 38 , just off her world record pace . 
 = = = = 2009 World Aquatics Championships = = = = 
 At the 2009 World Aquatics Championships , held in Rome , Soni set a meet record in the heats of the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , with a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 66 . In the semi @-@ final , Soni recorded a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 84 to set a new world record and become the first female to finish under 1 : 05 for the event . In the final of the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni won the gold with a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 93 . Despite being the favorite in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni went out too fast in the first half of the race and faded in the final meters , ultimately placing fourth . In the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni was narrowly beaten for the gold and the world record by two one @-@ hundredths ( 0 @.@ 02 ) of a second by Russian swimmer Yuliya Yefimova . 
 For her performance at the World Championships , she was named the American Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World Magazine . 
 = = = = 2009 Duel in the Pool = = = = 
 Soni then competed at the 2009 Duel in the Pool , a short course meet held in December at Manchester . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni broke Leisel Jones ' world record with a time of 2 : 14 @.@ 57 . One day later , Soni swam a 1 : 02 @.@ 70 in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke to break Jones ' world record of 1 : 03 @.@ 00 . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 = = = = 2010 National Championships = = = = 
 At the 2010 National Championships , Soni qualified to compete at the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . In the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni won in a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 73 . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni easily won with a time of 2 : 21 @.@ 60 , almost five seconds ahead of second @-@ place finisher Amanda Beard . 
 = = = = 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships = = = = 
 At the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships , Soni won a total of three gold medals . In the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni recorded the third fastest time in history and the fastest time recorded in a textile suit with a 1 : 04 @.@ 93 to win the gold medal ahead of Australians Leisel Jones and Sarah <unk> . Her time was also the fastest ever recorded in a textile swimsuit . Two days after the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni then competed in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni dominated the field with a time of 2 : 20 @.@ 69 . Leisel Jones came in second in 2 : 23 @.@ 23 and world record holder <unk> Pierse came in third with a time of 2 : 23 @.@ 65 . Less than an hour after the event , Soni competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Natalie Coughlin , Dana Vollmer and Jessica Hardy . Performing the breaststroke leg , Soni recorded a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 35 , the fastest in the field ; the American team went on to win the gold in a time of 3 : 55 @.@ 23 . 
 For her performance at the Pan Pacific Swimming Championships , Soni was named the World Swimmer of the Year and American Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World Magazine . 
 = = = = 2010 Short Course World Championships = = = = 
 At the end of 2010 , Soni competed at the 2010 World Short Course Championships in Dubai , where she won three gold medals and one silver . Soni swept all the breaststroke events and individually set four championship records . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 = = = = 2011 World Aquatics Championships = = = = 
 Soni won her first gold medal in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke . After posting the top times in the heats ( 1 : 05 @.@ 54 ) and semi @-@ finals ( 1 : 04 @.@ 91 ) , Soni recorded a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 05 in the final for the win . Her winning time was over a second ahead of second @-@ place finisher Leisel Jones . In her second event , the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni won with a time of 2 : 21 @.@ 47 , her first gold medal in the event at a long course World Championships . However , her time in the final was slightly slower than her semi @-@ final time of 2 : 21 @.@ 03 . In the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Soni won gold with Natalie Coughlin , Dana Vollmer , and Missy Franklin with a time of 3 : 52 @.@ 36 , over three seconds ahead of second @-@ place finisher China . Swimming the breaststroke leg , Soni had a split of 1 : 04 @.@ 71 . The final time of 3 : 52 @.@ 36 for the medley relay was the second @-@ fastest effort of all time , just behind the Chinese @-@ owned world record of 3 : 52 @.@ 19 . In her last event , the 50 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni finished in third place behind Jessica Hardy and Yuliya Yefimova . 
 At the year 's end , Soni was named the World Swimmer of the Year and American Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World Magazine , and defended her titles from 2010 . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 = = = = 2012 Olympic Trials = = = = 
 At the 2012 United States Olympic Trials , the U.S. qualifying meet for the Olympics , Soni qualified for the U.S. Olympic team by finishing second in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke and first in the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke . Her second @-@ place finish in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke also ensured her a spot on the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In her first event , the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni placed second behind <unk> Larson , a Texas A & M swimmer , with a time of 1 : 05 @.@ 99 , only losing by seven one @-@ hundredths ( 0 @.@ 07 ) of a second . In the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke , Soni placed first with a time of 2 : 21 @.@ 13 , winning by almost two seconds . 
 = = = = 2012 Summer Olympic Games = = = = 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Soni won her first medal , a silver , in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke , finishing 0 @.@ 08 seconds behind 15 @-@ year @-@ old Lithuanian <unk> <unk> and repeating her result from the 2008 Olympics . After topping the heats of the 200 @-@ metre breaststroke with a time of 2 : 21 @.@ 40 , and breaking <unk> Pierse 's world record in the semi @-@ finals with a time of 2 : 20 @.@ 00 , Soni won a gold medal in the final of the 200 @-@ meter breaststroke with a time of 2 : 19 @.@ 59 , breaking her own world record and becoming the first woman ever to break 2 minutes 20 seconds in the event . With her win , Soni became the first female to successfully defend her title in the event . In her final event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , she won gold with Missy Franklin , Dana Vollmer and Allison Schmitt . Swimming the breaststroke leg , she recorded a time of 1 : 04 @.@ 82 , and the U.S. team went on to set a new world record with a time of 3 : 52 @.@ 05 , bettering the previous Chinese @-@ owned record of 3 : 52 @.@ 19 set in 2009 . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 Soni took the year off to recover from a back injury , but returned to the 2013 World Aquatics Championships as a spectator . At the World Championships , her 200 @-@ meter breaststroke world record was broken by Denmark 's <unk> Møller Pedersen in the semi @-@ finals . 
 = = Personal bests = = 
 As of August 2 , 2012 . 
 = = World records = = 
 a Record set in a short course pool . 
 b Short course record with Natalie Coughlin , Dana Vollmer , and Missy Franklin . 
 c The first woman to swim in under 2 minutes 20 seconds in the event . 
 d Record set with Missy Franklin , Dana Vollmer , and Allison Schmitt . 
 = HMS York ( 90 ) = 
 HMS York was the first of two York @-@ class heavy cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the late 1920s . She mostly served on the North America and West Indies Station before World War II . Early in the war the ship escorted convoys in the Atlantic and participated in the Norwegian Campaign in 1940 . York was transferred to the Mediterranean theatre in late 1940 where she escorted convoys and the larger ships of the Mediterranean Fleet . She was wrecked in an attack by Italian explosive motorboats of the 10th Flotilla MAS at Suda Bay , Crete in March 1941 . The ship 's wreck was salvaged in 1952 and scrapped in Bari . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 York 's design was based on the earlier County classes but was intended to be smaller and cheaper , although better armoured . She was easily distinguishable from her sister ship , Exeter , as the latter had straight masts and funnels , while those of York were angled to the rear . In addition , York also had a very tall bridge designed to clear the aircraft catapult originally planned to be carried on the superfiring ( ' B ' ) gun turret forward . 
 York displaced 8 @,@ 250 long tons ( 8 @,@ 380 t ) at standard load and 10 @,@ 620 long tons ( 10 @,@ 790 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 575 feet ( 175 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 57 feet ( 17 @.@ 4 m ) and a draught of 20 feet 3 inches ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving four shafts , which developed a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 32 @.@ 25 knots ( 59 @.@ 73 km / h ; 37 @.@ 11 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . York carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 900 long tons ( 1 @,@ 900 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 13 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 24 @,@ 600 km ; 15 @,@ 300 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 628 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted six 50 @-@ calibre 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns in three twin turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of four QF 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk V anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . York mounted two single 2 @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) light AA guns ( " pom @-@ poms " ) . The ship carried two triple torpedo tube above @-@ water mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . 
 York lacked a full waterline armor belt . The sides of her boiler and engine rooms were protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour and sides of the magazines were protected by 4 @.@ 375 inches ( 111 @.@ 1 mm ) of armour . The transverse bulkheads at the end of her machinery rooms were 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) thick . The top and ends of the magazines were three inches thick . The lower deck over the machinery spaces and steering gear had a thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . Space and weight was reserved for one catapult and its seaplane , but they were not fitted until after she was completed . A second catapult , intended to be mounted on ' B ' turret , was deleted from the design during construction . 
 = = Service = = 
 York was laid down by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , Jarrow , on 18 May 1927 , launched on 17 July 1928 and was completed on 1 May 1930 . She became the flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Home Fleet upon commissioning . Between 1931 and 1934 she was commanded by Captain Richard Bevan . She served with the 8th Cruiser Squadron on the North America and West Indies Station , and was detached to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1935 and 1936 for the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War , before returning to the American Station until the outbreak of war in September 1939 . 
 The ship was transferred to Halifax , Nova Scotia that same month for convoy escort duties . In October 1939 , York was assigned to Force F at Halifax , which was active in hunting for commerce raiders and protecting convoys . She was briefly refitted in Bermuda between 31 October and 22 November before she returned to Great Britain for a more thorough refit in December . Upon its completion on 9 February York was assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of Home Fleet . On 3 March 1940 the ship intercepted the German blockade runner <unk> in the Denmark Strait near Iceland , but she was scuttled by her own crew before she could be captured . 
 In early April 1940 , York , and the rest of her squadron , were assigned to carry troops under Plan R 4 , the British plan to invade Norway . The troops were disembarked on 8 April when the British learned of the imminent German invasion of Norway and the squadron , under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral John Cunningham , joined the bulk of the Home Fleet already at sea . On 10 April the destroyer HMS Eclipse was badly damaged by air attack and York was detailed to tow her to Lerwick for repairs . The ship , and the light cruisers HMS Manchester and HMS Birmingham , ferried the 1st Battalion of the Green Howards and other troops from Rosyth to Åndalsnes and Molde on 24 – 25 April . York returned home on 26 April . York was one of the ships used to evacuate British and French troops from Namsos , along with three French transports and a number of British destroyers , on the evening of 1 / 2 May . 
 = = = In the Mediterranean = = = 
 In August 1940 York was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , joining the 3rd Cruiser Squadron in Alexandria in late September , after escorting a convoy around the Cape of Good Hope . Two days later she participated in Operation MB.5 , where the Mediterranean Fleet escorted the light cruisers HMS Liverpool and HMS Gloucester as they ferried troops to Malta . During the Battle of Cape Passero , York sank the disabled and abandoned destroyer Artigliere on 13 October after the destroyer 's engagement with the light cruiser HMS Ajax the previous evening . A month later York and the Mediterranean Fleet executed Operation MB8 , a complex series of manoeuvers , including Operation Judgement , where the ship escorted the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious as her aircraft attacked the Italian Fleet at Taranto on the evening of 11 / 12 November . A few days later York ferried British troops from Alexandria , Egypt to Piraeus , Greece . On 26 November , York , and the rest of the 3rd Cruiser Squadron , covered a small convoy to Malta . 
 The Mediterranean Fleet , including York , sortied on 16 December to conduct air strikes on Italian shipping , airbases on Rhodes and to bombard Valona . In early January 1941 the ship escorted the tanker RFA <unk> and four Flower @-@ class corvettes to Suda Bay , Crete and covered operations in the Eastern Mediterranean during Operation Excess . She arrived back at Alexandria on 16 January . York returned to Suda Bay in early February for operations against Italian shipping . During Operation Lustre in March , she protected troop convoys from Egypt to Greece . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 York was disabled at Suda Bay in Crete by two Italian explosive motorboats of the Italian Regia Marina assault Flotilla Decima <unk> MAS , launched by the destroyers Crispi and Sella on 26 March 1941 ; the two old destroyers were fitted with special cranes to operate assault craft . Six motorboats entered the bay , led by Tenente di <unk> Luigi <unk> , and attacked three targets in pairs ; the first was York , second the tanker Pericles and last another ship at anchor . Three of the attacking boats had various problems , either mechanical or human , due to the extreme temperature conditions , but the other three successfully attacked their targets . Two motorboats , packed with 330 @-@ kilogram ( 730 lb ) charges in the bows , struck York amidships , flooding both boiler rooms and one engine room . Two British seamen were killed . All Italian sailors survived the attack and fell into British hands . The ship was run aground to prevent her from sinking . The submarine HMS Rover was used to supply electrical power to operate the cruiser 's guns for anti @-@ aircraft defence , but she was later severely damaged by air attack and had to be towed away for repairs . On 18 May , further damage was inflicted by German bombers and the ship was damaged beyond repair . Her main guns were wrecked by demolition charges on 22 May 1941 when the Allies began to evacuate Crete . York 's wreck was salvaged in February 1952 and towed to Bari to be broken up , beginning on 3 March . 
 = Cabernet Sauvignon = 
 Cabernet Sauvignon ( French : [ <unk> <unk> ̃ ] ) is one of the world 's most widely recognized red wine grape varieties . It is grown in nearly every major wine producing country among a diverse spectrum of climates from Canada 's Okanagan Valley to Lebanon 's Beqaa Valley . Cabernet Sauvignon became internationally recognized through its prominence in Bordeaux wines where it is often blended with Merlot and Cabernet Franc . From France , the grape spread across Europe and to the New World where it found new homes in places like California 's Santa Cruz Mountains , Napa Valley , New Zealand 's Hawkes Bay , Australia 's Margaret River and Coonawarra regions and Chile 's Maipo Valley and Colchagua . For most of the 20th century , it was the world 's most widely planted premium red wine grape until it was surpassed by Merlot in the 1990s . 
 Despite its prominence in the industry , the grape is a relatively new variety , the product of a chance crossing between Cabernet Franc and Sauvignon blanc during the 17th century in southwestern France . Its popularity is often attributed to its ease of cultivation — the grapes have thick skins and the vines are hardy and naturally low yielding , budding late to avoid frost and resistant to viticultural hazards such as rot and insects — and to its consistent presentation of structure and flavours which express the typical character ( " <unk> " ) of the variety . <unk> and ease of pronunciation have helped to sell Cabernet Sauvignon wines to consumers , even when from unfamiliar wine regions . Its widespread popularity has also contributed to criticism of the grape as a " colonizer " that takes over wine regions at the expense of native grape varieties . 
 The classic profile of Cabernet Sauvignon tends to be full @-@ bodied wines with high tannins and noticeable acidity that contributes to the wine 's aging potential . In cooler climates , Cabernet Sauvignon tends to produce wines with blackcurrant notes that can be accompanied by green bell pepper notes , mint and cedar which will all become more pronounced as the wine ages . In more moderate climates the blackcurrant notes are often seen with black cherry and black olives notes while in very hot climates the current flavors can veer towards the over @-@ ripe and " jammy " side . In parts of Australia , particularly the Coonawarra wine region of South Australia , Cabernet Sauvignon wines tend to have a characteristic eucalyptus or menthol notes . 
 = = History and origins = = 
 For many years , the origin of Cabernet Sauvignon was not clearly understood and many myths and conjectures surrounded it . The word " Sauvignon " is believed to be derived from the French sauvage meaning " wild " and to refer to the grape being a wild Vitis vinifera vine native to France . Until recently the grape was rumored to have ancient origins , perhaps even being the Biturica grape used to make ancient Roman wine and referenced by Pliny the Elder . This belief was widely held in the 18th century , when the grape was also known as Petite Vidure or <unk> , apparently a corruption of Biturica . There was also belief that Vidure was a reference to the hard wood ( French <unk> dure ) of the vine , with a possible relationship to Carménère which was once known as Grand Vidure . Another theory was that the grapevine originated in the Rioja region of Spain . 
 While the period when the name Cabernet Sauvignon became more prevalent over Petite Vidure is not certain , records indicate that the grape was a popular Bordeaux planting in the 18th century Médoc region . The first estates known to have actively grown the variety ( and the likely source of Cabernet vines for other estates ) were Château Mouton and Château d <unk> in Pauillac . 
 The grape 's true origins were discovered in 1996 with the use of DNA typing at the UC Davis Department of Viticulture and <unk> , by a team led by Dr. Carole Meredith . The DNA evidence determined that Cabernet Sauvignon was the offspring of Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc and was most likely a chance crossing that occurred in the 17th century . Prior to this discovery , this origin had been suspected from the similarity of the grapes ' names and the fact that Cabernet Sauvignon shares similar aromas with both grapes — such as the blackcurrant and pencil box aromas of Cabernet franc and the <unk> of Sauvignon blanc . 
 = = = Offspring and White Cabernet = = = 
 While not as prolific in mutating as Pinot noir , nor as widely used in production of offspring , Cabernet Sauvignon has been linked to other grape varieties . In 1961 , a cross of Cabernet Sauvignon and Grenache produced the French wine grape <unk> . Cygne blanc is a white @-@ berried seedling of Cabernet Sauvignon that was discovered in 1989 growing in a garden in Swan Valley , Western Australia . Cabernet blanc is a crossing of Cabernet Sauvignon and an unknown hybrid grape variety that was discovered in Switzerland in the late 20th century . 
 In 1977 a vine producing ' bronze ' grapes was found in the vineyards of <unk> Wines in Australia . They propagated this mutant , registered it under the name of Malian , and sold pale red wines under that name . In 1991 one of the Bronze Cabernet vines started producing white grapes . <unk> registered this " White Cabernet " under the name of Shalistin . Compared to its Cabernet parent , Malian appears to lack anthocyanins in the <unk> cells but retains them in the epidermis , whereas Shalistin has no anthocyanins in either layer . The team that went on to discover the <unk> and <unk> genes that control grape color have suggested that a gene involved in anthocyanin production has been deleted in the <unk> of Malian , and then <unk> cells invaded the epidermis to produce Shalistin . 
 During a series of trials between 1924 and 1930 , the pollen of Cabernet Sauvignon was used to fertilize <unk> vines ( the white wine grape used to make the sparkling wine <unk> ) to create the red Italian wine grape <unk> Manzoni 2 @.@ 15 . 
 In 1983 , Cabernet Sauvignon was crossed with the white German wine grape Bronner to create the white wine grape <unk> gris . 
 = = Viticulture = = 
 While Cabernet Sauvignon can grow in a variety of climates , its suitability as a varietal wine or as a blend component is strongly influenced by the warmth of the climate . The vine is one of the last major grape varieties to bud and ripen ( typically 1 – 2 weeks after Merlot and Cabernet franc ) and the climate of the growing season affects how early the grapes will be harvested . Many wine regions in California give the vine an abundance of sunshine with few problems in ripening fully , which increases the likelihood of producing varietal Cabernet wines . In regions like Bordeaux , under the threat of inclement harvest season weather , Cabernet Sauvignon is often harvested a little earlier than ideal and is then blended with other grapes to fill in the gaps . In some regions , climate will be more important than soil . In regions that are too cool , there is a potential for more herbaceous and green bell pepper flavours from less than ideally ripened grapes . In regions where the grape is exposed to excess warmth and over @-@ ripening , there is a propensity for the wine to develop flavours of cooked or stewed blackcurrants . 
 The Cabernet grape variety has <unk> in a variety of vineyard soil types , making the consideration of soil less of concern particularly for New World winemakers . In Bordeaux , the soil aspect of terroir was historically an important consideration in determining which of the major Bordeaux grape varieties were planted . While Merlot seemed to thrive in <unk> and limestone @-@ based soils ( such as those of the Right Bank regions of the Gironde estuary ) , Cabernet Sauvignon seemed to perform better in the gravel @-@ based soil of the Médoc region on the Left Bank . The gravel soils offered the benefit of being well drained while absorbing and radiating heat to the vines , aiding ripening . <unk> and limestone @-@ based soils are often cooler , allowing less heat to reach the vines , delaying ripening . In regions where the climate is warmer , there is more emphasis on soil that is less fertile , which promotes less vigor in the vine which can keep yields low . In the Napa Valley wine regions of Oakville and Rutherford , the soil is more alluvial and dusty . Rutherford Cabernet Sauvignon has been often quoted as giving a sense of terroir with a taste of " Rutherford dust " . In the South Australian wine region of Coonawarra , Cabernet Sauvignon has produced vastly different results from grape vines planted in the region 's terra rosa soil – so much so that the red soil is considered the " boundary " of the wine region , with some controversy from wine growers with Cabernet Sauvignon planted on red soil . 
 In addition to ripeness levels , the harvest yields can also have a strong influence in the resulting quality and flavors of Cabernet Sauvignon wine . The vine itself is prone to vigorous yields , particularly when planted on the vigorous SO4 rootstock . Excessive yields can result in less concentrated and flavorful wine with flavors more on the green or herbaceous side . In the 1970s , a particular clone of Cabernet Sauvignon that was engineered to be virus free was noted for its very high yields @-@ causing many quality conscious producers to replant their vineyards in the late 20th century with different clonal varieties . To reduce yields , producers can plant the vines on less vigorous rootstock and also practice green harvesting with aggressive pruning of grape clusters soon after <unk> . 
 In general , Cabernet Sauvignon has good resistance to most grape diseases , powdery mildew being the most noted exception . It is , however , susceptible to the vine diseases <unk> <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = The " green bell pepper " flavor = = = 
 There are a couple of noted Cabernet Sauvignon flavors that are intimately tied to viticultural and climate influences . The most widely recognized is the herbaceous or green bell pepper flavor caused by pyrazines , which are more prevalent in <unk> grapes . <unk> compounds are present in all Cabernet Sauvignon grapes and are gradually destroyed by sunlight as the grape continues to ripen . To the human palate this compound is detectable in wines with pyrazine levels as low as 2 nanograms ( ng ) per liter . At the time of <unk> , when the grapes first start to fully ripen , there is the equivalent pyrazine level of 30 ng / l . In cooler climates , it is difficult to get Cabernet Sauvignon grapes to ripen fully to the point where pyrazine is not detected . The green bell pepper flavor is not considered a wine fault but it may not be desirable to all consumers ' tastes . The California wine region of Monterey was noted in the late 20th century for its very vegetal Cabernet Sauvignon with pronounced green pepper flavor , earning the nickname of " Monterey <unk> " . In addition to its cool climate , Monterey is also prone to being very windy , which can have the effect of shutting down the grape vines and further inhibiting ripeness . 
 Two other well known Cabernet Sauvignon flavors are mint and eucalyptus . Mint flavors are often associated with wine regions that are warm enough to have low pyrazine levels but are still generally cool , such as Australia 's Coonawarra region and some areas of Washington State . There is some belief that soil could also be a contributor to the minty notes , since the flavor also appears in some wines from the Pauillac region but not from similar climate of Margaux . <unk> Eucalyptus flavors tend to appear in regions that are habitats for the eucalyptus tree , such as California 's Napa and Sonoma valleys and parts of Australia , but there has been no evidence to conclusively prove a direct link between proximity of eucalyptus trees and the presence of that flavor in the wine . 
 = = Winemaking = = 
 In many aspects , Cabernet Sauvignon can reflect the desires and personality of the winemaker while still presenting familiar flavors that express the typical character of the variety . The most pronounced effects are from the use of oak during production . Typically the first winemaking decision is whether or not to produce a varietal or blended wine . The " Bordeaux blend " of Cabernet Sauvignon , Merlot and Cabernet franc , with potentially some Malbec , Petit Verdot or Carménère , is the classic example of blended Cabernet Sauvignon , emulated in the United States with wines produced under the " <unk> " designation . But Cabernet Sauvignon can be blended with a variety of grapes such as Shiraz , Tempranillo and Sangiovese . The decision to blend is then followed by the decision of when to do the blending — before , during or after fermentation . Due to the different fermentation styles of the grapes , many producers will ferment and age each grape variety separately and blend the wine shortly before bottling . 
 The Cabernet Sauvignon grape itself is very small , with a thick skin , creating a high 1 : 12 ratio of seed ( pip ) to fruit ( pulp ) . From these elements the high proportions of phenols and tannins can have a stark influence on the structure and flavor of the wine — especially if the must is subjected to long periods of maceration ( skin contact ) before fermentation . In Bordeaux , the maceration period was traditionally three weeks , which gave the winemaking staff enough time to close down the estate after harvest to take a hunting holiday . The results of these long maceration periods are very tannic and flavorful wines that require years of aging . Wine producers that wish to make a wine more approachable within a couple of years will drastically reduce the maceration time to as a little as a few days . Following maceration , the Cabernet must can be fermented at high temperatures up to 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . The temperature of fermentation will play a role in the result , with deeper colors and more flavor components being extracted at higher temperatures while more fruit flavors are maintained at lower temperature . In Australia there has been experimentation with carbonic maceration to make softer , fruity Cabernet Sauvignon wines . 
 The tannic nature of Cabernet Sauvignon is an important winemaking consideration . As the must is exposed to prolonged periods of maceration , more tannins are extracted from the skin and will be present in the resulting wine . If winemakers choose not to shorten the period of maceration , in favor of maximizing color and flavor concentrations , there are some methods that they can use to soften tannin levels . A common method is oak aging , which exposes the wine to gradual levels of oxidation that can mellow the harsh grape tannins as well as introduce softer " wood tannins " . The choice of fining agents can also reduce tannins with gelatin and egg whites being positively @-@ charged proteins that are naturally attracted to the negatively charged tannin molecules . These fining agents will bond with some of the tannins and be removed from the wine during filtration . One additional method is micro @-@ oxygenation which mimics some of the gradual aeration that occurs with barrel aging , with the limited exposure to oxygen aiding in the polymerization of the tannins into larger molecules , which are perceived on the palate as being softer . 
 = = = Affinity for oak = = = 
 One of the most noted traits of Cabernet Sauvignon is its affinity for oak , either during fermentation or in barrel aging . In addition to having a softening effect on the grape 's naturally high tannins , the unique wood flavors of vanilla and spice complement the natural grape flavors of blackcurrant and tobacco . The particular success of Cabernet @-@ based Bordeaux blends in the 225 liter ( 59 gallon ) <unk> were a significant influence in making that barrel size one of the most popular worldwide . In winemaking , the decision for the degree of oak influence ( as well as which type of oak ) will have a strong impact on the resulting wine . American oak , particularly from new barrels , imparts stronger oak flavors that are less subtle than those imparted by French oak . Even within the American oak family , the location of the oak source also plays a role with oak from the state of Oregon having more pronounced influence on Cabernet Sauvignon than oak from Missouri , Pennsylvania and Virginia . Winemakers often use a variety of oak barrels from different locations and of different ages and blend the wine as if they are blending different grape varieties . 
 Winemakers can also control the influence of oak by using alternatives to the standard <unk> barrels . Larger barrels have a smaller wood @-@ to @-@ wine ratio and therefore less pronounced oak flavors . Winemakers in Italy and Portugal sometimes use barrels made from other wood types such as chestnut and redwood . Another method that winemakers consider is tea bagging with oak chips or adding oak planks to the wines while fermenting or aging it in stainless steel tanks . While these methods are less costly than oak barrels , they create more pronounced oak flavors , which tend not to mellow or integrate with the rest of the wine 's components ; nor do they provide the gradual oxidation benefit of barrel aging . 
 = = Wine regions = = 
 = = = Bordeaux = = = 
 The Bordeaux wine region is intimately connected with Cabernet Sauvignon , even though wine is rarely made without the blended component of other grape varieties . It is the likely " birthplace " of the vine , and producers across the globe have invested heavily in trying to reproduce the structure and complexity of Bordeaux wines . While the " Bordeaux blend " of Cabernet Sauvignon , Cabernet franc and Merlot created the earliest examples of acclaimed Cabernet Sauvignon wine , Cabernet Sauvignon was first blended in Bordeaux with Syrah , a pairing that is widely seen in Australia and some vin de pays wines from the Languedoc . 
 The decision to first start blending Cabernet Sauvignon was partly derived from financial necessity . The sometime temperamental and unpredictable climate of Bordeaux during the " Little Ice Age " did not guarantee a successful harvest every year ; producers had to insure themselves against the risk of losing an entire vintage by planting a variety of grapes . Over time it was discovered that the unique characteristics of each grape variety can complement each other and enhance the overall quality of wine . As a base , or backbone of the wine , Cabernet Sauvignon added structure , acidity , tannins and aging potential . By itself , particularly when harvested at less than ideal ripeness , it can lack a sense of fruit or " fleshiness " on the palate which can be compensated by adding the rounder flavors of Merlot . Cabernet franc can add additional aromas to the bouquet as well as more <unk> . In the lighter soils of the Margaux region , Cabernet @-@ based wines can lack color , which can be achieved by blending in Petit Verdot . Malbec , used today mostly in <unk> , can add additional fruit and floral aromas . 
 DNA evidence has shown Cabernet Sauvignon is the result of the crossing of two other Bordeaux grape varieties — Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc — which has led grapevine historians , or ampelographers , to believe that the grape originated in Bordeaux . Early records indicate that the grape was a popular planting in the Médoc region during the 18th century . The loose berry clusters and thick skins of the grape provided a good resistance to rot in the sometimes wet maritime climate of Bordeaux . The grape continued to grow in popularity until the <unk> mildew epidemic of 1852 exposed Cabernet Sauvignon 's sensitivity to that grape disease . With vineyards severely ravaged or lost , many Bordeaux wine growers turned to Merlot , increasing its plantings to where it soon became the most widely planted grape in Bordeaux . As the region 's winemakers started to better understand the area 's terroir and how the different grape varieties performed in different region , Cabernet Sauvignon increased in plantings all along the Left Bank region of the Gironde river in the Médoc as well as Graves region , where it became the dominant variety in the wine blends . In the Right bank regions of Saint @-@ Émilion and <unk> , Cabernet is a distant third in plantings behind Merlot & Cabernet franc . 
 In the wine regions of the Left Bank , the Cabernet influence of the wine has shown unique characteristics in the different regions . In Saint @-@ <unk> and Pessac @-@ <unk> , the grape develops more mineral flavors . <unk> of violets are a characteristic of Margaux . Pauillac is noted by a strong lead pencil scent and Saint @-@ Julien by cedar and cigar boxes . The Cabernet wines of the <unk> are characterized by their soft tannins and rich fruit flavors while the southern Graves region is characterized by strong blackcurrant flavors , though in less intense wines over all . The percentage of Cabernet Sauvignon used in the blend will depend on terroir and the winemakers styles as well as the vintage . The First Growth estates of Château Mouton Rothschild and Château Latour are noted for regularly producing wines with some of the highest percentage of Cabernet — often around 75 % . 
 A common factor affecting the flavors of Bordeaux wines is the harvest yields of Cabernet Sauvignon . Throughout Bordeaux there is a legal maximum permitted yield of 50 hectoliters ( hl ) per hectare ( ha ) . With the aid of global warming and vigorous rootstocks , many Bordeaux vineyards can easily surpass 60 hl / ha , with some estates taking advantage of the legal loophole of <unk> <unk> de <unk> ( " ceiling limit classification " ) that permits higher yields during " exceptional " years . This has had an adverse effect on the quality of production from some producers who regularly use grapes harvested at excessive yields . In recent years there has been more of an emphasis on keeping yields low , particularly for an estate 's Grand vin . 
 = = = = Other French regions = = = = 
 The Bordeaux wine region accounts for more than 60 % of the Cabernet Sauvignon grown in France . Outside of Bordeaux , Cabernet Sauvignon is found in varying quantities throughout Le Midi and in the Loire Valley . In general , Cabernet Sauvignon wines are lighter and less structured , drinkable much earlier than Bordeaux wine . In the southwest French appellation d 'origine contrôlée ( AOCs ) of Bergerac and <unk> it is used to make rosé wine . In some regions it is used to add flavor and structure to Carignan while it is blended with <unk> in <unk> and <unk> as well as <unk> in <unk> . In Provence , the grape had some presence in the region in the mid 19th century , when <unk> Jules Guyot recommended it as a blending partner with Syrah . In recent years , several Midi wine estates , such as Mas de <unk> <unk> have received international acclaim for their Cabernet Sauvignon blended in <unk> , with Rhône grapes like Syrah . It is often made as a single varietal in the vin de pays of the Languedoc . The influence of Australian flying winemakers has been considerable in how Cabernet Sauvignon is treated by some Languedoc wine estates , with some producers making wines that can seem like they are from the New World . Overall , the grape has not exerted it dominance of the region , generally considered less ideally situated to the dry climate than Syrah . The Languedoc producers who give serious consideration to Cabernet Sauvignon , generally rely on irrigation to compensate for the climate . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 Cabernet Sauvignon has a long history in Italian wines , being first introduced to the Piedmont region in 1820 . In the mid @-@ 1970s , the grape earned notoriety and controversy as a component in the so @-@ called " Super Tuscan " wines of Tuscany . Today the grape is permitted in several <unk> di origine <unk> ( <unk> ) and is used in many <unk> <unk> <unk> ( IGT ) wines that are made outside DOC perimeters in certain regions . For most of its history the grape has been viewed with suspicion as a " foreign influence " that distracts from the native grape varieties . After decades of experimentation , the general view of Cabernet Sauvignon has improved as more winemakers find ways to complement their native grape varieties with Cabernet as a blending component . 
 In Piedmont , the grape was sometimes used as an " illegal " blending partner with Nebbiolo for DOC classified <unk> with the intention of adding color and more fruit flavors . In the <unk> of <unk> and Monferrato , Cabernet is a permitted blending grape with Nebbiolo as well as Barbera . Wines that are composed of all three grape varieties are often subjected to considerable oak treatment to add a sense of sweet <unk> to compensate for the high tannins of Cabernet Sauvignon and Nebbiolo as well as the high acidity of Barbera . There are varietal styles of Cabernet Sauvignon produce in Piedmont with qualities varying depending on the location . In other regions of northern Italy , such as Lombardy , Emilia @-@ Romagna and Friuli @-@ Venezia Giulia , the grape is often blended with Merlot to produce Bordeaux style blends . In the Veneto region , Cabernet Sauvignon is sometimes blended with the main grapes of <unk> @-@ Corvina , <unk> and <unk> . In southern Italy , the grape is mostly used as a blending component with local varieties @-@ such as Carignan in Sardinia , Nero d <unk> in Sicily , <unk> in Campania and <unk> in Calabria . 
 Cabernet Sauvignon has had a controversial history in Tuscan wine , particularly for its role in the arrivals of " Super Tuscan " in the mid @-@ 1970s . The origin of Super Tuscans is rooted in the restrictive DOC practices of the Chianti zone prior to the 1990s . During this time Chianti could be composed of no more than 70 % Sangiovese and had to include at least 10 % of one of the local white wine grapes . Many Tuscan wine producers thought they could produce a better quality wine if they were not hindered by the DOC regulations , particularly if they had the freedom to use Cabernet Sauvignon in the blend and not required to use white grape varieties . The <unk> Piero <unk> was one of the first to create a " Chianti @-@ style " wine that ignored the DOC regulations , releasing a 1971 Sangiovese @-@ Cabernet Sauvignon blend known as <unk> in 1978 . Other producers followed suit and soon the prices for these Super Tuscans were consistently beating the prices of some of the most well known Chianti . Other Tuscan wine regions followed suit , blending Cabernet Sauvignon with Sangiovese and even making varietal versions of the grape . Gradually the DOC system caught on and began allowing more regions to use the grape in their DOC designated wines . Cabernet Sauvignon in Tuscany is characterized by ripe black cherry flavors that can give a perception of sweetness as well as strong notes of blackcurrant . The wines typically reach an alcohol level around 14 % but can still maintain notable levels of acidity . When blended with Sangiovese in significant quantities , Cabernet Sauvignon can dominate the blend with most Tuscan producers aiming to find a particular balance that suits their desired style . 
 = = = Other Old World producers = = = 
 The introduction of Cabernet Sauvignon in Spanish wine occurred in the Rioja region when the Marqués de <unk> planted cuttings from Bordeaux . By 2004 , it was the sixth most widely planted red wine grape in Spain . Today it is found in some quantities in every Spanish wine region , though it is not permitted in every <unk> de Origen ( DO ) designated region . In those areas , wines with Cabernet Sauvignon are relegated to less distinguished designations such as Vino de la Tierra or Vino de Mesa . The grape is most prominent in the Catalan wine region of <unk> , where its use was revived by the estates of Bodegas Torres and Jean León . There the grape is often blended with Tempranillo . It is also primarily a blending grape in the Ribera del Duero , but producers in Navarra have found some international acclaim for their varietal wines . 
 In the United Kingdom , English wine producers have experimented with growing the variety in plastic tunnels which can create a greenhouse effect and protect the grapes from the less than ideal climate of the wine region . While the grape is permitted to be planted in some German wine regions ( such as the Mosel ) , the vineyard sites best suited for ripening Cabernet are generally already occupied with Riesling ; many producers are ill @-@ inclined to uproot the popular German variety in favor of Cabernet Sauvignon . In the 1980s , inexpensive Bulgarian Cabernet Sauvignon was highly touted for its value and helped to establish that country 's wine industry and garner it more international presence in the wine market . The grape is performing a similar function for many countries in Eastern Europe , including Turkey , Bulgaria , Czech Republic , Georgia , Hungary , Moldova , Romania , Slovenia , and Ukraine . It can be in the eastern Mediterranean wine regions of Cyprus , Greece , Israel and Lebanon . 
 = = = California = = = 
 In California , Cabernet Sauvignon has developed its characteristic style and reputation , recognizable in the world 's market . Production and plantings of the grape in California are similar in quantity to those of Bordeaux . The 1976 Judgment of Paris wine tasting event helped to catapult Californian Cabernet Sauvignons onto the international stage when Stag 's Leap Wine Cellars ' 1973 Stags Leap District Cabernet Sauvignon beat out classified Bordeaux estates like Château Mouton Rothschild , Château Montrose , Château Haut @-@ Brion and Château <unk> @-@ Las Cases in a blind tasting conducted by French wine experts . In the 1980s , a new epidemic of phylloxera hit California , devastating many vineyards , which needed replanting . There was some speculation that ravaged Cabernet vineyards would be replanted with other varietals ( such as those emerging from the Rhone Rangers movement ) but in fact California plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon doubled between 1988 and 1998 ; many wine regions — such as Napa Valley north of <unk> and Sonoma 's Alexander Valley — were almost completely dominated by the grape variety . It also started to gain a foothold in Dry Creek Valley , Sonoma Mountain and Mendocino County . Cabernet from Sonoma County has shown a tendency to feature anise and black olive notes while Napa County Cabernets are characterized by their strong black fruit flavors . 
 In California , the main stylistic difference in Cabernet Sauvignon is between hillside / mountain vineyards and those on flatter terrain like valley floors or some areas of the Central Valley . In Napa , the hillside vineyards of Diamond Mountain District , Howell Mountain , Mt . <unk> , Spring Mountain District have thinner , less fertile soils which produces smaller berries with more intense flavors , reminiscent of Bordeaux wines that require years of aging to mature . The yields are also much lower , typically in the range of 1 – 2 tons per acre in contrast to the 4 – 8 tons that can be produced in the more fertile valley floors . Wines produced from mountainside vineyards tend to be characterized by deep inky colors and strong berry aromas . Throughout California there are many wine regions that have the potential to grow Cabernet Sauvignon to full ripeness and produce fruity , full @-@ bodied wines with alcohol levels regularly above the Bordeaux average of 12 – 13 % — often in excess of 14 % . 
 The use of oak in California Cabernet has a long history , with many producers favoring the use of new oak barrels heavily composed of American oak . After the early 1980s ' unsuccessful trend to create more " food friendly " wines , with less ripeness and less oak influence , winemakers ' focus shifted back to oak influence , but producers were more inclined to limit and lighten the use of oak barrels , with many turning to French oak or a combination of new and older oak barrels . 
 = = = = Other American wine regions = = = = 
 Cabernet Sauvignon is the most widely planted red grape variety in Washington state according to the Washington State Wine Commission . It is generally found in the warmer sites of the Columbia Valley . The vines are choice plantings for growers due to their hardy vine stalks and resistance to the cold winter frost that is commonplace in Eastern Washington . Washington Cabernet Sauvignon is characterized by its <unk> and easy drinking styles that are not overly tannic . Recent Washington American Viticultural Areas ( AVAs ) that have seen some success with their Cabernet Sauvignons include Red Mountain , Walla Walla Valley and parts of the Yakima Valley AVA near the Tri @-@ Cities region . 
 In Oregon there are small quantities of Cabernet Sauvignon planted in the warmer southern regions of the Umpqua and Rogue Valleys . It has also started to develop a presence in the Arizona , New York , Texas and Virginia wine industries @-@ particularly in the Texas Hill Country and North Fork of Long Island AVAs . Throughout the United States , Cabernet Sauvignon is made in both varietal and blended styles . Under the American system , varietal Cabernet Sauvignon can include up to 25 % other grapes . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 Cabernet Sauvignon is grown in nearly every South American country including Chile , Argentina , Bolivia , Brazil , Peru and Uruguay . In Chile , the wines were historically limited by the excessively high yields that were commonplace throughout the country . As producers begun to concentrate on limiting yields , regional differences began to emerge that distinguished Chilean Cabernets . For vineyard plantings along flat river valleys , the climate of the region is the most important consideration ; as plantings move to higher elevations and along hillsides , soil type is a greater concern . The wines of the Aconcagua region are noted for their ripe fruit but closed , tight structure that needs some time in the bottle to develop . In the Maipo Valley , Cabernet Sauvignon wines are characterized by their pervasive blackcurrant fruit and an earthy , dusty note . In warmer regions , such as the Colchagua Province and around Curicó , the grapes ripen more fully ; they produce wines with rich fruit flavors that can be perceived as sweet due to the ripeness of the fruit . The acidity levels of these wines will be lower and the tannins will also be softer , making the wines more approachable at a younger age . 
 In Argentina , Cabernet Sauvignon lags behind Malbec as the country 's main red grape but its numbers are growing . The varietal versions often have lighter fruit flavors and are meant to be consumed young . Premium examples are often blended with Malbec and produce full , tannic wines with leather and tobacco notes . In recent years , there have been increased plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon in the <unk> Valley of the Mendoza Province ; the wines coming from vineyards planted at higher altitudes garner some international attention . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 In the 1970s , the Coonawarra region first brought international attention to Australian Cabernet Sauvignons with intense fruit flavors and subtle minty notes . The Margaret River region soon followed with wines that were tightly structured with pronounced black fruit notes . In the 1980s , Australia followed California 's contemporary trend in producing lighter , more " food friendly " wines with alcohol levels around 11 @-@ 12 % percent ; by the early 1990s , the styles changed again to focus on balance and riper fruit flavors . Today Cabernet Sauvignon is the second most widely planted red wine grape in Australia , following Shiraz with which it is often blended . It can be found in several wine regions with many large producers using grapes from several states . Notable regional differences characterize Australian Cabernet Sauvignon : in addition to the wine styles of Coonawarra and Margaret River , the Barossa Valley produces big , full bodied wines while the nearby , cooler Clare Valley produces wines with more concentrated fruit , and wines of the Victorian wine region of the Yarra Valley are noted for their balance in acidity , tannins and fruit flavors . 
 = = = Other New World producers = = = 
 Since the end of apartheid , the South African wine industry has been working to reestablish itself in the world 's wine markets with many regions actively promoting their Cabernet Sauvignon . Today it is the most widely planted red wine grape in South Africa . It is produced in both varietal and blended styles ; some producers favor a Bordeaux blend , while others follow the Australian example of blending with Syrah . Early examples of South African Cabernet Sauvignon were produced by grapes planted in vineyard locations that were cooler than ideal , creating very herbaceous wines with the distinctive " green bell pepper " notes . In the mid @-@ 1990s , there was more emphasis on harvesting at fuller ripeness , and new clones were introduced that produced riper , sweeter fruit . As the vines age , and better vineyards locations are identified , regional styles are starting to emerge among South African Cabernet Sauvignons : the Stellenbosch region is noted for heavy , full bodied wines while Constantia 's wines are characterized by their herbal and minty flavors . 
 In New Zealand , climate has been a challenge in finding wine regions suitable for producing Cabernet Sauvignon . Most of the industry focus has centered on the North Island . The Hawkes Bay region was the first to make a significant effort in producing Cabernet Sauvignon but the cool climate of the region , coupled with the high yields and fertile alluvial soils , produced wines that were still marked with aggressive green and vegetal flavors . Added focus on canopy management , which gives the grapes more sunlight to ripen by removing excess foliage , and low vigor rootstock and pruning combine to achieve lower yields and have started to produce better results . The grape is sometimes blended with Merlot to help compensate for climate and terroir . Other regions in New Zealand have sprung up with a renewed focus on producing distinctive New Zealand Cabernet Sauvignon : The Gimblett Road and Havelock North regions of Hawkes Bay , with their warm gravel soils , have started to achieve notice as well as Waiheke Island near Auckland . Overall the grape lags far behind Pinot noir in New Zealand 's red wine grape plantings . 
 = = Popularity and criticism = = 
 In the past century , Cabernet Sauvignon has enjoyed a swell of popularity as one of the noble grapes in the world of wine . Built partially on its historical success in Bordeaux as well as New World wine regions like California and Australia , planting the grape is considered a solid choice in any wine region that is warm enough to cultivate it . Among consumers Cabernet has become a familiar wine which has aided in its accessibility and appeal even from obscure wine regions and producers . In the 1980s , the Bulgarian wine industry was largely driven and introduced to the international wine market by the success of its Cabernet Sauvignon wines . The widespread popularity of Bordeaux has contributed to criticism of the grape variety for its role as a " colonizer " grape , being planted in new and emerging wine regions at the expense of focus on the unique local grape varieties . Some regions , such as Portugal with its abundance of native grape varieties , have largely ignored Cabernet Sauvignon as it seeks to rejuvenate its wine industry beyond Port production . 
 = = Wine styles = = 
 The style of Cabernet Sauvignon is strongly influenced by the ripeness of the grapes at harvest . When more on the unripe side , the grapes are high in pyrazines and will exhibit pronounced green bell peppers and vegetal flavors . When harvested overripe the wines can taste jammy and may have aromas of stewed blackcurrants . Some winemakers choose to harvest their grapes at different ripeness levels in order to incorporate these different elements and potentially add some layer of complexity to the wine . When Cabernet Sauvignon is young , the wines typically exhibit strong fruit flavors of black cherries and plum . The aroma of blackcurrants is one of the most distinctive and characteristic element of Cabernet Sauvignon that is present in virtually every style of the wine across the globe . Styles from various regions and producers may also have aromas of eucalyptus , mint and tobacco . As the wines age they can sometimes develop aromas associated with cedar , cigar boxes and pencil shavings . In general New World examples have more pronounced fruity notes while Old World wines can be more austere with heightened earthy notes . 
 = = = Ability to age = = = 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , a large part of Cabernet Sauvignon 's reputation was built on its ability to age and develop in the bottle . In addition to softening some of their austere tannins , as Cabernet wines age new flavors and aromas can emerge and add to the wines ' complexity . Historically this was a trait characterized by Bordeaux with some premium examples in favorable vintages having the potential to last for over a century , but producers across the globe have developed styles that could age and develop for several decades . Even with the ability to age , some Cabernet Sauvignon wines can still be approachable a few years after vintage . In Bordeaux , the tannins of the wines tend to soften after ten years and can typically last for at least another decade @-@ sometimes longer depending on the producer and vintage . Some Spanish and Italian Cabernet Sauvignons will need similar time as Bordeaux to develop but most examples are typically made to be drunk earlier . 
 While New World Cabernets are characterized as being drinkable earlier than Bordeaux , premium producers such as the Californian cult wines will produce wines that need time to age and could potentially develop for two to three decades . Overall , the majority of Californian Cabernets are meant to be approachable after only a couple of years in the bottle but can still have the potential to improve further over time . Similarly many premium Australian Cabernet will also need at least ten years to develop though many are approachable after two to five years . New Zealand wines are typically meant to be consumed young and will often maintain their green herbal flavors even with extended bottle aging . South American Cabernets have very pronounced fruit flavors when they are young and the best made examples will maintain some of those flavors as they age . South African wines tend to favor more Old World styles and typically require six to eight years ' aging before they start to develop further flavors . 
 = = Pairing with food = = 
 Cabernet Sauvignon is a very bold and assertive wine that has potential to overwhelm light and delicate dishes . The wine 's high tannin content as well as the oak influences and high alcohol levels associated with many regional styles play important roles in influencing how well the wine matches with different foods . When Cabernet Sauvignon is young , all those elements are at their peak , but as the wine ages it mellows ; possibilities for different food pairings open up . In most circumstances , matching the weight ( alcohol level and body ) of the wine to the heaviness of the food is an important consideration . Cabernet Sauvignons with high alcohol levels do not pair well with spicy foods due to hotness levels of the <unk> present in spices like chili peppers being enhanced by the alcohol with the heat accentuating the bitterness of the tannins . Milder spices , such as black pepper , pair better due to their ability to minimize the perception of tannins — such as in the classic pairings of Cabernet Sauvignon with steak au <unk> and pepper @-@ crusted <unk> tuna . 
 Fats and proteins reduce the perception of tannins on the palate . When Cabernet Sauvignon is paired with steak or dishes with a heavy butter cream sauce , the tannins are neutralized , allowing the fruits of the wine to be more noticeable . In contrast , starches such as pastas and rice will have little effect on tannins . The bitterness of the tannins can also be counterbalanced by the use of bitter foods , such as <unk> and <unk> , or with cooking methods that involve charring like grilling . As the wine ages and the tannins lessen , more subtle and less bitter dishes will pair better with Cabernet Sauvignon . The oak influences of the wine can be matched with cooking methods that have similar influences on the food @-@ such as grilling , smoking and plank roasting . Dishes that include oak @-@ influenced flavors and aromas normally found in Cabernet Sauvignon — such as dill weed , brown sugar , nutmeg and vanilla — can also pair well . 
 The different styles of Cabernet Sauvignon from different regions can also influence how well the wine matches up with certain foods . Old World wines , such as Bordeaux , have earthier influences and will pair better with mushrooms . Wines from cooler climates that have noticeable vegetal notes can be balanced with vegetables and greens . New World wines , with bolder fruit flavors that may even be perceived as sweet , will pair well with bolder dishes that have lots of different flavor influences . While Cabernet Sauvignon has the potential to pair well with bitter dark chocolate , it will not pair well with sweeter styles such as milk chocolate . The wine can typically pair well with a variety of cheeses , such as Cheddar , mozzarella and Brie , but full flavored or blue cheeses will typically compete too much with the flavors of Cabernet Sauvignon to be a complementary pairing . 
 = = Health benefits = = 
 In late 2006 , the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology published the result of studies conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai that showed the beneficial relationship of resveratrol , a compound found in all red wine , in reducing the risk factors associated with Alzheimer 's disease . The study showed that resveratrol found in Cabernet Sauvignon can reduce levels of amyloid beta peptides , which attack brain cells and are part of the etiology of Alzheimer 's . <unk> has also been shown to promote the clearance of amyloid @-@ beta peptides . It has also been shown that non @-@ alcoholic extracts of Cabernet Sauvignon protect hypertensive rats during <unk> and reperfusion . 
 = Ian Dougald McLachlan = 
 Air Vice Marshal Ian Dougald McLachlan , CB , CBE , DFC ( 23 July 1911 – 14 July 1991 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Born in Melbourne , he was a cadet at the Royal Military College , Duntroon , before joining the Air Force in December 1930 . After serving in instructional and general flying roles , he took command of No. 3 Squadron in December 1939 , leading it into action in the Middle East less than a year later . Awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , he returned to Australia in 1942 to command air bases in Canberra and Melbourne . The following year he was posted to the South West Pacific , where he led successively Nos. 71 and 73 Wings . Having been promoted to group captain , he took charge of Southern Area Command in 1944 , and No. 81 Wing in the Dutch East Indies the following year . 
 Raised to acting air commodore in 1946 , McLachlan served as senior air staff officer for the British Commonwealth Air Group in Japan until 1948 . After leading North @-@ Eastern Area Command in 1951 – 53 , he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire and posted to Britain , where he attended the Imperial Defence College . Promoted air vice marshal , he returned to Australia in 1957 as Air Officer Commanding Training Command ; in this role he carried out two major reviews focussing on the RAAF 's educational and command systems . He was Deputy Chief of the Air Staff from 1959 to 1961 , and then Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff in Washington , DC , until 1963 . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1966 , McLachlan 's final post before retiring in 1968 was as Air Member for Supply and Equipment . He was a consultant to Northrop after leaving the RAAF , and lived in Darling Point , Sydney , until his death in 1991 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The son of Dugald and Bertha McLachlan , Ian McLachlan was born in the Melbourne suburb of South Yarra , Victoria , on 23 July 1911 . Following education at Melbourne High School , he entered the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in 1928 . He was one of four cadets sponsored that year by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , which did not at that stage have its own officer training college . Budgetary constraints imposed by the Great Depression necessitated the transfer of these cadets out of Duntroon midway through their four @-@ year course . Although offered positions in the Australian Public Service or nominations for short @-@ term commissions with the Royal Air Force , all were determined to serve with the RAAF , apparently " delighted " at the prospect of entering their chosen service early . 
 Enlisting in the Air Force on 10 December 1930 , McLachlan completed his flight training the following year . He was commissioned as a pilot in 1932 , and undertook various flight @-@ instruction and general duties roles over the next five years . In 1937 , he was a member of the RAAF contingent posted to Britain to celebrate the coronation of King George VI . Ranked flight lieutenant , he was given command of No. 3 ( Army Cooperation ) Squadron , operating Hawker Demon fighters out of RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , on 4 December 1939 . He was promoted to squadron leader on 1 February 1940 , and led his unit to the Middle East on 15 July . 
 = = Combat service = = 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Sailing via Bombay , India , No. 3 Squadron arrived at Suez , Egypt , in late August 1940 . In its original army cooperation role supporting the Australian 6th Division in the North African Campaign , the squadron was equipped with obsolescent Gloster Gladiator biplane fighters and Westland Lysander observation aircraft . As part of his unit 's work @-@ up for operations , McLachlan organised training exercises with the 6th Division , as well as written exams to test his men 's knowledge of army jargon and air @-@ to @-@ ground communications . 
 Described by historian Alan Stephens as " acerbic but capable " , McLachlan led No. 3 Squadron through the Battle of Sidi Barrani in December 1940 , followed by the Battle of Bardia and the capture of Tobruk in January 1941 . Prior to converting to Hawker Hurricanes that month , the unit was credited with destroying twelve Italian aircraft for the loss of five Gladiators and two pilots ; McLachlan shot down a Fiat CR.42 on 10 December 1940 , the same action in which fellow squadron member and future ace Gordon Steege claimed his first " kill " . Air Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief RAF Middle East , Air Marshal Sir Arthur Longmore , praised McLachlan and his squadron for their " high morale and adaptability to desert conditions " . 
