 In a May 2015 interview , Frusciante said that he was finished with making music for public consumption , that he currently has no audience and in the past few years recorded music with no intention of ever releasing it . Frusciante said " For the last year and a half I made the decision to stop making music for anybody and with no intention of releasing it , which is what I was doing between 2008 and 2012 . I felt that if I took the public into consideration at all , I wasn ’ t going to grow and I wasn ’ t going to learn . Being an electronic musician meant I had to woodshed for a while , so I have a good few years worth of material from that period that ’ s never been released … At this point , I have no audience . I make tracks and I don ’ t finish them or send them to anybody , and consequently I get to live with the music . The music becomes the atmosphere that I ’ m living in . I either make really beautiful music that comes from classical , or I make music where the tempo is moving the whole time , and there ’ s no melodic or rhythmic center . ” 
 On November 24 , 2015 , Frusciante announced that he was releasing free unreleased songs dating from 2008 @-@ 2013 on his own official Bandcamp and Soundcloud pages . He also debunked the interview about him retiring from music industry , saying that his words were taken out of context . The announcement was made via Frusciante 's rarely updated website in an open letter titled " Hello audience , " where Frusciante provides an in @-@ depth response to the reporter who , according to him , misquoted him . He writes , " I also must clear something up . I normally don ’ t read my press , but I heard about this quote , recently taken out of context by some lame website and made into a headline , in which I said ' I have no audience ' . This has been misinterpreted , and by no fault of the excellent journalist who interviewed me for the fine publication Electronic Beats . [ ... ] Obviously I have a public audience . I am aware of them , and they know who they are . " He continues , " Reduced to a single sentence , it would have been accurate to say that , at this point , I have no particular audience in mind while I am making music . " 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Frusciante 's musical style has evolved over the course of his career . Although he received moderate recognition for his early guitar work , it was not until later in his career that music critics and guitarists alike began to fully recognize it : in October 2003 , he was ranked eighteenth in Rolling Stone 's list of the " 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time " . Frusciante attributes this recent recognition to his shift in focus , stating that he chose an approach based on rhythmic patterns inspired by the complexity of material Jimi Hendrix and Eddie Van Halen produced . On earlier records , however , much of his output was influenced by various underground punk and new wave musicians . In general , his sound is also defined by an affinity for vintage guitars . All the guitars that he owns , records , and tours with were made before 1970 . Frusciante will use the specific guitar that he finds appropriate for a certain song . All of the guitars he owned before quitting the band were destroyed when his house burned down in 1996 . The first guitar he bought after rejoining the Chili Peppers was a 1962 red Fender Jaguar . His most @-@ often used guitar , however , is a 1962 Sunburst Fender Stratocaster that was given to him as a gift from Anthony Kiedis after Frusciante rejoined the Chili Peppers in 1998 . He has played this guitar on every album since rejoining the Chili Peppers , and their ensuing tours . He also owns a 1955 Fender Stratocaster , his only Strat with a maple neck . Frusciante 's most highly appraised instrument is a 1955 Gretsch White Falcon , which he used twice per show during the By the Way tour . He has since stopped using it , saying there was " no room for it " . Virtually all of Frusciante 's acoustic work is played with a 1950s Martin 0 – 15 . 
 After leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers , he switched to using a Yamaha SG as his primary guitar for his solo work . Frusciante has also noted his increased use of the Roland MC @-@ 202 for his electronic music , saying that he was at the point " where I thought as much like a <unk> as I did a guitarist ... " The MC @-@ 202 has been his primary melodic instrument in his electronic music . 
 With the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Frusciante provided backing vocals in a falsetto tenor , a style he started on Blood Sugar Sex Magik . He thoroughly enjoyed his role in the Chili Peppers as backing vocalist , and said that backing vocals are a " real art form " . Despite his commitment to the Chili Peppers , he felt that his work with the band should remain separate from his solo projects . When he returned to the Chili Peppers in 1998 , Kiedis wanted the band to record " Living in Hell " , a song Frusciante had written several years before . Frusciante refused , feeling that the creative freedom he needed for his solo projects would have conflicted with his role in the band . 
 = = = Technique = = = 
 Frusciante 's guitar playing employs emphasis on appropriate melody , tone , and structure rather than virtuosity . Although virtuoso influences can be heard throughout his career , he has said that he often minimizes this . He feels that in general , guitar mastery has not evolved much since the 1960s and considers the greatest players of that decade unsurpassed . When he was growing up in the 1980s , many mainstream guitarists focused on speed . Because of this , he thinks that the skills of many defiant new wave and punk guitarists were largely overlooked . Therefore , he accentuates the melodically @-@ driven technique of players such as Matthew Ashman of Bow Wow Wow and Bernard Sumner of Joy Division as much as possible because he thinks that their style has been overlooked and consequently underexplored . Despite this , he considers himself a fan of technique @-@ driven guitarists like Randy Rhoads and Steve Vai , but represses an urge to emulate their style : " People believe that by playing faster and creating new playing techniques you can progress forward , but then they realize that emotionally they don 't progress at all . They transmit nothing to the people listening and they stay at where Hendrix was three decades ago . Something like that happened to Vai in the 80s . " Believing that focusing only on " clean tones " is negative , Frusciante developed an interest in playing with what he calls a " grimy " sound . As a result , he considers it beneficial to " mistreat " his guitar and employ various forms of distortion when soloing . He also tries to break as many " stylistic boundaries " as he can to expand his musical horizons . He thinks that much of the output from today 's guitarists is unoriginal , and that many of his contemporaries " follow the rules with no risk " . 
 Frusciante has stated that he became serious about creating and engineering his own electronic music in 2007 . As he progressed in enhancing his skills with electronic instruments and techniques , he has stated that he felt comfortable with how R & B and Hip hop music integrated into his work . He has noted that these and other new techniques were all part the influences for his EP , Letur @-@ Lefr . PBX Funicular Intaglio Zone was recorded while Frusciante looked to find new ways to play the guitar with the new forms of music and production that he had been studying . In his blog post , " My Recent History , " he notes that " Aspects of PBX are the realization of combinations of styles of music I saw in my head many years ago , as potentials , but which I had no idea how to execute . " 
 Frusciante 's approach to album composition has changed . On his early recordings , he welcomed sonic imperfections , noting that " even on [ To Record Only Water for Ten Days ] there are off @-@ pitch vocals and out @-@ of @-@ tune guitars . " However , on later albums such as Shadows Collide With People , he pursued the opposite : " I just wanted everything to be perfect — I didn 't want anything off pitch , or off time , or any unintentional this or that . " Frusciante views songwriting as taking time , and does not force it : " If a song wants to come to me , I 'm always ready to receive it , but I don 't work at it . " Much of his solo material is first written on an acoustic or <unk> electric guitar . He also prefers to record his albums on analog tapes and other relatively primitive equipment . This preference stems from his belief that older equipment can actually speed up the recording process , and that modern computerized recording technology gives only an illusion of efficiency . Frusciante tries to streamline the recording process as much as possible , because he thinks " music comes alive when [ you ] are creating it fast " . He also enjoys the challenge of having to record something in very few takes , and believes that when musicians are unable to handle the pressure of having to record something quickly they often get frustrated or bogged down by perfectionism . With his focus on new styles of music , Frusciante describes having worked with the computer as an instrument , and having found the ability to merge old and new production techniques together . He has noted that there has been a change in how he works on an album . In the past he would work on one song at a time , but with the new " Progressive Synth Pop " that he has been working on , he feels much more comfortable to work within the album as a whole . He currently uses the music tracker <unk> as his main Digital audio workstation along with some drum machines , sequencers , and other hardware , along with his <unk> , Arp , and other modular synthesizers . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Frusciante 's first major influence was Jimi Hendrix . He then saw The Red Hot Chili Peppers ( at that point , The was part of their name ) in concert in 1985 , after which their then @-@ guitarist Hillel Slovak became his second major influence , with Frusciante coming to idolize Slovak . Although Hendrix and Slovak were arguably Frusciante 's most profound influences , he was also inspired by glam rock artists David Bowie , and T. Rex ; as well as avant @-@ garde acts such as Captain Beefheart , The Residents , The Velvet Underground , Neu ! , Van der Graaf Generator , Frank Zappa , and Kraftwerk . 
 He credits his inspiration for learning guitar to Greg Ginn , Pat Smear , and Joe Strummer , amongst others . As an adolescent , he began by focusing upon Hendrix , as well as bands like Public Image Ltd . , The Smiths , and XTC . Frusciante 's other major influence was John McGeoch of Magazine and Siouxsie and the Banshees . 
 During the recording of Blood Sugar Sex Magik , Captain Beefheart and the acoustic , one @-@ man blues of Lead Belly and Robert Johnson , were among the most noteworthy influences . Frusciante cites R & B singer Brandy as a musical inspiration and admires her voice , calling it “ multidimensional ” and “ inspiring . ” In describing her voice and signature sound , he said , “ You can 't hear [ the elaborate harmonies ] with your conscious ; you have to hear her voice with your subconscious . ” He also mentioned that Brandy was the “ main inspiration ” behind the guitar work on Red Hot Chili Peppers ' 2006 album , Stadium Arcadium . 
 On Californication and By the Way , Frusciante derived the technique of creating tonal texture through chord patterns from post @-@ punk guitarists Vini Reilly of The Durutti Column and John McGeoch , and bands such as The Smiths , Fugazi and The Cure . He originally intended By the Way to be made up of " these punky , rough songs " , drawing inspiration from early punk artists such as the Germs and The Damned . However , this was discouraged by producer Rick Rubin , and he instead built upon Californication 's melodically @-@ driven style . During the recording of Stadium Arcadium , he moved away from his new wave influences and concentrated on emulating flashier guitar players such as Jimi Hendrix and Eddie Van Halen . 
 With his recent solo work , he has cited electronic music — in which the guitar is often completely absent — as an influence . His electronic music influences include Aphex Twin , Depeche Mode , New Order , The Human League , Ekkehard Ehlers , Peter Rehberg , and Christian <unk> . His interests are constantly changing , as he believes that without change he will no longer have any interest in playing : " I 'm always drawing inspiration from different kinds of music and playing guitar along with records , and I go into each new album project with a preconceived idea of what styles I want to combine . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2011 , Frusciante married Nicole Turley , drummer and lead vocalist of the experimental band Swahili Blonde . On May 8 , 2015 it was announced that Turley had filed for divorce . On October 3 , 2015 , Turley announced that she was seeking $ 75 @,@ 000 a month as part of their divorce settlement . According to court documents , Turley , who was already being paid $ 20 @,@ 000 a month , needs a higher payment to maintain her quality of living . She claims her finances are down to only $ 30 @,@ 000 . Turley said that Frusciante was worth $ 14 million and she was entitled to more money saying that together the couple owned three homes , a team of personal assistants , and a private music studio . A week later Frusciante responded to Turley 's demands saying that he refuses to pay her any more money and that she is also seeking $ 2 @,@ 600 a month for gifts and expenses for her adult brother . He also said he was done footing the bill for her musical career saying “ I don ’ t know if you can call her recording efforts a hobby or a past @-@ time … but it seems improper to characterize Nicole as a professional musician . ” On October 19 , 2015 , a judge ruled in favor of Turley saying Frusciante had to pay his former wife $ 53 @,@ 000 a month . Frusciante was also forced to pay $ 71 @,@ 000 for Turley 's legal expenses . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt ( 1994 ) 
 Smile from the Streets You Hold ( 1997 ) 
 To Record Only Water for Ten Days ( 2001 ) 
 From the Sounds Inside ( 2001 ) 
 Shadows Collide with People ( 2004 ) 
 The Will to Death ( 2004 ) 
 Inside of Emptiness ( 2004 ) 
 A Sphere in the Heart of Silence ( 2004 ) 
 Curtains ( 2005 ) 
 The Empyrean ( 2009 ) 
 PBX Funicular Intaglio Zone ( 2012 ) 
 Enclosure ( 2014 ) 
 Trickfinger ( 2015 ) 
 <unk> Tracks 2009 @-@ 2011 ( 2015 ) 
 = Wadzeks Kampf mit der Dampfturbine = 
 Wadzeks Kampf mit der Dampfturbine ( Wadzek 's Struggle with the Steam Turbine ) is a 1918 comic novel by the German author Alfred Döblin . Set in Berlin , it narrates the futile and often delusional struggle of the eponymous industrialist Wadzek against Rommel , his more powerful competitor . In its narrative technique and its refusal to psychologize its characters , as well as in its vivid evocations of Berlin as a modern metropolis , Wadzeks Kampf mit der Dampfturbine has been read as a precursor to Döblin 's better @-@ known 1929 novel Berlin Alexanderplatz . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the novel opens , Wadzek , owner of a factory that produces steam engines , is locked in a struggle with his more powerful rival Rommel , whose much larger company manufactures turbines . He can be seen as representing a new type of entrepreneur , more technologically advanced and less scrupulous than Wadzek . Losing value , the stock of Wadzek 's company is being bought up by Rommel ; in desperation , Wadzek teams up with Schneemann , an engineer working at one of Rommel 's factories , to thwart his company 's takeover by Rommel . This effort includes the misguided theft of some of Rommel 's business correspondence . Fearing legal retribution for this theft , Wadzek , accompanied by Schneemann , flees with his wife Pauline and daughter Herta to his house in Reinickendorf , where the two men fortify the house in delusional preparation for a siege that never comes . Financially and spiritually broken , Wadzek returns to Berlin and with Schneemann attempts to turn himself in at a police station , where they learn that no warrant has even been issued for their arrest . There follows a temporary reconciliation with his estranged family and the first attempts to begin a new career in education — Wadzek would instruct his students in a new , moralistic and humane approach to technology . However , after walking in on an erotically and exotically charged debauch held in his own parlor ( the aftermath of an African @-@ themed birthday party Pauline held with her two new friends from Reinickendorf ) , Wadzek suffers a further breakdown . The novel ends aboard a ship bound for America , Wadzek eloping with Gaby , an old acquaintance and erstwhile lover of Rommel 's , to begin a new life . 
 = = Stylistic and thematic aspects = = 
 The novel , originally conceived by Döblin as a novel in " Kino @-@ Stil " ( " cinematic style " ) , is characterized by rapid shifts of perspective and the increasingly sophisticated use of montage . Döblin , having emphatically rejected the psychological novel in his 1913 essay " To novel writers and their critics , " presents the reader of Wadzek with a depiction of characters from a perspective that , rather than offering psychological motivations for their actions , opts for a " psychiatric method " that records events and processes without commenting on them or attempting to explain them . Condemned by contemporary critics for its overly @-@ detailed and grotesque descriptive language , the novel 's style has since received acknowledgment for its " radical naturalism " . Describing the narrative technique used in Wadzek , the critic Judith Ryan has written , 
 At times Wadzek and his co @-@ actors are seen from without , as if by a [ ... ] camera , at times his perceptions are given from within , but regardless of the observational standpoint , we have no access to Wadzek 's psyche . What we know of his emotions and his internal responses to events is solely what we have deduced from his external actions . 
 Döblin 's refusal to make Wadzek a tragic figure , as well as the novel 's <unk> and satire of tragedy , earned the praise of a young Bertolt Brecht , who declared , " Ich liebe das Buch . " Other themes of the novel include monopoly capitalism , modern technology , the bourgeois family , and the modern metropolis . Certain aspects of the plot , such as Schneemann 's dislike of Stettin ( Szczecin ) and Wadzek 's elopement for America , recapitulate elements of Döblin 's own biography . 
 = = Genesis and publication = = 
 By his own account , Döblin wrote Wadzeks Kampf mit der Dampfturbine " in one go " from August to December 1914 , at which time he had to begin work as a military doctor near the western front in Sarreguemines . While he had originally conceived of the work as a three @-@ stage narrative about the progress of modern technology ( represented by the steam engine , the steam turbine , and the oil motor ) , his planned sequel , Der <unk> ( The Oil Motor ) , never came to fruition . He conducted extensive research for the novel , spending time in the facilities of AEG and learning about the construction of machines , turbines , and motors . Döblin submitted the draft to rigorous stylistic overhaul during the war years , shortening the novel considerably and radicalizing the syntax . The novel was published in May 1918 by Fischer Verlag and was not reprinted until a critical edition , based on the text of the first edition with minor corrections drawn from the manuscript and typescript , was published by Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag in 1987 . The original manuscript and subsequent typescript are preserved in the German Literary Archive in Marbach . As of 2016 , no English translation is available . 
 = German cruiser Prinz Eugen = 
 For the Austrian World War I battleship , see SMS Prinz Eugen 
 Prinz Eugen ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) was an Admiral Hipper @-@ class heavy cruiser , the third member of the class of five vessels . She served with Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . The ship was laid down in April 1936 , launched in August 1938 , and entered service after the outbreak of war , in August 1940 . She was named after Prince Eugene of Savoy , an 18th @-@ century Austrian general . 
 Prinz Eugen saw action during Operation Rheinübung , an attempted breakout into the Atlantic Ocean with the battleship Bismarck in May 1941 . The two ships destroyed the British battlecruiser Hood and severely damaged the battleship Prince of Wales in the Battle of Denmark Strait . Prinz Eugen was detached from Bismarck during the operation to raid Allied merchant shipping , but this was cut short due to engine troubles . After putting into occupied France and undergoing repairs , the ship participated in Operation Cerberus , a daring daylight dash through the English Channel back to Germany . In February 1942 , Prinz Eugen was deployed to Norway , although her time stationed there was curtailed when she was torpedoed by the British submarine Trident days after arriving in Norwegian waters . The torpedo severely damaged the ship 's stern , which necessitated repairs in Germany . 
 Upon returning to active service , the ship spent several months training officer cadets in the Baltic before serving as artillery support for the retreating German Army on the Eastern Front . After the German collapse in May 1945 , she was surrendered to the British Royal Navy before being transferred to the US Navy as a war prize . After examining the ship in the United States , the US Navy assigned the cruiser to the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll . Having survived the atomic blasts , Prinz Eugen was towed to Kwajalein Atoll , where she ultimately capsized and sank in December 1946 . The wreck remains partially visible above the water approximately two miles northwest of Bucholz Army Airfield , on the edge of <unk> . One of her screw propellers was salvaged and is on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial in Germany . 
 = = Design = = 
 Prinz Eugen was 207 @.@ 7 meters ( 681 ft ) long overall , and had a beam of 21 @.@ 7 m ( 71 ft ) and a maximum draft of 7 @.@ 2 m ( 24 ft ) . After launching , her straight bow was replaced with a clipper bow , increasing the length overall to 212 @.@ 5 meters ( 697 ft ) . The new bow kept her foredeck much drier in heavy weather . The ship had a design displacement of 16 @,@ 970 t ( 16 @,@ 700 long tons ; 18 @,@ 710 short tons ) and a full @-@ load displacement of 18 @,@ 750 long tons ( 19 @,@ 050 t ) . Prinz Eugen was powered by three sets of geared steam turbines , which were supplied with steam by twelve ultra @-@ high pressure oil @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's top speed was 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , at 135 @,@ 619 shaft horsepower ( 101 @.@ 131 MW ) . As designed , her standard complement consisted of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 340 enlisted men . 
 The ship 's primary armament was eight 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 60 guns mounted in four twin turrets , placed in superfiring pairs forward and aft . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) L / 65 guns , twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and eight 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns . The ship also carried a pair of triple 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo launchers abreast of the rear superstructure . For aerial reconnaissance , she was equipped with three Arado Ar 196 seaplanes and one catapult . Prinz Eugen 's armored belt was 70 to 80 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick ; her upper deck was 12 to 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick and her main armored deck was 20 to 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 97 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick faces and 70 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Prinz Eugen was ordered by the Kriegsmarine from the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel . Her keel was laid on 23 April 1936 , under construction number 564 and cover name Kreuzer J. She was originally to be named after Wilhelm von Tegetthoff , the Austrian victor of the Battle of Lissa , though considerations over the possible insult to Italy , defeated by Tegetthoff at Lissa , led the Kriegsmarine to adopt Prinz Eugen as the ship 's namesake . She was launched on 22 August 1938 , in a ceremony attended by the Governor ( <unk> ) of the Ostmark , Arthur Seyss @-@ Inquart , who made the christening speech . Also present at the launch were Adolf Hitler , the Regent of Hungary , Admiral Miklós Horthy ( who had commanded the battleship SMS Prinz Eugen from 24 November 1917 to 1 March 1918 ) , and his wife <unk> <unk> , who performed the christening . As built , the ship had a straight stem , though after her launch this was replaced with a clipper bow . A raked funnel cap was also installed . 
 Commissioning was delayed slightly due to light damage sustained during a Royal Air Force attack on Kiel on the night of 1 July 1940 . Prinz Eugen suffered two relatively light hits in the attack , but she was not seriously damaged and was commissioned into service the following month on 1 August . The cruiser spent the remainder of 1940 conducting sea trials in the Baltic Sea . In early 1941 , the ship 's artillery crews conducted gunnery training . A short period in dry dock for final modifications and improvements followed . In April , the ship joined the newly commissioned battleship Bismarck for maneuvers in the Baltic . The two ships had been selected for Operation Rheinübung , a breakout into the Atlantic to raid Allied commerce . 
 On 23 April , while passing through the Fehmarn Belt en route to Kiel , Prinz Eugen detonated a magnetic mine dropped by British aircraft . The mine damaged the fuel tank , propeller shaft couplings , and fire control equipment . The planned sortie with Bismarck was delayed while repairs were carried out . Admirals Erich Raeder and Günther Lütjens discussed the possibility of delaying the operation further , in the hopes that repairs to the battleship Scharnhorst would be completed or Bismarck 's sistership Tirpitz would complete trials in time for the ships to join Prinz Eugen and Bismarck . Raeder and Lütjens decided that it would be most beneficial to resume surface actions in the Atlantic as soon as possible , however , and that the two ships should sortie without reinforcement . 
 = = = Operation Rheinübung = = = 
 By 11 May 1941 , repairs to Prinz Eugen had been completed . Under the command of Kapitän zur See ( KzS — Captain at Sea ) Helmuth Brinkmann , the ship steamed to Gotenhafen , where the crew readied her for her Atlantic sortie . On 18 May , Prinz Eugen rendezvoused with Bismarck off Cape Arkona . The two ships were escorted by three destroyers — Hans Lody , Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , and Z23 — and a flotilla of minesweepers . The Luftwaffe provided air cover during the voyage out of German waters . At around 13 : 00 on 20 May , the German flotilla encountered the Swedish cruiser HSwMS Gotland ; the cruiser shadowed the Germans for two hours in the Kattegat . Gotland transmitted a report to naval headquarters , stating : " Two large ships , three destroyers , five escort vessels , and 10 – 12 aircraft passed Marstrand , course 205 ° / 20 ' . " The Oberkommando der Marine ( OKM — Naval High Command ) was not concerned about the security risk posed by Gotland , though Lütjens believed operational security had been lost . The report eventually made its way to Captain Henry Denham , the British naval attaché to Sweden , who transmitted the information to the Admiralty . 
 The code @-@ breakers at Bletchley Park confirmed that an Atlantic raid was imminent , as they had decrypted reports that Bismarck and Prinz Eugen had taken on prize crews and requested additional navigational charts from headquarters . A pair of Supermarine Spitfires were ordered to search the Norwegian coast for the German flotilla . On the evening of 20 May , Prinz Eugen and the rest of the flotilla reached the Norwegian coast ; the minesweepers were detached and the two raiders and their destroyer escorts continued north . The following morning , radio @-@ intercept officers on board Prinz Eugen picked up a signal ordering British reconnaissance aircraft to search for two battleships and three destroyers northbound off the Norwegian coast . At 7 : 00 on the 21st , the Germans spotted four unidentified aircraft that quickly departed . Shortly after 12 : 00 , the flotilla reached Bergen and anchored at Grimstadfjord . While there , the ships ' crews painted over the Baltic camouflage with the standard " outboard gray " worn by German warships operating in the Atlantic . 
 While in Bergen , Prinz Eugen took on 764 t ( 752 long tons ; 842 short tons ) of fuel ; Bismarck inexplicably failed to similarly refuel . At 19 : 30 on 21 May , Prinz Eugen , Bismarck , and the three escorting destroyers left port . By midnight , the force was in the open sea and headed toward the Arctic Ocean . At this time , Admiral Raeder finally informed Hitler of the operation , who reluctantly allowed it to continue as planned . The three escorting destroyers were detached at 04 : 14 on 22 May , while the force steamed off Trondheim . At around 12 : 00 , Lütjens ordered his two ships to turn toward the Denmark Strait to attempt the breakout into the open waters of the Atlantic . 
 By 04 : 00 on 23 May , Lütjens ordered Prinz Eugen and Bismarck to increase speed to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) to make the dash through the Denmark Strait . Upon entering the Strait , both ships activated their <unk> radar detection equipment sets . Bismarck led Prinz Eugen by about 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) ; mist reduced visibility to 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 to 13 @,@ 100 ft ) . The Germans encountered some ice at around 10 : 00 , which necessitated a reduction in speed to 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . Two hours later , the pair had reached a point north of Iceland . The ships were forced to zigzag to avoid ice floes . At 19 : 22 , hydrophone and radar operators aboard the German warships detected the cruiser HMS Suffolk at a range of approximately 12 @,@ 500 m ( 41 @,@ 000 ft ) . Prinz Eugen 's radio @-@ intercept team decrypted the radio signals being sent by Suffolk and learned that their location had indeed been reported . 
 Admiral Lütjens gave permission for Prinz Eugen to engage Suffolk , though the captain of the German cruiser could not clearly make out his target and so held fire . Suffolk quickly retreated to a safe distance and shadowed the German ships . At 20 : 30 , the heavy cruiser HMS Norfolk joined Suffolk , but approached the German raiders too closely . Lütjens ordered his ships to engage the British cruiser ; Bismarck fired five salvoes , three of which straddled Norfolk and rained shell splinters on her decks . The cruiser laid a smoke screen and fled into a fog bank , ending the brief engagement . The concussion from the 38 cm guns disabled Bismarck 's <unk> 23 radar set ; this prompted Lütjens to order Prinz Eugen to take station ahead so she could use her functioning radar to scout for the formation . 
 The British cruisers tracked Prinz Eugen and Bismarck through the night , continually relaying the location and bearing of the German ships . The harsh weather broke on the morning of 24 May , revealing a clear sky . At 05 : 07 that morning , hydrophone operators aboard Prinz Eugen detected a pair of unidentified vessels approaching the German formation at a range of 20 nmi ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) , reporting " Noise of two fast @-@ moving turbine ships at 280 ° relative bearing ! " . At 05 : 45 , lookouts on the German ships spotted smoke on the horizon ; these turned out to be from Hood and Prince of Wales , under the command of Vice Admiral Lancelot Holland . Lütjens ordered his ships ' crews to battle stations . By 05 : 52 , the range had fallen to 26 @,@ 000 m ( 85 @,@ 000 ft ) and Hood opened fire , followed by Prince of Wales a minute later . Hood engaged Prinz Eugen , which the British thought to be Bismarck , while Prince of Wales fired on Bismarck . 
 The British ships approached the Germans head on , which permitted them to use only their forward guns , while Bismarck and Prinz Eugen could fire full broadsides . Several minutes after opening fire , Holland ordered a 20 ° turn to port , which would allow his ships to engage with their rear gun turrets . Both German ships concentrated their fire on Hood . About a minute after opening fire , Prinz Eugen scored a hit with a high @-@ explosive 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) shell , detonating Unrotated Projectile ammunition and starting a large fire , which was quickly extinguished . Holland then ordered a second 20 ° turn to port , to bring his ships on a parallel course with Bismarck and Prinz Eugen . By this time , Bismarck had found the range to Hood , so Lütjens ordered Prinz Eugen to shift fire and target Prince of Wales to keep both of his opponents under fire . Within a few minutes , Prinz Eugen scored a pair of hits on the battleship and reported that a small fire had been started . 
 Lütjens then ordered Prinz Eugen to drop behind Bismarck , so she could continue to monitor the location of Norfolk and Suffolk , which were still some 10 to 12 nmi ( 19 to 22 km ; 12 to 14 mi ) to the east . At 06 : 00 , Hood was completing her second turn to port when Bismarck 's fifth salvo hit . Two of the shells landed short , striking the water close to the ship , but at least one of the 38 cm armour @-@ piercing shells struck Hood and penetrated her thin deck armor . The shell reached Hood 's rear ammunition magazine and detonated 112 t ( 110 long tons ; 123 short tons ) of cordite propellant . The massive explosion broke the back of the ship between the main mast and the rear funnel ; the forward section continued to move forward briefly before the in @-@ rushing water caused the bow to rise into the air at a steep angle . The stern similarly rose upward as water rushed into the ripped @-@ open compartments . After only eight minutes of firing , Hood had disappeared , taking all but three of her crew of 1 @,@ 419 men with her . 
 After a few more minutes , during which Prince of Wales scored three hits on Bismarck , the damaged British battleship withdrew . The Germans ceased fire as the range widened , though Captain Ernst Lindemann , Bismarck 's commander , strongly advocated chasing Prince of Wales and destroying her . Lütjens firmly rejected the request , and instead ordered Bismarck and Prinz Eugen to head for the open waters of the North Atlantic . After the end of the engagement , Lütjens reported that a " Battlecruiser , probably Hood , sunk . Another battleship , King George V or Renown , turned away damaged . Two heavy cruisers maintain contact . " At 08 : 01 , he transmitted a damage report and his intentions to OKM , which were to detach Prinz Eugen for commerce raiding and to make for St. Nazaire for repairs . Shortly after 10 : 00 , Lütjens ordered Prinz Eugen to fall behind Bismarck to discern the severity of the oil leakage from the bow hit . After confirming " broad streams of oil on both sides of [ Bismarck 's ] wake " , Prinz Eugen returned to the forward position . 
 With the weather worsening , Lütjens attempted to detach Prinz Eugen at 16 : 40 . The squall was not heavy enough to cover her withdrawal from Wake @-@ Walker 's cruisers , which continued to maintain radar contact . Prinz Eugen was therefore recalled temporarily . The cruiser was successfully detached at 18 : 14 . Bismarck turned around to face the Wake @-@ Walker 's formation , forcing Suffolk to turn away at high speed . Prince of Wales fired twelve salvos at Bismarck , which responded with nine salvos , none of which hit . The action diverted British attention and permitted Prinz Eugen to slip away . 
 On 26 May , Prinz Eugen rendezvoused with the supply ship <unk> to refill her nearly empty fuel tanks . She had by then only some 160 tons fuel left , enough for a day . Afterwards the ship continued further south on a mission against shipping lines . However , before any merchant ship was found , defects in her engines showed and on 27 May she was ordered to give up her mission and make for a port in occupied France . On 28 May Prinz Eugen refuelled from the tanker Esso Hamburg . The same day more engine problems showed up , including trouble with the port engine turbine , the cooling of the middle engine and problems with the starboard screw , reducing her speed to maximum 28 knots . The screw problems could only be checked and repaired in a dock and thus Brest , with its large docks and repair facilities , was chosen as destination . Despite the many British warships and several convoys in the area , at least 104 units were identified on the 29th by the ship 's radio crew , Prinz Eugen reached the Bay of Biscay undiscovered , and on 1 June the ship was joined by German destroyers and aircraft off the coast of France south of Brest ; and escorted to Brest , which she reached late on 1 June where she immediately entered dock . 
 = = = Operation Cerberus and Norwegian operations = = = 
 Brest is not far from bases in southern England and during their stay in Brest Prinz Eugen and the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were repeatedly attacked by Allied bombers . The Royal Air Force jokingly referred to the three ships as the Brest Bomb Target Flotilla , and between 1 August and 31 December 1941 it dropped some 1200 tons of bombs on the port . On the night of 1 July 1941 , Prinz Eugen was struck by an armour @-@ piercing bomb that destroyed the control center deep down under the bridge . The attack killed 60 men and wounded more than 40 others . Among those killed was First Watch Officer , Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Otto <unk> . The loss of the control center also made the main guns useless and repairs lasted until the end of 1941 . 
 The continuous air attacks led the German command to decide Prinz Eugen , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau would have to move to safer bases as soon as they were repaired and ready . Meanwhile , the Bismarck operation had demonstrated the risks of operating in the Atlantic without air cover . In addition , Hitler saw the Norwegian theater as the " zone of destiny " , so he ordered the three ships ' return to Germany in early 1942 so they could be deployed there . The intention was use the ships to interdict Allied convoys to the Soviet Union , as well as to strengthen the defenses of Norway . Hitler insisted they would make the voyage via the English Channel , despite the Raeder 's protests that it was too risky . Vice Admiral Otto Ciliax was given command of the operation . In early February , minesweepers swept a route through the Channel , though the British failed to detect the activity . 
 At 23 : 00 on 11 February , Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Prinz Eugen left Brest . They entered the Channel an hour later ; the three ships sped at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , hugging the French coast along the voyage . By 06 : 30 , they had passed Cherbourg , at which point they were joined by a flotilla of torpedo boats . The torpedo boats were led by Kapitän zur See Erich Bey , aboard the destroyer Z29 . General der Jagdflieger ( General of Fighter Force ) Adolf Galland directed Luftwaffe fighter and bomber forces ( Operation Donnerkeil ) during Cerberus . The fighters flew at masthead @-@ height to avoid detection by the British radar network . Liaison officers were present on all three ships . German aircraft arrived later to jam British radar with chaff . By 13 : 00 , the ships had cleared the Strait of Dover but , half an hour later , a flight of six Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers , with Spitfire escort , attacked the Germans . The British failed to penetrate the Luftwaffe fighter shield , and all six Swordfish were destroyed . 
 Off Dover , Prinz Eugen came under fire from British coastal artillery batteries , though they scored no hits . Several Motor Torpedo Boats then attacked the ship , but Prinz Eugen 's destroyer escorts drove the vessels off before they could launch their torpedoes . At 16 : 43 , Prinz Eugen encountered five British destroyers : Campbell , <unk> , Mackay , Whitshed , and Worcester . She fired her main battery at them and scored several hits on Worcester , but she was forced to maneuver erratically to avoid their torpedoes . Nevertheless , Prinz Eugen arrived in Brunsbüttel on the morning of 13 February , completely undamaged but suffering the only casualty in all three big ships , killed by aircraft gunfire . 
 On 21 February 1942 , Prinz Eugen , the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer , and the destroyers Richard Beitzen , Paul Jakobi , Z25 , Hermann Schoemann , and Friedrich Ihn steamed to Norway . After stopping briefly in Grimstadfjord , the ships proceeded on to Trondheim . Two days later , while patrolling off the Trondheimsfjord , the British submarine Trident torpedoed Prinz Eugen . The torpedo struck the ship in the stern , killing 50 men - mainly passengers , causing serious damage and rendering the ship unmaneuverable . However , on her own power she managed to reach Trondheim and from there to was towed to <unk> , where , over the next few months , emergency repairs were effected . Her entire stern was cut away and plated over and two jury @-@ rigged rudders , operated manually via capstans , were installed . 
 On 16 May , Prinz Eugen made the return voyage to Germany under her own power . While en route to Kiel , the ship was attacked by a British force of 19 Bristol Blenheim bombers and 27 Bristol Beaufort torpedo bombers commanded by Wing Commander Mervyn Williams , though the aircraft failed to hit the ship . Prinz Eugen was out of service for repairs until October ; she conducted sea trials beginning on 27 October . Hans @-@ Erich Voss , who later became Hitler 's Naval Liaison Officer , was given command of the ship when she returned to service . In reference to her originally planned name , the ship 's bell from the Austrian battleship Tegetthoff was presented on 22 November by the Italian <unk> ( Rear Admiral ) de Angeles . Over the course of November and December , the ship was occupied with lengthy trials in the Baltic . In early January 1943 , the Kriegsmarine ordered the ship to return to Norway to reinforce the warships stationed there . Twice in January Prinz Eugen attempted to steam to Norway with Scharnhorst , but both attempts were broken off after British surveillance aircraft spotted the two ships . After it became apparent that it would be impossible to move the ship to Norway , Prinz Eugen was assigned to the Fleet Training Squadron . For nine months , she cruised the Baltic training cadets . 
 = = = Service in the Baltic = = = 
 As the Soviet Army pushed the Wehrmacht back on the Eastern Front , it became necessary to reactivate Prinz Eugen as a gunnery support vessel ; on 1 October 1943 , the ship was reassigned to combat duty . In June 1944 , Prinz Eugen , the heavy cruiser Lützow , and the 6th Destroyer Flotilla formed the Second Task Force , later renamed Task Force Thiele after its commander , Vizeadmiral August Thiele . Prinz Eugen was at this time under the command of KzS Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> ; throughout June she steamed in the eastern Baltic , northwest of the island of Utö as a show of force during the German withdrawal from Finland . On 19 – 20 August , the ship steamed into the Gulf of Riga and bombarded Tukums . Four destroyers and two torpedo boats supported the action , along with Prinz Eugen 's Ar 196 floatplanes ; the cruiser fired a total of 265 shells from her main battery . Prinz Eugen 's bombardment was instrumental in the successful repulse of the Soviet attack . 
 In early September , Prinz Eugen supported a failed attempt to seize the fortress island of <unk> . The ship then returned to Gotenhafen , before escorting a convoy of ships evacuating German soldiers from Finland . The convoy , consisting of six freighters , sailed on 15 September from the Gulf of Bothnia , with the entire Second Task Force escorting it . Swedish aircraft and destroyers shadowed the convoy , but did not intervene . The following month , Prinz Eugen returned to gunfire support duties . On 11 and 12 October , she fired in support of German troops in Memel . Over the first two days , the ship fired some 700 rounds of ammunition from her main battery . She returned on the 14th and 15th , after having restocked her main battery ammunition , to fire another 370 rounds . 
 While on the return voyage to Gotenhafen on 15 October , Prinz Eugen inadvertently rammed the light cruiser Leipzig amidships north of Hela . The cause of the collision was heavy fog . The light cruiser was nearly cut in half , and the two ships remained wedged together for fourteen hours . Prinz Eugen was taken to Gotenhafen , where repairs were effected with a month . Sea trials commenced on 14 November . On 20 – 21 November , the ship supported German troops on the Sworbe Peninsula by firing around 500 rounds of main battery ammunition . Four torpedo boats — T13 , T16 , T19 , and <unk> — joined the operation . Prinz Eugen then returned to Gotenhafen to resupply and have her worn @-@ out gun barrels re @-@ bored . 
 The cruiser was ready for action by mid @-@ January 1945 , when she was sent to bombard Soviet forces in Samland . The ship fired 871 rounds of ammunition at the Soviets advancing on the German bridgehead at <unk> held by the XXVIII Corps , which was protecting Königsberg . She was supported in this operation by the destroyer Z25 and torpedo boat T33 . At that point , Prinz Eugen had expended her main battery ammunition , and critical munition shortages forced the ship to remain in port until 10 March , when she bombarded Soviet forces around Gotenhafen , Danzig , and Hela . During these operations , she fired a total of 2 @,@ 025 shells from her 20 @.@ 3 cm guns and another 2 @,@ 446 rounds from her 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . The old battleship Schlesien also provided gunfire support , as did Lützow after 25 March . The ships were commanded by Vizeadmiral Bernhard Rogge . 
 The following month , on 8 April , Prinz Eugen and Lützow steamed to Swinemünde . On 13 April , 34 Lancaster bombers attacked the two ships while in port . Thick cloud cover forced the British to abort the mission and return two days later . On the second attack , they succeeded in sinking Lützow with a single Tallboy bomb hit . Prinz Eugen then departed Swinemünde for Copenhagen , arriving on 20 April . Once there , she was decommissioned on 7 May and turned over to Royal Navy control the following day . For his leadership of Prinz Eugen in the final year of the war , <unk> was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 21 April 1945 . Prinz Eugen was mentioned twice in Wehrmachtbericht during her operational career , the first time on 13 February 1942 and the second time on 18 May 1942 . 
 = = = Service with the US Navy = = = 
 On 27 May 1945 , Prinz Eugen and the light cruiser Nürnberg — the only major German naval vessels to survive the war — were escorted by the British cruisers Dido and Devonshire to Wilhelmshaven . On 13 December , Prinz Eugen was awarded as a war prize to the United States , which sent the ship to Wesermünde . The United States did not particularly want the cruiser , but it did want to prevent the Soviet Union from acquiring it . Her US commander , Captain Arthur H. Graubart , recounted later how the British , Soviet and US representatives in the Control Commission all claimed the ship and how in the end the various large prizes were divided in three lots , Prinz Eugen being one of them . The three lots were then drawn lottery style from his hat with the British and Soviet representatives drawing the lots for other ships and Graubart being left with the lot for Prinz Eugen . The cruiser was commissioned into the US Navy as the unclassified miscellaneous vessel USS Prinz Eugen with the hull number IX @-@ 300 . A composite American @-@ German crew consisting of 574 German officers and sailors , supervised by eight American officers and eighty @-@ five enlisted men under the command of Graubart , then took the ship to Boston , departing on 13 January 1946 and arriving on 22 January . 
 After arriving in Boston , the ship was extensively examined by the US Navy . Her very large GHG passive sonar array was removed and installed on the submarine USS Flying Fish for testing . American interest in magnetic amplifier technology increased again after findings in investigations of the fire control system of Prinz Eugen . The guns from turret Anton were removed while in Philadelphia in February . On 1 May the German crewmen left the ship and returned to Germany . Thereafter , the American crew had significant difficulties in keeping the ship 's propulsion system operational — eleven of her twelve boilers failed after the Germans departed . The ship was then allocated to the fleet of target ships for Operation Crossroads in Bikini Atoll . Operation Crossroads was a major test of the effects of nuclear weapons on warships of various types . The trouble with Prinz Eugen 's propulsion system may have influenced the decision to dispose of her in the nuclear tests . 
 She was towed to the Pacific via Philadelphia and the Panama Canal , departing on 3 March . The ship survived two atomic bomb blasts : Test Able , an air burst on 1 July 1946 and Test Baker , a submerged detonation on 25 July . Prinz Eugen was moored about 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) from the epicenter of both blasts and was only lightly damaged by them ; the Able blast only bent her foremast and broke the top of her main mast . She suffered no significant structural damage from the explosions but was thoroughly contaminated with radioactive fallout . The irradiated ship was towed to the Kwajalein Atoll in the central Pacific , where a small leak went unrepaired due to the radiation danger . On 29 August 1946 , the US Navy decommissioned Prinz Eugen . 
 By late December 1946 , the ship was in very bad condition ; on 21 December , she began to list severely . A salvage team could not be brought to Kwajalein in time , so the US Navy attempted to beach the ship to prevent her from sinking , but on 22 December , Prinz Eugen capsized and sank . Her main battery gun turrets fell out of their barbettes when the ship rolled over . The ship 's stern , including her propeller assemblies , remain visible above the surface of the water . The US government denied salvage rights on the grounds that it did not want the irradiated steel entering the market . In August 1979 , one of the ship 's screw propellers was retrieved and placed in the Laboe Naval Memorial in Germany . The ship 's bell is currently held at the National Museum of the United States Navy , while the bell from Tegetthoff is held in Graz , Austria . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 During her operational career with the Kriegsmarine , Prinz Eugen lost 115 crew members ; 79 men were killed in action , 33 were killed in accidents and three died of other causes . Of these 115 crew members , four were officers , seven were cadets or ensigns , two were petty officers , 22 were junior petty officers , 78 were sailors and two were civilians . 
 = Millennium Force = 
 Millennium Force is a steel roller coaster built by Intamin at Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky , Ohio , United States . It was the fourteenth roller coaster to be built at the park since the Blue Streak opened in 1964 . Upon completion in 2000 , Millennium broke six world records and was the world 's first Giga Coaster , a roller coaster that exceeds 300 feet ( 91 m ) in height . It was briefly the tallest and fastest in the world until Steel Dragon 2000 opened later the same year . The ride is also the third @-@ longest roller coaster in North America after The Beast at Kings Island and Fury 325 at Carowinds . It was the first roller coaster to use a cable lift system rather than a traditional chain lift . The coaster has a 310 ft ( 94 m ) , 45 @-@ degree lift hill with a 300 ft ( 91 m ) drop and features two tunnels , three overbanked turns , and four hills . It has a top speed of 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) . 
 Since its debut , Millennium Force has been voted the number one steel roller coaster ten times in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards . Its lowest ranking in the poll has been two , a position that it has swapped with Superman the Ride ( formerly Bizarro ) numerous times since 2001 . Although Millennium Force has been surpassed in height and speed , it remains one of the tallest and fastest in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 The planning , design and development phases of Millennium took place over five years . The first rumors that a new record @-@ breaking roller coaster would be built at Cedar Point , which included speculation about a ten inversion roller coaster from Bolliger & Mabillard and an Arrow Dynamics <unk> , began circulating in early 1998 . A roller coaster from D. H. Morgan Manufacturing was also rumored . On July 2 , 1999 , Cedar Fair Entertainment Company filed a trademark for the name Millennium Force , which raised more speculation about what the ride would be like . About a week later , the first track pieces were seen at the park , which confirmed that the ride would be manufactured by Intamin . Cedar Point officials also confirmed that it would not have inversions . 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 Millennium Force was announced on July 22 , 1999 , as the tallest roller coaster in the world , taking the record from Fujiyama at Fuji @-@ Q Highland in Japan . Don <unk> , General Manager of Cedar Point said , " Millennium Force introduces the world to a whole new level of roller coaster riding . " The ride cost $ 25 million to design and build . Millennium Force was built in the Frontier Trail section of the park and the Giant Wheel was relocated to make room for it . Cedar Point , Intamin , and Werner Stengel designed the layout of the ride . After the ride was announced , several disputes about whether Millennium Force or Superman : The Escape was the tallest and fastest roller coaster in the world arose between Cedar Point and Six Flags Magic Mountain . Superman : The Escape is 415 feet ( 126 m ) high and its speed is 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) ; however , it is a shuttle roller coaster , not a complete @-@ circuit roller coaster . 
 = = = Construction and opening = = = 
 Construction started in August 1999 when the site was cleared . The removal and relocation of the Giant Wheel began in October on closing day ; the first of 226 supports were installed on October 11 , starting at the brake run . Two hundred twenty @-@ six footers , each about 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep were dug ; the largest ones were 56 by 56 feet ( 17 by 17 m ) . The concrete construction was done by Mosser Construction . The lift hill was topped off in early January 2000 . 
 The ride 's construction took seven months , and 120 construction workers and project managers participated . Testing took two months . The park conducted a " pull @-@ through " by pulling a train along the course to ensure proper clearance . The ride was inspected and tested with water @-@ dummies on the trains . The first media event was held on May 11 , 2000 , and the ride opened to the public on May 13 . When it opened , it broke six world records . It was the first Giga Coaster and was the world 's fastest complete @-@ circuit roller coaster , but was later overtaken by other rides . About a month after Millennium 's debut , Cedar Point introduced a new queuing system called " Ticket to Ride " to reduce the waiting times , which allowed visitors to buy a ticket then return later and wait in a shorter line . In August , Cedar Point engaged John Hancock and Associates and Stalker Radar of Indianapolis to measure the height and speed of Millennium Force . The height was measured at 310 feet 11 inches ( 94 @.@ 77 m ) , and the speed was measured at 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) , slightly faster than what the park had been advertising ( 92 mph ) . 
 Before the start of the 2004 season , Millennium Force 's seat belts were modified because of an incident on the Bizarro roller coaster at Six Flags New England . The new seat belts were shorter and some riders had difficulties with them . The roller coaster 's layout was repainted over a three @-@ year period of time , before the 2011 , 2012 and 2013 season . In 2012 , the park added a new LED lighting system . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 = = = Queue = = = 
 Millennium Force 's entrance is located behind the Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad 's Celebration Plaza station . The queue is situated between the ride 's last overbanked turn and the station . A DJ booth is provided to entertain waiting visitors ; the park 's " Jamming DJ 's " take requests for family friendly songs from people in the queue . It was then replaced by Cedar Point 's <unk> , which plays music videos of popular songs , the Gatekeeper / Maverick shuffle , park trivia , sports news , park advertisements , weather forecasts , and popular news headlines . About a month after Millennium 's debut , Cedar Point introduced a new queue system known as " Ticket to Ride " ( later <unk> ) to reduce the wait time . Visitors could buy tickets then return later and wait in a shorter line . This system was discontinued in 2004 after several people complained it was unfair that others were going ahead of them in line . In 2012 , Cedar Point introduced its Fast Lane queue system on the ride ; visitors can buy a wristband which enables them to wait in a shorter line . The system was tested at Kings Island the previous year , where it received positive reviews . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 Millennium Force covers 13 acres ( 5 @.@ 3 ha ) ; it runs parallel to the shoreline of Lake Erie then travels to an island located inside the park , that also houses the former Shoot the Rapids log flume and the Dinosaurs Alive ! attractions . There are two tunnels , three overbanked turns and four hills . One cycle of the ride takes approximately 2 minutes and 20 seconds . 
 While the train is being loaded with passengers , the catch car for the cable lift descends the lift hill and latches onto the middle car underneath the train . Once the train is cleared , the cable lift immediately pulls the train up the 45 degree lift hill at 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) to a height of 310 feet ( 94 m ) . The train drops 300 feet ( 91 m ) at an 80 degree angle and reaches a top speed of 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) at the bottom of the hill . It then climbs 169 feet ( 52 m ) through a right overbanked turn at 122 degrees from the horizontal axis , then travels through a tunnel as it passes over the Frontier Trail . It then travels over a 182 @-@ foot ( 55 m ) parabolic hill , which provides a moment of zero gravity as it passes over a lagoon and down onto Adventure Island . While on Adventure Island , the train passes by the Dinosaurs Alive ! attraction several times . It completes a 105 @-@ foot ( 32 m ) , 360 @-@ degree right @-@ handed helix , followed by a left overbanked turn , passing the Shoot the Rapids water ride . It then completes a small right @-@ hand turn before traveling over another hill to leave the island . The train then travels left through a second tunnel where the on @-@ ride photo is taken , followed by a left turn and a small hill , passing by the queue . Finally , the train travels 68 feet ( 21 m ) high through another right overbanked turn over the queue and is stopped by magnetic brakes . Passengers disembark the ride at an unloading station and the train moves to a second station where it is loaded . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Manufacturer = = = 
 Millennium Force is a Giga Coaster model designed by Werner Stengel and built by Swiss manufacturer Intamin . It was the first of a series of roller coasters , including Top Thrill Dragster — the tallest and fastest roller coaster in the world in 2003 — that Intamin built at Cedar Point . As of 2015 , Millennium Force is one of only two Giga Coasters built by Intamin . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Millennium Force operates with three stainless steel , stadium @-@ style seating trains colored red , blue , and yellow . Each train has nine cars that seat four passengers , allowing a maximum capacity of 36 people per train and 1 @,@ 300 riders an hour . Each seat has an individual , hydraulic , T @-@ shaped lap bar and seat belt which rests across the rider 's lap . Each train weighs 19 tons . 
 = = = Station = = = 
 The station has two platforms , one for unloading and one for loading . Two trains are loaded and unloaded while the third train is running the course . There is also a separate line in the station where riders can wait for the first seat . The loading platform has red overhead lights , which are located above the train . Millennium Force 's theme song is played in the station while riders are boarding . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel tubular track is 6 @,@ 595 feet ( 2 @,@ 010 m ) long and the lift is approximately 310 feet ( 94 m ) high . The track is blue and the supports are silver , and consists of 229 pieces of track , each weighing between 11 @,@ 000 and 17 @,@ 000 pounds ( 5 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 700 kg ) . Intamin supplied the track with hollow structural sections ( HSS ) , which is used in all the track pieces , supports and towers . Millennium uses three different track shapes . The simplest sections are two @-@ pipe track , made with two running rails connected by 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) square HSS cross @-@ members . The ride also uses three @-@ pipe track , which has two running rails with a backbone of round HSS , which forms a triangle . The third type of track forms a square and is considered the strongest . It has two running rails with two backbone tubes . 
 = = Lighting = = 
 When the ride opened in 2000 , Cedar Point chose High End Systems , headquartered in Austin , Texas , to light the ride . Rob Decker , Cedar Point ’ s Corporate Director of Planning & Design , said that they thought they would have to mount multiple floodlights on the tower . However , they were able to install thirty EC @-@ 1 floodlights at the base of the lift hill structure which provided lighting throughout the ride 's structure . Of the six main support towers , three had six EC @-@ 1s , and three towers had four EC @-@ 1s . The three tallest towers had another unit in the middle . 
 Over the years , the lights were not maintained and grew noticeably dimmer . In 2012 , Cedar Point introduced a new nighttime show , Luminosity — Ignite the Night ! , to " re @-@ energize " the park at the end of the day . New LED lights from Sunrise , Florida @-@ based Chauvet Professional were installed to illuminate the ride . Twenty <unk> Range and ten <unk> Ridge wash lights were installed at the base of the lift hill structure . 
 = = Records = = 
 When it opened in May 2000 , Millennium Force broke six world records and used a new magnetic braking system instead of friction brakes found on most roller coasters . This new system enabled a shorter brake run , which slows the train from 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) down to a standstill in six seconds , to be built . 
 Millennium Force held the records for tallest and fastest complete @-@ circuit roller coaster until August 2000 , when Steel Dragon 2000 opened . Millennium Force held the record for tallest and fastest roller coaster at Cedar Point until 2003 , when Cedar Point debuted Top Thrill Dragster , which at the time was the tallest and fastest roller coaster in the world . 
 As of 2015 , Millennium Force has the seventh tallest lift , the seventh fastest speed , the fifth @-@ longest track , and the seventh @-@ highest drop among steel roller coasters in the world . It is the second longest steel roller coaster in North America , and the third @-@ longest roller coaster behind The Beast at Kings Island and Fury 325 at Carowinds . 
 = = = Coaster records = = = 
 Millennium Force has held records for the following : 
 First ever complete @-@ circuit roller coaster to top 300 feet ( 91 m ) 
 Tallest complete @-@ circuit roller coaster ( 310 feet ( 94 m ) ) 
 Longest drop on a complete @-@ circuit roller coaster ( 300 feet ( 91 m ) ) 
 Fastest complete @-@ circuit roller coaster ( 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) ) 
 <unk> non @-@ inversion banked turn on a roller coaster ( 122 ° ) ( Half Corkscrew ) 
 First roller coaster to utilize a cable lift system 
 = = = Park records = = = 
 Cedar Point has held records for the following ( May 2000 statistic on left and May 2013 statistic on right ) : 
 Most rides at an amusement park ( 68 / 73 ) 
 Most roller coasters at an amusement park ( 14 / 16 ) 
 Most steel roller coasters at an amusement park ( 12 / 14 ) 
 Most feet of roller coaster track at an amusement park ( 44 @,@ 013 ft / 54 @,@ 358 ft ) 
 = = Operation = = 
 As both a high altitude and high velocity ride , Millennium Force is affected by unfavorable weather conditions such as rain , lightning or strong winds ; under these conditions the ride is closed , but in light rain it can remain open . There is no minimum age requirement , but passengers must be between 48 and 78 inches ( 120 and 200 cm ) to ride . Persons over a certain weight or waist size are not allowed to ride if the seat and lapbar harness cannot accommodate them . Passengers on Millennium Force may not take loose articles onto the train and are required to wear shirts and footwear . Headphones must be removed before boarding . Passengers are advised not to ride Millennium Force if they have recently had surgery , heart trouble , high blood pressure , neck or back trouble , or any medical condition that may be aggravated by riding , or are pregnant . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Millennium Force changed the way roller coasters were built . More rides were built with cable lifts , which require less maintenance , can support more weight , and can run faster than a traditional chain lift . Millennium Force also led to more coasters over 300 feet ( 91 m ) tall being built . Top Thrill Dragster opened three years later , breaking the 400 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) height record . Dragster was also built by Intamin , which did not build another " Giga Coaster " until 2010 , when it built Intimidator 305 at Kings Dominion . Intimidator 305 is similar to Millennium Force ; it has a cable lift and a similar layout , but has shoulder harnesses instead of the lap bars on Millennium Force . Leviathan opened at Canada 's Wonderland in May 2012 ; it is over 300 feet ( 91 m ) . Leviathan is a Hyper Coaster manufactured by Bolliger & Mabillard , and uses a chain lift , not a cable lift . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Millennium Force has one of the longest lines in the park , with passengers waiting over four hours when the ride debuted . The ride received positive reactions from visitors , many of whom said it was smooth and very comfortable . Others said , " It 'll scare the daylights out of you " . In its first six years of operation , Millennium Force had over 10 million riders . By August 2012 , Millennium had given more than 21 million rides . Several television shows , including the Travel Channel 's Extreme Terror Rides , Bert the Conqueror , Off Limits , the Discovery Channel 's Extreme Rides , and the National Geographic Channel 's Super Coasters have featured Millennium Force . Out of over 500 roller coasters that Werner Stengel has engineered , he stated that Millennium Force is his favorite . Robb Alvey , a notable roller coaster enthusiast , called it a " milestone in roller coaster history " . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 Millennium Force has consistently ranked high in coaster polls and has won numerous awards . Millennium Force and Superman the Ride ( formerly Bizarro ) at Six Flags New England have held the top two places in the Golden Ticket Awards since 2001 . In the Travel Channel 's Insane Coaster Wars , Millennium Force was voted the " fan favorite " in the Extreme Heights and The Top 10 categories . In 2013 , Time ranked Millennium Force as the top roller coaster in the United States . 
 = Isaac Parker = 
 Isaac Charles Parker ( October 15 , 1838 – November 17 , 1896 ) was an American politician and jurist . He served as the United States Congressman for Missouri 's 7th congressional district for two terms and presided over the United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas for 21 years . 
 He became known as the " Hanging Judge " of the American Old West due to the large number of convicts that he sentenced to death . In 21 years on the federal bench , Judge Parker tried 13 @,@ 490 cases . In more than 8 @,@ 500 of these cases , the defendant either pleaded guilty or was convicted at trial . Parker sentenced 160 people to death ; 79 of them were executed . 
 Parker 's health deteriorated in the 1890s and the jurisdiction and power of his court were reduced by Congress . In September 1896 , Congress effectively closed the District Court for the Western District of Arkansas by removing its jurisdiction . Shortly after , on November 17 , 1896 , Parker died of complications due to Bright 's disease . He is buried in Fort Smith . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Parker was the youngest son of Joseph Parker and his wife Jane Shannon , and the great @-@ nephew of Ohio Governor Wilson Shannon . He was raised on the family farm near Barnesville , Ohio . He attended Breeze Hill Primary School , followed by the Barnesville Classical Institute , a private school . He taught in a county primary school to pay for his secondary education . At 17 , he began an apprenticeship in law , and passed the Ohio bar exam in 1859 . 
 Parker moved to St. Joseph , Missouri between 1859 and 1861 and worked at his maternal uncle 's law firm of Shannon and Branch . On December 12 , 1861 , Parker married Mary O 'Toole , with whom he had sons Charles and James . By 1862 , Parker had his own law firm and was working in the municipal and country courts . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In April 1861 , Parker ran as a Democrat for the St. Joseph part @-@ time city attorney . He served three one @-@ year terms from April 1861 to 1863 . The American Civil War broke out four days after Parker took office and he enlisted in a pro @-@ Union home guard unit , the 61st Missouri Emergency Regiment . He had reached the rank of corporal by the end of the war . 
 During the 1860s , Parker continued both his legal and political careers . In 1864 , he formally split from the Democratic Party over conflicting opinions on slavery . He ran as a Republican for county prosecutor of the Ninth Missouri Judicial District . By the fall of 1864 , he was serving as a member of the Electoral College and voted for Abraham Lincoln . In 1868 , Parker won a six @-@ year term as judge of the Twelfth Missouri Circuit . 
 Parker was nominated for Missouri 's 7th congressional district on September 13 , 1870 , backed by the Radical faction of the Republican party . He then resigned his judgeship and devoted his energy to his campaign . Parker won the election after his opponent withdrew two weeks prior to the vote . 
 The first session of the Forty @-@ second Congress convened on March 4 , 1871 . During his first term , Parker helped to secure pensions for veterans in his district and campaigned for a new federal building to be built in St. Joseph . He sponsored a failed bill designed to enfranchise women and allow them to hold public office in United States territories . He also sponsored legislation to organize the Indian Territory under a territorial government . 
 Parker was again elected to Missouri 's 7th district in the forty @-@ third Congress . A local paper wrote of him , " Missouri had no more trusted or influential representative in ... Congress during the past two years " . In his second term , Parker concentrated on Indian policy , including the fair treatment of the tribes residing in the Indian Territory . His speeches in support of the Bureau of Indian Affairs gained national attention . 
 In 1874 , Parker was the caucus nominee of the Republican Party for a Missouri Senate seat . However , the political tide had shifted in Missouri ; it seemed unlikely that he would be elected to the Senate , so he sought a presidential appointment as judge for the Western District of Arkansas . 
 = = District judge = = 
 On May 26 , 1874 , President Ulysses S. Grant nominated Parker as Chief Justice of the Utah Territory to replace James B. McKean . However , following a request from Parker , Grant instead nominated him for the United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas , replacing William Story who was facing impeachment proceedings due to allegations of corruption . 
 Parker arrived in Fort Smith on May 4 , 1875 , initially without his family . His appointment at age 36 made him the youngest federal judge in the West . Parker 's first session as the district judge was on May 10 , 1875 , with court prosecutor W. H. H. Clayton , who remained the United States Attorney for the Western District of Arkansas for fourteen of Parker 's twenty @-@ one years on the court . 
 In May 1875 , Parker tried 18 men during his first session of court , all of whom were charged with murder ; 15 were convicted in jury trials . Parker sentenced eight of them to a mandatory death penalty . He ordered six of the men to be executed at the same time on September 3 , 1875 . One of those sentenced to death was killed trying to escape , and another 's sentence was commuted to life in prison due to his youth . Parker gave an interview to the St. Louis Republic on September 1 , 1896 , in which he stated that he had no say whether a convict was to be hanged due to compulsory death sentences , and that he favoured " the abolition of capital punishment " . 
 Parker 's court had final jurisdiction over the Indian Territory from 1875 until 1889 , as there was no court available for appeals . The legal systems and governments of the Five Civilized Tribes and other Native American tribes in the Indian Territory covered their own citizens , and federal law applied to non @-@ Indian United States citizens in the territory . 
 According to Congress , the federal court for the Western District of Arkansas was to meet in four separate terms each year : in February , May , August , and November . The court had such a large caseload that the four terms ran together . Parker 's court sat six days a week in order to ensure that they tried as many cases as possible each term , and often up to ten hours each day . In 1883 , Congress reduced the jurisdiction of the court , reassigning parts of the Indian Territory to federal courts in Texas and Kansas ; however , the increasing number of settlers moving into the Indian Territories actually increased the court 's workload . 
 From May 1 , 1889 , changes made by Congress allowed appeals of capital convictions to the United States Supreme Court . Forty @-@ four cases in which Parker imposed the death penalty were appealed to the Supreme Court , which overturned and ordered a re @-@ trial for 30 of them . 
 While serving as a district judge in Fort Smith , Parker served on the Fort Smith School Board and was the first president of St. John 's Hospital ( known today as Sparks Health System ) . 
 In his time on the court , Parker presided over a number of high @-@ profile cases , including the trial of Cherokee Bill and the " Oklahoma Boomer " case involving David L. Payne , who illegally settled on lands in the Indian Territory . In 1895 , Parker heard two cases involving Crawford Goldsby ( Cherokee Bill ) . The first involved Goldsby killing a bystander during a general @-@ store robbery in 1894 . He was convicted in a case that lasted from February 26 to June 25 , 1895 , and Parker sentenced him to death . However , while awaiting execution , Goldsby attempted to escape prison and killed a prison guard . He was again brought before Parker , who gave him a second death sentence on December 2 , 1895 . Goldsby was eventually hanged on March 17 , 1896 . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Keeping up with continued settlement in the West , the Courts Act of 1889 established a federal court system in the Indian Territory ; this decreased the jurisdiction of the Western District Court at Fort Smith . 
 Parker clashed with the Supreme Court on a number of occasions , with around two @-@ thirds of cases appealed to the Supreme Court being upheld . In 1894 , Parker gained national attention in a dispute with the Supreme Court over the case of Lafayette Hudson . Hudson was convicted of assault with intent to kill and sentenced to four years imprisonment . He appealed to the Supreme Court and was granted bail . Parker refused to release Hudson on the grounds that statute law did not provide the Supreme Court the authority to demand Hudson 's release . 
 In 1895 , Congress passed a new Courts Act which removed the remaining Indian Territory jurisdiction of the Western District , effective September 1 , 1896 . This effectively closed the federal court for the Western District of Arkansas by removing its jurisdiction . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Parker was at home when the August 1896 term began , too sick to preside over the court , as he suffered from Bright 's disease . The jurisdiction of the court came to an end on September 1 , 1896 , over lands in the Indian Territory ; reporters wanted to interview him about his career but had to talk to him at his bedside . Parker died on November 17 , 1896 , of a number of health conditions , including heart degeneration and Bright 's disease . His funeral in Fort Smith had the highest number of attenders up to that point . He is buried at the Fort Smith National Cemetery . 
 In 21 years on the federal bench , Parker tried 13 @,@ 490 cases ; more than 8 @,@ 500 defendants either pleaded guilty or were convicted at trial . He sentenced 160 people to death and 79 were executed ; the others either died while incarcerated or were acquitted , pardoned , or their sentences were commuted . 
 Parker has been represented in a number of fictionalised portrayals of his time at Fort Smith . Charles Portis features Parker in his novel True Grit , which has twice been adapted as films of the same name . Parker is a featured character in the sequel to the first film . He was portrayed by James Westerfield in the 1969 movie and by John McIntire in the sequel . He was played by Jake Walker in the 2010 remake of True Grit . Douglas C. Jones features Parker as a supporting character in several novels about the men who " rode for Parker " . Zeke Proctor , one of Parker 's deputy marshals , is featured in Larry McMurtry 's 1997 novel Zeke and Ned . 
 In 1887 , November 27th My Great great Uncle Leander Dixon ( who lived in the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas was in a logging camp in the Oklahoma Indian territory . He had brought his wife along in an attempt to get his sister away from the bandit Smith who was a horse thief and a peddler of illegal whiskey ( selling to indians was against the law in those days ) This is the first I have ever read this newspaper account but I was aware of the story for years . My cousin obtained all the hand written records from ( Hanging Judge Parkers court in Ft Smith Arkansas ( Parker is famous in Hollywood movies , Hang em High , True Grit etc ) I read the accounts and from surviving family and onlookers and they all contradicted the newspaper account ( which has no date or byline ) Also contradicted by my great Aunt Belle who was 4 years old at the time . She recalled her Aunt coming through the door of their Arkansas home with the news , she had bullet holes in her apron and had barely escaped being killed herself . The Federal Marshal Frank Dalton ( a brother of the infamous Dalton gang who were all killed in the famous Coffeyville Kansas bank robbery ) was the Marshal that Judge Parker sent to arrest Smith . The latest update to the story is that his brother Bob Dalton who was killed later as a bandit in Coffeyville was a Deputy at the time and was with him . <unk> accounts said that the deputies rode up without warning and started firing into the tent killing my Great Great Aunt Mary Leander 's wife and that Leander came out with a pistol firing and killed the deputy . ( But the court depositions made no mention of Leanders firing . He was rounded and died of pneumonia in the jail which is still part of the museum in Ft Smith .. a dirt floor dungeon in those days no ventilation and filthy . I spent my childhood visiting my Grandfather in a nearby town and he was still bitter at Judge Parker and opposed honoring him with the monuments . I was never told why until many years after he <unk> around ten years ago I was made aware of this story and it gets more embroidered with histories on the net and I have tried to correct and give the families side but I have made little headway in getting corrections <unk> : / / <unk> / … / pa … / outlaw @-@ <unk> http : / / <unk> / … / pa … / outlaw @-@ <unk> http : / / <unk> / … / frank @-@ dalton @-@ best … court records now are kept at 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 182 = 
 Route 182 is a 0 @.@ 96 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 54 km ) state highway in Hackettstown , New Jersey , United States . The highway serves as a connector of Route 57 to U.S. Route 46 . The southern end of Route 182 is at a three @-@ way intersection , where Route 57 heads westbound towards Phillipsburg . Also present at this intersection is Warren County Route 517 , which is signed as New Jersey Route 24 , but not maintained by the state . County Route 517 runs concurrent with Route 182 to its north end at U.S. Route 46 , and turns west with US 46 before splitting in downtown Hackettstown . 
 Route 182 was first an alignment of pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 , but was not maintained by the state . In 1927 , there was a renumbering , and it became part of New Jersey Route S @-@ 24 , which was a spur of Route 24 . Route 24 at the time went along the alignment of Route 57 , but when the second renumbering occurred in 1953 , there was yet another change . In 1953 , Route 24 was realigned onto most of Route S24 , except for a short part which was designated Route 57 . The highway went through a final change on October 9 , 1969 . On that day , there was a small renumbering of Hackettstown , with Route 24 being truncated to the three @-@ way intersection , and Route 57 reassigned onto the rest of Route 24 . The former alignment of Route 57 was reassigned as New Jersey Route 182 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 182 begins at an intersection with Route 57 and County Route 517 ( CR 517 ) . Immediately at that intersection , CR 517 becomes concurrent with Route 182 , but is maintained by the NJDOT . The fourth road at that intersection is <unk> – Mobile Home Court , which is a cul @-@ de @-@ sac . The highway progresses northward , passing some small commercial buildings and arriving at the largest free @-@ standing shopping center in Hackettstown , across from Shelley Drive . The next significant intersection is with East Avenue and an adjacent <unk> . East Avenue heads east briefly turning northeast , crosses over the Musconetcong River , passes behind the Union Cemetery , and intersects US 46 . 
 Route 182 continues northward , passing several small businesses and side streets , as well as the main entrance to the Union Cemetery . Route 182 ends at a three @-@ way intersection with US 46 and CR 604 . CR 604 is also signed as Willow Grove Street , and heads northwest out of the intersection . US Route 46 is also signed as Mill Street , with the eastbound side heading east @-@ southeast from the intersection and the westbound side heading northwest from the intersection . CR 517 which had been concurrent with Route 182 , continues along a concurrency with U.S. Route 46 westbound . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 182 was originally defined as a segment of pre @-@ 1927 Route 12 . However , it was not maintained by the state , and instead , maintained by the county . The highway remained the same until 1927 , which is when it became a part of Route S24 , which was assigned as a spur off of Route 24 . The parent highway , Route 24 , was assigned as a highway to run from Schooley 's Mountain west to Penwell . There , Route S24 would terminate , but the direct highway was not improved by the county . Instead of the original decision , Route 24 was assigned to end at Hackettstown , where the two highways would intersect at the southern end of Route 182 . 
 The next change to the highway , was in 1953 , when the New Jersey State Highway Department renumbered the highway system around the state . This time , Route 24 was defined to run along the alignment of the now @-@ decommissioned Route S24 . Now , Route 24 ran along a new alignment , including a part which was supposed to be temporary . The entirety of current Route 57 was also assigned as Route 24 . That year , the state took over the alignment that was maintained by the county . The final change in highway alignment around Hackettstown occurred on October 9 , 1969 . This time Route 24 was truncated off the alignment of current Route 57 , and now ended in Hackettstown , at the three @-@ way intersection . The older alignment of Route 57 did not retain its designation , as plans developed to make a bypass of Hackettstown , continuing the highway from Phillipsburg to U.S. Route 46 just east of Hackettstown . However , plans never finished , and instead , the designation of Route 182 was assigned to the original alignment of Route 57 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Hackettstown , Warren County . 
 = ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 Tarzon = 
 The ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 Tarzon , also known as VB @-@ 13 , was a guided bomb developed by the United States Army Air Forces during the late 1940s . Mating the guidance system of the earlier Razon radio @-@ controlled weapon with a British Tallboy 12 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) bomb , the ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 saw brief operational service in the Korean War before being withdrawn from service in 1951 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Development of the VB @-@ 13 Tarzon began in February 1945 , with Bell Aircraft being awarded a contract by the United States Army Air Forces for the development of a very large guided bomb . The VB @-@ 13 was a combination of a radio @-@ command guidance system as used on the smaller VB @-@ 3 Razon ( ' Range And azimuth only ' ) guided bomb with the British @-@ developed Tallboy 12 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) " earthquake " bomb , known to the USAAF as <unk> . The ' Tarzon ' name was a portmanteau , combining Tallboy , range and azimuth only , describing the weapon and guidance system ; and was pronounced similarly to that of " Tarzan " , the popular " ape @-@ man " fictional character . 
 The VB @-@ 13 , redesignated ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 in 1948 , was developed under the project code MX @-@ 674 . It had an annular wing around the midsection of its body , mounted near the weapon 's center of gravity . At the rear of the bomb was an octagonal tail surface containing the Razon control surfaces . Intended to be <unk> by the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress bomber , the Tarzon bomb used the combination of AN / ARW @-@ 38 [ Joint Army Navy , Piloted Aircraft , Radio , Automatic Flight or Remote Control ] command link transmitter on the B @-@ 29 and an AN / URW @-@ 2 [ Joint Army Navy , Utility , Radio , Automatic Flight or Remote Control ] receiver on the Tarzon to provide manual command guidance of range and azimuth . This was done with visual tracking of the bomb 's course , aided by a flare mounted in the tail of the weapon . <unk> on board the ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 aided in stabilisation , while a pneumatic system drove the bomb 's control surfaces . The guidance system was considered effective ; Tarzon proved in testing to have an accuracy of 280 feet ( 85 m ) . 
 In addition to the 12 @,@ 000 pounds ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) nominal weight of the Tallboy it was based on , the annular wing and control surfaces boosted the weight of Tarzon by an additional 1 @,@ 100 pounds ( 500 kg ) . As a result , the size and weight of the ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 were such that the weapon would not fit inside the bomb bay of a Superfortress ; instead , the weapon was carried in a semi @-@ recessed mounting , half the weapon being exposed to the airstream . This increased drag on the carrying aircraft , in addition to causing turbulent airflow that could affect the handling of the B @-@ 29 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Although the VB @-@ 13 project had not reached the testing stage by the end of World War II , it avoided being cancelled , proceeding as a low @-@ priority project . Limited testing was conducted during 1948 and 1949 ; additional testing at Alamogordo , New Mexico in 1950 led to the Tarzon being approved for operational service in the Korean War . 
 Tarzon saw its first combat use in December 1950 , the ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 replacing the Razon in operational service ; the smaller weapon had been determined to be too small for effective use against bridges and other hardened targets . Used solely by the 19th Bomb Group , which had previously conducted the Razon 's combat missions , the first Tarzon drop in combat took place on December 14 , 1950 . 
 The largest bomb used in combat during the war , Tarzon was used in strikes against North Korean bridges and other hardened targets , the Tarzon 's improved accuracy over conventional ' dumb bombs ' led to the confirmed destruction of at least six high @-@ priority targets during approximately six months of combat use ; these included a hydroelectric plant , proving the effectiveness of guided weapons against conventional targets as well as bridges . 
 Thirty Tarzon missions were flown between December 1950 and March 1951 ; the weapon 's success led to a contract for the production of 1 @,@ 000 additional ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 missiles . On March 29 , 1951 , however , a Tarzon strike against Sinuiju went awry ; the group commander 's aircraft was destroyed as a result of the premature detonation of the bomb when , the aircraft suffering mechanical difficulties , the weapon was jettisoned in preparation for ditching . The thirtieth , and as it proved final , mission , three weeks following the Sinuiju mission , also suffered an unintentional detonation of a jettisoned , " safed " bomb , although this time without the loss of the aircraft . 
 An investigation proved that the fault lay in the construction of the bomb 's tail ; breaking up on impact , a ' safed ' bomb would have its arming wire removed , rendering it ' unsafe ' and detonating the weapon . Modifications were made to solve the problem , but the damage had been done ; the safety issues , increased maintenance costs compared to conventional bombs , the fact that the bomb 's guidance system required clear @-@ day use only , rendering the bombers vulnerable to enemy fighters , and required that the weapon be released at a prime altitude for the aircraft to be in danger from enemy flak . These combined with the weapon 's poor reliability – only six of twenty @-@ eight bombs dropped successfully destroyed their targets – to result in the production order being canceled by the USAF ; following this , the Tarzon program as a whole was terminated in August 1951 . 
 = Obvious Child = 
 Obvious Child is a 2014 American romantic comedy film written and directed by Gillian Robespierre in her directorial debut . The film stars Jenny Slate , Jake Lacy , Gaby Hoffmann and David Cross . The story follows Donna ( Slate ) , a stand @-@ up comedian , who has a drunken one @-@ night stand with a man named Max ( Lacy ) after breaking up with her boyfriend . She subsequently finds out she is pregnant and decides to have an abortion . 
 Obvious Child originated as a 2009 short film which was written by Robespierre , Anna Bean and Karen Maine , and also starred Slate in the main role . By making the film , Robespierre hoped to remove the stigma surrounding abortion and to correct what she perceived as a misrepresentation of unplanned pregnancy in earlier films . She finished the feature @-@ length script in 2012 . The film was financed through various production companies and filmmaking grants and it was shot in New York in 2013 . 
 The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 17 , 2014 , and was released in theaters on June 6 , 2014 . It grossed US $ 3 @.@ 3 million and was well received by critics . David Edelstein , Mick LaSalle and Dana Stevens praised the film 's portrayal of abortion , while A. O. Scott and Ty Burr highlighted its realism and humor . The film won numerous accolades , including two awards from the National Board of Review and two Independent Spirit Award nominations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After performing a set at her regular comedy club , Donna Stern ( Jenny Slate ) is dumped in the bathroom by her boyfriend , Ryan ( Paul Briganti ) , who confesses he is leaving her for one of her friends . Donna <unk> into a wave of depression and later drunkenly delivers a terrible set in which she insults her ex @-@ boyfriend . Later that night , at the bar , she meets Max ( Jake Lacy ) , who is there with clients but who missed her set . Donna and Max have an instant connection and they end up having sex . In the morning Donna leaves Max 's apartment without saying goodbye . 
 Several weeks after their one @-@ night stand , Donna discovers that she is pregnant . Donna visits a Planned Parenthood clinic to schedule an abortion and discovers the only dates available are her mother 's birthday and Valentine 's Day ; she picks Valentine 's Day . 
 Max tracks Donna down at the bookstore where she works and they have the first of several awkward conversations . Donna then runs into Max when he stops by her mother 's apartment to return a book to her mother , Nancy ( Polly Draper ) , who is a former professor of his . They have lunch together where Donna is prepared to tell Max about her pregnancy and impending abortion until he makes a comment about how he wants to be a grandfather someday . He comes to Donna 's comedy show , but she leaves with another man , Sam ( David Cross ) . She has an awkward evening with Sam and quickly leaves . After her terrible night , Donna visits her mother to talk about her upcoming abortion . Her mother comforts her by telling her that she too had an abortion before Donna was conceived . 
 After pushing Max away , Donna finally invites him to the club to see her perform . When he arrives she performs a set , speaking about how she is pregnant and planning to have an abortion . Max leaves , but on the day of Donna 's abortion , he arrives at her home with flowers and asks if he can accompany her to her procedure . While at the clinic he tells her he supports her , and that when he said that he wanted to be a grandfather , he meant sometime far in the future . The two agree that this is one of the nicest Valentine 's Days they have ever had . After the abortion , Max takes Donna to his home where he makes her tea , and then they watch Gone with the Wind together . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jenny Slate as Donna Stern , a comedian who works at a bookstore 
 Jake Lacy as Max , the object of Donna 's one @-@ night stand 
 Gaby Hoffmann as Nellie , Donna 's roommate and best friend 
 David Cross as Sam , a comedian and friend of Donna 's 
 Gabe <unk> as Joey , Donna and Nellie 's friend , who is also a comedian 
 Richard Kind as Jacob Stern , Donna 's father 
 Polly Draper as Nancy Stern , Donna 's mother 
 Paul Briganti as Ryan , Donna 's ex @-@ boyfriend 
 Cindy Cheung as Dr. Bernard , a physician at the Planned Parenthood clinic 
 Stephen Singer as Gene , owner of the bookstore at which Donna works 
 = = Production = = 
 Obvious Child originated as a short film of the same name about an unemployed woman who decides to terminate her pregnancy resulting from a one @-@ night stand , which was written by Gillian Robespierre , Anna Bean and Karen Maine . Robespierre said that the story was spawned from her frustration with what she perceived as a " misrepresentation of women on screen when it came to unplanned pregnancy " , in films such as Juno ( 2007 ) , Knocked Up ( 2007 ) and Waitress ( 2007 ) . Robespierre , Bean and Maine , feeling " disenchanted with the representation of young women 's experience with becoming pregnant " , wanted to make a film that <unk> an abortion by featuring a woman who terminates a pregnancy without regretting her decision . Jenny Slate was cast as the lead after Robespierre and Bean saw Slate performing stand @-@ up comedy . The short was produced in 2009 and released on the video @-@ sharing website Vimeo , where it was watched by 40 @,@ 000 people . 
 Inspired by the responses to the short film , Robespierre decided to expand the story into a feature film , and wrote an extended screenplay with Karen Maine and Elisabeth Holm . Although the writers wanted to " stick as close ... as possible " to the original story and characters , they changed the lead character 's profession to stand @-@ up comedy . The film 's stand @-@ up scenes were written by Robespierre , who tried to emulate Jenny Slate 's style of comedy , and were revised by Slate and Gabe <unk> , another comedian , who also volunteered their own material . The script was written over an 18 @-@ month period before Robespierre and Holm began to seek financiers to fund the film 's production ; they started sending the script to potential financiers in November 2012 . It was financed through a variety of sources , including the production companies Animal Kingdom Films , Rooks Nest Entertainment , Sundial Pictures and <unk> Films , as well as grants from Rooftop Films , the Tribeca Film Institute and the San Francisco Film Society . 
 The film was shot by cinematographer Chris Teague over 18 days in New York during April 2013 . The filmmakers were given permission by Planned Parenthood to film for a day in the organization 's New Rochelle clinic . The film was edited by Casey Brooks in Greenpoint , Brooklyn , and the score was written by Robespierre 's boyfriend . 
 = = Release = = 
 Obvious Child premiered at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival on January 17 , 2014 . A Kickstarter campaign to help send the film to Sundance was created by the director on December 13 , 2013 , earning a total of $ 37 @,@ 214 by January 14 , 2014 . Independent film distributor A24 Films bought the film 's North American distribution rights , while international distribution rights were purchased by The Exchange . It was released in the United States on June 6 , 2014 , and earned $ 3 @,@ 123 @,@ 963 at the box office in 18 weeks . It also earned $ 197 @,@ 361 and $ 4 @,@ 093 in the United Kingdom and New Zealand respectively , making a total gross of $ 3 @,@ 325 @,@ 417 . 
 Posters for the film advertised it as an " abortion comedy " . Gillian Robespierre said that she found the descriptor reductive , but also said that she was pleased that the word " abortion " was being used on the film 's poster and in headlines about the film . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Emily Blake speculated that the film 's lack of recognition in mainstream award circles may have been due to its label as " the abortion comedy " . NBC drew criticism for requesting that the word " abortion " be removed from an online advertisement for the film ; it apologized after a petition circulated by Planned Parenthood accused the network of censorship . The film was marketed in conjunction with the abortion @-@ rights organization NARAL Pro @-@ Choice America . 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in North America on October 7 , 2014 . Extra features include an audio commentary with Robespierre , Elisabeth Holm and Jenny Slate , a featurette about the film 's production , a collection of extended scenes , and the original 2009 Obvious Child short film on which the feature was based . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Obvious Child was met with positive reviews from film critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 89 % , based on 145 reviews with an average rating of 7 @.@ 3 / 10 . The consensus from the website states , " Tackling a sensitive subject with maturity , honesty , and wit , Obvious Child serves as a deeply promising debut for writer @-@ director Gillian Robespierre . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 35 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Peter Travers described Obvious Child as " uniquely special " in Rolling Stone , while The Washington Post 's Ann Hornaday described it as " one of the most startlingly honest romantic comedies to appear onscreen in years " . Ty Burr of The Boston Globe found the characters sympathetic and realistic , and enjoyed the humor . The New York Times ' chief critic A. O. Scott praised the film for striking a balance between humor and sentimentality , writing , " It 's both funny and serious without trying too hard to be either , and by trying above all to be honest . " Peter Debruge described Jenny Slate as " wildly funny " in Variety , while Marc Mohan called her performance " endearing and real " in The Oregonian . The Hollywood Reporter 's Todd McCarthy was also impressed by Slate 's performance and opined that the supporting cast members were equally impressive . 
 Numerous critics praised Obvious Child for its portrayal of abortion , including Dana Stevens of Slate , who wrote that the way Donna 's abortion was portrayed was humane and politically neutral but also that the film , " for all its lightness of tone , is radical " . In a review for The Guardian , Xan Brooks described the film as " fresh and funny and really rather brave " for handling a controversial topic that other filmmakers routinely avoid . New York critic David Edelstein called Robespierre " brave enough to be ambivalent " in choosing not to include a blatant political message in the film . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Mick LaSalle similarly concluded that " If the movie has a political statement , it 's a subtle one " ; he also praised the film for treating the topic sincerely while still maintaining a humorous tone . 
 Conversely , Michelle <unk> suggested in a review for The Nation that the film 's popularity with critics was not due to its quality but rather its taboo subject matter : " If the ordinary drama of abortion were more regularly represented in the movies , Obvious Child wouldn 't be much more than an amusing hipster diversion . " Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail expressed a similar sentiment and opined that many of the film 's jokes were crude and lacking in humor . USA Today 's Scott Bowles also found Obvious Child unfunny , describing the characters as " so morbid and whiny that the jokes don 't work , even as irony " . Kyle Smith , a critic for the New York Post , found the plot uninteresting and the cinematography " ugly " , and criticized Slate 's " desperate " performance . 
 The film was criticized by a variety of conservative and anti @-@ abortion groups and publications , including the Family Research Council , The Heritage Foundation , and the Media Research Center , through its <unk> blog and <unk> News Service . In an article for The Human Life Review , Mary Rose <unk> dismissed the film as " obvious propaganda " . Katelyn Beaty , meanwhile , who reviewed Obvious Child for Christianity Today , wrote : " While I ultimately disagree with Robespierre 's political aims , at the least she has provided a sometimes funny , often tender portrait of many ( though not all ) women who face an unplanned pregnancy . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici = 
 Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici ( 11 August 1667 – 18 February 1743 ) was the last scion of the House of Medici . A patron of the arts , she bequeathed the Medici 's large art collection , including the contents of the Uffizi , Palazzo Pitti and the Medicean villas , which she inherited upon her brother Gian Gastone 's death in 1737 , and her Palatine treasures to the Tuscan state , on the condition that no part of it could be removed from " the Capital of the grand ducal State .... [ and from ] the succession of His Serene Grand Duke . " 
 Anna Maria Luisa was the only daughter of Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany , and Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , a niece of Louis XIII of France . On her marriage to Elector Johann Wilhelm II , she became Electress Palatine , and , by patronising musicians , she earned for the contemporary Palatine court the reputation of an important music centre . As Johann Wilhelm had syphilis the union produced no offspring , which , combined with her siblings ' barrenness , meant that the Medici were on the verge of extinction . 
 In 1713 Cosimo III altered the Tuscan laws of succession to allow the accession of his daughter , and spent his final years canvassing the European powers to agree to recognise this statute . However , in 1735 , as part of a territorial arrangement , the European powers appointed Francis Stephen of Lorraine as heir , and he duly ascended the Tuscan throne in her stead . After the death of Johann Wilhelm , Anna Maria Luisa returned to Florence , where she enjoyed the rank of first lady until the accession of her brother Gian Gastone , who banished her to the Villa La Quiete . When Gian Gastone died in 1737 , Francis Stephen 's envoy offered Anna Maria Luisa the position of nominal regent of Tuscany , but she declined . Her death , in 1743 , brought the royal House of Medici to an end . Her remains were interred in the Medicean necropolis , the Basilica of San Lorenzo , Florence , which she helped complete . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Despite her mother 's efforts to induce a miscarriage by means of riding , Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici , the only daughter and second child of Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany , and his consort , Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , was born in Florence on 11 August 1667 . She was named after her maternal aunt Anne Marie Louise d 'Orléans , Duchess of Montpensier . 
 Her parents ' relationship was quarrelsome ; Marguerite Louise took every chance to humiliate Cosimo . On one documented occasion , she branded him " a poor groom " in the presence of the Papal nuncio . The enmity between them continued until 26 December 1674 ; after all attempts at conciliation failed , a stressed Cosimo consented to his wife 's departure for the Convent of Montmartre , France . The contract created that day revoked her privileges as a petite fille de France ) , and declared that upon her death all her assets were to be inherited by her children . Cosimo granted her a pension of 80 @,@ 000 livres in compensation . She abandoned Tuscany in June 1675 ; Anna Maria Luisa never saw her again . Although Cosimo doted on his daughter , she was raised by her paternal grandmother , Vittoria della Rovere . 
 = = = Electress Palatine = = = 
 In 1669 , Anna Maria Luisa was considered as a potential bride to Louis , le Grand Dauphin , the heir @-@ apparent of Louis XIV of France . Cosimo III did not like the idea of a French marriage , and never devoted himself fully to the cause ( she was later rejected ) . Instead , Cosimo offered her to his first choice , Peter II of Portugal . Peter 's ministers , fearing that Princess Anna Maria Luisa would dominate Peter II and fearing she might have inherited Marguerite Louise ’ s manner , declined . In fact , contemporaries thought her traits to be a combination of those of her father and paternal grandmother , Vittoria della Rovere . 
 Following refusals from Spain , Portugal , France and Savoy , Leopold I , Holy Roman Emperor , suggested Johann Wilhelm , Elector Palatine . James II of England put forward his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Francesco II d 'Este , Duke of Modena , but the Princess deemed a duke too lowly in terms of protocol for the daughter of a grand duke . The Elector Palatine obtained the style Royal Highness from the Holy Roman Emperor for Cosimo III in February 1691 . ( Cosimo had hitherto been outranked by the Duke of Savoy — much to his anger — who derived royal status from his successful <unk> to the abolished Cypriot throne ) . Consequently , Johann Wilhelm was ultimately chosen . He and Anna Maria Luisa were married by proxy on 29 April 1691 . At the accompanying festivities , a contemporary describes the Electress 's physical attributes : " In her person , she is tall , her complexion was fair , her eyes large and expressive , both those and her hair were black ; her mouth was small , with a fullness of the lips ; her teeth were as white as ivory .... " 
 She departed for Düsseldorf , her husband ’ s capital , on 6 May 1691 , accompanied by her younger brother , Gian Gastone . Johann Wilhelm surprised her at Innsbruck , where they officially married . The Palatinate Anna Maria Luisa arrived in was ravaged by the ongoing Nine Years ' War , in which Louis XIV assaulted the Palatinate on behalf of his brother , Philippe of France , Duke of Orléans , occupying the city of Philippsburg in the process . 
 The Electress became pregnant in 1692 ; however , she miscarried . It is thought that soon after arrival she contracted syphilis from the Elector , which explains why Anna Maria Luisa and Johann Wilhelm failed to produce any children . Anna Maria Luisa and Johann Wilhelm , notwithstanding , shared a harmonious marriage . The Electress spent her time enjoying balls , musical performances and other festivities . He commissioned a theatre for her where the comedies of French playwright Molière were performed . Because Anna Maria Luisa patronised many musicians , the contemporary Palatine court enjoyed regard as an international centre of music . She invited Fortunato <unk> to court and appointed him maestro di cappella ( " music teacher " ) . Agostino Steffani , a polymath , was sponsored by the Electress from his arrival in Düsseldorf , in 1703 , until her return to Tuscany ; the <unk> library in Florence houses two editions of his chamber duets . 
 Anna Maria Luisa arranged a marriage for her younger brother at the instigation of their father : On 2 July 1697 Gian Gastone de ' Medici married Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , heiress of the eponymous duchy , in Düsseldorf . Gian Gastone 's wife repulsed him , and for that reason , they separated in 1708 . 
 The same year as Gian Gastone 's marriage , the Peace of Ryswick ended the Nine Years ' War : French troops withdrew from the Electoral Palatinate and Johann Wilhelm received the County of <unk> . Following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes , a document which had hitherto given rights to Calvinists , in 1685 , 2 @,@ 000 French Huguenots emigrated to the Electoral Palatinate . Johann Wilhelm , under criticism for his treatment of the Palatine Protestants from the Elector of Brandenburg introduced a <unk> in 1705 , which sanctioned religious freedom . 
 = = = Tuscan succession = = = 
 Cosimo III wished to alter the male @-@ only Tuscan line of succession so as to allow the accession of his daughter , Anna Maria Luisa , in the event of a male @-@ line succession failure . But his plan was met with fierce opposition from the European powers . Charles VI , Holy Roman Emperor , Tuscany 's nominal feudal over @-@ lord , subscribed , but only if he should succeed her . Cosimo and herself were at odds with the proposal . Without a concord in sight , the " Tuscan question " became dormant . 
 Some years later , as the question of the succession became more urgent , Cardinal Francesco Maria de ' Medici , Cosimo III 's brother , was released from his vows and coerced into marrying the incumbent Duke of Guastalla 's elder daughter , Eleanor , in 1709 . The Electress urged him to care for his health and " give us the consolation of a little prince . " However , two years later , he died without issue , taking with him any hope of an heir . 
 Following the death of his heir apparent , Ferdinando , in 1713 , Cosimo deposited a bill in the Senate , Tuscany 's titular legislature , promulgating that if Cosimo and his new heir apparent , Gian Gastone , were to predecease the Electress , she would ascend the throne . Charles VI was furious ; he replied that the Grand Duchy was an imperial fief and therefore he alone possessed the prerogative to alter the laws of succession . To complicate things further , Elisabeth Farnese , heiress of the Duchy of Parma , the second wife of Philip V of Spain , as a great @-@ granddaughter of Margherita de ' Medici , exercised a claim to Tuscany . In May 1716 , Charles VI , who constantly changed his stance on the issue , told Florence that the Electress 's succession was unquestioned , but added that Austria and Tuscany must soon reach an agreement regarding which royal house was to follow the Medici . 
 In June 1717 , Cosimo declared his wish that the House of Este should succeed the Electress . Charles VI had previously offered the Grand Duke territorial compensation — in the form of the State of <unk> — if he chose quickly , but reneged . In 1718 , Charles VI repudiated Cosimo 's decision , declaring a union of Tuscany and Modena ( the Este lands ) unacceptable . Hereafter , a stalemate existed between them . 
 = = = Return to Florence = = = 
 The Elector Palatine died in June 1716 . His widow , Anna Maria Luisa , returned to Florence in October 1717 . Dowager Grand Princess Violante Beatrice , her brother Ferdinando 's widow , and Anna Maria Luisa did not enjoy an amiable relationship . Upon hearing of Anna Maria Luisa 's intention to return , Violante Beatrice prepared to depart for Munich , her brother 's capital , but Gian Gastone wished her to stay , so she did . To keep the two ladies from quarrelling over precedence , Cosimo III defined Violante Beatrice 's status just before the Electress 's arrival by appointing her Governess of Siena . 
 On 4 April 1718 England , France and the Dutch Republic ( and later Austria ) selected Don Carlos of Spain , the elder child of Elisabeth Farnese and Philip V of Spain , as the Tuscan heir ( with no mention of Anna Maria Luisa ) . By 1722 , the Electress was not even acknowledged as heiress , and Cosimo was reduced to a spectator at the conferences for Tuscany 's future . In the midst of this , Marguerite Louise , Anna Maria Luisa 's mother , died . Instead of willing her valuables to her children , as prescribed by the 1674 agreement , they went to the Princess of <unk> , a distant relative . 
 On 25 October 1723 , six days before his death , Cosimo III distributed a final proclamation commanding that Tuscany shall stay independent ; Anna Maria Luisa shall succeed uninhibited after Gian Gastone ; the Grand Duke reserves the right to choose his successor . Unfortunately for Cosimo , Europe completely ignored it . Gian Gastone , now the Grand Duke , and Anna Maria Luisa were not on good terms . He despised the Electress for engineering his unhappy marriage with Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , while she detested his liberal policies : he repealed all of his father 's anti @-@ Semitic statutes and revelled in upsetting her . Consequently , the Electress was compelled to abandon her apartment in the left wing of the royal palace , the Pitti , for the Villa La Quiete . She refurbished La Quiete 's house and gardens with the assistance of Sebastiano <unk> , the gardener of the Boboli Gardens , and the architects Giovanni Battista <unk> and Paolo <unk> . In the period 1722 – 1725 , the Electress embellished the villa further by commissioning twelve statues of various religious figures . 
 In spite of their mutual dislike , the Electress and Violante Beatrice attempted to improve Gian Gastone 's poor public image together . Rumours abounded that the Grand Duke had died ; it was a rarity for the public to see him . To dispel the said rumours , the Electress compelled him to make an appearance — his last one — in 1729 , on the feast day of the patron saint of Florence , John the Baptist . The Ruspanti , Gian Gastone 's morally corrupt entourage , hated the Electress ; and she , them . Violante Beatrice tried to withdraw the Grand Duke from their sphere of influence by organising banquets . His conduct at these literally sent those in attendance scrambling for their carriages : he vomited repeatedly into his napkin , belched and told rude jokes . These distractions ceased upon Violante Beatrice 's death in 1731 . 
 In 1736 , during the War of the Polish Succession , Don Carlos was banished from Tuscany as part of a territorial swap , and Francis III of Lorraine was made heir in his stead . In January 1737 , the Spanish troops , who had occupied Tuscany since 1731 , withdrew ; 6 @,@ 000 Austrian soldiers took their place . 
 Gian Gastone died from " an accumulation of diseases " on 9 July 1737 , surrounded by prelates and his sister . Anna Maria Luisa was offered a nominal regency by the Prince de Craon , the Grand Duke 's envoy , until Francis III could arrive in Florence , but declined . At Gian Gastone 's demise , all the House of Medici 's allodial possessions , including £ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 liquid cash , a vast art collection , robes of state and lands in the former Duchy of Urbino , were conferred on Anna Maria Luisa . In regards to this , her most notable act was the <unk> di Famiglia ( " Family Pact " ) , signed on 31 October 1737 . In collaboration with the Holy Roman Emperor and Francis of Lorraine , she willed all the personal property of the Medici 's to the Tuscan state , provided that nothing was ever removed from Florence . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 The " Lorrainers , " as the occupying forces were dubbed , were popularly loathed . The Viceroy , the Prince de Craon , whom the Electress disliked for his " vulgar " court , allowed the Electress to live undisturbed in her own wing of the Pitti , living in virtual seclusion , only on occasion receiving a select @-@ number of guests under a black dais in her silver @-@ clad audience room . She occupied herself financing and overseeing the construction of the Cappella dei <unk> — started in 1604 by Ferdinando I de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany — to the tune of 1 @,@ 000 crowns per week , and she donated much of her fortune to charity : £ 4 @,@ 000 per annum . This is equivalent to £ 577 thousand in present @-@ day terms . On 18 February 1743 , Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici , Dowager Electress Palatine , died of an " oppression on the breast " . Sir Horace Mann , 1st Baronet , a British resident in Florence , recalled in a letter that " The common people are convinced she went off in a hurricane of wind ; a most violent one began this morning and lasted for about two hours , and now the sun shines as bright as ever ... " The royal line of the House of Medici became extinct with her death . Her will , having been completed just months before , according to Sir Horace Mann , left £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of jewellery to the Grand Duke Francis and her lands in the former Duchy of Urbino to the Marquis Rinuccini , her main executor and a minister under her father , Cosimo III . She was interred in the crypt that she helped to complete in San Lorenzo ; although not entirely finished at the time of her death , her testament stipulated that part of the revenue of her estate should " be used to continue , finish and perfect ... the said famous chapel San Lorenzo " . 
 Anna Maria Luisa 's single most enduring act was the Family Pact . It ensured that all the Medicean art and treasures collected over nearly three centuries of political ascendancy remained in Florence . Cynthia Miller Lawrence , an American art @-@ historian , argues that Anna Maria Luisa thus provisioned for Tuscany 's future economy through tourism . Sixteen years after her death , the Uffizi Gallery , built by Cosimo the Great , the founder of the Grand Duchy , was made open to public viewing . 
 In 2012 after concern caused by the 1966 Flood of the Arno River , her bones were exhumed . A scientific examination found no traces of syphilis , which she had long been thought to have died from . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 11 August 1667 – 29 April 1691 : Her Highness Princess Anna Maria Luisa 
 29 April 1691 – 8 June 1716 : Her Serene Highness The Electress [ Palatine of the Rhine ] 
 8 June 1716 – 18 February 1743 : Her Serene Highness The Dowager Electress [ Palatine of the Rhine ] 
 = Maryland Route 285 = 
 Maryland Route 285 ( MD 285 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 2 @.@ 43 miles ( 3 @.@ 91 km ) from MD 213 east to the Delaware state line within Chesapeake City . MD 285 roughly parallels the north side of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal in southern Cecil County . The state highway was paved along Biddle Street from Lock Street , then part of U.S. Route 213 ( now MD 213 ) , east to the state line around 1930 . When US 213 was moved to the Chesapeake City Bridge in the late 1940s , MD 285 was extended along Lock Street to reconnect with US 213 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 285 begins at an intersection with MD 213 ( Augustine Herman Highway ) just north of the Chesapeake City Bridge . The state highway , which heads east as two @-@ lane Lock Street , curves to the south at the intersection with county @-@ maintained Hemphill Street . At the intersection with MD 284 ( Hemphill Street ) , MD 285 curves to the southwest , following Lock Street into the town of Chesapeake City to its intersection with Biddle Street . MD 285 turns east onto Biddle Street while a stub of Lock Street continues south to the edge of the canal as unsigned MD 537B . The state highway passes through a residential section of the north side of the town , meeting the other end of MD 284 . MD 285 runs through an S @-@ curve before leaving the town limits . The state highway passes through a mix of farmland and scattered residences as it parallels the north side of the canal . At Knights Corner Road , MD 285 curves northeast away from the canal to its eastern terminus at the Delaware state line . The roadway continues east as Chesapeake City Road , which heads to an intersection with Delaware Route 71 ( DE 71 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 285 was constructed in three sections . The portion of Lock Street between county @-@ maintained Hemphill Street and the northern junction with MD 284 was part of the original Cecilton – Elkton highway passing through Chesapeake City that was designated for improvement by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . This segment of state road was paved in 1914 . Following the expansion and straightening of the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal in the 1920s , the portion of Lock Street from the northern junction with MD 284 to Biddle Street was constructed as the approach to a vertical lift bridge constructed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers , connecting Lock Street on the north side with George Street on the south side of the town in 1926 . This new alignment became part of US 213 when the federal highway was marked through southern Cecil County around 1927 . 
 Biddle Street was paved from US 213 to the Delaware state line and designated MD 285 around 1930 . The vertical lift bridge used by US 213 to cross the canal was destroyed by the tanker Franz Klasen on July 28 , 1942 . A ferry was established to carry traffic across the canal until the completion of a new bridge . The Chesapeake City Bridge was completed in 1948 along with new approach roads ; US 213 was moved to the new bridge and approach roads and MD 285 was extended north on Lock Street to its present western terminus at US 213 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Cecil County . 
 = Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee = 
 Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee is a platform video game developed by Oddworld Inhabitants and published by GT Interactive . It was released in 1997 for the PlayStation video game console , DOS and Microsoft Windows in North America , Australia and Europe . The game was released under the title Abe a GoGo ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> A <unk> ) in Japan for the PlayStation by publisher SoftBank , with a PC version following in 2001 . The Game Boy version of Abe 's Oddysee , retitled as Oddworld Adventures , was developed by Saffire Corporation and published by GT Interactive in 1998 . 
 The game centers on the titular Abe , a Mudokon slave at the ' RuptureFarms ' meat processing factory . When he discovers that he and his fellow Mudokons are to be slaughtered , he decides to escape and liberate as many enslaved Mudokons as he can . The player assumes the role of Abe as he attempts a perilous quest to emancipate his downtrodden people . 
 Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee was widely acclaimed for having innovative gameplay , good graphics , and engaging cut @-@ scenes ; however , its steep learning curve and system of saving only at checkpoints , received criticism . It was the first game in the planned five @-@ part Oddworld series , which also includes its direct sequels , Oddworld : Abe 's Exoddus , Oddworld : Munch 's Oddysee and Oddworld : Stranger 's Wrath . A remake titled Oddworld : New ' n ' Tasty ! was developed by Just Add Water and released through digital distribution in 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Abe 's Oddysee is a two @-@ dimensional platform game in which players take control of the character Abe , to travel across separate screens : solving puzzles , navigating obstacles , and avoiding enemies . Abe will die if attacked by an enemy , touched by an obstacle , dropped from too great a height , or even holding a grenade for too long , respawning at the last checkpoint . As well as jumping to navigate areas and crouching to roll under obstacles , Abe can break into a run to jump over large gaps or escape enemies , or tiptoe to avoid disturbing enemies , adding a limited stealth element to the game . Abe can also use throwable objects such as meat , rocks or grenades to bypass enemies or destroy obstacles , though grenades have a timer and , as explained , will blow up Abe if he holds one for too long . 
 Abe has the ability to telepathically control Sligs ( a type of non @-@ player character ) , but can only use this in safe areas . Flying orbs in certain areas also prevent Abe 's telepathy by zapping him . Once Abe successfully possesses a <unk> , Abe can use them to attack other enemies and activate mechanisms dangerous to himself , and can then destroy them . Abe 's body is immobile and vulnerable whilst possessing someone else , whereas if his host is killed , control will return to Abe 's body . 
 Along the way , the player will encounter other Mudokons that he can rescue . By holding down the GameSpeak button and pressing various commands , Abe can command them to follow him , stay put , and activate mechanisms , as well as praise or scold them . Sometimes Abe will have to go through certain procedures to persuade a certain Mudokon , such as responding to whistles . Mudokons can be rescued by safely leading them past traps and enemies to bird portals , which can be activated by chanting . If the player rescues at least 50 Mudokons during the course of the game , Abe survives the ending . 
 Throughout the game , Abe is attacked by Sligs , Scrabs , and Paramites . Sligs will shoot on sight , but cannot see through dark areas ; Scrabs will attack anyone in their territory ; whilst Paramites will attack in packs and become shy alone . <unk> are bipedal creatures that Abe can ride and communicate with by GameSpeak , although they will be distracted by dripping honey . Late in the game , Abe gains the ability to transform into a demigod ' Shrykull ' , which can <unk> all on @-@ screen enemies . Abe can use this ability once after rescuing a certain amount of Mudokons at the same time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Abe 's Oddysee includes only four named characters , and many anonymous slaves and guards . The protagonist of the game is Abe , a Mudokon slave worker born into captivity and ignorant of his people 's rich history and culture . Abe is often described as a " klutz " ; and his mouth is sewn shut , possibly to prevent his outcry . 
 During his adventure , Abe is joined by the Elum ( " Mule " spelled backwards ) : a stubborn , loyal assistant . Abe and Elum were originally envisioned as beginning Abe 's Oddysee together , living off the land until thrust into an industrial factory ; but the developers determined that the story was stronger should Abe come from a factory existence to self @-@ sustenance . 
 A mentor enters the story in Big Face , the shaman of the Mudokon people , who wears a large wooden mask from which his name is derived . He saves Abe from death and sets him to rescue his compatriots and face the trials of the <unk> Lines , before freeing the eventual dozens of freed slaves . 
 The primary antagonist of the game is Molluck the Glukkon , the ruthless chief executive officer of the meat @-@ packing factory titled RuptureFarms . Because Molluck 's business empire is failing in decline of the wildlife whose meat he sells , Molluck decides to use his Mudokon slave population in his food products . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Abe 's Oddysee begins with the eponymous protagonist as a prisoner in RuptureFarms , from which he narrates his story . He and many other Mudokons are slaves to Molluck the Glukkon , the owner of RuptureFarms : " the biggest meat @-@ processing plant on Oddworld " . Abe is a contented floor @-@ <unk> First Class and currently Employee of the Year . 
 At the time of the story , the ingredients of the corporation 's three major " Tasty Treats " ( <unk> Cakes , <unk> Pies , and Meech <unk> ) are quickly running out , with the <unk> already extinct . While working late , Abe overhears Molluck 's plan to use the Mudokon slaves as meat products called " Mudokon Pops ! " , which frightens Abe into escaping from the factory . 
 Outside RuptureFarms and the surrounding Free @-@ Fire Zone , Abe sees a moon with its face in the shape of a Mudokon handprint . Thereupon he falls down a cliff , smashing his head ; and as he lies on the ground , the shaman BigFace orders Abe to rescue his enslaved brethren and " restore the lost land " , having first accomplished the Mudokons ' spiritual trials in the forests of <unk> and the deserts of <unk> . In each land , Abe traverses a labyrinthine , abandoned temple ; and after each of these , BigFace marks one of Abe 's hands with a scar : one representing the Paramites and one representing the Scrabs . When Abe has both scars , he can become the Shrykull , an invincible demigod . 
 With this new ability , Abe returns to RuptureFarms , rescues his Mudokon brethren , and deactivates most of the factory 's power . When Molluck sees this and decides to flood the entire factory with poisonous gas , Abe races to the boardroom and once there uses the Shrykull 's power to destroy the Glukkon executives ( who were summoned there under an emergency board meeting to be safe from the gas ) and terminates the gas ; but is himself captured . What happens next depends on how many Mudokons were rescued throughout the game ; if the player has rescued at least 50 Mudokon slaves in the game , the free Mudokons electrocute Molluck and BigFace rescues Abe , but if the player fails to rescue 50 Mudokons throughout the game , Molluck kills Abe instead . Subsequent games and media treat the Good Ending as canonical . 
 In the initial PlayStation version of the game , upon " perfect " completion of the game — completion with all 99 Mudokon slaves rescued — an extra full motion video ( FMV ) " Guardian Angel " can be viewed , which depicts a captured Abe harassed by " The Shrink " : a mechanical creature with a sophisticated artificial intelligence . The FMV is notable due to its absence from the PC version and later PlayStation releases of the game , and its introduction of a new character to the Oddworld mythos . The character was reputedly part of an early advertising campaign , which included television commercials , but was eventually abandoned . 
 = = Development = = 
 Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee began production in January 1995 under the working title of Soul Storm . After GT Interactive acquired publishing rights on September 12 , 1996 , the title was changed , first to Epic and eventually to Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee . The game had a private showing at E3 ' 96 , but it was not until E3 ' 97 that journalists took note of the game and it was generally well received . The version of the game shown at E3 ' 97 was remarkably similar to the release version , and Abe 's Oddysee had a reportedly smooth development cycle with few late changes . 
 The first footage creator Lorne Lanning saw of Abe 's Oddysee involved a pack of <unk> chasing Abe . He said he was happy with the animation at the time but when development was nearing completion , the studio discovered that there was not enough disk space to include all of the species featured in the game . The <unk> were removed from the final game and identified in the story as extinct . Another sequence under time and budget constraints concerned the moon that Abe witnesses after his escape from the Stockyards . Lanning explained that the CG sequence that occurs between Abe escaping RuptureFarms and entering the Stockyards was originally accompanied by footage of a meteor shower creating the shape of Abe 's handprint , in order to imply " greater forces that are really behind it , that are trying to send him symbols " . The budget for the game was $ 4 million . 
 Abe 's Oddysee was the first major GT title that the UK development team , that had been taken in by GT following the acquisition of Warner Interactive , became involved with . The testing process of the game was unusual for GT Interactive as the British team did game play testing whilst normally American games were only tested in Europe for language and other compatibility issues . The soundtrack features mostly ambient music composed by Ellen Meijers . Because of the lack of testing , the final version of the game left behind a ledge clipping through the floor glitch , a glitch which allows Abe to jump backwards behind screens ( which is also known as a ' Stop Turn ' ) , and an invincibility glitch . All of these glitches can result in skipping of <unk> and <unk> , which was first discovered in June 2014 on the Microsoft Windows version of the game . Similar glitches are also found in Oddworld : Abe 's Exoddus , but the invincibility death delay glitch could only work using a hidden cheat in the game . There are several other glitches that can cause Abe 's Mudokons not to follow Abe and some glitches related to levers and riding platformers . Another type of invincibility glitch was found in the re @-@ make . The ledge glitch and the stop turn glitches were fixed . 
 When Abe 's Oddysee was in production , the developers found that a male executive at publisher GT Interactive tried to sabotage production because he didn 't like the game being made . He took footage of the game to his boss , who loved the direction the game had , and chose to provide more funding at the expense of the executive that wanted to shut it down . Lanning later explained that in 1997 during Oddysee 's production , men in the video game industry were seen as making toys , and not taken seriously . Men were " happy to make a living , but they weren ’ t necessarily going out and bragging about it " Games began to be more about shooting and violence and blood , but Oddworld Inhabitants was " the antithesis to that " and said " we can make people feel better rather than just feel like they won . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The game saw its first release on the PlayStation , DOS and Windows on September 19 , 1997 , on a day dubbed as " Odd Friday " by the developer and publisher ; over 500 @,@ 000 units were originally released worldwide . The Japanese version followed in October . 
 For the release in Japan , the title of Abe 's Oddysee was changed to Abe a GoGo by the publisher SoftBank . Other changes included the art for the " Mudokon Pops ! " packaging , which originally consisted of a Mudokon head speared on a stick . Due to undisclosed current events in Japan , the design was changed to a more ambiguous , " happier " image . The design for the protagonist Abe and other Mudokons was also significantly altered . Certain Japanese pressure groups were offended by the Mudokons having four fingers and most of them working in a meat @-@ packing factory , due to a historic Japanese subclass of meat packers who were looked down upon in society . Four fingers , or showing four fingers to another person , came to insinuate the other was a member of the subclass , because it suggested the meat packers who lost fingers at work . Oddworld Inhabitants had to alter the design of Mudokons to three fingers , or else face legal battles and large fines . 
 Oddworld Inhabitants made the altered designs a permanent feature ; subsequent versions of Abe 's Oddysee released outside Japan included both the changed packaging and changed Mudokon hand . Future games and media ( including New ' n ' Tasty ! ) also recognise these changes as canon , although Abe 's Exoddus oddly features four @-@ fingered Mudokon sprites , and scenes from Abe 's Oddysee shown in the game were not altered . 
 The Game Boy port was released as Oddworld Adventures ; it was developed by Saffire Corporation and published by GT Interactive in 1998 . The game is a significantly cut @-@ down version of Abe 's Oddysee , with only a few similar levels and a condensed plot ( Abe starts out as a native Mudokon , so the opening levels in RuptureFarms are absent from this version ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release in 1997 , Oddworld : Abe 's Oddysee received mostly positive reviews . Edge described the game as " a tight 2D platformer that 's packed with great innovative touches and some great character design " . GameSpot gave the PlayStation version 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 and praised the game as " the ideal platformer , balancing its action and puzzle elements perfectly to make the game intelligent , engaging , and , best yet , fun " . Animation World Magazine applauded multiple aspects of the game , saying it " features some of the best graphics and animation we 've ever seen " and commenting on the " sophisticated gameplay " . The graphics struck many reviewers as being excellent , as while the game is two @-@ dimensional , all elements were rendered in 3D programs . PC Zone remarked that " the developers have created an outstanding visual environment for Abe to leap around in , " while GamePro described the graphics as " eye @-@ popping " . The game 's audio was often singled out for praise . GameSpot gave the music a score of nine out of ten . 
 Most criticism toward the game was directed at the save system . Edge said that " Oddworld demands a certain level of commitment to progress " , while Science Fiction Weekly claimed the game 's " innovative game play makes for a steep learning curve . This initial difficulty in figuring out how to play is aggravated by a save feature that often forces players to redo difficult sections . " PC Zone stated that " progress does seem to rely on trial and error , which involves much replaying of levels and gnashing of teeth . All this can be frustrating at times , especially when Abe is plonked right back at the start of a level when he dies " . The game 's follow @-@ up , Abe 's Exoddus , notably implemented a suspend save feature that did not require the reaching of checkpoints . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The game won many awards , including the " E3 <unk> 1997 " from GamePro in August 1997 and the " Best Director " award at the World Animation Festival in 1997 . In the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences ' first annual Interactive Achievement Awards it was nominated in the categories " Console Adventure Game of the Year " and " Outstanding Achievement in Sound and Music " . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Abe 's Oddysee received two direct sequels . Oddworld : Abe 's Exoddus was released for PlayStation in November 1998 , taking place directly after Oddysee . The game continues the style of gameplay from the previous game with several improvements , such as the ability to use GameSpeak with different species and possess explosive clouds of wind . Oddworld : Munch 's Oddysee was released for Xbox in 2001 , bringing the gameplay into 3D environments as well as allowing players to play as another character , Munch . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 A remake of Abe 's Oddysee was developed by UK studio Just Add Water . The game was built using the Unity game engine and was released on July 22 , 2014 on the PS4 on the PlayStation Network in North America and a European release on July 23 , 2014 and was subsequently released for the PC , Mac , Linux , Xbox One , PS3 , PS Vita and Wii U. 
 = Montague Druitt = 
 Montague John Druitt ( 15 August 1857 – early December 1888 ) was one of the suspects in the Jack the Ripper murders that took place in London between August and November 1888 . 
 He came from an upper @-@ middle class English background , and studied at Winchester College and the University of Oxford . After graduating , he was employed as an assistant schoolmaster at a boarding school and pursued a parallel career in the law , qualifying as a barrister in 1885 . His main interest outside work was cricket , which he played with many leading players of the time , including Lord Harris and Francis Lacey . 
 In November 1888 , he lost his post at the school for reasons that remain unclear . One month later his body was discovered drowned in the River Thames . His death , which was found to be a suicide , roughly coincided with the end of the murders attributed to Jack the Ripper . Private suggestions in the 1890s that he could have committed the crimes became public knowledge in the 1960s , and led to the publication of books that proposed him as the murderer . The evidence against him was entirely circumstantial , however , and many writers from the 1970s onwards have rejected him as a likely suspect . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Druitt was born in Wimborne Minster , Dorset , England . He was the second son and third child of prominent local surgeon William Druitt , and his wife Ann ( née Harvey ) . William Druitt was a justice of the peace , a governor of the local grammar school , and a regular worshipper at the local Anglican church , the Minster . Six weeks after his birth , Montague Druitt was christened at the Minster by his maternal great @-@ uncle , Reverend William Mayo . The <unk> lived at Westfield House , which was the largest house in the town , and set in its own grounds with stables and servants ' cottages . Druitt had six brothers and sisters , including an elder brother William who entered the law , and a younger brother Edward who joined the Royal Engineers . 
 Druitt was educated at Winchester College , where he won a scholarship at the age of 13 , and excelled at sports , especially cricket and fives . He was active in the school 's debating society , an interest that might have spawned his desire to become a barrister . In debates , he spoke in favour of French republicanism , compulsory military service , and the resignation of Benjamin Disraeli , and against the Ottoman Empire , the influence of Otto von Bismarck , and the conduct of the government in the Tichborne case . He defended William Wordsworth as " a bulwark of Protestantism " , and condemned the execution of King Charles I as " a most dastardly murder that will always attach to England 's fair name as a blot " . In a light @-@ hearted debate , he spoke against the proposition that bondage to fashion is a social evil . 
 In his final year at Winchester , 1875 – 76 , he was Prefect of Chapel , treasurer of the debating society , school fives champion , and opening bowler for the cricket team . In June 1876 , he played cricket for the school team against Eton College , which won the match with a team including cricketing luminaries Ivo Bligh and Kynaston Studd , as well as a future Principal Private Secretary at the Home Office Evelyn Ruggles @-@ Brise . Druitt bowled out Studd for four . With a glowing academic record , he was awarded a Winchester Scholarship to New College , Oxford . 
 At New College , he was popular with his peers , and was elected Steward of the Junior Common Room by them . He played cricket and rugby for the college team , and was the winner of both double and single fives at the university in 1877 . In a seniors ' cricket match in 1880 , he bowled out William Patterson , who later captained Kent County Cricket Club . 
 Druitt gained a second class in Classical Moderations in 1878 and graduated with a third class Bachelor of Arts degree in Literae Humaniores ( Classics ) in 1880 . His youngest brother , Arthur , entered New College in 1882 , just as Druitt was following in his eldest brother William 's footsteps by embarking on a career in law . 
 = = Career = = 
 On 17 May 1882 , two years after graduation , Druitt was admitted to the Inner Temple , one of the qualifying bodies for English barristers . His father had promised him a legacy of £ 500 ( equivalent to £ 45 @,@ 000 today ) , and Druitt paid his membership fees with a loan from his father secured against the inheritance . He was called to the bar on 29 April 1885 , and set up a practice as a barrister and special pleader . 
 Druitt 's father died suddenly from a heart attack in September 1885 , leaving an estate valued at £ 16 @,@ 579 ( equivalent to £ 1 @,@ 615 @,@ 000 today ) . In a codicil , Druitt senior instructed his executors to deduct the money he had advanced to his son from the legacy of £ 500 . Montague received very little money , if any , from his father 's will , although he did receive some of his father 's personal possessions . Most of Dr Druitt 's estate went to his wife Ann , three unmarried daughters ( Georgiana , Edith and Ethel ) , and eldest son William . 
 Druitt rented legal chambers at 9 King 's Bench Walk in the Inner Temple . In the late Victorian era only the wealthy could afford legal action , and only one in eight qualified barristers was able to make a living from the law . While some of Druitt 's biographers claim his practice did not flourish , others suppose that it provided him with a relatively substantial income on the basis of his costly lease of chambers and the value of his estate at death . He is listed in the Law List of 1886 as active in the Western Circuit and Winchester Sessions , and for 1887 in the Western Circuit and Hampshire , Portsmouth and Southampton Assizes . 
 To supplement his income and help pay for his legal training , Druitt worked as an assistant schoolmaster at George Valentine 's boarding school , 9 Eliot Place , Blackheath , London , from 1880 . The school had a long and distinguished history ; Benjamin Disraeli had been a pupil there in the 1810s , and boys from the school had been playmates of a younger son of Queen Victoria , Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught , who as a boy in the 1860s had lived nearby at Greenwich Park . Druitt 's post came with accommodation in Eliot Place , and the long school holidays gave him time to study the law and to pursue his interest in cricket . 
 = = Cricket = = 
 In Dorset , Druitt played for the Kingston Park Cricket Club , and the Dorset County Cricket Club . He was particularly noted for his skill as a bowler . In 1882 and 1883 , he toured the West Country with a gentleman 's touring team called the Incogniti . One of Druitt 's fellow local players was Francis Lacey , the first man knighted for services to cricket . Druitt played for another wandering team , the Butterflies , on 14 June 1883 , when they drew against his alma mater Winchester College . The team included first @-@ class cricketers A. J. Webbe , J. G. Crowdy , John Frederick and Charles Seymour . 
 While working at Blackheath , Druitt joined the local cricket club , Blackheath Morden , and became the club 's treasurer . It was a well @-@ connected club : the President was politician Sir Charles Mills and one of its players was Stanley Christopherson , who later became President of the Marylebone Cricket Club . After the merger of the club with other local sports associations to form the Blackheath Cricket , Football and Lawn Tennis Company , Druitt took on the additional roles of company secretary and director . 
 The inaugural game of the new club was played against George Gibbons Hearne 's Eleven , which included many members of the famous cricketing Hearne family . Hearne 's team won by 21 runs . On 5 June 1886 , in a match between Blackheath and a gentleman 's touring team called the Band of Brothers , led by Lord Harris , Druitt bowled Harris for 14 and took three other wickets . Blackheath won by 178 runs . Two weeks later , he dismissed England batsman John Shuter , who was playing for Bexley Cricket Club , for a duck , and Blackheath won the game by 114 runs . The following year , Shuter returned to Blackheath with a Surrey County side that included Walter Read , William Lockwood , and Bobby Abel , whom Druitt bowled out for 56 . Surrey won by 147 runs . 
 On 26 May 1884 , Druitt was elected to the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) on the recommendation of his fellow Butterflies player Charles Seymour , who proposed him , and noted fielder Vernon Royle , who seconded his nomination . One of the minor matches he played for MCC was with England bowler William Attewell against Harrow School on 10 June 1886 . The MCC won by 57 runs . Druitt also played against MCC for Blackheath : on 23 July 1887 , he bowled out Dick <unk> for 28 runs , but he only made 5 runs before bowled out by Arnold Fothergill with a ball caught by <unk> . The MCC won by 52 runs . 
 In June 1888 , Lord Harris played twice for Blackheath with Druitt and Stanley Christopherson ; Blackheath won both matches easily , but Druitt was out of form and contributed neither runs nor wickets in either match . In August 1888 , Druitt played for the Gentlemen of Bournemouth against the Parsees cricket team during their tour of England , and took five wickets in the visitors ' first innings . Nevertheless , the Parsees won . On 8 September 1888 , the Blackheath Club played against the Christopherson brothers . Druitt was bowled out by Stanley Christopherson , who was playing with his brothers instead of for Blackheath , and in reply Druitt bowled out Christopherson . Blackheath won by 22 runs . 
 In addition to cricket , Druitt also played field hockey . 
 = = Death = = 
 On Friday 30 November 1888 , Druitt was dismissed from his post at the Blackheath boys ' school . The reason for his dismissal is unclear . One newspaper , quoting his brother William 's inquest testimony , reported that he was dismissed because he " had got into serious trouble " , but did not specify any further . In early December 1888 , he disappeared , and on 21 December 1888 the Blackheath Cricket Club 's minute book records that he was removed as treasurer and secretary in the belief that he had " gone abroad " . 
 On 31 December 1888 , his body was found floating in the River Thames , off Thornycroft 's torpedo works , Chiswick , by a waterman named Henry <unk> . Stones in Druitt 's pockets had kept his body submerged for about a month . He was in possession of a return train ticket to Hammersmith dated 1 December , a silver watch , a cheque for £ 50 and £ 16 in gold ( equivalent to £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 1 @,@ 600 today ) . It is not known why he should have carried such a large amount of money , but it could have been a final payment from the school . 
 Some modern authors suggest that Druitt was dismissed because he was a homosexual or pederast and that may have driven him to suicide . One speculation is that the money found on his body was going to be used for payment to a blackmailer . Others , however , think that there is no evidence of homosexuality and that his suicide was instead precipitated by an hereditary psychiatric illness . His mother suffered from depression and was institutionalised from July 1888 . She died in an asylum in Chiswick in 1890 . His maternal grandmother committed suicide while insane , his aunt attempted suicide . , and his eldest sister committed suicide in old age . A note written by Druitt and addressed to his brother William , who was a solicitor in Bournemouth , was found in Druitt 's room in Blackheath . It read , " Since Friday I felt that I was going to be like mother , and the best thing for me was to die . " 
 As was usual in the district , the inquest was held at the Lamb Tap public house , Chiswick , by the coroner Dr Thomas Bramah Diplock , on 2 January 1889 . The coroner 's jury concluded that Druitt had committed suicide by drowning while in an unsound state of mind . He was buried in Wimborne cemetery the next day . At probate , his estate was valued at £ 2 @,@ 600 ( equivalent to £ 261 @,@ 200 today ) . 
 It is not known why Druitt committed suicide in Chiswick . One suggested link is that one of his University friends , Thomas Seymour Tuke of the Tuke family , lived there . Tuke was a psychiatric doctor with whom Druitt played cricket , and Druitt 's mother was committed to Tuke 's asylum in 1890 . Another suggestion is that Druitt knew Harry Wilson , whose house , " The <unk> " , lay between Hammersmith station and Thornycroft 's wharf , where Druitt 's body was found . 
 = = Jack the Ripper suspect = = 
 On 31 August 1888 , Mary Ann Nichols was found murdered in the impoverished Whitechapel district in the East End of London , with her throat slashed . During September , three more women ( Annie Chapman on the 8th , and Elizabeth Stride and Catherine Eddowes on the 30th ) were found dead with their throats cut . On 9 November 1888 , the body of Mary Jane Kelly was discovered . Her throat had been severed down to the spine . In four of the cases the bodies were mutilated after death . The similarities between the crimes led to the supposition that they were committed by the same assailant , who was given the nickname " Jack the Ripper " . Despite an extensive police investigation into the five murders , the Ripper was never identified and the crimes remained unsolved . 
 Shortly after Kelly 's murder , stories that the Ripper had drowned in the Thames began to circulate . In February 1891 , the MP for West Dorset , Henry Richard Farquharson , announced that Jack the Ripper was " the son of a surgeon " who had committed suicide on the night of the last murder . Although Farquharson did not name his suspect , the description resembles Druitt . Farquharson lived 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the Druitt family and was part of the same social class . The Victorian journalist George R. Sims noted in his memoirs , The Mysteries of Modern London ( 1906 ) : " [ the Ripper 's ] body was found in the Thames after it had been in the river for about a month " . Similar comments were made by Sir John Moylan , Assistant Under @-@ Secretary of the Home Office : " [ the Ripper ] escaped justice by committing suicide at the end of 1888 " and Sir Basil Thomson , made Assistant Commissioner of the CID in 1913 : " [ the Ripper was ] an insane Russian doctor [ who ] escaped arrest by committing suicide in the Thames at the end of 1888 " . Neither Moylan nor Thomson was involved in the Ripper investigation . 
 Assistant Chief Constable Sir Melville Macnaghten named Druitt as a suspect in the case in a private handwritten memorandum of 23 February 1894 . Macnaghten highlighted the coincidence between Druitt 's disappearance and death shortly after the last of the five murders on 9 November 1888 , and claimed to have unspecified " private information " that left " little doubt " Druitt 's own family believed him to have been the murderer . Macnaghten 's memo was eventually discovered in his personal papers by his daughter , Lady <unk> , who showed them to British broadcaster Dan Farson . A slightly different abridged copy of the memo found in the Metropolitan Police archive was released to the public in 1966 . Farson first revealed Druitt 's initials " <unk> " in a television programme in November 1959 . 
 In 1961 , Farson investigated a claim by an Australian that Montague 's cousin , Lionel Druitt , had published a pamphlet in Australia entitled " The East End Murderer — I knew him " , but the claim has never been substantiated . Journalist Tom Cullen revealed Druitt 's full name in his 1965 book Autumn of Terror , which was followed by Farson 's 1972 book Jack the Ripper . Before the discovery of Macnaghten 's memo , books on the Ripper case , such as those written by Leonard Matters and Donald McCormick , poured scorn on stories that the Ripper had drowned in the Thames because they could not find a suicide that matched the description of the culprit . Cullen and Farson , however , supposed that Druitt was the Ripper on the basis of the Macnaghten memorandum , the near coincidence between Druitt 's death and the end of the murders , the closeness of Whitechapel to Druitt 's rooms in the Inner Temple , the insanity that was acknowledged by the inquest verdict of " unsound mind " , and the possibility that Druitt had absorbed the rudimentary anatomical skill supposedly shown by the Ripper through observing his father at work . 
 Since the publication of Cullen 's and Farson 's books , other Ripper authors have argued that their theories are based solely on flawed circumstantial evidence , and have attempted to provide Druitt with alibis for the times of the murders . On 1 September , the day after the murder of Nichols , Druitt was in Dorset playing cricket . On the day of Chapman 's murder , he played cricket in Blackheath , and the day after the murders of Stride and Eddowes , he was in the West Country defending a client in a court case . While writers Andrew <unk> and Tom Cullen argue that Druitt had the time and opportunity to travel by train between London and his cricket and legal engagements , or use his city chambers as a base from which to commit the murders , others dismiss that as " improbable " . Many experts believe that the killer was local to Whitechapel , whereas Druitt lived miles away on the other side of the River Thames . His chambers were within walking distance of Whitechapel , and his regular rail journey would almost certainly have brought him to Cannon Street station , a few minutes ' walk from the East End . It seems unlikely , however , that he could have travelled the distance in blood @-@ stained clothes unnoticed , and a clue discovered during the investigation into the murder of Catherine Eddowes ( a piece of her blood @-@ stained clothing ) indicates that the murderer travelled north @-@ east from where she was murdered , whereas Druitt 's chambers , and the railway station , were to the south @-@ west . 
 Macnaghten incorrectly described Druitt as a 41 @-@ year @-@ old doctor , and cited allegations that he " was sexually insane " without specifying the source or details of the allegations . Macnaghten did not join the force until 1889 , after the murder of Kelly and the death of Druitt , and was not involved in the investigation directly . Macnaghten 's memorandum named two other suspects ( " <unk> " and Michael <unk> ) and was written to refute allegations against a fourth , Thomas <unk> . The three Macnaghten suspects — Druitt , <unk> and <unk> — also match the descriptions of three unnamed suspects in Major Arthur Griffiths ' Mysteries of Police and Crime ( 1898 ) ; Griffiths was Inspector of Prisons at the time of the Ripper murders . 
 Inspector Frederick Abberline , who was the leading investigative officer in the case , appeared to dismiss Druitt as a suspect on the basis that the only evidence against him was the coincidental timing of his suicide shortly after the fifth murder . Other officials involved in the Ripper case , Metropolitan Police Commissioner James Monro and pathologist Thomas Bond , believed that the murder of Alice McKenzie on 17 July 1889 , seven months after Druitt 's death , was committed by the same culprit as the earlier murders . The inclusion of McKenzie among the Ripper 's victims was contested by Abberline and Macnaghten among others , but if she was one of his victims , then Druitt clearly could not be the Ripper . Another murder occasionally included among the Ripper cases is that of Martha Tabram , who was viciously stabbed to death on 7 August 1888 . Her death coincided with the middle of Bournemouth Cricket Week , 4 – 11 August , in which Druitt was heavily involved , and was during the school holidays which Druitt spent in Dorset . In the words of one of his biographers , " It scarcely left time for a 200 @-@ mile round dash to fit in a murder . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Druitt was a favoured suspect in the Jack the Ripper crimes throughout the 1960s , until the advent of theories in the 1970s that the murders were not the work of a single serial killer but the result of a conspiracy involving the British royal family and Freemasonry . These theories , widely condemned as ridiculous , implicate Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale , his tutor James Stephen , and their doctor Sir William Gull to varying degrees . One version of the conspiracy promoted by Stephen Knight in his 1976 book Jack the Ripper : The Final Solution supposed that Druitt was a scapegoat , chosen by officialdom to take the blame for the murders . Martin Howells and Keith Skinner followed the same line in their 1987 book The Ripper Legacy , which was panned by one critic as being based on " no evidence whatever " . 
 The theories attempted to link Druitt with Clarence , Gull and Stephen through a network of mutual acquaintances and possible connections . Reginald Acland , the brother of Gull 's son @-@ in @-@ law , had legal chambers in King 's Bench Walk near Druitt 's , as did Harry Stephen , who was James Stephen 's brother . Harry Stephen was good friends with Harry Wilson , who had a house in Chiswick , " The <unk> " , near to where Druitt 's body was found . Wilson and James Stephen were close friends of Clarence , and were both members of an exclusive society called the Cambridge Apostles . As a schoolboy , Druitt had played cricket against two of Wilson 's friends , Kynaston Studd and Henry Goodhart , who was also one of the Apostles . Another potential connection between Druitt and Wilson is through John Henry Lonsdale . Lonsdale 's name and Blackheath address are written in a diary belonging to Wilson now in the possession of Trinity College , Cambridge . Lonsdale 's address is a few yards from the school at which Druitt worked and lived , and Lonsdale had been a barrister and had also rented legal chambers in King 's Bench Walk . In 1887 , Lonsdale entered the church and was assigned as curate to Wimborne Minster , where the Druitt family worshiped . Lonsdale and Macnaghten were classmates at Eton , and so theorists argue that Lonsdale might have been in a position to provide " private information " to Macnaghten regarding Druitt . The connections between the Apostles and Druitt led to the suggestion that he was part of the same social set . Druitt , his mother , and his sister Georgiana , were invited to a ball in honour of Clarence at the home of Lord Wimborne on 17 December 1888 , although they did not attend because by that time Montague was dead , his mother was in an asylum , and his sister was expecting her second child . Clarence , Stephen , Wilson , Studd , and Goodhart are suggested to have been homosexual , although this is contested by historians . John Wilding 's 1993 book Jack the Ripper Revealed used the connections between Druitt and Stephen to propose that they committed the crimes together , but reviewers considered it an " imaginative tale ... most questionable " , an " exercise in ingenuity rather than ... fact " , and " lack [ ing ] evidential support " . 
 In his 2005 and 2006 biographies of Druitt , D. J. Leighton concluded that Druitt was innocent , but repeated some of Knight 's and Wilding 's discredited claims . Leighton suggested that Druitt could have been murdered , either out of greed by his elder brother William or , as previously suggested by Howells and Skinner , out of fear of exposure by Harry Wilson 's homosexual cronies . The propensity of theorists to associate Ripper suspects with homosexuality has led scholars to assume that such notions are based on homophobia rather than evidence . 
 The accusations against Clarence , Stephen , Gull and Druitt also draw on cultural perceptions of a decadent ruling class , and depict a high @-@ born murderer or murderers preying on lower @-@ class victims . Because Druitt and the other upper @-@ middle @-@ class and aristocratic Ripper suspects were wealthy , there is more biographical material on them than on the residents of the Whitechapel slums . Consequently , it is easier for writers to construct solutions based on a wealthy culprit rather than one involving a Whitechapel resident . There is no direct evidence against Druitt , and since the 1970s , the number of Jack the Ripper suspects has continued to grow , with the result that there are now over 100 different theories about the Ripper 's identity . 
 In fiction , Druitt is depicted as the murderer in the musical Jack the Ripper by Ron Pember and Denis de Marne . In John Gardner 's Sherlock Holmes story The Revenge of Moriarty , Professor Moriarty 's criminal exploits are hampered by increased police activity as a result of the Jack the Ripper murders . He discovers that Druitt is the murderer and so fakes his suicide in the hope that the police will lose interest once the murders cease . 
 = French battleship Brennus = 
 Brennus was the first pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the French Navy built in the late 19th century . She was laid down in January 1889 , launched in October 1891 , and completed in 1896 . Her design was unique and departed from earlier ironclad battleship designs by introducing a number of innovations . These included a main battery of heavy guns mounted on the centerline and the first use of Belleville boilers . She formed the basis for several subsequent designs , beginning with Charles Martel . 
 Brennus spent the majority of her career in the Mediterranean Squadron , and she served as its flagship early in her career . In 1900 , she accidentally rammed and sank the destroyer <unk> . As newer battleships were commissioned into the fleet , Brennus was relegated to the Reserve Squadron in the early 1900s . By the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , her old age and poor condition prevented her from seeing action . She was ultimately stricken from the naval register in 1919 and sold for scrap three years later . 
 = = Design = = 
 An earlier vessel , also named Brennus , was laid down in 1884 and cancelled under the tenure of Admiral Théophile Aube . The vessel , along with a sister ship named Charles Martel , was a modified version of the Marceau @-@ class ironclad battleships . After Aube 's retirement , the plans for the ships were reworked entirely for the ships actually completed , though they are sometimes conflated with the earlier , cancelled vessels . This confusion may be a result of the same shipyard working on both of the ships named Brennus , along with use of material assembled for the first vessel to build the second . The two pairs of ships were , nevertheless , distinct vessels . The second Brennus was ordered in 1888 . 
 Brennus was the first pre @-@ dreadnought style battleship built in the French Navy ; the previous Magenta @-@ class ships were barbette ships , a type of ironclad battleship . Brennus formed the basis for the subsequent group of five broadly similar battleships built to the same design specifications , begun with Charles Martel , though they reverted to the armament layout of the earlier <unk> which saw the main guns distributed in single turrets in a lozenge pattern . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Brennus was 110 @.@ 29 meters ( 361 ft 10 in ) long between perpendiculars , and had a beam of 20 @.@ 4 m ( 66 ft 11 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 28 m ( 27 ft 2 in ) . She had a displacement of 11 @,@ 190 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 013 long tons ) . As built , the ship was significantly overweight , and her draft was .38 m ( 1 ft 3 in ) greater than intended , without a full load of ammunition . Most of her armored belt was submerged . Her superstructure had to be cut down and her mainmast , intended to be a fighting mast , had to be replaced with a lighter pole mast . Unlike most battleships of the period , she was built without a ram bow . Brennus had a crew of 673 officers and enlisted men . 
 Brennus had two vertical triple expansion engines each driving a single screw , with steam supplied by thirty @-@ two Belleville water @-@ tube boilers . The decision to fit Brennus with water @-@ tube boilers was made in 1887 , and she was the first large ship to be equipped with them . Her propulsion system was rated at 13 @,@ 900 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 400 kW ) , which allowed the ship to steam at a speed of 17 @.@ 5 to 18 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 to 33 @.@ 3 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 7 mph ) . As built , she could carry 600 t ( 590 long tons ; 660 short tons ) of coal , though additional space allowed for up to 980 t ( 960 long tons ; 1 @,@ 080 short tons ) in total . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Brennus 's main armament consisted of three Canon de 340 mm / 42 Modèle 1887 guns , two in a twin turret forward , and the third in a single turret aft . Her secondary armament consisted of ten Canon de 164 mm Modèle 1893 guns , four of which were mounted in single turrets amidships ; the other six were located directly underneath them in casemates . The ship also carried four 9 @-@ pounder quick @-@ firing guns , fourteen 3 @-@ pounders , and eight 1 @-@ pounder guns , and six 1 @-@ pounder revolver cannons . Her armament suite was rounded out by four above @-@ water 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all of which were later removed . 
 The ship 's armor was constructed with both steel and compound armor . The main belt was 460 mm ( 18 in ) thick amidships , and tapered down to 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) at the lower edge . On either end of the central citadel , the belt was reduced to 305 mm at the waterline and 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on the lower edge ; the belt extended for the entire length of the hull . Above the belt was 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick side armor . The main battery guns were protected with a maximum thickness of 460 mm of armor , and the secondary turrets had 100 mm thick sides . The main armored deck was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . The conning tower had 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service career = = 
 Brennus was laid down at the Lorient dockyard in January 1889 and launched on 17 October 1891 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed in 1896 and she was commissioned into the French Navy . In 1897 , the French Navy issued a new doctrine for gunnery control . During gunnery training exercises to test the new system , Brennus and the ironclad battleships Neptune and Marceau got 26 % hits at a range of 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 to 4 @,@ 400 yd ) . Their success prompted the Navy to make the method the standard for the fleet in February 1898 . 
 In July and August 1900 , the French fleet conducted maneuvers in the English Channel . At the time , Brennus was the flagship of the Mediterranean Squadron , under Vice Admiral Fournier . On 10 August off Cape St. Vincent , while returning from the maneuvers , she collided with the destroyer <unk> . The destroyer quickly sank , and only fourteen men from her crew of 50 were rescued . By 1903 , Brennus was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with three other battleships and three armored cruisers . There , she flew the flag of Rear Admiral Besson during the annual summer maneuvers in July – August 1903 . 
 Brennus continued on in the Reserve Squadron through 1907 , during which time she was again the flagship of Vice Admiral Fournier . Fournier was the commander in chief of the annual summer maneuvers , which began in late June and concluded on 4 August 1907 . The following year , the Mediterranean Fleet was reorganized into three squadrons ; Brennus again repeated her role as flagship , of the Third Squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> . Due to her age and condition by the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Brennus was not mobilized and did not see action . Brennus was ultimately stricken from the naval register in 1919 and sold for scrapping in 1922 . 
 = Will Middlebrooks = 
 William " Will " Scott Middlebrooks ( born September 9 , 1988 ) is an American professional baseball third baseman for the Milwaukee Brewers of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He made his MLB debut with the Boston Red Sox on May 2 , 2012 and played with them through 2014 . He also played for the San Diego Padres . 
 A fifth round draft pick in the 2007 MLB draft out of Liberty @-@ Eylau High School in Texarkana , Texas , Middlebrooks signed with the Red Sox for $ 925 @,@ 000 , bypassing his commitment to Texas A & M University . Middlebrooks was originally a shortstop , but the Red Sox converted him into a third baseman in the minor leagues . He represented the United States in the 2011 All @-@ Star Futures Game . Following Middlebrooks ' emergence as the Red Sox ' starting third baseman in 2012 , the organization traded former All @-@ Star Kevin Youkilis . After struggles in the 2013 and 2014 seasons , the Red Sox traded Middlebrooks to the San Diego Padres . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Middlebrooks attended Liberty @-@ Eylau High School in Texarkana , Texas . Middlebrooks played shortstop and pitched for the high school baseball team . As a pitcher , he could reach 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) with his fastball . Liberty @-@ Eylau won the Class 3A state championship in 2006 , Middlebrooks ' junior season . In his senior season , Middlebrooks had a .555 batting average with 22 stolen bases and 48 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 38 games , and a 13 @-@ 0 win – loss record as a pitcher . He was named to the Class 3A All @-@ State First Team and Class 3A Player of the Year by the Texas Sports Writers Association . 
 In addition to baseball , Middlebrooks played American football and basketball in high school . A quarterback , placekicker and punter , he played on the school 's football team , which also featured LaMichael James . He was named an All @-@ State punter . Middlebrooks admits that he preferred football , until he realized during his junior year that he had the opportunity to be selected in the Major League Baseball Draft . In November 2006 , he committed to attend Texas A & M University on a full scholarship to play baseball and football for the Texas A & M Aggies . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Boston Red Sox = = = 
 = = = = Minor Leagues = = = = 
 Middlebrooks had been projected as a first round talent in the 2007 Major League Baseball draft . However , the belief that he would follow through with his scholarship to Texas A & M led Middlebrooks to fall in the draft . The Boston Red Sox drafted Middlebrooks in the fifth round of the draft , selecting him as a shortstop , rather than as a pitcher . He received a $ 925 @,@ 000 signing bonus to bypass his commitment to Texas A & M. 
 Middlebrooks made his professional debut in 2008 with the Lowell Spinners of the Class A @-@ Short Season New York – Penn League , where he batted .254 with one home run . He described himself as developmentally behind other players at his level because of the time he had devoted to football . Initially a shortstop , Middlebrooks made the transition to third base as he added muscle , increasing from 190 pounds ( 86 kg ) at the time he was drafted to 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) . 
 In 2009 , Middlebrooks played for the Greenville Drive of the Class A South Atlantic League , where he batted .265 with seven home runs and 57 RBIs . He was promoted to the Salem Red Sox of the Class A @-@ Advanced Carolina League in 2010 and responded by batting .276 with 12 home runs and 70 RBIs . Middlebrooks began the 2011 season playing for the Portland Sea Dogs of the Class AA Eastern League . He played in the Eastern League All @-@ Star Game , hitting a double in the game . Middlebrooks also participated in the 2011 All @-@ Star Futures Game , starting at third base and going 1 @-@ for @-@ 2 . 
 Through August 2011 , Middlebrooks batted .306 with 18 home runs and 80 RBIs for Portland , at which point he was promoted to the Pawtucket Red Sox of the Class AAA International League . Joe McDonald of ESPN.com called Middlebrooks " Boston 's likely [ third baseman ] of the future " upon his promotion from Portland to Pawtucket . He hit <unk> in 16 games with Pawtucket to close out the 2011 season . 
 After the 2011 season , the Red Sox assigned Middlebrooks to the Arizona Fall League , where he hit four home runs in 13 games and was named to the Rising Stars Game . In November 2011 , Middlebrooks , Che @-@ <unk> Lin and Drake Britton were added to the Red Sox 40 @-@ man roster to prevent them from being selected in the Rule 5 draft . 
 Heading into the 2012 season , Baseball America rated Middlebrooks as the Red Sox ' best prospect and 51st best prospect overall . Starting the 2012 season with Pawtucket , Middlebrooks hit .333 with nine home runs and 27 RBIs in 24 games and 93 at @-@ bats . Meanwhile , Red Sox starting third baseman Kevin Youkilis struggled , opening the 2012 season batting .219 . As Youkilis struggled , Middlebrooks appeared to be ready for a promotion . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 The Red Sox promoted Middlebrooks to the major leagues on May 2 , 2012 , when Youkilis was placed on the disabled list . He made his MLB debut that day , drawing a walk in his first plate appearance and recording two hits . On May 6 , he hit a game @-@ tying grand slam for his first major league home run in what was eventually a 17 @-@ inning loss to the Baltimore Orioles . In his first 41 games with the Red Sox , Middlebrooks batted .326 with nine home runs and 34 RBIs , the most RBIs to start a career for a member of the Red Sox since Walt Dropo recorded 37 RBIs in his first 41 career games dating back to 1949 – 50 . 
 Bobby Valentine , the manager of the Red Sox , initially alternated between Middlebrooks and Youkilis at third base . However , Middlebrooks ' emergence led the Red Sox to trade Youkilis on June 23 . Middlebrooks was named American League Player of the Week for the week ending June 24 . Middlebrooks broke a bone in his right hand when he was hit by a pitch in a game against the Cleveland Indians on August 10 , ending his rookie season with a .288 batting average , 15 home runs and 54 RBIs in 75 games played . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 On April 7 , 2013 , Middlebrooks hit three home runs in a 13 – 0 Red Sox victory over the Toronto Blue Jays in Toronto . Two of his home runs were hit off of pitcher R.A. Dickey . However , he lost playing time to José Iglesias after he strained his back in May . After he batted .192 on the season , the Red Sox optioned Middlebrooks to Pawtucket on June 25 , 2013 . The Red Sox opted not to promote Middlebrooks when they traded Iglesias on July 30 , using Brandon Snyder and Brock Holt instead . After Middlebrooks made adjustments , the Red Sox recalled him from Pawtucket on August 10 . In Game 3 of the 2013 World Series , Middlebrooks was ruled to have obstructed future teammate Allen Craig after diving for an errant throw at third base . The play awarded Craig the game winning run for the Cardinals . The Red Sox won the series over the Cardinals . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 In 2014 , Middlebrooks missed 19 games in April due to a strained calf . In May , he broke a finger , and again went on the disabled list . He had been struggling at the plate to begin the season hitting just .197 with two home runs in 21 games . As he rehabilitated his injury in the minor leagues , Middlebrooks began playing in the outfield , due to the Red Sox ' signing of Stephen Drew . After the Red Sox traded Drew , they hoped that Middlebrooks would improve his performance with more regular playing time . Middlebrooks continued to miss time later in the season due to lingering effects of the hand injury . He finished the 2014 season with a .191 average in 215 at @-@ bats . 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 During the 2014 – 15 offseason , the Red Sox signed free agent Pablo Sandoval , a third baseman . On December 19 , 2014 , the Red Sox traded Middlebrooks to the San Diego Padres for Ryan Hanigan , whom the Padres had acquired earlier the same day . Middlebrooks competed with Yangervis Solarte to be the Padres ' starting third baseman in spring training . By July , the Padres began to use Middlebrooks at shortstop as Solarte received more playing time at third base . With Middlebrooks batting .212 on the season , the Padres optioned Middlebrooks to the El Paso Chihuahuas of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) on July 22 . On December 2 , 2015 , the Padres non @-@ tendered Middlebrooks , making him a free agent . 
 = = = Milwaukee Brewers = = = 
 On December 15 , 2015 , Middlebrooks agreed to a minor league contract with an invitation to spring training with the Milwaukee Brewers . The Brewers assigned him to the Colorado Springs Sky Sox of the PCL to start the 2016 season . Middlebrooks batted .282 with 10 home runs and 47 RBIs for Colorado Springs , before he was promoted to the major leagues on July 4 . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Middlebrooks is an athletic defensive player . He hits for power and is also credited for his contact skills , though he is not considered the most patient hitter . His throwing arm is well regarded , and his baserunning is rated as average . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Middlebrooks grew up in Texarkana , Texas . His father , Tom , serves as the head baseball coach and assistant football coach at Liberty @-@ Eylau , and his younger sister , Lacey , played softball for the University of Tulsa . She is now an assistant softball coach at the University at Buffalo . Middlebrooks ' mother , Julie , and youngest sister , Mary , are artists ; Julie is an art teacher . He has been friends with Ryan Mallett of the Baltimore Ravens since they met in a football camp after Mallett moved to the Texarkana area in the seventh grade . 
 Middlebrooks was engaged to Ann Lux , a former Dallas Cowboys cheerleader , however they broke up in August 2012 . They are from the same hometown and have known each other since age 12 . Later in 2012 , Middlebrooks began dating Jenny Dell , a reporter who covered the Red Sox for the New England Sports Network . They became engaged in July 2014 , and were married in February 2016 . 
 = USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) = 
 USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) ( " Mighty Mo " or " Big Mo " ) is a United States Navy Iowa @-@ class battleship and was the third ship of the U.S. Navy to be named in honor of the U.S. state of Missouri . Missouri was the last battleship commissioned by the United States and was best remembered as the site of the surrender of the Empire of Japan which ended World War II . 
 Missouri was ordered in 1940 and commissioned in June 1944 . In the Pacific Theater of World War II she fought in the battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa and shelled the Japanese home islands , and she fought in the Korean War from 1950 to 1953 . She was decommissioned in 1955 into the United States Navy reserve fleets ( the " Mothball Fleet " ) , but reactivated and modernized in 1984 as part of the 600 @-@ ship Navy plan , and provided fire support during Operation Desert Storm in January / February 1991 . 
 Missouri received a total of 11 battle stars for service in World War II , Korea , and the Persian Gulf , and was finally decommissioned on 31 March 1992 , but remained on the Naval Vessel Register until her name was struck in January 1995 . In 1998 , she was donated to the USS Missouri Memorial Association and became a museum ship at Pearl Harbor . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Missouri was one of the Iowa @-@ class " fast battleship " designs planned in 1938 by the Preliminary Design Branch at the Bureau of Construction and Repair . She was laid down at the Brooklyn Navy Yard on 6 January 1941 , launched on 29 January 1944 and commissioned on 11 June with Captain William Callaghan in command . The ship was the third of the Iowa class , but the fourth and final Iowa @-@ class ship commissioned by the U.S. Navy . The ship was christened at her launching by Mary Margaret Truman , daughter of Harry S. Truman , then a United States Senator from Missouri . 
 Missouri 's main battery consisted of nine 16 in ( 406 mm ) / 50 cal Mark 7 guns , which could fire 2 @,@ 700 lb ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) armor @-@ piercing shells some 20 mi ( 32 @.@ 2 km ) . Her secondary battery consisted of twenty 5 in ( 127 mm ) / 38 cal guns in twin turrets , with a range of about 10 mi ( 16 km ) . With the advent of air power and the need to gain and maintain air superiority came a need to protect the growing fleet of allied aircraft carriers ; to this end , Missouri was fitted with an array of Oerlikon 20 mm and Bofors 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns to defend allied carriers from enemy airstrikes . When reactivated in 1984 Missouri had her 20 mm and 40 mm AA guns removed , and was outfitted with Phalanx CIWS mounts for protection against enemy missiles and aircraft , and Armored Box Launchers and Quad Cell Launchers designed to fire Tomahawk missiles and Harpoon missiles , respectively . 
 Missouri was the last U.S. battleship to be completed . Wisconsin , the highest @-@ numbered U.S. battleship built , was completed before Missouri ; BB @-@ 65 to BB @-@ 71 were ordered but cancelled . 
 = = World War II ( 1944 – 1945 ) = = 
 = = = Shakedown and service with Task Force 58 , Admiral Mitscher = = = 
 After trials off New York and shakedown and battle practice in the Chesapeake Bay , Missouri departed Norfolk , Virginia on 11 November 1944 , transited the Panama Canal on 18 November and steamed to San Francisco for final fitting out as fleet flagship . She stood out of San Francisco Bay on 14 December and arrived at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii on 24 December 1944 . She departed Hawaii on 2 January 1945 and arrived in Ulithi , West Caroline Islands on 13 January . There she was temporary headquarters ship for Vice Admiral Marc A. Mitscher . The battleship put to sea on 27 January to serve in the screen of the Lexington carrier task group of Mitscher 's TF 58 , and on 16 February the task force 's aircraft carriers launched the first naval air strikes against Japan since the famed Doolittle raid , which had been launched from the carrier Hornet in April 1942 . 
 Missouri then steamed with the carriers to Iwo Jima where her main guns provided direct and continuous support to the invasion landings begun on 19 February . After TF 58 returned to Ulithi on 5 March , Missouri was assigned to the Yorktown carrier task group . On 14 March , Missouri departed Ulithi in the screen of the fast carriers and steamed to the Japanese mainland . During strikes against targets along the coast of the Inland Sea of Japan beginning on 18 March , Missouri shot down four Japanese aircraft . 
 Raids against airfields and naval bases near the Inland Sea and southwestern Honshū continued . When the carrier Franklin incurred battle damage , the Missouri 's carrier task group provided cover for the Franklin 's retirement toward Ulithi until 22 March , then set course for pre @-@ invasion strikes and bombardment of Okinawa . 
 Missouri joined the fast battleships of TF 58 in bombarding the southeast coast of Okinawa on 24 March , an action intended to draw enemy strength from the west coast beaches that would be the actual site of invasion landings . Missouri rejoined the screen of the carriers as Marine and Army units stormed the shores of Okinawa on the morning of 1 April . An attack by Japanese forces was repulsed successfully . 
 On 11 April , a low @-@ flying kamikaze , although fired upon , crashed on Missouri 's starboard side , just below her main deck level . The starboard wing of the plane was thrown far forward , starting a gasoline fire at 5 in ( 127 mm ) Gun Mount No. 3 . The battleship suffered only superficial damage , and the fire was brought quickly under control . The remains of the pilot were recovered on board the ship just aft of one of the 40 mm gun tubs . Captain Callaghan decided that the young Japanese pilot had done his job to the best of his ability , and with honor , so he should be given a military funeral . The following day he was buried at sea with military honors . 
 About 23 : 05 on 17 April , Missouri detected an enemy submarine 12 mi ( 19 km ) from her formation . Her report set off a hunter @-@ killer operation by the light carrier Bataan and four destroyers , which sank the Japanese submarine I @-@ 56 . 
 Missouri was detached from the carrier task force off Okinawa on 5 May and sailed for Ulithi . During the Okinawa campaign she had shot down five enemy planes , assisted in the destruction of six others , and scored one probable kill . She helped repel 12 daylight attacks of enemy raiders and fought off four night attacks on her carrier task group . Her shore bombardment destroyed several gun emplacements and many other military , governmental , and industrial structures . 
 = = = Service with the Third Fleet , Admiral Halsey = = = 
 Missouri arrived at Ulithi on 9 May and then proceeded to Apra Harbor , Guam , arriving on 18 May . USS Louisville delivered Bull Halsey ’ s 50 officers and 100 staff to USS Missouri BB 63 at Guam from Man of War . That afternoon Admiral William F. Halsey , Jr . , Commander Third Fleet , brought his command into the Missouri . She passed out of the harbor on 21 May , and by 27 May was again conducting shore bombardment against Japanese positions on Okinawa . Missouri led the 3rd Fleet in strikes on airfields and installations on Kyūshū on 2 – 3 June . She rode out a fierce storm on 5 and 6 June that wrenched the bow off the cruiser Pittsburgh . Some topside fittings were smashed , but Missouri suffered no major damage . Her fleet again struck Kyūshū on 8 June , then hit hard in a coordinated air @-@ surface bombardment before retiring towards Leyte . She arrived at San Pedro Bay , Leyte on 13 June , after almost three months of continuous operations in support of the Okinawa campaign . 
 Here she rejoined the powerful 3rd Fleet in strikes at the heart of Japan from within its home waters . The fleet set a northerly course on 8 July to approach the Japanese main island , Honshū . Raids took Tokyo by surprise on 10 July , followed by more devastation at the juncture of Honshū and Hokkaidō , the second @-@ largest Japanese island , on 13 – 14 July . For the first time , naval gunfire destroyed a major installation within the home islands when Missouri joined in a shore bombardment on 15 July that severely damaged the Nihon Steel Co. and the Wanishi Ironworks at Muroran , Hokkaido . 
 During the nights of 17 and 18 July , Missouri bombarded industrial targets in Honshū . Inland Sea aerial strikes continued through 25 July , and Missouri guarded the carriers as they attacked the Japanese home islands . 
 = = = Signing of the Japanese Instrument of Surrender = = = 
 Strikes on Hokkaidō and northern Honshū resumed on 9 August , the day the second atomic bomb was dropped . 
 After the Japanese agreed to surrender , Admiral Sir Bruce Fraser of the Royal Navy , the Commander of the British Pacific Fleet , boarded Missouri on 16 August and conferred the honour of Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire upon Admiral Halsey . Missouri transferred a landing party of 200 officers and men to the battleship Iowa for temporary duty with the initial occupation force for Tokyo on 21 August . Missouri herself entered Tokyo Bay early on 29 August to prepare for the signing by Japan of the official instrument of surrender . 
 High @-@ ranking military officials of all the Allied Powers were received on board on 2 September , including Chinese General Hsu Yung @-@ Ch 'ang , British Admiral @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Fleet Sir Bruce Fraser , Soviet Lieutenant @-@ General Kuzma Nikolaevich <unk> , Australian General Sir Thomas Blamey , Canadian Colonel Lawrence Moore Cosgrave , French Général d 'Armée Philippe Leclerc de <unk> , Dutch Vice Admiral Conrad Emil Lambert Helfrich , and New Zealand Air Vice Marshal Leonard M. <unk> . 
 Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz boarded shortly after 0800 , and General of the Army Douglas MacArthur , the Supreme Commander for the Allies , came on board at <unk> . The Japanese representatives , headed by Foreign Minister Mamoru Shigemitsu , arrived at <unk> . At 0902 , General MacArthur stepped before a battery of microphones and opened the 23 @-@ minute surrender ceremony to the waiting world by stating , " It is my earnest hope — indeed the hope of all mankind — that from this solemn occasion a better world shall emerge out of the blood and carnage of the past , a world founded upon faith and understanding , a world dedicated to the dignity of man and the fulfillment of his most cherished wish for freedom , tolerance , and justice . " 
 During the surrender ceremony , the deck of Missouri was decorated with a 31 @-@ star American flag that had been taken ashore by Commodore Matthew Perry in 1853 after his squadron of " Black Ships " sailed into Tokyo Bay to force the opening of Japan 's ports to foreign trade . This flag was actually displayed with the reverse side showing , i.e. , stars in the upper right corner : the historic flag was so fragile that the conservator at the Naval Academy Museum had sewn a protective linen backing to one side to help secure the fabric from deteriorating , leaving its " wrong side " visible . The flag was displayed in a wood @-@ framed case secured to the bulkhead overlooking the surrender ceremony . Another U.S. flag was raised and flown during the occasion , a flag that some sources have indicated was in fact that flag which had flown over the U.S. Capitol on 7 December 1941 . This is not true ; it was a flag taken from the ship 's stock , according to Missouri 's Commanding Officer , Captain Stuart " Sunshine " Murray , and it was " ... just a plain ordinary GI @-@ issue flag " . 
 By 09 : 30 the Japanese emissaries had departed . In the afternoon of 5 September , Admiral Halsey transferred his flag to the battleship South Dakota , and early the next day Missouri departed Tokyo Bay . As part of the ongoing Operation Magic Carpet she received homeward bound passengers at Guam , then sailed unescorted for Hawaii . She arrived at Pearl Harbor on 20 September and flew Admiral Nimitz 's flag on the afternoon of 28 September for a reception . 
 = = Post @-@ war ( 1946 – 1950 ) = = 
 The next day , Missouri departed Pearl Harbor bound for the eastern seaboard of the United States . She reached New York City on 23 October and hoisted the flag of Atlantic Fleet commander Admiral Jonas Ingram . Four days later , Missouri boomed out a 21 @-@ gun salute as President Truman boarded for Navy Day ceremonies . 
 After an overhaul in the New York Naval Shipyard and a training cruise to Cuba , Missouri returned to New York . During the afternoon of 21 March 1946 , she received the remains of the Turkish Ambassador to the United States , <unk> Ertegün . She departed on 22 March for Gibraltar , and on 5 April anchored in the Bosphorus off Istanbul . She rendered full honors , including the firing of 19 @-@ gun salutes during the transfer of the remains of the late ambassador and again during the funeral ashore . 
 Missouri departed Istanbul on 9 April and entered Phaleron Bay , Piraeus , Greece , the following day for an overwhelming welcome by Greek government officials and anti @-@ communist citizens . Greece had become the scene of a civil war between the communist World War II resistance movement and the returning Greek government @-@ in @-@ exile . The United States saw this as an important test case for its new doctrine of containment of the Soviet Union . The Soviets were also pushing for concessions in the Dodecanese to be included in the peace treaty with Italy and for access through the Dardanelles strait between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean . The voyage of Missouri to the eastern Mediterranean symbolized America 's strategic commitment to the region . News media proclaimed her a symbol of U.S. interest in preserving both nations ' independence . 
 Missouri departed Piraeus on 26 April , touching at Algiers and Tangiers before arriving at Norfolk on 9 May . She departed for Culebra Island on 12 May to join Admiral Mitscher 's 8th Fleet in the Navy 's first large @-@ scale postwar Atlantic training maneuvers . The battleship returned to New York City on 27 May , and spent the next year steaming Atlantic coastal waters north to the Davis Strait and south to the Caribbean on various Atlantic command training exercises . On 13 December , during a target practice exercise in the North Atlantic , a star shell accidentally struck the battleship , but without causing injuries . 
 Missouri arrived at Rio de Janeiro on 30 August 1947 for the Inter @-@ American Conference for the Maintenance of Hemisphere Peace and Security . President Truman boarded on 2 September to celebrate the signing of the Rio Treaty , which broadened the Monroe Doctrine by stipulating that an attack on any one of the signatory American countries would be considered an attack on all . 
 The Truman family boarded Missouri on 7 September 1947 to return to the United States and disembarked at Norfolk on 19 September . Her overhaul in New York — which lasted from 23 September to 10 March 1948 — was followed by refresher training at Guantanamo Bay . The summer of 1948 was devoted to midshipman and reserve training cruises . Also in 1948 , the Big Mo became the first battleship to host a helicopter detachment , operating two Sikorsky HO3S @-@ 1 machines for utility and rescue work . The battleship departed Norfolk on 1 November 1948 for a second three @-@ week Arctic cold @-@ weather training cruise to the Davis Strait . During the next two years , Missouri participated in Atlantic command exercises from the New England coast to the Caribbean , alternated with two midshipman summer training cruises . She was overhauled at Norfolk Naval Shipyard from 23 September 1949 to 17 January 1950 . 
 Throughout the latter half of the 1940s , the various service branches of the United States had been reducing their inventories from their World War II levels . For the Navy , this resulted in several vessels of various types being decommissioned and either sold for scrap or placed in one of the various United States Navy reserve fleets scattered along the East and West Coast of the United States . As part of this contraction , three of the Iowa @-@ class battleships had been de @-@ activated and decommissioned ; however , President Truman refused to allow Missouri to be decommissioned . Against the advice of Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson , Secretary of the Navy John L. Sullivan , and Chief of Naval Operations Louis E. Denfeld , Truman ordered Missouri to be maintained with the active fleet partly because of his fondness for the battleship and partly because the battleship had been christened by his daughter Margaret Truman . 
 Then the only U.S. battleship in commission , Missouri was proceeding seaward on a training mission from Hampton Roads early on 17 January 1950 when she ran aground 1 @.@ 6 mi ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) from Thimble Shoal Light , near Old Point Comfort . She hit shoal water a distance of three ship @-@ lengths from the main channel . Lifted some 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above waterline , she stuck hard and fast . With the aid of tugboats , pontoons , and a rising tide , she was refloated on 1 February 1950 and repaired . 
 = = The Korean War ( 1950 – 1953 ) = = 
 In 1950 , the Korean War broke out , prompting the United States to intervene in the name of the United Nations . President Truman was caught off guard when the invasion struck , but quickly ordered U.S. forces stationed in Japan into South Korea . Truman also sent U.S.-based troops , tanks , fighter and bomber aircraft , and a strong naval force to Korea to support the Republic of Korea . As part of the naval mobilization Missouri was called up from the Atlantic Fleet and dispatched from Norfolk on 19 August to support UN forces on the Korean peninsula . 
 Missouri arrived just west of Kyūshū on 14 September , where she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Allan Edward Smith . The first American battleship to reach Korean waters , she bombarded Samchok on 15 September 1950 in an attempt to divert troops and attention from the Incheon landings . This was the first time since World War II that Missouri had fired her guns in anger , and in company with the cruiser Helena and two destroyers , she helped prepare the way for the U.S. Eighth Army offensive . 
 Missouri arrived at Incheon on 19 September , and on 10 October became flagship of Rear Admiral J. M. Higgins , commander , Cruiser Division 5 ( CruDiv 5 ) . She arrived at Sasebo on 14 October , where she became flagship of Vice Admiral A. D. Struble , Commander , 7th Fleet . After screening the aircraft carrier Valley Forge along the east coast of Korea , she conducted bombardment missions from 12 to 26 October in the Chongjin and Tanchon areas , and at Wonsan where she again screened carriers eastward of Wonsan . 
 MacArthur 's amphibious landings at Incheon had severed the North Korean Army ’ s supply lines ; as a result , North Korea ’ s army had begun a lengthy retreat from South Korea into North Korea . This retreat was closely monitored by the Peoples Republic of China ( PRC ) , out of fear that the UN offensive against Korea would create a US @-@ backed enemy on China ’ s border , and out of concern that the UN offensive in Korea could evolve into a UN war against China . The latter of these two threats had already manifested itself during the Korea War : U.S. F @-@ 86 Sabres on patrol in " MiG Alley " frequently crossed into China while pursuing Communist MiGs operating out of Chinese airbases . 
 Moreover , there was talk among the U.N. commanders — notably General Douglas MacArthur — about a potential campaign against the People 's Republic of China . In an effort to dissuade UN forces from completely overrunning North Korea , the People 's Republic of China issued diplomatic warnings that they would use force to protect North Korea , but these warnings were not taken seriously for a number of reasons , among them the fact that China lacked air cover to conduct such an attack . This changed abruptly on 19 October 1950 , when the first of an eventual total of 380 @,@ 000 People 's Liberation Army soldiers under the command of General Peng Dehuai crossed into North Korea , launching a full @-@ scale assault against advancing U.N. troops . The PRC offensive caught the UN completely by surprise ; UN forces realized they would have to fall back , and quickly executed an emergency retreat . UN assets were shuffled in order to cover this retreat , and as part of the force tasked with covering the UN retreat Missouri was moved into Hungnam on 23 December to provide gunfire support about the Hungnam defense perimeter until the last UN troops , the U.S. 3rd Infantry Division , were evacuated by way of the sea on 24 December 1950 . 
 Missouri conducted additional operations with carriers and shore bombardments off the east coast of Korea until 19 March 1951 . She arrived at Yokosuka on 24 March , and 4 days later was relieved of duty in the Far East . She departed Yokosuka on 28 March , and upon arrival at Norfolk on 27 April became the flagship of Rear Admiral James L. Holloway , Jr . , commander , Cruiser Force , Atlantic Fleet . During the summer of 1951 , she engaged in two midshipman training cruises to northern Europe . Under the command of Captain John Sylvester , Missouri entered Norfolk Naval Shipyard 18 October 1951 for an overhaul , which lasted until 30 January 1952 . 
 Following winter and spring training out of Guantanamo Bay , Missouri visited New York , then set course from Norfolk on 9 June 1952 for another midshipman cruise . She returned to Norfolk on 4 August and entered Norfolk Naval Shipyard to prepare for a second tour in the Korean combat zone . 
 Missouri stood out of Hampton Roads on 11 September 1952 and arrived at Yokosuka on 17 October . Vice Admiral Joseph J. Clark , commander of the 7th Fleet , brought his command onboard on 19 October . Her primary mission was to provide seagoing artillery support by bombarding enemy targets in the <unk> @-@ Tanchon area , at Chongjin , in the Tanchon @-@ <unk> area , and at <unk> , Wonsan , Hamhung , and Hungnam during the period 25 October through 2 January 1953 . 
 Missouri put in to Incheon on 5 January 1953 and sailed thence to Sasebo , Japan . General Mark W. Clark , Commander in Chief , U.N. Command , and Admiral Sir Guy Russell , the Royal Navy commander of the British Far East Station , visited the battleship on 23 January . In the following weeks , Missouri resumed " Cobra " patrol along the east coast of Korea to support troops ashore . Repeated bombardment of Wonsan , <unk> , Hungnam , and Kojo destroyed main supply routes along the eastern seaboard of Korea . 
 The last bombardment mission by Missouri was against the Kojo area on 25 March . On 26 March , her commanding officer – Captain Warner R. Edsall – suffered a fatal heart attack while conning her through the submarine net at Sasebo . She was relieved as the 7th Fleet flagship on 6 April by her older sister New Jersey . 
 Missouri departed Yokosuka on 7 April and arrived at Norfolk on 4 May to become flagship for Rear Admiral E. T. Woolridge , commander , Battleships @-@ Cruisers , Atlantic Fleet , on 14 May . She departed on 8 June on a midshipman training cruise , returned to Norfolk on 4 August , and was overhauled in Norfolk Naval Shipyard from 20 November 1953 to 2 April 1954 . As the flagship of Rear Admiral R. E. Kirby , who had relieved Admiral Woolridge , Missouri departed Norfolk on 7 June as flagship of the midshipman training cruise to Lisbon and Cherbourg . During this voyage Missouri was joined by the other three battleships of her class , New Jersey , Wisconsin , and Iowa , the only time the four ships sailed together . She returned to Norfolk on 3 August and departed on 23 August for inactivation on the West Coast . After calls at Long Beach and San Francisco , Missouri arrived in Seattle on 15 September . Three days later she entered Puget Sound Naval Shipyard where she was decommissioned on 26 February 1955 , entering the Bremerton group , Pacific Reserve Fleet . 
 Upon arrival in Bremerton , Missouri was moored at the last pier of the reserve fleet berthing . This placed her very close to the mainland , and she served as a popular tourist attraction , logging about 180 @,@ 000 visitors per year , who came to view the " surrender deck " where a bronze plaque memorialized the spot ( 35 ° 21 ' 17 " N , 139 ° 45 ' 36 " E ) where Japan surrendered to the Allies , and the accompanying historical display that included copies of the surrender documents and photos . A small cottage industry grew in the civilian community just outside the gates , selling souvenirs and other memorabilia . Nearly thirty years passed before Missouri returned to active duty . 
 = = Reactivation ( 1984 to 1990 ) = = 
 Under the Reagan Administration ’ s program to build a 600 @-@ ship Navy , led by Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman , Missouri was reactivated and towed by the salvage ship Beaufort to the Long Beach Naval Yard in the summer of 1984 to undergo modernization in advance of her scheduled recommissioning . In preparation for the move , a skeleton crew of 20 spent three weeks working 12- to 16 @-@ hour days preparing the battleship for her tow . During the modernization Missouri had her obsolete armament removed : 20 mm and 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns , and four of her ten 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) gun mounts . 
 Over the next several months , the ship was upgraded with the most advanced weaponry available ; among the new weapons systems installed were four MK 141 quad cell launchers for 16 AGM @-@ 84 Harpoon anti @-@ ship missiles , eight Armored Box Launcher ( ABL ) mounts for 32 BGM @-@ 109 Tomahawk missiles , and a quartet of Phalanx Close In Weapon System ( CIWS ) Gatling guns for defense against enemy anti @-@ ship missiles and enemy aircraft . Also included in her modernization were upgrades to radar and fire control systems for her guns and missiles , and improved electronic warfare capabilities . During the modernization Missouri 's 800 lb ( 360 kg ) bell , which had been removed from the battleship and sent to Jefferson City , Missouri for sesquicentennial celebrations in the state , was formally returned to the battleship in advance of her recommissioning . Missouri was formally recommissioned in San Francisco on 10 May 1986 . " This is a day to celebrate the rebirth of American sea power " , Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger told an audience of 10 @,@ 000 at the recommissioning ceremony , instructing the crew to " listen for the footsteps of those who have gone before you . They speak to you of honor and the importance of duty . They remind you of your own traditions . " Also present at the recommissioning ceremony was Missouri governor John Ashcroft , U.S. Senator Pete Wilson , Secretary of the Navy John Lehman , San Francisco mayor Dianne Feinstein , and Margaret Truman . 
 Four months later Missouri departed from her new home port of Long Beach for an around @-@ the @-@ world cruise , visiting Pearl Harbor Hawaii ; Sydney , Hobart , and Perth , Australia ; Diego Garcia ; the Suez Canal ; Istanbul , Turkey ; Naples , Italy ; Rota , Spain ; Lisbon , Portugal ; and the Panama Canal . Missouri became the first American battleship to circumnavigate the globe since Theodore Roosevelt 's " Great White Fleet " 80 years before – a fleet which included the first battleship named USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 11 ) . 
 In 1987 , Missouri was outfitted with 40 mm grenade launchers and 25 mm chain guns and sent to take part in Operation Earnest Will , the escorting of reflagged Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf . These smaller @-@ caliber weapons were installed due to the threat of Iranian @-@ manned , Swedish @-@ made <unk> cigarette boats operating in the Persian Gulf at the time . On 25 July , the ship departed on a six @-@ month deployment to the Indian Ocean and North Arabian Sea . She spent more than 100 continuous days at sea in a hot , tense environment – a striking contrast to her world cruise months earlier . As the centerpiece for Battlegroup Echo , Missouri escorted tanker convoys into the Strait of Hormuz , keeping her fire control system trained on land @-@ based Iranian Silkworm missile launchers . 
 Missouri returned to the United States via Diego Garcia , Australia and Hawaii in early 1988 . Several months later , Missouri 's crew again headed for Hawaiian waters for the Rim of the Pacific ( <unk> ) exercises , which involved more than 50 @,@ 000 troops and ships from the navies of Australia , Canada , Japan and the United States . Port visits in 1988 included Vancouver and Victoria in Canada , San Diego , Seattle , and Bremerton . 
 In the early months of 1989 , Missouri was in the Long Beach Naval Shipyard for routine maintenance . On 1 July 1989 , while berthed at Pier D , the music video for Cher 's If I Could Turn Back Time was filmed aboard Missouri and featured the ship 's crew . A few months later she departed for Pacific Exercise ( <unk> ) ' 89 , where she and New Jersey performed a simultaneous gunfire demonstration for the aircraft carriers Enterprise and Nimitz . The highlight of <unk> was a port visit in Pusan , Republic of Korea . In 1990 , Missouri again took part in the <unk> Exercise with ships from Australia , Canada , Japan , Korea , and the U.S. 
 = = Gulf War ( January – February 1991 ) = = 
 On 2 August 1990 Iraq , led by President Saddam Hussein , invaded Kuwait . In the middle of the month U.S. President George H. W. Bush , in keeping with the Carter Doctrine , sent the first of several hundred thousand troops , along with a strong force of naval support , to Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf area to support a multinational force in a standoff with Iraq . 
 Missouri 's scheduled four @-@ month Western Pacific port @-@ to @-@ port cruise set to begin in September was canceled just a few days before the ship was to leave . She had been placed on hold in anticipation of being mobilized as forces continued to mass in the Middle East . Missouri departed on 13 November 1990 for the troubled waters of the Persian Gulf . She departed from Pier 6 at Long Beach , with extensive press coverage , and headed for Hawaii and the Philippines for more work @-@ ups en route to the Persian Gulf . Along the way she made stops at Subic Bay and Pattaya Beach , Thailand , before transiting the Strait of Hormuz on 3 January 1991 . During subsequent operations leading up to Operation Desert Storm , Missouri prepared to launch Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles ( TLAMs ) and provide naval gunfire support as required . 
 Missouri fired her first Tomahawk missile at Iraqi targets at 01 : 40 am on 17 January 1991 , followed by 27 additional missiles over the next five days . 
 On 29 January , the Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigate <unk> led Missouri northward , using advanced mine @-@ avoidance sonar . In her first naval gunfire support action of Desert Storm she shelled an Iraqi command and control bunker near the Saudi border , the first time her 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns had been fired in combat since March 1953 off Korea . The battleship bombarded Iraqi beach defenses in occupied Kuwait on the night of 3 February , firing 112 16 in ( 410 mm ) rounds over the next three days until relieved by Wisconsin . Missouri then fired another 60 rounds off Khafji on 11 – 12 February before steaming north to Faylaka Island . After minesweepers cleared a lane through Iraqi defenses , Missouri fired 133 rounds during four shore bombardment missions as part of the amphibious landing feint against the Kuwaiti shore line the morning of 23 February . The heavy pounding attracted Iraqi attention ; in response to the battleship ’ s artillery strike , the Iraqis fired two HY @-@ 2 Silkworm missiles at the battleship , one of which missed , . The other missile was intercepted by a <unk> @-@ 30 Sea Dart missile launched from the British air defence destroyer HMS Gloucester within 90 seconds and crashed into the sea roughly 700 yd ( 640 m ) in front of Missouri . 
 During the campaign , Missouri was involved in a friendly fire incident with the Oliver Hazard Perry @-@ class frigate Jarrett . According to the official report , on 25 February , Jarrett 's Phalanx CIWS engaged the chaff fired by Missouri as a countermeasure against enemy missiles , and stray rounds from the firing struck Missouri , one penetrating through a bulkhead and becoming embedded in an interior passageway of the ship . Another round struck the ship on the forward funnel , passing completely through it . One sailor aboard Missouri was struck in the neck by flying shrapnel and suffered minor injuries . Those familiar with the incident are skeptical of this account , however , as Jarrett was reportedly over 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away at the time and the characteristics of chaff are such that a Phalanx would not normally regard it as a threat and engage it . There is no dispute that the rounds that struck Missouri did come from Jarrett , and that it was an accident . The suspicion is that a Phalanx operator on Jarrett may have accidentally fired off a few rounds manually , although there is no evidence to support this . 
 During the operation , Missouri also assisted coalition forces engaged in clearing Iraqi naval mines in the Persian Gulf . By the time the war ended , Missouri had destroyed at least 15 naval mines . 
 With combat operations out of range of the battleship ’ s weapons on 26 February , Missouri had fired a total 783 rounds of 16 in ( 410 mm ) shells and launched 28 Tomahawk cruise missiles during the campaign , and commenced to conduct patrol and armistice enforcement operations in the northern Persian Gulf until sailing for home on 21 March . Following stops at Fremantle and Hobart , Australia , the warship visited Pearl Harbor before arriving home in April . She spent the remainder of the year conducting type training and other local operations , the latter including 7 December " voyage of remembrance " to mark the 50th anniversary of the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 . During that ceremony , Missouri hosted President George H. W. Bush , the first such presidential visit for the warship since Harry S. Truman boarded the battleship in September 1947 . 
 = = Museum ship ( 1998 to present ) = = 
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s and the absence of a perceived threat to the United States came drastic cuts in the defense budget , and the high cost of maintaining and operating battleships as part of the United States Navy 's active fleet became uneconomical ; as a result , Missouri was decommissioned on 31 March 1992 at Long Beach , California after 16 total years of active service . Her last commanding officer , Captain Albert L. <unk> , wrote in the ship 's final Plan of the Day : 
 Our final day has arrived . Today the final chapter in battleship Missouri ’ s history will be written . It 's often said that the crew makes the command . There is no truer statement ... for it 's the crew of this great ship that made this a great command . You are a special breed of sailors and Marines and I am proud to have served with each and every one of you . To you who have made the painful journey of putting this great lady to sleep , I thank you . For you have had the toughest job . To put away a ship that has become as much a part of you as you are to her is a sad ending to a great tour . But take solace in this — you have lived up to the history of the ship and those who sailed her before us . We took her to war , performed magnificently and added another chapter in her history , standing side by side our forerunners in true naval tradition . God bless you all . 
 Missouri returned to be part of the reserve fleet at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard , Bremerton , Washington , until 12 January 1995 , when she was struck from the Naval Vessel Register . She remained in Bremerton , but was not open to tourists as she had been from 1957 to 1984 . In spite of attempts by citizens ' groups to keep her in Bremerton and be re @-@ opened as a tourist site , the U.S. Navy wanted to pair a symbol of the end of World War II with one representing its beginning . On 4 May 1998 , Secretary of the Navy John H. Dalton signed the donation contract that transferred her to the nonprofit USS Missouri Memorial Association ( MMA ) of Honolulu , Hawaii . She was towed from Bremerton on 23 May to Astoria , Oregon , where she sat in fresh water at the mouth of the Columbia River to kill and drop the saltwater barnacles and sea grasses that had grown on her hull in Bremerton , then towed across the eastern Pacific , and docked at Ford Island , Pearl Harbor on 22 June , just 500 yd ( 460 m ) from the Arizona Memorial . Less than a year later , on 29 January 1999 , Missouri was opened as a museum operated by the MMA . 
 Originally , the decision to move Missouri to Pearl Harbor was met with some resistance . The National Park Service expressed concern that the battleship , whose name has become synonymous with the end of World War II , would overshadow the battleship Arizona , whose dramatic explosion and subsequent sinking on 7 December 1941 has since become synonymous with the attack on Pearl Harbor . To help guard against this impression Missouri was placed well back from and facing the Arizona Memorial , so that those participating in military ceremonies on Missouri 's aft decks would not have sight of the Arizona Memorial . The decision to have Missouri 's bow face the Arizona Memorial was intended to convey that Missouri watches over the remains of Arizona so that those interred within Arizona 's hull may rest in peace . 
 Missouri was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on 14 May 1971 for hosting the signing of the instrument of Japanese surrender that ended World War II . She is not eligible for designation as a National Historic Landmark because she was extensively modernized in the years following the surrender . 
 On 14 October 2009 , Missouri was moved from her berthing station on Battleship Row to a drydock at the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard to undergo a three @-@ month overhaul . The work , priced at $ 18 million , included installing a new anti @-@ corrosion system , repainting the hull , and upgrading the internal mechanisms . Drydock workers reported that the ship was leaking at some points on the starboard side . The repairs were completed the first week of January 2010 and the ship was returned to her berthing station on Battleship Row on 7 January 2010 . The ship 's grand reopening occurred on 30 January . 
 = = Appearances in popular culture = = 
 Missouri was central to the plot of the film Under Siege , and the ship was prominently featured in another movie , Battleship . As Missouri has not moved under her own power since 1992 , shots of the ship at sea were obtained with the help of three tugboats . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Missouri received eight battle stars for her service in World War II , five for her service during the Korean War , and three for her service during the Gulf War . Missouri also received numerous awards for her service in World War II , Korea , and the Persian Gulf . 
 = M @-@ 70 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 70 was a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . In the 1920s , the highway originally connected Sterling in southwest Arenac County with Prescott in southeast Ogemaw County . The route was later adjusted to run from M @-@ 76 near Sterling along a convoluted route through Maple Ridge and Prescott to end at M @-@ 55 in Nester 's Corners . The highway was still a gravel road when the designation was removed by 1960 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The final route used by M @-@ 70 followed Melita Road starting at M @-@ 76 northwest of Sterling . The highway ran north and crossed the Rifle River at a point between sections of the Ogemaw State Forest . The highway turned east on Main Street Road in Melita . From there , M @-@ 70 ran east on Main Street Road to the junction with Reed Road where it turned northward to Maple Ridge Road . The highway followed Maple Ridge Road east into Maple Ridge and turned north on Briggs Road . Crossing the Ogemaw – Arenac county line , the road name changed to Sage Lake Road into the village of Prescott . From there , it turned westerly on Greenwood Road through downtown Prescott , and north on Clark Road to end at M @-@ 55 one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Nester Corners , which is the intersection of South Sage Lake Road and M @-@ 55 . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 70 was first shown on a state map on July 1 , 1919 , with the debut of the Michigan state trunkline highway system . The original routing was shown between M @-@ 76 at Sterling and M @-@ 55 at Prescott . In 1929 , M @-@ 55 was shifted to run due east from Selkirk to US Highway 23 north of Whittemore . The segment east of Prescott to Whittemore was turned over to the county , but the section north of Prescott was added to M @-@ 70 . This extended M @-@ 70 north to its terminus in Nester 's Corners . The designation was decommissioned by July 1 , 1960 . At the time , the highway was still a gravel road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hancock ( film ) = 
 Hancock is a 2008 American superhero comedy @-@ drama film directed by Peter Berg and starring Will Smith , Charlize Theron , Jason Bateman and Eddie Marsan . It tells the story of a vigilante superhero , John Hancock ( Smith ) from Los Angeles whose reckless actions routinely cost the city millions of dollars . Eventually one person he saves , Ray Embrey ( Bateman ) , makes it his mission to change Hancock 's public image for the better . 
 The story was originally written by Vincent Ngo in 1996 . It languished in " development hell " for years and had various directors attached , including Tony Scott , Michael Mann , Jonathan Mostow , and Gabriele Muccino before going into production in 2007 . Hancock was filmed in Los Angeles with a production budget of $ 150 million . 
 In the United States , the film was rated PG @-@ 13 by the Motion Picture Association of America after changes were made at the organization 's request in order to avoid an R rating , which it had received twice before . The film was presented and widely released on July 2 , 2008 in the United States and the United Kingdom by Columbia Pictures . Hancock received mixed reviews from film critics and grossed more than $ 620 million in theaters worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 John Hancock ( Will Smith ) is an alcoholic man with superhero powers , including flight , invulnerability , and super @-@ strength . Though he uses his powers to stop criminals in his current residence of Los Angeles , his activity inadvertently causes millions of dollars in property damage due to his constant intoxication . As a result , he is routinely jeered at the crime scenes . Hancock also ignores court subpoenas from the city of Los Angeles to address the property damage he has caused . 
 When public relations spokesperson Ray Embrey ( Jason Bateman ) departs from an unsuccessful meeting pitching his All @-@ Heart logo for corporations who are extraordinarily charitable , he becomes trapped on railroad tracks with an incoming freight train . Hancock saves Ray 's life , but he causes the train to derail and nearly injures another driver . Hancock is jeered by other drivers for causing more damage , but Ray steps in and publicly thanks Hancock for saving his life . Ray offers to improve Hancock 's public image , and Hancock grudgingly accepts . The spokesperson convinces the alcoholic superhero to permit himself to be jailed for outstanding subpoenas so they can show Los Angeles how much the city really needs Hancock . When the crime rate rises after Hancock 's incarceration , the superhero is contacted by the Chief of Police . With a new costume from Ray , Hancock intervenes with a bank robbery , rescuing a cop and stopping the leader of the robbers , Red Parker ( Eddie Marsan ) . 
 After the rescue , Hancock is applauded for handling the bank robbery . The superhero becomes popular once more , as Ray had predicted . He goes out to dinner with Ray and his wife Mary ( Charlize Theron ) , with whom he reveals his apparent immortality and his amnesia from 80 years ago . After Hancock tucks a drunken Ray in bed , he discovers that Mary also has superpowers . He threatens to expose her until she explains their origins , and she tells him that they have lived for 3 @,@ 000 years with their powers , having been called gods and angels in their time . She explains that they are the last of their kind and that their kind are paired . Mary does not tell Hancock the entire truth , and Hancock departs to tell Ray about the conversation . The exchange results in a battle between Hancock and Mary that takes them to downtown Los Angeles , causing significant damage to the area . Ray , downtown in a business meeting , sees and recognizes Mary using superhero powers like Hancock . 
 Hancock is later shot twice in the chest and wounded when he stops a liquor store robbery . After being hospitalized , Mary enters and explains that as the pair of immortals gets close , they begin to lose their powers . She also explains that Hancock was attacked in an alley 80 years prior , where he obtained amnesia . Mary deserted him then in order for him to recover from his injuries . When he is hospitalized , the hospital is raided by Red Parker , the bank robber , and two men that Hancock had humiliated during his incarceration . Mary , visiting Hancock , is shot in the process . Hancock is able to stop two men but is further wounded by them . When Red attempts to finish Hancock off , Ray comes to the rescue and kills the bank robber with a fire axe . With Mary nearly dying , Hancock flees from the hospital so their parting would allow her to heal with her powers . He later winds up in New York City , working as a superhero . Ray is seen walking with Mary discussing historical events such as the reign of Attila the Hun in a jovial manner . As gratitude to Ray , Hancock paints Ray 's All @-@ Heart logo on the moon and calls the spokesperson to look up to the worldwide advertisement . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Hancock , now living in New York City , confronts a fleeing criminal with the police . Cornered , the man takes a hostage and jeeringly demands Hancock escort him to safety . Hancock turns back and smiles as the credits resume . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Will Smith as John Hancock , an alcoholic superhero . Hancock is invulnerable , immortal , possesses superhuman strength , reflexes and stamina , highly developed regeneration , and can fly at supersonic speeds . He is also an amnesiac ; his first memories are of waking up alone in a hospital in 1931 . During his release , the duty nurse asked him for his " John Hancock " , which he adopted as his current alias . Smith described the character , " Hancock is not your average superhero . Every day he wakes up mad at the world . He doesn 't remember what happened to him and there 's no one to help him find the answers . " To give a realistic appearance of superhero flight , Smith was often suspended by wires 60 feet ( 18 m ) above the ground and propelled at 40 – 50 miles per hour ( 64 – 80 km / h ) . , Hancock 's character is a parody version of DC 's Superman . 
 Jason Bateman as Ray Embrey , a corporate public relations consultant whose life Hancock saves . Bateman said , " My character sees life through rose @-@ colored glasses so he doesn 't understand how people can 't see the positive side of Hancock . I like being the everyman . I like being the tour guide , the one who tethers whatever absurdity might be in a film and helps make that tangible to the audience . " 
 Charlize Theron as Mary Embrey , Ray 's wife and Hancock 's ex @-@ wife who also has powers and abilities like him , but they are both becoming weak as they are close to each other . Theron described Mary , " She makes this conscious decision to live in suburbia and be this soccer mom to her stepson and be the perfect wife — she lives in this bubble . But when people do that it usually means they are hiding some characteristic inside themselves that scares them . That is Mary 's case . She knows who she is and what she is capable of . " 
 Eddie Marsan as Kenneth " Red " Parker , Jr . , a bank robber who later becomes Hancock 's arch @-@ nemesis . Having previously filmed the low @-@ budget Happy @-@ Go @-@ Lucky , Marsan found the transition to the big @-@ budget Hancock to be a shock . Marsan said , " I went from being in a car with Sally Hawkins in Happy @-@ Go @-@ Lucky to blowing up a bank in downtown LA . " 
 Film producers Akiva Goldsman and Michael Mann appear as executives listening to Ray 's lecture . Television host Nancy Grace also has a cameo appearance . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Vincent Ngo wrote the spec script Tonight , He Comes in 1996 . The draft , about a troubled 12 @-@ year @-@ old , and a fallen superhero , was initially picked up by director Tony Scott as a potential project . Producer Akiva Goldsman came across the script , which he had considered a favorite , and encouraged Richard Saperstein , then president of development and production at Artisan Entertainment , to acquire it in 2002 . Michael Mann was initially attached to direct Tonight , He Comes , but he instead opted to direct Miami Vice . Eventually , Artisan placed the project in turnaround , and it was acquired by Goldsman . 
 Vince Gilligan and John August rewrote Ngo 's script , and Jonathan Mostow was attached to direct the film . Under Mostow 's supervision , a ten @-@ page treatment was written to be pitched to Will Smith to portray the lead role in the film . Neither Mostow nor Smith was yet committed to make the project an active priority at the time . Several studios pursued the opportunity to finance the film , and Columbia Pictures succeeded in acquiring the prospect in February 2005 . A second draft was scripted by Gilligan following the finalization of the deal with Columbia . The film was initially slated for a holiday 2006 release . 
 In November 2005 , Mostow and Smith committed to Tonight , He Comes , with production slated to begin in Los Angeles in summer 2006 . Smith 's salary in his pay or play contract for the film was $ 20 million and 20 percent of the film 's gross . The actor had also set up a pay or play contract to film I Am Legend under Warner Bros. after completion of Tonight , He Comes . Mostow eventually departed from the project due to creative differences . Italian director Gabriele Muccino filled Mostow 's vacancy in May 2006 . Since Muccino was busy editing The Pursuit of Happyness starring Smith , which Muccino had directed , Smith switched projects to film I Am Legend first for its December 2007 release , and then film Tonight , He Comes afterward . Later in the month , Muccino left the project because of an incompatibility with filming the story . Since Muccino was preparing The Pursuit of Happyness , the studio had delayed the production start for Tonight , He Comes to summer 2007 , enabling Warner Bros. to begin production of I Am Legend with Smith . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In October 2006 , Peter Berg was attached to direct Tonight , He Comes with production slated to begin in May 2007 in Los Angeles , the story 's setting . Berg had been midway through filming The Kingdom when he heard about the film and called Michael Mann , who had become one of its producers . The new director compared the original script 's tone to Leaving Las Vegas ( 1995 ) , calling it " a scathing character study of this suicidal alcoholic superhero " . The director explained the rewrite , " We thought the idea was cool , but we did want to lighten it up . We all did . " Before filming began , Tonight , He Comes was retitled John Hancock , and it was eventually shortened to Hancock . 
 Filming began on Hancock on July 3 , 2007 in Los Angeles , having a production budget of $ 150 million . Locations such as Hollywood Boulevard were designed to look damaged , having rubble , overturned vehicles , and fires . Smith 's character is also an alcoholic , so for scenes in liquor stores , the art department designed fake labels such as Pap Smear Vodka for the bottles because " brown @-@ bag brands " like Thunderbird and Night Train refused to lend their names . Reshoots were filmed in Times Square in May 2008 , the late date resulting in the cancellation of the film 's original world premiere in Australia on June 10 , 2008 . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Hancock was Peter Berg 's first film with visual effects as critical cinematic elements . He considered the computer @-@ generated fight his least favorite part of the film , citing limited control in making the scene successful . According to the director , " Once the fight starts , you 're very limited and you 're at the mercy of your effects guys ... unless they 're really technically oriented ... it 's definitely the time we have the least amount of control as directors . " He and other filmmakers worked to cut down on the fight scene , believing that the film 's success would come from the character study of Smith 's character , John Hancock , similar to Robert Downey , Jr . ' s acclaimed portrayal of Tony Stark in the previous May 's superhero release , Iron Man . 
 Visual effects supervisor Carey Villegas described Peter Berg 's photography as " very high energy " , to which the visual effects crew had difficulty adapting . Though the crew had estimated developing 300 visual effects shot at its initial bid , the final tally was approximately 525 shots . An unexpected shot was a scene in which Hancock shoves a prisoner 's head up another 's anus , and filmmakers initially attempted to film it conventionally , using sleight of hand techniques with cameras . Finding that doing so did not capture " the vulgarity of the gag " , the crew was enlisted to use computer @-@ generated effects . Visual effects were also applied in conjunction with the film 's choreography , incorporating palm trees , twisters , and debris in the computer @-@ generated fight scene and combining visual effects with a crane shot to portray Hancock 's derailment of a freight train . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The New York Times noted that Hancock 's original story and controversial subject matter present a stark contrast to " a <unk> of sequels and animated sure shots " and represent a gamble for " an increasingly corporate entertainment industry " . Hancock had been reviewed by the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) twice , and both times received an R rating instead of the makers ' preferred PG @-@ 13 rating to target broader audiences . 
 The MPAA questioned elements including Smith 's character drinking in front of a 7 @-@ year @-@ old and the character flying under the influence of alcohol . Scenes that were removed to receive a PG @-@ 13 rating from the MPAA included a scene of statutory rape , two of three uses of the word " fuck " ( the MPAA only permitted one use for the PG @-@ 13 rating ) , and intense shots of needles going into arms . The MPAA allowed scenes of Hancock shoving a prisoner 's head up another 's behind and of Hancock having explosive ejaculation during sexual intercourse , though Berg chose to save the latter scene for the DVD , explaining , " It just wasn 't that funny . Never was . You 'd put it in front of an audience and there 'd be two , maybe three people laughing . There was no way to do that and then regain even a modicum of emotional integrity . " The director kept the scene with the prisoners since a Las Vegas test screening was overwhelmingly successful : " At the end of the day , I couldn 't ignore an audience when they 're laughing that hard . " With such elements , studio executives only became comfortable with Hancock when the marketing approach focused on action and humor . Berg noted , " The ad campaign for this movie is much friendlier than the film . " The MPAA ultimately gave the film a PG @-@ 13 rating , citing " some intense sequences of sci @-@ fi action and violence and language " . 
 Hancock was originally titled Tonight , He Comes and later changed to John Hancock before settling on its final title . Prior to the film 's release , marketing consultants attempted to persuade Sony Pictures to again change the title Hancock because it was too vague for audiences , suggesting alternatives like Heroes Never Die , Unlikely Hero , and Less Than Hero . Despite the advice , Sony stayed with Hancock and anticipated marketing on the popularity of the film 's star , Will Smith . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Hancock had its world premiere as the opener at the 30th Moscow International Film Festival on June 19 , 2008 . To avoid copyright infringement , organizers took " unprecedented " steps to prevent illegal reproduction of the film . 
 For the film , Sony created a digital camera package ( DCP ) having 4K resolution , containing four times more information than the typical DCP that possessed 2K resolution . Projectors for the higher @-@ resolution package have been installed in 200 theaters in the United States with two dozen in evaluation . 
 Prior to the film 's opening five @-@ day weekend in the United States and Canada , predictions for its weekend performance ranged from as low as $ 70 million to as high as $ 125 million . According to CinemaScore , Hancock was given a B + grade by audiences . The film was shown in advance screenings on July 1 , 2008 in 3 @,@ 680 theaters in the United States and Canada , grossing $ 6 @.@ 8 million . The film was widely released on July 2 , 2008 , expanding to 3 @,@ 965 theaters . At the conclusion of the five @-@ day weekend , Hancock took top placement at the box office in the United States and Canada , grossing an estimated $ 103 @.@ 8 million . The film had the third @-@ biggest opening 4th of July weekend after Transformers and Spider @-@ Man 2 . Hancock was Will Smith 's fifth film to open on a 4 July weekend and was his most successful opening to date . The film was also Smith 's eighth film in a row to take top placement in the American and Canadian box office and the twelfth film in Smith 's career to lead the box office . Hancock was also Peter Berg 's strongest opening of his directing career to date . Chad Hartigan , analyst for Exhibitor Relations , said about Smith 's successful opening , " Audiences don 't care what critics say ; they 're going to turn out for anything he does . " 
 Outside the United States and Canada , Hancock grossed $ 78 @.@ 3 million in its opening weekend , drawing from 5 @,@ 444 screenings across 50 markets , ranking it the third highest international opening of 2008 after Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and Iron Man . Hancock averaged $ 14 @,@ 382 per screen . It placed on top in 47 of the 50 markets in which it opened ; its strongest openings were the United Kingdom with $ 19 @.@ 3 million , Germany with $ 12 @.@ 4 million , South Korea with $ 8 @.@ 5 million , Australia with $ 7 @.@ 3 million , and China with $ 5 @.@ 5 million . The Chinese opening was the fourth @-@ biggest opening to date for the country . Other international performances included $ 3 @.@ 4 million in Brazil and $ 3 @.@ 1 million in Taiwan . In Hong Kong , the film opened in first place with $ 1 @.@ 3 million , averaging $ 37 @,@ 300 across the 35 venues . The film 's overall gross for its opening five @-@ day weekend worldwide is $ 185 @.@ 6 million . 
 In the following weekend of July 11 , 2008 , Hancock fell to second place in the United States and Canada behind Hellboy II : The Golden Army , grossing an estimated $ 33 million , a " modest " 47 % drop in revenue ( see second weekend in box office performance ) . The film 's recorded American and Canadian attendance was higher than the Smith feature Men in Black II in both films ' second weekend , but it was significantly less than attendance records for Smith 's other films , Independence Day and Men in Black through the same point . Internationally Hancock expanded to 8 @,@ 125 screens across 67 markets , ranking first at the box office again in 30 markets . The film 's top opening grosses for the weekend included $ 11 @.@ 4 million in Russia ( 589 screens ) , $ 9 @.@ 9 million in France ( 739 screens ) , $ 4 @.@ 6 million in Mexico ( 783 screens ) , $ 2 @.@ 2 million in India ( 429 screens ) , $ 1 @.@ 7 million in the Netherlands ( 90 screens ) , $ 1 @.@ 3 million in Belgium ( 69 screens ) , and $ 1 million in Ukraine ( 81 screens ) . In territories playing Hancock for a second weekend , the United Kingdom dropped 45 % to total $ 33 @.@ 4 million to date , Germany 37 % to total $ 24 @.@ 2 million to date , South Korea 38 % to total $ 14 @.@ 7 million to date , and Australia 47 % to total $ 14 @.@ 4 million to date . For the second weekend , with the 67 markets , Hancock accumulated an estimated $ 71 @.@ 4 million in the international box office , only a $ 7 @.@ 2 million drop from the previous weekend in territories outside the United States and Canada . 
 In Hancock 's third weekend of July 18 , the film took top placement in the international box office a third time , grossing an estimated $ 44 @.@ 8 million from 8 @,@ 286 screens across 71 territories . The film had beaten The Dark Knight , which premiered that weekend in 20 international markets . Hancock had tracked 32 % internationally ahead of its performance in the United States and Canada . It had opened in four new markets for the weekend , ranking first in Spain with $ 8 @.@ 6 million from 562 sites and first in Norway with $ 1 million from 60 sites . Hancock also kept top placement in France , estimating $ 4 @.@ 4 million from 741 screens for a total of $ 16 @.@ 8 million to date . 
 The film experienced a late resurgence in the international box office on the weekend of September 12 , grossing $ 10 @.@ 6 million from 1 @,@ 425 screens in 31 markets . Making up most of the amount was $ 8 million from the film 's premiere in Italy on 678 screens . Hancock has grossed $ 227 @,@ 946 @,@ 274 in the United States and Canada and $ 396 @,@ 440 @,@ 472 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 624 @,@ 386 @,@ 746 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Hancock was part of Sony 's experiment in providing content to consumers who own a BRAVIA television equipped with an Internet connection . The film 's release over the Internet took place after its theatrical run and before its release on DVD . According to Sony executives , distributing Hancock was an opportunity to showcase BRAVIA , though the method has been perceived as an " obvious threat " to cable companies ' video on demand . The film was available to BRAVIA owners from October 28 , 2008 to November 10 , 2008 . 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on November 25 , 2008 . The single @-@ disc DVD provides a theatrical cut ( 92 minutes ) and an unrated cut ( 102 minutes ) as well as five featurettes and two documentaries . The double @-@ disc DVD includes these features , a digital copy of the film , and two additional making @-@ of extras . The Blu @-@ ray Disc includes these , an on @-@ set visual diary , and a picture @-@ in @-@ picture track . George Lang of The Oklahoman described the unrated cut as " a rare instance when deleted scenes enhance the final product " . Christopher Monfette of IGN thought that the Blu @-@ ray Disc was a " beautiful " transfer , the audio was well @-@ balanced , and the featurettes were well @-@ supplied . 
 In the week ending November 30 , Hancock placed first on three video charts : the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert sales chart , Home Media Magazine 's video rental chart , and Nielsen 's Blu @-@ ray Disc chart . With the year 's Black Friday shopping day on November 28 , Hancock was the top seller in the Blu @-@ ray Disc format . Over 5 @.@ 38 million DVDs were sold for a revenue of $ 91 @,@ 066 @,@ 638 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Hancock received mixed reviews from film critics . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 41 % , based on 217 reviews , with an average score of 5 @.@ 4 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Though it begins with promise , Hancock suffers from a flimsy narrative and poor execution " . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average rating , the film has received an average score of 49 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Todd McCarthy of Variety felt that the film 's premise was undermined by the execution . McCarthy believed the concept ensured the film was " amusing and plausible " for its first half , but that the second half was full of illogical story developments and missed opportunities . Stephen Farber of The Hollywood Reporter said that the opening established the premise well , but that the film came undone when it began to alternate between comedy and tragedy , and introduced a backstory for Hancock that did not make sense . He said it rewrote its own internal logic in order to pander to its audience . Stephen Hunter in The Washington Post said it had begun with promise , but that the change in tone partway through was so abrupt that the film did not recover . Jim Schembri of The Age called the change in direction " an absolute killer story twist " , and David Denby of The New Yorker said it lifted the film to a new level by supplementing the jokes with sexual tension and emotional power . 
 Jim Schembri wrote that Berg 's direction helped to sell Hancock 's " well @-@ drawn " backstory , Todd McCarthy said the gritty visual approach adopted by Berg did not mesh well with the " vulgar goofiness " of certain scenes , and Stephen Farber said that Berg 's frantic direction compounded the storytelling errors . Stephen Hunter said that Berg had not understood that the shifting tone and plot twists were meant to be humorous , and that he had played straight what was supposed to be a dark comedy and subversive satire . David Denby said Berg 's style — especially his use of close @-@ ups — was intended to showcase " genuine actors at work " , while Manohla Dargis of The New York Times insisted Berg had taken Hancock to heart and brought gravity to the film . 
 David Denby described Smith 's performance as contrasting with his performances in his other films . He said , " For the first time in his life , Will Smith doesn ’ t flirt with the audience ... he stays in character as a self @-@ hating lonely guy . " Stephen Hunter argued that Smith and his co @-@ stars had misunderstood the material in the same manner as Berg . He added that the examination of Smith 's character came across at first as an examination of " phenomenally gifted " black sporting superstars who were " marginalized " , " dehumanized " and exploited as a product by society . Manohla Dargis was struck by Theron 's performance , saying that she enabled Smith to deepen the film 's emotional complexity . Todd McCarthy said that Smith 's " attitude @-@ laden quips " helped to carry the film 's superior first half , and that all three leads performed capably , but he said no opportunity was offered for the supporting characters to register . Roger Ebert writing in the Chicago Sun Times praised the three leads , saying that Smith avoided playing Hancock " as a goofball " and instead portrayed him as a more subtle and serious character . Stephen Farber said that Hancock was a good showcase for the leads , affirming that Smith shone in a film that was only sporadically worthy of his performance , while Colm Andrew of the Manx Independent said that despite the mix of themes " the laughs are frequent and genuine ( no forced slapstick ) , the fight scenes exciting and the emotional stuff quite moving " . 
 Jim Schembri concluded that the film was " refreshing , savvy , fun and fast " . He said it managed to mix comedy and action successfully , and that the drama came across as surprisingly genuine . Stephen Farber believed that the extended development of the film had reduced its quality , but that the visual effects were " stellar " and showed wit . McCarthy praised the effects , but said the film was " both overwrought and severely undernourished . " Roger Ebert observed the film was " a lot of fun " , and Manohla Dargis admitted that it was " unexpectedly satisfying " . She said that while it faltered and felt rushed towards its end , it had an emotional complexity and " <unk> " that spoke with sincerity about essential human vulnerabilities . Stephen Hunter concluded that Hancock was ultimately " indigestible " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Hancock won the award for " Best Summer Action / Adventure Movie " at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards . Smith 's performance won him the award for " Favorite Movie Actor " at the 2009 Kids ' Choice Awards . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Director Peter Berg said prior to Hancock 's release that if the film pulls in as much business as predicted , a sequel , Hancock 2 , would likely follow . After the film 's release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc , actor Will Smith said that there was ongoing discussion about a possible sequel , " The ideas aren 't [ ... ] developed , but we are building out an entire world ; I think people are going to be very surprised at the new world of Hancock . " In August 2009 , Columbia Pictures hired screenwriters Adam Fierro and Glen Mazzara to write the sequel , and the studio plans to bring back the producing team from the original film . Charlize Theron confirmed that she would reprise her role , and Berg said to expect a third actor to star as another figure with powers like Smith 's and Theron 's characters . 
 = History of ethanol fuel in Brazil = 
 The history of ethanol fuel in Brazil dates from the 1970s and relates to Brazil ’ s sugarcane -based ethanol fuel program , which allowed the country to become the world 's second largest producer of ethanol , and the world 's largest exporter . Several important political and technological developments led Brazil to become the world leader in the sustainable use of bioethanol , and a policy model for other developing countries in the tropical zone of Latin America , the Caribbean , and Africa . Government policies and technological advances also allowed the country to achieve a landmark in ethanol consumption , when ethanol retail sales surpassed 50 % market share of the gasoline @-@ powered vehicle fleet in early 2008 . This level of ethanol fuel consumption had only been reached in Brazil once before , at the peak of the Pró @-@ Álcool Program near the end of the 1980s . 
 = = Early experiences = = 
 Sugarcane has been cultivated in Brazil since 1532 , introduced in Pernambuco that year , sugar was one of the first commodities exported to Europe by the Portuguese settlers . Ethyl alcohol or ethanol is obtained as a by @-@ product of sugar mills producing sugar , and can be processed to produce alcoholic beverages , ethanol fuel or alcohol for industrial or antiseptic uses . The first use of sugarcane ethanol as fuel in Brazil dates back to the late twenties and early thirties of the 20th century , with the introduction of the automobile in the country . After World War I some experimenting took place in Brazil 's Northeast Region , and as early as 1919 , the Governor of Pernambuco mandated all official vehicles to run on ethanol . The first ethanol fuel production plant went on line in 1927 , the Usina Serra Grande Alagoas ( USGA ) , located in the Northeastern state of Alagoas , producing fuel with 75 % ethanol and 25 % ethyl ether . As other plants began producing ethanol fuel , two years later there were 500 cars running on this fuel in the country 's Northeast Region . 
 A decree was issued on February 20 , 1931 , mandating the blend of 5 % hydrated ethanol to all imports of gasoline by volume . The number of distilleries producing ethanol fuel went from 1 in 1933 to 54 by 1945 . Fuel @-@ grade ethanol production increased from 100 @,@ 000 liters in 1933 to 51 @.@ 5 million liters in 1937 , representing 7 % of the country 's fuel consumption . Production peaked to 77 million liters during World War II , representing 9 @.@ 4 % of all ethanol production in the country . Due to German submarine attacks threatening oil supplies , the mandatory blend was as high as 50 percent in 1943 . After the end of the war cheap oil caused gasoline to prevail , and ethanol blends were only used sporadically , mostly to take advantage of sugar surpluses , until the 1970s , when the first oil crisis resulted in gasoline shortages and awareness on the dangers of oil dependence . 
 = = The Pro @-@ Alcohol era = = 
 As a response to the 1973 oil crisis , the Brazilian government began promoting bioethanol as a fuel . The National Alcohol Program -Pró @-@ Álcool- ( Portuguese : ' Programa Nacional do Álcool ' ) , launched in 1975 , was a nationwide program financed by the government to phase out automobile fuels derived from fossil fuels , such as gasoline , in favor of ethanol produced from sugar cane . The decision to produce ethanol from sugarcane was based on the low cost of sugar at the time , the idle capacity for distillation at the sugar plants , and the country 's tradition and experience with this feedstock . Other sources of fermentable carbohydrates were also explored such as manioc and other feedstocks . The first phase of the program concentrated in production of anhydrous ethanol for blending with gasoline . 
 After testing in government fleets with several prototypes developed by local subsidiaries of Fiat , Volkswagen , GM , and Ford , and compelled by the second oil crisis , the first 16 gasoline stations began supplying hydrous ethanol in May 1979 for a fleet of 2 @,@ 000 neat ethanol adapted vehicles , and by July , the Fiat 147 was launched to the market , becoming the first modern commercial neat ethanol @-@ powered car ( E100 ) sold in the world . Brazilian carmakers modified gasoline engines to support hydrous ethanol characteristics . Changes included compression ratio , amount of fuel injected , replacement of materials subject to corrosion by ethanol , use of colder spark plugs suitable for dissipating heat due to higher flame temperatures , and an auxiliary cold @-@ start system that injects gasoline from a small tank to aid cold starting . Six years later , approximately 75 % of Brazilian passenger cars were manufactured with ethanol engines . 
 The Brazilian government also made mandatory the blend of ethanol fuel with gasoline , fluctuating from 1976 until 1992 between 10 % and 22 % . Due to this mandatory minimum gasoline blend , pure gasoline ( E0 ) is no longer sold in the country . A federal law was passed in October 1993 establishing a mandatory blend of 22 % anhydrous ethanol ( E22 ) in the entire country . This law also authorized the Executive to set different percentages of ethanol within pre @-@ established boundaries ; since 2003 these limits were fixed at a maximum of 25 % ( E25 ) and a minimum of 20 % ( E20 ) by volume . Since then , the government has set the percentage on the ethanol blend according to the results of the sugarcane harvest and the levels of ethanol production from sugarcane , resulting in blend variations even within the same year . 
 Since July 2007 the mandatory blend was 25 % of anhydrous ethanol and 75 % gasoline or E25 blend . As a result of supply shortages and high ethanol fuel prices , in 2010 the government mandated a temporary 90 @-@ day blend reduction from E25 to E20 beginning February 1 , 2010 . As supply shortages took place again between the 2010 @-@ 2011 harvest seasons , some ethanol was imported from the US , and in April 2011 the government reduced the minimum mandatory blend to 18 percent , leaving the mandatory blend range between E18 to E25 . 
 By mid March 2015 the government raised the ethanol blend in regular gasoline from 25 % to 27 % . The blend on premium gasoline was kept at 25 % upon request by <unk> , the Brazilian association of automakers , because of concerns about the effects on the higher blend on cars that were built only for E25 as the maximum blend , as opposed to flex @-@ fuel cars . The government approved the higher blend as an economic incentive for ethanol producers , due to an existing overstock of over 1 billion liters ( 264 million US gallons ) of ethanol . The implementation of <unk> is expected to allow the consumption of the overstock before the end of 2015 . 
 The Brazilian government provided three important initial motivators for the ethanol industry : guaranteed purchases by the state @-@ owned oil company Petrobras , low @-@ interest loans for agro @-@ industrial ethanol firms , and fixed gasoline and ethanol prices where hydrous ethanol sold for 59 % of the government @-@ set gasoline price at the pump . These incentives made ethanol production competitive . 
 After reaching more than 4 million cars and light trucks running on pure ethanol by the late 1980s , representing 33 % of the country 's motor vehicle fleet , ethanol production and sales of neat ethanol cars tumbled due to several factors . First , gasoline prices fell sharply as a result of the 1980s oil glut . The inflation adjusted real 2004 dollar value of oil fell from an average of US $ 78 @.@ 2 in 1981 to an average of US $ 26 @.@ 8 per barrel in 1986 . Also , by mid @-@ 1989 a shortage of ethanol fuel supply in the local market left thousands of vehicles in line at gas stations or out of fuel in their garages . At the time ethanol production was tightly regulated by the government , as well as pricing of both gasoline and ethanol fuel , the latter subject to fixed producer prices . As a complement , the government provided subsidies to guarantee a lower ethanol price at the pump as compared to gasoline , as consumers were promised that ethanol prices would never be higher than 65 % the price of gasoline . As sugar prices sharply increased in the international market by the end of 1988 and the government did not set the sugar export quotas , production shifted heavily towards sugar production causing an ethanol supply shortage , as the real cost of ethanol was around US $ 45 per barrel . As ethanol production stagnated at 12 billion liters and could not keep pace with the increasing demand required by the now significant ethanol @-@ only fleet , the Brazilian government began importing ethanol from Europe and Africa in 1991 . Simultaneously , the government began reducing ethanol subsidies , thus marking the beginning of the industry 's deregulation and the slow extinction of the Pró @-@ Álcool Program . 
 In 1990 , production of neat ethanol vehicles fell to 10 @.@ 9 % of the total car production as consumers lost confidence in the reliability of ethanol fuel supply , and began selling or converting their cars back to gasoline fuel . By the beginning of 1997 Fiat , Ford , and General Motors had all stopped producing ethanol powered cars , leaving only Volkswagen ( who offered the Gol , Santana , <unk> and their derivatives ) . The manufacturers requested a reinstatement of a stable gasohol program and promised to develop products by 1999 . 
 = = The Flex @-@ fuel era = = 
 Confidence in ethanol @-@ powered vehicles was restored with the introduction in the Brazilian market of flexible @-@ fuel vehicles starting in 2003 . A key innovation in the Brazilian flex technology was avoiding the need for an additional dedicated sensor to monitor the ethanol @-@ gasoline mix , which made the first American M85 flex fuel vehicles too expensive . This was accomplished through the lambda probe , used to measure the quality of combustion in conventional engines , is also required to tell the engine control unit ( ECU ) which blend of gasoline and alcohol is being burned . This task is accomplished automatically through software developed by Brazilian engineers , called " Software Fuel Sensor " ( SFS ) , fed with data from the standard sensors already built @-@ in the vehicle . The technology was developed by the Brazilian subsidiary of Bosch in 1994 , but was further improved and commercially implemented in 2003 by the Italian subsidiary of Magneti Marelli . A similar fuel injection technology was developed by the Brazilian subsidiary of Delphi Automotive Systems , and it is called " Multifuel . " This technology allows the controller to regulate the amount of fuel injected and spark time , as fuel flow needs to be decreased and also self @-@ combustion needs to be avoided when gasoline is used because ethanol engines have compression ratio around 12 : 1 , too high for gasoline . 
 In March 2003 , Volkswagen launched in the Brazilian market the Gol 1 @.@ 6 Total Flex , the first commercial flexible fuel vehicle capable of running on any blend of gasoline and ethanol . Chevrolet followed three months later with the Corsa 1 @.@ 8 Flexpower , using an engine developed by a joint @-@ venture with Fiat called PowerTrain . That year production of full flex @-@ fuel reached 39 @,@ 853 automobiles and 9 @,@ 411 light commercial vehicles . By 2008 , popular manufacturers that build flexible fuel vehicles are Chevrolet , Fiat , Ford , Peugeot , Renault , Volkswagen , Honda , Mitsubishi , Toyota and Citroën . Nissan launched its first flex fuel in the Brazilian market in 2009 and Kia Motors in 2010 . Flexible @-@ fuel vehicles were 22 % of the car sales in 2004 , 73 % in 2005 , 87 @.@ 6 % in July 2008 , and reached a record 94 % in August 2009 . The production of flex @-@ fuel cars and light commercial vehicles reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010 , and 15 @.@ 3 million units by March 2012 . As of December 2011 , the fleet of flex automobiles and light commercial vehicles had reached 14 @.@ 8 million vehicles , representing 21 % of Brazil 's motor vehicle fleet and 31 @.@ 8 % of all registered light vehicles . 
 This rapid adoption of the flex technology was facilitated by the fuel distribution infrastructure already in place , as around 27 @,@ 000 filling stations countrywide were available by 1997 with at least one ethanol pump , a heritage of the Pró @-@ Álcool program , and by October 2008 have reached 35 @,@ 000 fueling stations . 
 The flexibility of Brazilian FFVs empowered the consumers to choose the fuel depending on current market prices . The rapid adoption and commercial success of " flex " vehicles , as they are popularly known , together with the mandatory blend of alcohol with gasoline as E25 fuel , have increased ethanol consumption up to the point that during the first two months of 2008 ethanol consumption increased by 56 % when compared to the same period in 2007 , and achieving a landmark in ethanol consumption in February 2008 , when ethanol retail sales surpassed the 50 % market share of the gasoline @-@ powered fleet . This level of ethanol fuel consumption had not been reached since the end of the 80s , at the peak of the Pró @-@ Álcool Program . According to two separate research studies conducted in 2009 , at the national level 65 % of the flex @-@ fuel registered vehicles regularly use ethanol fuel , and all @-@ year @-@ long by 93 % of flex car owners in São Paulo , the main ethanol producer state where local taxes are lower , and prices at the pump are more competitive than gasoline . 
 Between 1979 and 2011 , Brazil substituted around 22 million pure gasoline @-@ powered vehicles with 5 @.@ 7 million neat ethanol vehicles , 14 @.@ 8 million flex @-@ fuel vehicles and almost 1 @.@ 5 million flex motorcycles . The number of neat ethanol vehicles still in use by 2003 was estimated between 2 and 3 million vehicles , and 1 @.@ 22 million as of December 2011 . There were 80 flex car and light truck models available in the market manufactured by 12 major carmakers by December 2011 , and four flex @-@ fuel motorcycle models available . 
 The early technology in flex fuel engines had a fuel economy with hydrated ethanol ( E100 ) that was 25 to 35 % lower than gasoline , but flex engines are now being designed with higher compression ratios , taking advantage of the higher ethanol blends and maximizing the benefits of the higher oxygen content of ethanol , resulting in lower emissions and improving fuel efficiency , allowing flex engines in 2008 models to reduce the fuel economy gap to 20 to 25 % that of gasoline . 
 = = Latest developments = = 
 = = = Ethanol @-@ powered diesel engine = = = 
 Under the auspices of the <unk> for Sustainable Transport ( BEST ) project , the first ethanol @-@ powered ( <unk> or ED95 ) bus began operations in São Paulo city on December 2007 as a one @-@ year trial project . The bus is a Scania model with a modified diesel engine capable of running with 95 % hydrous ethanol blended with a 5 % ignition improver , with a <unk> body . Scania adjusted the compression ratio from 18 : 1 to 28 : 1 , added larger fuel injection nozzles , and altered the injection timing . 
 During the trial period performance and emissions were monitored by the National Reference Center on Biomass ( <unk> - Portuguese : Centro Nacional de <unk> em <unk> ) at the Universidade de São Paulo , and compared with similar diesel models , with special attention to carbon monoxide and particulate matter emissions . Performance is also important as previous tests have shown a reduction in fuel economy of around 60 % when <unk> is compared to regular diesel . 
 In November 2009 , a second ED95 bus began operating in São Paulo city . The bus was a Swedish Scania with a Brazilian <unk> body . The second bus was scheduled to operate between Lapa and Vila Mariana , passing through Avenida Paulista , one of the main business centers of São Paulo city . The two test buses operated regularly for 3 years . 
 In November 2010 the municipal government of São Paulo city signed an agreement with UNICA , Cosan , Scania and <unk> Metropolitana " , the local bus operator , to introduce a fleet of 50 ethanol @-@ powered ED95 buses by May 2011 . The city 's government objective is to reduce the carbon footprint of the city 's bus fleet of 15 @,@ 000 diesel @-@ powered buses , with a final goal that the entire bus fleet use only renewable fuels by 2018 . Scania will manufacture the buses in its plant located in São Bernardo do Campo , São Paulo . These buses use the same technology and fuel as the 700 buses manufactured by Scania and already operating in Stockholm . 
 The first ethanol @-@ powered buses were delivered in May 2011 , and the 50 buses will start regular service in June 2011 . The fleet of 50 ethanol @-@ powered ED95 buses had a cost of R $ 20 million ( US $ 12 @.@ 3 million ) and due to the higher cost of the ED95 fuel , one of the firms participating in the cooperation agreement , <unk> ( a joint venture between Royal Dutch Shell and Cosan ) , will supply the fuel to the municipality at 70 % the market price of regular diesel . 
 = = = Flex @-@ fuel motorcycles = = = 
 The latest innovation within the Brazilian flexible @-@ fuel technology is the development of flex @-@ fuel motorcycles . In 2007 Magneti Marelli presented the first motorcycle with flex technology . Delphi Automotive Systems also presented in 2007 its own injection technology for motorcycles . Besides the flexibility in the choice of fuels , a main objective of the fuel @-@ flex motorcycles is to reduce CO2 emissions by 20 percent , and savings in fuel consumption in the order of 5 % to 10 % are expected . 
 The first flex fuel motorcycle was launched to the Brazilian market by Honda in March 2009 . Produced by its local subsidiary Moto Honda da Amazônia , the CG 150 Titan Mix is sold for around US $ 2 @,@ 700 . Because the motorcycle does not have a secondary gas tank for a cold start like the Brazilian flex cars do , the fuel tank must have at least 20 % of gasoline to avoid start up problems at temperatures below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . The motorcycle ’ s panel includes a gauge to warn the driver about the actual ethanol @-@ gasoline mix in the storage tank . During the first eight months after its market launch the CG 150 Titan Mix has sold 139 @,@ 059 motorcycles , capturing a 10 @.@ 6 % market share , and ranking second in sales of new motorcycles in the Brazilian market in 2009 . 
 In September 2009 , Honda launched a second flexible @-@ fuel motorcycle , the on @-@ off road NXR 150 Bros Mix . By December 2010 both Honda flexible @-@ fuel motorcycles had reached cumulative production of 515 @,@ 726 units , representing an 18 @.@ 1 % market share of the Brazilian new motorcycle sales in that year . As of January 2011 there were four flex @-@ fuel motorcycle models available in the market . During 2011 a total of 956 @,@ 117 flex @-@ fuel motorcycles were produced , raising its market share to 56 @.@ 7 % . Since their inception in 2009 almost 1 @.@ 5 million flexible @-@ fuel motorcycles had been produced in the country through December 2011 , and the two million mark was reached in August 2012 . 
 = = = New generation of flex engines = = = 
 The Brazilian subsidiaries of Magneti Marelli , Delphi and Bosch have developed and announced the introduction in 2009 of a new flex engine generation that eliminates the need for the secondary gasoline tank by warming the ethanol fuel during starting , and allowing flex vehicles to do a normal cold start at temperatures as low as − 5 ° C ( 23 ° F ) , the lowest temperature expected anywhere in the Brazilian territory . Another improvement is the reduction of fuel consumption and tailpipe emissions , between 10 % to 15 % as compared to flex motors sold in 2008 . In March 2009 Volkswagen do Brasil launched the Polo E @-@ Flex , the first flex fuel model without an auxiliary tank for cold start . The Flex Start system used by the Polo was developed by Bosch . 
 = = 2009 @-@ 2013 supply shortage = = 
 Since 2009 the Brazilian ethanol industry has experienced financial stress due to the credit crunch caused by the economic crisis of 2008 ; poor sugarcane harvests due to unfavorable weather ; high sugar prices in the world market that made more attractive to produce sugar rather than ethanol ; and other domestic factors that resulted in a decline of its annual production despite a growing demand in the local market . Brazilian ethanol fuel production in 2011 was 21 @.@ 1 billion liters ( 5 @.@ 6 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) , down from 26 @.@ 2 million liters ( 6 @.@ 9 billion gallons ) in 2010 . A supply shortage took place for several months during 2010 and 2011 , and prices climbed to the point that ethanol fuel was no longer attractive for owners of flex @-@ fuel vehicles ; the government reduced the minimum ethanol blend in gasoline to reduce demand and keep ethanol fuel prices from rising further ; and for the first time since the 1990s , ethanol fuel was imported from the United States . 
 As a result of higher ethanol prices caused by the Brazilian ethanol industry crisis , combined with government subsidies set to keep gasoline price lower than the international market value , by November 2013 only 23 % flex @-@ fuel car owners were using ethanol regularly , down from 66 % in 2009 . 
 = Gas tungsten arc welding = 
 Gas tungsten arc welding ( GTAW ) , also known as tungsten inert gas ( TIG ) welding , is an arc welding process that uses a non @-@ consumable tungsten electrode to produce the weld . The weld area is protected from atmospheric contamination by an inert shielding gas ( argon or helium ) , and a filler metal is normally used , though some welds , known as autogenous welds , do not require it . A constant @-@ current welding power supply produces electrical energy , which is conducted across the arc through a column of highly ionized gas and metal vapors known as a plasma . 
 GTAW is most commonly used to weld thin sections of stainless steel and non @-@ ferrous metals such as aluminum , magnesium , and copper alloys . The process grants the operator greater control over the weld than competing processes such as shielded metal arc welding and gas metal arc welding , allowing for stronger , higher quality welds . However , GTAW is comparatively more complex and difficult to master , and furthermore , it is significantly slower than most other welding techniques . A related process , plasma arc welding , uses a slightly different welding torch to create a more focused welding arc and as a result is often automated . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the discovery of the short pulsed electric arc in 1800 by Humphry Davy and of the continuous electric arc in 1802 by Vasily Petrov , arc welding developed slowly . C. L. Coffin had the idea of welding in an inert gas atmosphere in 1890 , but even in the early 20th century , welding non @-@ ferrous materials such as aluminum and magnesium remained difficult because these metals react rapidly with the air and result in porous , dross @-@ filled welds . Processes using flux @-@ covered electrodes did not satisfactorily protect the weld area from contamination . To solve the problem , bottled inert gases were used in the beginning of the 1930s . A few years later , a direct current , gas @-@ shielded welding process emerged in the aircraft industry for welding magnesium . 
 Russell Meredith of Northrop Aircraft perfected the process in 1941 . Meredith named the process <unk> because it used a tungsten electrode arc and helium as a shielding gas , but it is often referred to as tungsten inert gas welding ( TIG ) . The American Welding Society 's official term is gas tungsten arc welding ( GTAW ) . Linde Air Products developed a wide range of air @-@ cooled and water @-@ cooled torches , gas lenses to improve shielding , and other accessories that increased the use of the process . Initially , the electrode overheated quickly and , despite tungsten 's high melting temperature , particles of tungsten were transferred to the weld . To address this problem , the polarity of the electrode was changed from positive to negative , but the change made it unsuitable for welding many non @-@ ferrous materials . Finally , the development of alternating current units made it possible to stabilize the arc and produce high quality aluminum and magnesium welds . 
 Developments continued during the following decades . Linde developed water @-@ cooled torches that helped prevent overheating when welding with high currents . During the 1950s , as the process continued to gain popularity , some users turned to carbon dioxide as an alternative to the more expensive welding atmospheres consisting of argon and helium , but this proved unacceptable for welding aluminum and magnesium because it reduced weld quality , so it is rarely used with GTAW today . The use of any shielding gas containing an oxygen compound , such as carbon dioxide , quickly contaminates the tungsten electrode , making it unsuitable for the TIG process . In 1953 , a new process based on GTAW was developed , called plasma arc welding . It affords greater control and improves weld quality by using a nozzle to focus the electric arc , but is largely limited to automated systems , whereas GTAW remains primarily a manual , hand @-@ held method . Development within the GTAW process has continued as well , and today a number of variations exist . Among the most popular are the pulsed @-@ current , manual programmed , hot @-@ wire , <unk> , and increased penetration GTAW methods . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Manual gas tungsten arc welding is a relatively difficult welding method , due to the coordination required by the welder . Similar to torch welding , GTAW normally requires two hands , since most applications require that the welder manually feed a filler metal into the weld area with one hand while manipulating the welding torch in the other . Maintaining a short arc length , while preventing contact between the electrode and the workpiece , is also important . 
 To strike the welding arc , a high frequency generator ( similar to a Tesla coil ) provides an electric spark . This spark is a conductive path for the welding current through the shielding gas and allows the arc to be initiated while the electrode and the workpiece are separated , typically about 1 @.@ 5 – 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 06 – 0 @.@ 12 in ) apart . 
 Once the arc is struck , the welder moves the torch in a small circle to create a welding pool , the size of which depends on the size of the electrode and the amount of current . While maintaining a constant separation between the electrode and the workpiece , the operator then moves the torch back slightly and tilts it backward about 10 – 15 degrees from vertical . Filler metal is added manually to the front end of the weld pool as it is needed . 
 Welders often develop a technique of rapidly alternating between moving the torch forward ( to advance the weld pool ) and adding filler metal . The filler rod is withdrawn from the weld pool each time the electrode advances , but it is always kept inside the gas shield to prevent oxidation of its surface and contamination of the weld . Filler rods composed of metals with a low melting temperature , such as aluminum , require that the operator maintain some distance from the arc while staying inside the gas shield . If held too close to the arc , the filler rod can melt before it makes contact with the weld puddle . As the weld nears completion , the arc current is often gradually reduced to allow the weld crater to solidify and prevent the formation of crater cracks at the end of the weld . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 Welders wear protective clothing , including light and thin leather gloves and protective long sleeve shirts with high collars , to avoid exposure to strong ultraviolet light . Due to the absence of smoke in GTAW , the electric arc light is not covered by fumes and particulate matter as in stick welding or shielded metal arc welding , and thus is a great deal brighter , subjecting operators to strong ultraviolet light . The welding arc has a different range and strength of UV light wavelengths from sunlight , but the welder is very close to the source and the light intensity is very strong . Potential arc light damage includes accidental flashes to the eye or arc eye and skin damage similar to strong sunburn . Operators wear opaque helmets with dark eye lenses and full head and neck coverage to prevent this exposure to UV light . Modern helmets often feature a liquid crystal @-@ type face plate that self @-@ darkens upon exposure to the bright light of the struck arc . Transparent welding curtains , made of a polyvinyl chloride plastic film , are often used to shield nearby workers and bystanders from exposure to the UV light from the electric arc . 
 Welders are also often exposed to dangerous gases and particulate matter . While the process doesn 't produce smoke , the brightness of the arc in GTAW can break down surrounding air to form ozone and nitric oxides . The ozone and nitric oxides react with lung tissue and moisture to create nitric acid and ozone burn . Ozone and nitric oxide levels are moderate , but exposure duration , repeated exposure , and the quality and quantity of fume extraction , and air change in the room must be monitored . Welders who do not work safely can contract emphysema and oedema of the lungs , which can lead to early death . Similarly , the heat from the arc can cause poisonous fumes to form from cleaning and degreasing materials . Cleaning operations using these agents should not be performed near the site of welding , and proper ventilation is necessary to protect the welder . 
 = = = Applications = = = 
 While the aerospace industry is one of the primary users of gas tungsten arc welding , the process is used in a number of other areas . Many industries use GTAW for welding thin workpieces , especially nonferrous metals . It is used extensively in the manufacture of space vehicles , and is also frequently employed to weld small @-@ diameter , thin @-@ wall tubing such as those used in the bicycle industry . In addition , GTAW is often used to make root or first @-@ pass welds for piping of various sizes . In maintenance and repair work , the process is commonly used to repair tools and dies , especially components made of aluminum and magnesium . Because the weld metal is not transferred directly across the electric arc like most open arc welding processes , a vast assortment of welding filler metal is available to the welding engineer . In fact , no other welding process permits the welding of so many alloys in so many product configurations . Filler metal alloys , such as elemental aluminum and chromium , can be lost through the electric arc from volatilization . This loss does not occur with the GTAW process . Because the resulting welds have the same chemical integrity as the original base metal or match the base metals more closely , GTAW welds are highly resistant to corrosion and cracking over long time periods , making GTAW the welding procedure of choice for critical operations like sealing spent nuclear fuel canisters before burial . 
 = = Quality = = 
 Gas tungsten arc welding , because it affords greater control over the weld area than other welding processes , can produce high @-@ quality welds when performed by skilled operators . Maximum weld quality is assured by maintaining cleanliness — all equipment and materials used must be free from oil , moisture , dirt and other impurities , as these cause weld porosity and consequently a decrease in weld strength and quality . To remove oil and grease , alcohol or similar commercial solvents may be used , while a stainless steel wire brush or chemical process can remove oxides from the surfaces of metals like aluminum . Rust on steels can be removed by first grit blasting the surface and then using a wire brush to remove any embedded grit . These steps are especially important when negative polarity direct current is used , because such a power supply provides no cleaning during the welding process , unlike positive polarity direct current or alternating current . To maintain a clean weld pool during welding , the shielding gas flow should be sufficient and consistent so that the gas covers the weld and blocks impurities in the atmosphere . GTAW in windy or drafty environments increases the amount of shielding gas necessary to protect the weld , increasing the cost and making the process unpopular outdoors . 
 The level of heat input also affects weld quality . Low heat input , caused by low welding current or high welding speed , can limit penetration and cause the weld bead to lift away from the surface being welded . If there is too much heat input , however , the weld bead grows in width while the likelihood of excessive penetration and spatter increase . Additionally , if the welding torch is too far from the workpiece the shielding gas becomes ineffective , causing porosity within the weld . This results in a weld with <unk> , which is weaker than a typical weld . 
 If the amount of current used exceeds the capability of the electrode , tungsten inclusions in the weld may result . Known as tungsten spitting , this can be identified with radiography and can be prevented by changing the type of electrode or increasing the electrode diameter . In addition , if the electrode is not well protected by the gas shield or the operator accidentally allows it to contact the molten metal , it can become dirty or contaminated . This often causes the welding arc to become unstable , requiring that the electrode be ground with a diamond abrasive to remove the impurity . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The equipment required for the gas tungsten arc welding operation includes a welding torch utilizing a non @-@ consumable tungsten electrode , a constant @-@ current welding power supply , and a shielding gas source . 
 = = = Welding torch = = = 
 GTAW welding torches are designed for either automatic or manual operation and are equipped with cooling systems using air or water . The automatic and manual torches are similar in construction , but the manual torch has a handle while the automatic torch normally comes with a mounting rack . The angle between the centerline of the handle and the centerline of the tungsten electrode , known as the head angle , can be varied on some manual torches according to the preference of the operator . Air cooling systems are most often used for low @-@ current operations ( up to about 200 A ) , while water cooling is required for high @-@ current welding ( up to about 600 A ) . The torches are connected with cables to the power supply and with hoses to the shielding gas source and where used , the water supply . 
 The internal metal parts of a torch are made of hard alloys of copper or brass so it can transmit current and heat effectively . The tungsten electrode must be held firmly in the center of the torch with an appropriately sized collet , and ports around the electrode provide a constant flow of shielding gas . <unk> are sized according to the diameter of the tungsten electrode they hold . The body of the torch is made of heat @-@ resistant , insulating plastics covering the metal components , providing insulation from heat and electricity to protect the welder . 
 The size of the welding torch nozzle depends on the amount of shielded area desired . The size of the gas nozzle depends upon the diameter of the electrode , the joint configuration , and the availability of access to the joint by the welder . The inside diameter of the nozzle is preferably at least three times the diameter of the electrode , but there are no hard rules . The welder judges the effectiveness of the shielding and increases the nozzle size to increase the area protected by the external gas shield as needed . The nozzle must be heat resistant and thus is normally made of alumina or a ceramic material , but fused quartz , a high purity glass , offers greater visibility . Devices can be inserted into the nozzle for special applications , such as gas lenses or valves to improve the control shielding gas flow to reduce turbulence and introduction of contaminated atmosphere into the shielded area . Hand switches to control welding current can be added to the manual GTAW torches . 
 = = = Power supply = = = 
 Gas tungsten arc welding uses a constant current power source , meaning that the current ( and thus the heat ) remains relatively constant , even if the arc distance and voltage change . This is important because most applications of GTAW are manual or semiautomatic , requiring that an operator hold the torch . Maintaining a suitably steady arc distance is difficult if a constant voltage power source is used instead , since it can cause dramatic heat variations and make welding more difficult . 
 The preferred polarity of the GTAW system depends largely on the type of metal being welded . Direct current with a negatively charged electrode ( DCEN ) is often employed when welding steels , nickel , titanium , and other metals . It can also be used in automatic GTAW of aluminum or magnesium when helium is used as a shielding gas . The negatively charged electrode generates heat by emitting electrons , which travel across the arc , causing thermal ionization of the shielding gas and increasing the temperature of the base material . The ionized shielding gas flows toward the electrode , not the base material , and this can allow oxides to build on the surface of the weld . Direct current with a positively charged electrode ( DCEP ) is less common , and is used primarily for shallow welds since less heat is generated in the base material . Instead of flowing from the electrode to the base material , as in DCEN , electrons go the other direction , causing the electrode to reach very high temperatures . To help it maintain its shape and prevent softening , a larger electrode is often used . As the electrons flow toward the electrode , ionized shielding gas flows back toward the base material , cleaning the weld by removing oxides and other impurities and thereby improving its quality and appearance . 
 Alternating current , commonly used when welding aluminum and magnesium manually or semi @-@ automatically , combines the two direct currents by making the electrode and base material alternate between positive and negative charge . This causes the electron flow to switch directions constantly , preventing the tungsten electrode from overheating while maintaining the heat in the base material . Surface oxides are still removed during the electrode @-@ positive portion of the cycle and the base metal is heated more deeply during the electrode @-@ negative portion of the cycle . Some power supplies enable operators to use an unbalanced alternating current wave by modifying the exact percentage of time that the current spends in each state of polarity , giving them more control over the amount of heat and cleaning action supplied by the power source . In addition , operators must be wary of rectification , in which the arc fails to reignite as it passes from straight polarity ( negative electrode ) to reverse polarity ( positive electrode ) . To remedy the problem , a square wave power supply can be used , as can high @-@ frequency voltage to encourage ignition . 
 = = = Electrode = = = 
 The electrode used in GTAW is made of tungsten or a tungsten alloy , because tungsten has the highest melting temperature among pure metals , at 3 @,@ 422 ° C ( 6 @,@ 192 ° F ) . As a result , the electrode is not consumed during welding , though some erosion ( called burn @-@ off ) can occur . Electrodes can have either a clean finish or a ground finish — clean finish electrodes have been chemically cleaned , while ground finish electrodes have been ground to a uniform size and have a polished surface , making them optimal for heat conduction . The diameter of the electrode can vary between 0 @.@ 5 and 6 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 02 and 0 @.@ 25 in ) , and their length can range from 75 to 610 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 to 24 @.@ 0 in ) . 
 A number of tungsten alloys have been standardized by the International Organization for Standardization and the American Welding Society in ISO <unk> and AWS <unk> , respectively , for use in GTAW electrodes , and are summarized in the adjacent table . 
 Pure tungsten electrodes ( classified as WP or EWP ) are general purpose and low cost electrodes . They have poor heat resistance and electron emission . They find limited use in AC welding of e.g. magnesium and aluminum . 
 Cerium oxide ( or ceria ) as an alloying element improves arc stability and ease of starting while decreasing burn @-@ off . Cerium addition is not as effective as thorium but works well , and cerium is not radioactive . 
 An alloy of lanthanum oxide ( or <unk> ) has a similar effect as cerium , and is also not radioactive . 
 Thorium oxide ( or thoria ) alloy electrodes offer excellent arc performance and starting , making them popular general purpose electrodes . However , it is somewhat radioactive , making inhalation of thorium vapors and dust a health risk , and disposal an environmental risk . 
 Electrodes containing zirconium oxide ( or zirconia ) increase the current capacity while improving arc stability and starting and increasing electrode life . 
 Filler metals are also used in nearly all applications of GTAW , the major exception being the welding of thin materials . Filler metals are available with different diameters and are made of a variety of materials . In most cases , the filler metal in the form of a rod is added to the weld pool manually , but some applications call for an automatically fed filler metal , which often is stored on spools or coils . 
 = = = Shielding gas = = = 
 As with other welding processes such as gas metal arc welding , shielding gases are necessary in GTAW to protect the welding area from atmospheric gases such as nitrogen and oxygen , which can cause fusion defects , porosity , and weld metal embrittlement if they come in contact with the electrode , the arc , or the welding metal . The gas also transfers heat from the tungsten electrode to the metal , and it helps start and maintain a stable arc . 
 The selection of a shielding gas depends on several factors , including the type of material being welded , joint design , and desired final weld appearance . Argon is the most commonly used shielding gas for GTAW , since it helps prevent defects due to a varying arc length . When used with alternating current , argon shielding results in high weld quality and good appearance . Another common shielding gas , helium , is most often used to increase the weld penetration in a joint , to increase the welding speed , and to weld metals with high heat conductivity , such as copper and aluminum . A significant disadvantage is the difficulty of striking an arc with helium gas , and the decreased weld quality associated with a varying arc length . 
 Argon @-@ helium mixtures are also frequently utilized in GTAW , since they can increase control of the heat input while maintaining the benefits of using argon . Normally , the mixtures are made with primarily helium ( often about 75 % or higher ) and a balance of argon . These mixtures increase the speed and quality of the AC welding of aluminum , and also make it easier to strike an arc . Another shielding gas mixture , argon @-@ hydrogen , is used in the mechanized welding of light gauge stainless steel , but because hydrogen can cause porosity , its uses are limited . Similarly , nitrogen can sometimes be added to argon to help stabilize the austenite in austenitic stainless steels and increase penetration when welding copper . Due to porosity problems in ferritic steels and limited benefits , however , it is not a popular shielding gas additive . 
 = = Materials = = 
 Gas tungsten arc welding is most commonly used to weld stainless steel and nonferrous materials , such as aluminum and magnesium , but it can be applied to nearly all metals , with a notable exception being zinc and its alloys . Its applications involving carbon steels are limited not because of process restrictions , but because of the existence of more economical steel welding techniques , such as gas metal arc welding and shielded metal arc welding . Furthermore , GTAW can be performed in a variety of other @-@ than @-@ flat positions , depending on the skill of the welder and the materials being welded . 
 = = = Aluminum and magnesium = = = 
 Aluminum and magnesium are most often welded using alternating current , but the use of direct current is also possible , depending on the properties desired . Before welding , the work area should be cleaned and may be preheated to 175 to 200 ° C ( 347 to 392 ° F ) for aluminum or to a maximum of 150 ° C ( 302 ° F ) for thick magnesium workpieces to improve penetration and increase travel speed . AC current can provide a self @-@ cleaning effect , removing the thin , refractory aluminum oxide ( sapphire ) layer that forms on aluminum metal within minutes of exposure to air . This oxide layer must be removed for welding to occur . When alternating current is used , pure tungsten electrodes or <unk> tungsten electrodes are preferred over thoriated electrodes , as the latter are more likely to " spit " electrode particles across the welding arc into the weld . Blunt electrode tips are preferred , and pure argon shielding gas should be employed for thin workpieces . Introducing helium allows for greater penetration in thicker workpieces , but can make arc starting difficult . 
 Direct current of either polarity , positive or negative , can be used to weld aluminum and magnesium as well . Direct current with a negatively charged electrode ( DCEN ) allows for high penetration . Argon is commonly used as a shielding gas for DCEN welding of aluminum . Shielding gases with high helium contents are often used for higher penetration in thicker materials . <unk> electrodes are suitable for use in DCEN welding of aluminum . Direct current with a positively charged electrode ( DCEP ) is used primarily for shallow welds , especially those with a joint thickness of less than 1 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 063 in ) . A thoriated tungsten electrode is commonly used , along with a pure argon shielding gas . 
 = = = Steels = = = 
 For GTAW of carbon and stainless steels , the selection of a filler material is important to prevent excessive porosity . Oxides on the filler material and workpieces must be removed before welding to prevent contamination , and immediately prior to welding , alcohol or acetone should be used to clean the surface . <unk> is generally not necessary for mild steels less than one inch thick , but low alloy steels may require preheating to slow the cooling process and prevent the formation of martensite in the heat @-@ affected zone . Tool steels should also be preheated to prevent cracking in the heat @-@ affected zone . <unk> stainless steels do not require preheating , but martensitic and ferritic chromium stainless steels do . A DCEN power source is normally used , and thoriated electrodes , tapered to a sharp point , are recommended . Pure argon is used for thin workpieces , but helium can be introduced as thickness increases . 
 = = = <unk> metals = = = 
 Welding dissimilar metals often introduces new difficulties to GTAW welding , because most materials do not easily fuse to form a strong bond . However , welds of dissimilar materials have numerous applications in manufacturing , repair work , and the prevention of corrosion and oxidation . In some joints , a compatible filler metal is chosen to help form the bond , and this filler metal can be the same as one of the base materials ( for example , using a stainless steel filler metal with stainless steel and carbon steel as base materials ) , or a different metal ( such as the use of a nickel filler metal for joining steel and cast iron ) . Very different materials may be coated or " buttered " with a material compatible with a particular filler metal , and then welded . In addition , GTAW can be used in cladding or overlaying dissimilar materials . 
 When welding dissimilar metals , the joint must have an accurate fit , with proper gap dimensions and bevel angles . Care should be taken to avoid melting excessive base material . Pulsed current is particularly useful for these applications , as it helps limit the heat input . The filler metal should be added quickly , and a large weld pool should be avoided to prevent dilution of the base materials . 
 = = Process variations = = 
 = = = Pulsed @-@ current = = = 
 In the pulsed @-@ current mode , the welding current rapidly alternates between two levels . The higher current state is known as the pulse current , while the lower current level is called the background current . During the period of pulse current , the weld area is heated and fusion occurs . Upon dropping to the background current , the weld area is allowed to cool and solidify . Pulsed @-@ current GTAW has a number of advantages , including lower heat input and consequently a reduction in distortion and <unk> in thin workpieces . In addition , it allows for greater control of the weld pool , and can increase weld penetration , welding speed , and quality . A similar method , manual programmed GTAW , allows the operator to program a specific rate and magnitude of current variations , making it useful for specialized applications . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The <unk> variation is used to precisely place weld metal on thin edges . The automatic process replicates the motions of manual welding by feeding a cold filler wire into the weld area and <unk> ( or oscillating ) it into the welding arc . It can be used in conjunction with pulsed current , and is used to weld a variety of alloys , including titanium , nickel , and tool steels . Common applications include rebuilding seals in jet engines and building up saw blades , milling cutters , drill bits , and mower blades . 
 = 8th Military Police Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 8th Military Police Brigade is a military police brigade of the United States Army based at Schofield Barracks , Hawaii . It is responsible for military police units in the Pacific Ocean region . 
 Activated during the Vietnam War , the 8th Military Police Brigade was specifically organized to provide planning , direction and supervision for the criminal investigation work required by the U.S. Army in Vietnam . It took over from a provisional Military Police Group ( Criminal Investigation ) that had been formed on 3 November 1966 in charge of all criminal investigative work in Vietnam , except for the metropolitan Saigon area . 
 In July 1972 , it became the basis for the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Center , Vietnam Field Office . It served in the region for several years and earning ten campaign streamers before being deactivated during the American forces pullout from the region . The brigade was reactivated in Korea in the 1980s to provide command and control for all U.S. Pacific military police forces , and has since been moved to Hawaii , where much of U.S. Army Pacific is located . 
